 Story_ID: 668857 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing are Jay Lilly and Jamie Sartin. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My full name is Jacques Dominique Wilkins; J-A-C-Q-U-E-S, Dominique, D-O-M-I-N-I-Q-U-E, Wilkins, W-I-L-K-I-N-S [HistoryMaker Dominique Wilkins]. Speaker 1: Briefly, can you give us the story behind your name? Speaker 2: The story behind my name, that's a long story. But to give you the short version of that, my father [John Wilkins, Sr.] was in the [U.S.] military. He was in the [U.S.] Army, and we were based in Paris, France, or he was based in Paris, France at the time. And at the time I was born, we had a nanny who actually named me Dominique. It wasn't my mom [Gertrude Wilkins Baker] or dad who named me. It was actually the nanny, who recently passed a few years ago. Speaker 1: But they liked it I guess, right? They liked it? Speaker 2: Yeah, they loved the name, they loved the name. But the funny thing is I use Dominique more than I use Jacques. I didn't like the name Jacques. And so, it wasn't until I got older that I really started to love my first name. But it was already too late, because Dominique was already--everybody used that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: One, twelve, sixty [January 12, 1960] (makes sound). Speaker 1: All right, In Paris? Speaker 2: In Paris, France; Sorbonne, France (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Sorbonne, okay. That's where the university [University of Paris, Paris, France] is? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation, I'm the vice president of basketball for the Atlanta Hawks. I'm also the analyst for Fox television [Fox Sports] for the Hawks, and also a proud, one of the proud owners of a company called CBA Sports [Norcross, Georgia], which is basketball flooring-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on every level. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date (laughter), that's a good question. Today is August 5, 2016. Speaker 1: October (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: See, I don't keep up with the dates (laughter). Okay, okay. It's October, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yes, October 5, 2016 (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, I got you. August 5, 2016. Speaker 2: October (laughter). Speaker 1: Did I say--what did I say? Speaker 2: August again. Speaker 1: Did I say August? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I thought I said Oct- okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's okay, we got it. Speaker 1: No, I can do it again, I got it. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: October 5, 2016. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: Right now, we're in Atlanta [Georgia] at the 191 building [191 Peachtree Tower]. Story_ID: 668858 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer. And the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, what is it? Speaker 2: My favorite food is actually Italian. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, mostly blues and blacks. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is the fall. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vacation, I would say Barbados. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite phrase? Yes, I can show you better than I can tell you (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 668859 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Wilkins, Sr.] side and we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother's name is Gertrude, G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E, Ba- actually, my mom has quite a few last names. She's been married a couple of times. But her maiden name is Smallwood, and that's S-M-A-L-L-W-O-O-D [Gertrude Wilkins Baker]. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: That's a tough one. I can't quite remember what her date of birth is. Speaker 1: And where was she, where was she raised? Speaker 2: She was raised in Washington, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: My mother comes from a very big family. She has eight brothers, actually nine brothers and nine sisters. So, she comes from a very large family. The Smallwood side of the family, which is my mom's side of the family, originated out of North Carolina, different parts of North Carolina, from New Bern, North Carolina to Greenville, North Carolina, Fayetteville, North Carolina, and finally migrated to Washington, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What is Washington near? Speaker 2: Washington is about a fifteen or twenty minute drive from Greenville, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, Greenville, North Carolina, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, what did your mother's parents [Clara Smallwood and Jason Smallwood] do? Speaker 2: My mother's parents worked in the cotton fields, corn, tobacco, and the steel mill in North Carolina at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she get a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: My mother, her degree of education was probably high school. She graduated from high school and never went to college. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Did she discuss growing up, and what it was like there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I mean she grew up, like I said, she grew up in a very big family, so times were really tough, you know. You just imagine, there's eighteen kids in a family and you're trying to, you know, you're fighting for food, you're fighting for clothes, you're fighting for respect in the family. So, she grew up in a tough environment. Speaker 1: Eighteen (unclear) at the same time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighteen brothers and sisters under one roof, you know. So, that's, that was tough. But my grandmother was very tough, though. She was a disciplinarian, and she really did a good job of raising all those kids. Story_ID: 668860 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is John Willey Wilkins; John, J-O-H-N, Willey, W-I-L-L-E-Y, Wilkins, W-I-L-K-I-N-S [John Wilkins, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Again, I can't even tell you my father's date of birth (laughter). My father is in, would be in his late seventies, early eighties right now. He passed sixteen years--actually twenty-two years ago. Speaker 1: So, he was born in the '30s [1930s] I guess, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirties [1930s]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And where was he born and raised? Speaker 2: Also in Washington, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you know anything about your father's aspirations growing up, what he wanted to do? Speaker 2: Yeah. Actually my father, growing up he wanted to be into athletics, and he played a little basketball. My dad was 6'6", so he was, he was a big man. During that time, that was considered a very large man. And he decided early on in his life to go into the [U.S.] military. So, he went into the military when he was seventeen or eighteen years old. But he still played basketball even though he was in the military. But I guess he figured he wouldn't be able to make a career out of it, so he went into the military. Story_ID: 668861 Speaker 1: Well, you know, often, if you have like a particular athletic talent in the [U.S.] military. They put you on a team in the military (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and he did. He played military basketball for a little while. And I look at the athleticism in my family. All the guys in the family, it all stems from my father [John Wilkins, Sr.]. My father was a very athletic man. Even, you know, in his earlier years as a father, I mean he would do a lot of stuff with us--play basketball, baseball, football. He would do that stuff with us. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your father was 6'6"? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Does he come from a tall family? Speaker 2: Yes, my grandfather's side of the family is very tall. And all my--my father had three sisters, and they all were tall. They all were at least 5'10", 6" tall. Speaker 1: He joined the [U.S.] Air Force, right? Speaker 2: My dad was in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Army? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now did he get a chance to finish high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad finished high school, but didn't go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Not one they wanted to tell, you know. (Laughter). But I know the two families knew each other, the Smallwood family and the Wilkins family. So, all the kids knew each other. So, my dad met my mom [Gertrude Wilkins Baker] at a very early age, about seventeen or eighteen. They was together a long time. Speaker 1: Okay. So a very small community there? Speaker 2: Yeah, Washington, North Carolina is very small. Half of the town is related to me. So that tell you how small it is. Story_ID: 668862 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you, do you have? Speaker 2: It's eight of us. I'm the oldest boy, and I've got, I've got four sisters and three brothers. Speaker 1: Do you want to name them for us, from the oldest to the youngest? Speaker 2: Yes. My sister Cynthia [Cynthia Wilkins] is the oldest. I'm next to the oldest, and my brother John [John Wilkins, Jr.] is the third oldest. And then it's my sister Wanda [Wanda Wilkins], then my brother Gerald [Gerald Wilkins], and it's my brother James [James Wilkins], and my sister Jean [Jean Wilkins], and my youngest sister, April [April Wilkins]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now is there a story about how your parents--I mean not, not, I already asked that question, I'm sorry. Story_ID: 668863 Speaker 1: When you consider their personalities, their talents, their character, what they look like--who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father [John Wilkins, Sr.]. I look like my father's twin, believe it or not. We're--very strong--very strong genes there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did you grow up in Washington, North Carolina? Speaker 2: No, I grew up in Baltimore, Maryland. I left home when I was sixteen years old, and I went to North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So your fa- your father came back from the [U.S.] Army and the family settled in Baltimore? Speaker 2: He was stationed in Fort Meade [Fort George G. Meade, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In Baltimore. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you grew up on or near the base? Speaker 2: Near the base, but we mostly lived off the base, you know. We lived in local neighborhoods in Baltimore in Cherry Hill, O'Donnell Heights, you know, Turner Station, and the Dundalk areas in Baltimore. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Can you describe--well, okay, so, that's a lot of moving. Speaker 2: We never stayed in one place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We moved around a lot, and never really had a place that was home because we moved so much. And so we were kind of used to, I was kind of used to moving. So, it was nothing for me to pick up and go. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So your father's in the Army, and you all are still, you're still, you're moving around Baltimore? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 668864 Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest childhood memories in Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Baltimore was very rough at that time. At that time when I was living in Baltimore, they had the highest crime rate in America. And one of the neighborhoods I lived in was at the top of that list. But because-- Speaker 1: Which one (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which was Westport [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, there's a lot of stories on Westport and movies about Westport. But because I played basketball, it was hands off. And the older guys used to say, "Hey, look, you're going to be the first one to get out of this neighborhood." So, they would, the word would go through the neighborhood that no one is to mess with this kid. And so they kind of took care of me, and kind of taught me the game of basketball. Speaker 1: Now, that's something I've heard before. And, you know, I've actually seen it acted out in some ways in Chicago [Illinois] and places, where if somebody had a talent, whatever the local criminal element was, leaves them alone. Speaker 2: Yeah. There was much more respect in that criminal element in those days. Because the older guys did not want to see us doing what they were doing, particularly one of the guys who was like an older brother to me. He would always tell me, "If I ever catch you doing any of these things I'm doing, you're going to be in a lot of trouble." I ain't going to tell you exactly what he said, but it was something of that nature. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But they kept me away from trouble, and they taught me how to do things the right way. They said, "Look, when you get out of this neighborhood, you're going to owe us." And I'm twelve, and I'm like, "What does that mean?" And they said, "Not like you think. The only thing we want from you is to give to someone else what we're giving to you." And so they took care of all those young guys. Story_ID: 668865 Speaker 1: I usually ask--well, I'm going to ask you about school and jus- just tell, tell me what you know. You might not remember all the names of the schools, I don't know if you remember that much. Speaker 2: Oh, I remember the names (laughter), oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well, where'd you start? Where'd you start? Speaker 2: Well, the school in Baltimore [Maryland] where I went was a school called Hampstead, which is the junior high school that I went to. Then it was P.S. Jones [ph.] that was across the street from me, literally across the street from my house where I went to elementary school and that sort of thing. But where I really started to notice my talents was at Hampstead Junior High [Hampstead Hill Junior High School; Hampstead Hill Academy, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I ended up going to Patterson High [Patterson High School, Baltimore, Maryland]. I only stayed there for a month before my father [John Wilkins, Sr.] was stationed in Oklahoma, which was Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I left there after a month. And after being in little Washington, North Carolina, I went back to Washington, North Carolina and that's when I started my high school career. Speaker 1: Okay. So what were you interested in in school? Speaker 2: Believe it or not, math. I was a straight A student in math. I hated everything else, other than American history. Those two were my two favorite subjects. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have favorite teachers? Speaker 2: I did. Some names I can't even remember right now. But it was a, it was a teacher that I had in college [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] named Jan Kemp, who was one of the toughest teachers I've ever known. Speaker 1: I don't want to get you to college yet. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got to do--you know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --a chronological path, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But if a good story pops up, I'm not going to stop you from telling it (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. But that's about it. I can't remember anybody else's--really that's a long time ago. I can't remember half of those teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 668866 Speaker 1: You said your--your father [John Wilkins, Sr.] was into sports. He's 6'6". Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He plays with you and your brothers? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And when did you know that you had, you know, potential basketball talent and that--? Speaker 2: I knew when I was twelve that I was going to be a pro. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew it. I mean I just, I was determined. And-- Speaker 1: What happened, was there an incident or something? Speaker 2: Well, most of th- most of the older guys used to make me play against older kids for money. I was like twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old at the time playing against these kids who were fifteen and sixteen, one on one for money. And if I'd win, they would give me like three or four dollars every game I would win, and they'd keep the rest (laughter). But I never lost, because for me it was survival. You know, I'm trying to take money home to the family. So, that's when I knew. I'm like, I'm going to play in the pros one day. I knew it early on. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is in Baltimore, Maryland? Speaker 2: It's in Baltimore, Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, I know your brother became a professional basketball player. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Gerald [Gerald Wilkins]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He played with the Knicks [New York Knicks]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there's somebody else. Speaker 2: His son [Damien Wilkins] played for ten years as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, basketball is a part of our family. Speaker 1: So, were your other brothers talented to a degree? Speaker 2: Yeah. Actually my brother John [John Wilkins, Jr.] who's a year younger than me, at the time he was better than Gerald. I'd never seen Gerald play until I was in the pros. Actually, my first year of college [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] was the first time I saw Gerald play. We never knew he played basketball, because Gerald was always doing his own thing. So, we never seen him play. And I looked up and he's playing on the high school team. And I'm like, Gerald can't play, you know (laughter). But he turned out to be a great player, you know, and played fourteen or fifteen years in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. Speaker 1: Yeah, a great defender. Speaker 2: Oh, a super defender. Speaker 1: Right, right. So, okay, so when did you leave Baltimore (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I left Baltimore when I was sixteen. That was 1976. Speaker 1: So now, you were playing high school basketball then, I assume? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was, I was on the Patterson High [Patterson High School] in Baltimore, and I left and caught a Greyhound bus to North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I'm trying to--now, when you were in--I see what people do now. But I wondered, when you were in junior high school, you were thirteen or fourteen, were people trying to recruit you? Speaker 2: People didn't really start to recruit me until my, probably my first year of high school. Speaker 1: Thirteen? Speaker 2: Actually I was sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen? Sixteen (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixteen. I was getting ready to turn seventeen-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I had my first experience with recruiters. Because the high school team I played on was unbelievable. And we were seventy-six and one in three years on that high school team, so we had every scout in the nation at our high school games. Speaker 1: So this is Patterson? Speaker 2: No, this is at Washington High [Washington High School, Washington, North Carolina]. 'Cause I left Patterson (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Washington High. Speaker 2: --after going to school there for a month-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I went to, I caught a bus and went to North Carolina. Story_ID: 668867 Speaker 1: Now this is something that--okay. Well, this bounces off of something you said before we started the interview, that people don't know that you basically raised yourself-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: --at a certain point. Now, how did this happen? What happened? Speaker 2: Well, I raised myself and my whole family since I was twelve. I took care of my whole family since I was very young. My father [John Wilkins, Sr.] and my mom [Gertrude Wilkins Baker] got divorced when I was like eleven or twelve. They got divorced, so I became the man of the family when-- Speaker 1: This is '71 [1971] or '72 [1972], right? Speaker 2: This is '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, when a kid at that age shouldn't have to do that. You know, I had to become-- Speaker 1: Just because they get divorced doesn't mean the children have to raise themselves. Speaker 2: Yeah, but when you got eight kids--when you have eight kids in a family and a mother trying to raise those kids in a rough neighborhood like that, that's hard. Speaker 1: Well, your father, did he move out? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was gone. My father was gone. Speaker 1: Okay. You said he went to Fort Sill? Speaker 2: No, my mother got remarried. Speaker 1: Okay, but she ended up--? Speaker 2: She ended up getting remarried, and her husband went to Fort Sill, and that's when we went to Oklahoma. And I stayed there literally--it wasn't even a month before I came back to North Carolina. Because I left North Carolina to go to Fort Sill, but I came back. Speaker 1: All right, I'm getting back on path. Okay, you're in Baltimore [Maryland]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Your parents divorce in Baltimore? Speaker 2: Um-hm, when I was eleven or twelve years old. Speaker 1: Okay. So then you end up going to Fort Sill with your-- Speaker 2: I end up going to North Carolina first. Speaker 1: North Carolina first, okay. Speaker 2: And then they moved to Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to visit and was going to stay, but I decided to come back. Story_ID: 668868 Speaker 1: So, there's the team in Washington [North Carolina] that you're playing high school basketball for (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Yeah, so I played three years of high school basketball there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. And this is the team that won seventy-six (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-six and one, in three years. Speaker 1: Gee whiz. Well, what was the mascot for the team? Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was the Washington Pam Pack. Actually it was named after the Pamlico Packing Company, which was a little local company there in town. So we really didn't have a mascot, you know. But it was just straight basketball. I mean that school was incredible, incredible, with the talent they put in--that came out of that school [Washington High School, Washington North Carolina]. Speaker 1: Who were the people that influenced you there? I mean the coaches, the players? Who--? Speaker 2: The biggest influence in North Carolina was my basketball coach and my high school coach [Dave Smith]. My high school coach was more than a coach. He was a father, he was a brother. He was everything to us. He taught us how to be young men first and players second. He was, he was a pretty special guy. Story_ID: 668869 Speaker 1: Now, I'm missing something here too. I- I'm trying to piece this together now. So when you left Fort Sill [Oklahoma] and went back to North Carolina, you were living on your own (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was living with my coach. Speaker 1: With your coach? Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I lived--when I first went to North Carolina, my coach discovered me on the playground playing with some of his players. He didn't know who I was. And he came up to me and he said, "Do you live here?" I'm like, "I'm not sure yet." He said, "Well, where you going when you leave here?" I'm like, "I don't know. I'm not sure yet." So he took me to his house. He showed me the bedroom, he showed me the kitchen. He said, "You can have all this. The only tradeoff is you have to play for my team." I'm like, "Okay." And that's how it all started. Speaker 1: What happened to, yo- your father [John Wilkins, Sr.]? Speaker 2: My father was still living in Baltimore [Maryland]. And I didn't see a lot of him, you know. We heard from him from time to time, but didn't see a lot of him. I actually didn't see my father until I came to the pros and I found out my father was living in Baltimore in a homeless shelter. He was a very proud man, never asked anybody for anything. And I remember my brother and I go back and get him out of the homeless shelter. When we found out he was homeless, we brought him to Atlanta [Georgia] and we took care of him until the day he died. Speaker 1: I'm just thinking that something had to be wrong for a man to have spent a lot of time playing with his children and playing sports with them and being around, and then--and a man who was physical enough to be in the [U.S.] Army, you know, and to make a career out of it on some level--and then to just drop out of the-- Speaker 2: Well, him and my mother [Gertrude Wilkins Smallwood] just didn't get along. It was oil and water, it just did not work. And he was an easy going man, an easy going man. And he just said, you know, we can't do this, and he left. Speaker 1: I just wondered if there was more to it than that. Because it seems like, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it really wasn't. Speaker 1: --he was still going to-- Speaker 2: My mom was tough, she was a tough lady. She was a tough lady, and my dad was a gentle giant. And it just, you know, it just didn't click. You know, he wanted to be there, no question. And again there were times when he would bring food to us, and my mom would throw it away, like, "Aw, we don't want this. We don't need this." And we would go out in the trashcan and get our food, like, "What are you doing? We're going to eat this food." But they just, they just did not click. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, all right, so you're living with your coach. What's the name of your coach? Speaker 2: Coach Dave Smith. Speaker 1: Dave Smith, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he passed a year ago. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, did you live with him throughout high school? Speaker 2: Just my first year of high school, and then I lived with my grandparents after that. After they found out who I was and what I could do, you know, I lived with them. Speaker 1: All right. So you got a reputation in town as a ballplayer? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Story_ID: 668870 Speaker 1: Now, you are--I say, say, everybody used to say this at the--in the gyms and (unclear) and stuff, you are one of the most gifted basketball players ever to play in terms of, there's hardly anybody that can jump like you, and move like you, and is as quick as you. The only person who could rival you I guess would be Michael Jordan, you know, in those days. I mean, just--you had incredible physical talent. I suppose you had it then, too. Speaker 2: I mean it's funny, you know, Michael and I still talk about it to this day. You know, he was one of those thorns in my side in the Eastern--in the East when we played here. And that was a guy who could equal your athleticism. He was incredible. And we both were in awe of each other, we really were. And some of the things we did, that you would never see again. You know, a lot of times, you know, people get into comparisons, and I hate comparisons. Speaker 1: Well they do all the time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they do. Speaker 1: I tell you, they do that. Speaker 2: They do. But what we did will never be duplicated, I mean because it's just a God given talent and just a feel for the game. Some of the things we did on the court were all spontaneous, and nothing we worked on. A lot of guys, they have to work on a lot of stuff they do. We didn't work on that stuff. It was all just God given talent and, you know, just being aware of people around you and how to elude contact. You know, it was just a part of our game. Speaker 1: Okay. One of the players who was actually from North Carolina that everybody idolized in the early '70s [1970s] was Earl "The Pearl" Monroe [Earl Monroe]. Were you aware of him? Speaker 2: I know Earl very well. I'm very close to Earl. Earl--I stole his spin move. I practiced that spin move over and over and over. He had the greatest spin move in the history of the game. No one is even close to how he was able to execute that spin. But I practiced a whole year on that spin until it became my move. So Earl knew about it, because I talked to him about it; you know, how easy was that for him to do? And how did he work on it? So, I got a lot of tips from Earl. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I remember a game on CBS where he made a move. And that's when they first started instant replays. They were asking him what he did, and he said, "Man, I don't know what I was doing" (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean it was just all spontaneous, it was part of the game. It was things about what we did that we never worked on. Like, people ask me, "Did you used to go practice before you did a dunk contest?" I never practiced a single dunk. It was dunks I was doing in games, so I didn't have to practice it. It all came to me as I was doing the contest. I didn't go to a gym or jump over mascots, and all that. I didn't do none of that, none of us did. It was just--we just did what we do in games. Speaker 1: Yeah, they seem to be more contrived now. People have put cars out there, and other people are standing around. And-- Speaker 2: It is a funny thing when you talk about the cars. We were jumping over cars when we were teenagers, you know, back in the neighborhood, (laughter) running from--you know, trying to stay out of trouble (laughter). So, there was always obstacles in the way that you had to go over or around. So, that was a normal thing. But now it's, it makes people seem like this is the first time this has ever been done. We've been doing that stuff when we was kids. Story_ID: 668871 Speaker 1: Did you have a specific training regimen, you know, once you were living with the coach [Dave Smith] and all that? Speaker 2: You know what? The best training regimen--and most guys in that era will tell you--the best training regimen is to play basketball, play basketball, play basketball. That's all you do is get out there and play every day. We played summer basketball. We played basketball year round, we never stopped. And the only way you can get better as a player is to work on your game against somebody else. You can go to a gym all day long and do workouts, but it don't make you a better player. It may get you strong, you know, in certain areas, but it will not change your game, other than playing the game. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And in terms of height and, and speed and quickness and all that, did you have very many players that were the same size or--? Speaker 2: A lot of guys I played against were either the same size or a lot bigger. But my game was built on speed, agility, and quickness. And either I was going to go over you or around you. And that was my whole mentality. But most of the guys I played against, you know, they were 6'9", 6'10", 6'1l" guys playing small forward, the same position I played. So, they were some big physical guys in the area, even from high school on up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I'm talking about, high school. Speaker 2: In high school [Washington High School, Washington, North Carolina], I mean some of the guys I played in high school--I remember when we won, state championship, that front line of the team we beat was 6'9", 6'9", 6'10" in high school. Speaker 1: That's big for-- Speaker 2: And the tallest guy we had was 6'9", and was 6'8" and 6'7", you know. And going against--and I played against teams in high school where their center was 7'1", the power forward was 6'10", you know. So, it wasn't like we were playing against small guys, not in the State of North Carolina. Story_ID: 668872 Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you were competing in state championships in North Carolina in high school [Washington High School, Washington, North Carolina] against teams that sound like college teams some of- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) True, yeah. We were, like I said, we were seventy-six and one in two years, and we had back to back state titles. We played East Carolina University [Greenville, North Carolina] in a scrimmage game and beat them. That's how good our team was. Speaker 1: Well who were some of the other players on your team, and who were some of the people you played against? That-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Would we know any of them now? Speaker 2: Well, we had eleven guys go to a major college off our high school team. I played with a guy named Alvis Rogers, who at that time was the best player on our team. He was 6'9", and I'm telling you, he was like, I mean he was like Atlas; I mean, he was cut. And he was athletic. He could shoot, run, dribble--he could do it all. Speaker 1: So you weren't the best player on the team? Speaker 2: My first year, no. I seriously believe--and most people, they kind of, you know, they fight me on this. But I thought at my first year in high school that he was the best player on our team. Because when I came, I was a city boy coming into town with a bunch of country boys, and they didn't accept me right away. So, there was a little competition between h- he and I. But once we started winning, we started to embrace each other, and we came as one. And then eventually, yeah, I became the better player. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he's 6'9"? Speaker 2: Oh, he was--man (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened to him? Speaker 2: Actually, he's coaching now in Pittsburgh women's basketball [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. But what happened with him, he went to Duke [sic. Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] and he tore his knee up. And at that time, if you tear your knee up, it's hard to come back from. He would've been a top five pick, there's no question. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He'd have been a top five pick. Speaker 1: That seems to be what happens to a lot of potentially pro players; they hurt their knee in the lower-- Speaker 2: And it was hard to come back from knee injuries in those days, you know. So, it was tough for him. But you know, we stay in touch from time to time, to this day. Speaker 1: Now what about your opponents? Who, who played against you that we might know? Speaker 2: I played against, in high school I played against Mitchell Wiggins who played in the NBA [National Basketball Association] for a long time with a team called North Lenoir [North Lenoir High School, LaGrange, North Carolina] in North Carolina. I played against Williams in high school. And James Worthy, we didn't get a chance to play against him. But we all were around the same time--me, Buck Williams, James Worthy, Michael Jordan--all of us were around the same time. Even though Michael was a little younger, we came out during the same time. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, everyone remembers Buck Williams, who played for the Portland Trail Blazers, yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Um-hm. Worthy and I, to this day we always wonder who was the better player, because we wanted to play against one another in high school and we never got the opportunity. Because I think they lost before the state championship, and we won it all. So, we talk about it from time to time, and I say, "I wish we had a chance to play, too, James." I didn't really want to tell him what I really was thinking, you know (laughter), you know. But, but a lot of respects for him, a lot of respect for James Worthy. Story_ID: 668873 Speaker 1: Now did you play any other sports in high school [Washington High School, Washington, North Carolina]? Did you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran track. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I hold my high school record in the quarter mile. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I was a sprinter, you know. Speaker 1: That's a stamina race, too. Speaker 2: Woo, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Quarter mile-- Speaker 2: Well, when I first ran it, I ran it all out. I thought that's how you were supposed to run it, right? I get to the finish line and I almost passed out--throwing up and everything (laughter). Because I didn't understand that you had to, you know, stride that first two hundred yards out and then blow it out at the end, the last two hundred and something yards. And I was--man, I swore I'd never run again, but the coach convinced me to keep running. I played football, too, and I quit the same day that I joined, because I got hit. I was a receiver and I got hit. I remember waking up, and I took my pads off on the field (laughter). I'm like, "Oh, no, this is not for me." Speaker 1: All right. Yeah, that's--yeah, football can really-- Speaker 2: And as a young kid--because I was a skinny kid, you know. Man, I'm not playing no football. And I love football but I said, "No, I'll stick to basketball and track." And that's what I did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Did your coach [Dave Smith] influence you in terms of--? Speaker 2: My coach didn't want me to play nothing but basketball and run track. He was cool with track, but he didn't want me playing football, because he said he thought that was too much. Three sports in high school, he thought that was just way too much. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And, but his whole focus was basketball really, at the end of the day. Speaker 1: Was basketball bigger there than football? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. In the State of North Carolina, oh, yeah. Basketball is god in North Carolina. That's basketball mecca. Speaker 1: It's funny you should say it was god, because they used to call Earl "The Pearl" [Earl Monroe] Black Jesus. Speaker 2: Yes, they did, and they still call him that (laughter). He was, he was something else. Speaker 1: Now, did you ever see him play in person? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. See, I used to--when I was in Baltimore [Maryland], we had the Baltimore Bullets [Washington Wizards]. And they used to--I mean I used to sneak in the games when I was a kid. You know, we used to sneak in the games when we should have been home in bed somewhere. But we were young kids, and we knew somebody down there and we'd sneak into the stadium down at the Baltimore Civic Center [Royal Farms Arena, Baltimore, Maryland]. And so, we used to go watch the Bullets play. So, I saw Earl "The Pearl" up close. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I wondered, you know, they say--people we've interviewed from Winston-Salem [North Carolina] talk about how folks would start lining up at dawn to get a ticket. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. If they came to the Baltimore Civic Center, it was standing room only. And Earl "The Pearl" and Archie Clark, all them guys in that era, man, that's who we grew up wanting to be like. And the Dr. Js [Julius Erving] and all these different--we grew up--because you know, we watched the ABA [American Basketball Association] back in those days as well as the NBA [National Basketball Association]. Story_ID: 668874 Speaker 1: So you're playing high school basketball. Did you--did they honor you in high school [Washington High School, Washington, North Carolina] with any kind of--were you like--? Speaker 2: You know what? Because of what I went through when I left North Carolina, they didn't honor me until last year, when I went back after thirty years. Because if you're a great player in the State of North Carolina during that time, you don't leave the ACC. It's a sin to leave the ACC, so I got death threats. I got paint poured on my mother's [Gertrude Wilkins Baker] car, the windows bust out. I got arrested, all Fs on my transcript. They basically tried to destroy me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I don't want to get too far. When you left the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], in your junior year you joined the pros (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. This was, this was in high school when this happened. Speaker 1: Oh, was it? Speaker 2: This was in high school where all this happened. All these death threats and all that stuff was in high school. Speaker 1: I mean, what happened? Speaker 2: What happened was when I decided to sign with the University of Georgia and not go to an ACC school all that happened. Speaker 1: Oh, I see, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, now I get it. I gotcha. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so when I left North Carolina, I swore I'd never go back. I didn't go back for thirty years. Speaker 1: Now le- let's walk through this. When you were in high school, you're an All-State player, you know, a champion player-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in high school. How were your grades in school? Speaker 2: Oh, I had excellent grades, excellent grades in high school, enough to go to a major college. You know, just at that time, you know, being a good student coming from a great basketball program, from a winning program, and to have those people want to see you all the time in their environment, which is the ACC and once you kind of buck the system and leave out of the ACC as a great player in that state, that was against all rules. Speaker 1: Okay, the ACC is the Atlantic Coast Conference-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) right? Story_ID: 668875 Speaker 1: Tell me about the recruiting process. I mean how did they, how did they recruit you to, to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Recruiting was Disneyland. It was so off the charts. I had a scout at my high school [Washington High School, Washington, North Carolina] every day. Game or not, they were at my high school recruiting me across the nation, probably three hundred and something schools. And they come at you with everything, you know. They promise you this, promise you that. "This is the best situation, and that is the best situation." So, you have to get to a point where you have to narrow it down to like five schools. And then you make a decision from those five schools, and hopefully it's your best decision. And I thought Georgia was the best decision for me. If I had the chance to go back and do it again, I'd do the same thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did anybody else participate in your decision to choose a school? A coach or anybody else? Speaker 2: My family, my family. I think that was about it; it was my family. It was nobody else, not the high school coach [Dave Smith], nobody. It was mainly my family who I confided in. Speaker 1: Were there a lot of personal visits from coaches and scouts? Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot. Like I said, every week. And I narrowed it down to four or five schools. I visited Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was the first school I visited, was Georgia Tech. And I went to Georgia, I went to Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland], I went to North Carolina State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and North Carolina [University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina]. So, those were the schools I visited and narrowed it down to. And at the last minute--actually I signed a letter of intent with North Carolina State, and at the last minute I changed my mind. Speaker 1: Yeah, they had a pretty good team. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, th- they do now. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a great team there. Speaker 1: They had a tournament then with-- Speaker 2: But the year--if I had went to North Carolina State, that next year they won the national championship. Speaker 1: Is that when they had Dereck Whittenburg? Speaker 2: Whittenburg and Lowe [Sidney Lowe], and they had Thurl Bailey-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --and Lorenzo Charles on. Just imagine that team (laughter). That would have been an unbelievable team. Story_ID: 668876 Speaker 1: All right. Now, I'm going to get off of basketball for a minute to talk about your family. Because you were saying earlier--and I think it's really remarkable that your greatest achievement happened before you even-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --played big time basketball (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I think the biggest thing for me when I look at achievements--I remember coming home one day and my mom [Gertrude Wilkins Baker] was on the step, she was crying. And I said, "What's wrong?" She said, "We don't have anything to eat today." And I said, "Don't worry. One day I'll make you rich, and we won't have to worry about a meal ever again." And from the time I was twelve until the time I was eighteen, I worked my butt off and I got my mom her first house she owned. I don't know how I did it, but I did it. And she never, she never asked for food again. Speaker 1: Did you, did. Yeah, now, but did, did you do it all through basketball? Speaker 2: I did some basketball, I did it through summer jobs. I mean, I worked during the summer. You know, in Baltimore [Maryland] they had these community programs where they'd have you work and make money. I used to cut grass, hustle bottles. Me and my brother, we did some of everything, you know, to bring home a dime. And so we bought my mom her first--because I always would bring money home to feed the family, so my mother never wanted for food again. Speaker 1: Okay, but enough money to buy a house though, that's a lot of-- Speaker 2: At that time, it was a lot back then. But if you look at it today, it really wasn't very much money at all. But I had the opportunity to put her in something that was comfortable. It wasn't a great house, but nevertheless it was a house that she was comfortable in. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, all right. Very few teenagers can do this (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, very few people are able to refocus themselves and d- be determined at something, and believe that they can accomplish it. I never believed in someone telling me what I can't do. I take it as a challenge when people tell me I can't do anything, and I'm out to prove them wrong. And I've always been that my whole life. Story_ID: 668877 Speaker 1: High school graduation, you're on your way to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, what convinced you to go to the University of Georgia? Speaker 2: It was just, I wanted to go somewhere where I couldn't be compared to anybody. And by going to the University of Georgia, there was no one to compare me to. They hadn't been to a tournament since 1934 before I came. And so, I decided with six other high school All-Americans that we would all go at the same time. And that's what we did. Speaker 1: Okay. Who were the other six? Speaker 2: It was Lamar Heard from Cartersville, Georgia; Derrick Floyd out of Miami, Florida. It was Terry Fair out of Macon, Georgia, and a guy named Bobby Miles [Robert Miles] out of North Carolina. And there was another guy named Bobby [ph.], I can't remember his last name. Those are five guys that were high school All-Americans, and we all came there at the same time. Speaker 1: Wow. All right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And after I left, the year I left college, they went to the Final Four [NCAA Final Four], tell you what kind of team we had. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about the University of Georgia. Did it meet your expectations? Speaker 2: The University of Georgia was--I don't think outstanding is a strong enough word. It's a wonderful university that really had my back. It got me out of a very tough situation in North Carolina, what I was going through, and brought me to Georgia and treated me like a native son. I can't, I can't tell you how great it was playing at University of Georgia, and the people that I was engaged with--Coach Durham [Hugh Durham], Vince Dooley. All those people embraced me, you know, the students, you know, the alumni. And that's why to this day I'm proud to wear that G, is because of the way they treated me. Speaker 1: Now was there any--what was the discussion about what position you would play? Was it locked down that you would play small forward? Or-- Speaker 2: Oh, I knew I was going to play small forward. That wasn't even a question. (Laughter) They knew it, I knew it, and basically they were building the team around me, basically. Speaker 1: Okay. They had you in place? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was the first signing, and then everybody else signed after that. Speaker 1: Now, let me back up a little bit to '76 [1976]. This is--now, you--well, yeah, you start at the University of Georgia in '79 [1979]. But back in '76 [1976], the NBA [National Basketball Association] had its first slam dunk contest. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you see it? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was David Thompson and Dr. J [Julius Erving], and those guys in that dunk contest. Yeah, I sure did. Speaker 1: What did you think about it? Speaker 2: I said they, them guys are inhuman. Them guys are, they're like Superman, some of the stuff they did. As a young kid you see that kind of stuff, and say how can a person do the stuff that they did? And it was, you know, entertaining. It was a magical thing to watch, because as a young kid you'd never seen stuff like that--athletes that can do things in the air the way they did it. They were--I mean even to this day when you go back and watch some of the stuff that Dr. J and David Thompson di- man, the stuff is pretty incredible. Story_ID: 668878 Speaker 1: When did you first dunk a basketball? Speaker 2: I first dunked when I was twelve or thirteen, and it was by accident. I didn't even realize I had dunked. You know, people started cheering and hollering, and I'm like, "What'd I do?" And so, actually it was a goal in our neighborhood, that was eleven and a half feet, and I was the only kid who could dunk on that goal. Everybody would try it, the older kids, the big kids, but nobody could do it. I was the only kid. They kept telling me, "He's too small, he can't do that." I was the only one that could do it. So that--I mean, I've been dunking at an early age--thirteen, fourteen years old. Speaker 1: On an eleven foot rim (laughter)? Speaker 2: Um-hm, an eleven and a half rim in the neighborhood. It had chains on it, Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, I've seen some of these, you know, in the South, you know, where the rim is higher than it's supposed to be, but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. This, and this goal was around for twenty-five, twenty-six years, and nobody had changed it. It was there that long. Even when I went back and redid my old playground court, that same goal was still there. It's kind of a historical site, you know, because there was so much basketball played on that court, you know. Speaker 1: This is North Carolina--in Washington [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: This was in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 1: In Baltimore, okay. Speaker 2: And that's-- Speaker 1: What part is it in? Speaker 2: It's in, it's in Westport [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Westport, O'Donnell Heights [Baltimore, Maryland] area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I forget the name of the school. Oh, my god, I can't think of the name of the school. I can't even think of the name of the school right now. Story_ID: 668879 Speaker 1: Back to seventy- back up to '79 [1979]. All right, so you're at the U- University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] there. They're building a team around you, and you've got these five All-Americans from other places that are there too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Who's the coach at the University of Georgia? Speaker 2: Hugh Durham (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hugh Durham, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. How did you like pl- playing for him? Speaker 2: It was great. It was great playing for Hugh. Hugh prepared me for the pros. Speaker 1: What kind of advice did he give you? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't more so advice. It was more teaching and it was more discipline and, again, learning how to be a young man first. He said, you know, he used to tell me all the time, "You know, basketball is very easy for you. I got to teach you how to be a young man, and teach you respect and teach you honor, all those things." He said, "Everything else is easy for you. If I can teach you that, you're good." And he did, he did teach me that. He taught all of us. He was like a father to us, too, more so than a coach. And the great thing is that he and I are going into the College Basketball Hall of Fame [National Collegiate Basketball Hall of Fame, Kansas City, Missouri] together this year. So, that's a great honor. Speaker 1: What are the highlights of your tenure with the University of Georgia? Speaker 2: My highlights? (Pause) I think the highlight for me is my junior year, you know, playing with a team, with a team of guys that, you know, we were very good that year, and we were, we were winning. And I think one of the satisfying things for me, is the coach said to me, he said, "You know, there's nothing else you can do here in college ball." He said, "It's time for you go to the pros. And I don't want to be the one to hold you back," and that meant the world to me. And he said, "Yeah, you can come back next year and we'll probably have a chance to win it all. But as--I can't be the one to hold you back." So, he told me to go and pursue my career. Speaker 1: Now, is it--I mean as far as you know, is it unusual for a coach to tell a player that? Speaker 2: It's very unusual, very unusual. Because usually a coach wants to keep a kid in school, and he's never going to go to them and tell them, "Okay, it's time for you to go," f- for selfish reasons. But Coach Hugh Durham wasn't like that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you get in the NBA [National Basketball Association] draft in--well, how far did the team go, first of all, the University of Georgia team? Speaker 2: We went to the NIT the year I left. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the National Invitational Tournament. Speaker 2: Yeah. And then once I left and went to the pros, the team, again, they were seasoned now. You know, they had more confidence in themselves. And all of us wanted--I mean we talked about, "You know, if you stay, man, we have a chance." But they, to their credit, man, they fought hard that next year and went to the Final Four [NCAA Final Four]. Speaker 1: Okay. Who beat them in the Final Four? Speaker 2: North Carolina State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: --the team that I originally signed with. (Laughter) Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 668880 Speaker 1: So you were drafted. Tell us about the NBA [National Basketball Association] draft process. What--what was it like then, as opposed to now? Speaker 2: Oh, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean now it's televised, and everybody's-- Speaker 2: That's a scary moment. That's, that's world stage there. You know, and you're sitting there waiting to see where you're going to go. And I knew if I didn't go one, I was going to go three. I already knew that because of the way it was mapped out and what the scouts were talking about, and different teams were talking about. So, I knew I would go--if I didn't go to the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers], I was going to go to the Utah Jazz at number three. And so when the Lakers picked James Worthy, I said, "Aw, I guess I'm going to Utah," you know, (laughter) and I was not happy. Speaker 1: Now, who picked--who was drafted two? Speaker 2: Terry Cummings. Speaker 1: Okay. Terry Cummings (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was drafted number two. Speaker 1: --from DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, from DePaul. We had--man, that class was crazy. Speaker 1: Yeah, he went to the Bucks [Milwaukee Bucks]. He was an All-Star with the Bucks, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, a tough, tough player. I mean that's--again, how big those small forwards were in those days; I mean 6'10". Terry Cummings was 6'10", and James Worthy--those were big guys. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, okay, so Utah Jazz used to be the New Orleans Jazz. They are in Utah now. Were you happy about being drafted by the Jazz? Speaker 2: No, not at all. I did not want to go to the Jazz (laughter). I wanted to either go to the Lakers at that time, or if there's some way I could be traded to Atlanta [Atlanta Hawks]. And so, I ended up getting my wish later that week by coming to Atlanta. Speaker 1: What happened? You know, I know they traded--I think they traded, I think they traded for John Drew (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They traded John Drew and Freeman Williams for a million dollars, which was a lot back then for a rookie. And so, that's how bad I wanted out of Utah and that's how bad Atlanta wanted me. Speaker 1: Did, did they--well, did--I mean I just want to know why Utah didn't want to keep you. Speaker 2: I think it was financially, was a problem back then, you know, because they took cash to get me. Speaker 1: Who did they have then? Okay. Speaker 2: You know, so again, teams weren't thriving the way they are now, you know. Speaker 1: Who did Utah have then? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I want to say Mark Eaton, who was a 7'5" center. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. Speaker 2: I want to say Darrell Griffith was there. I can't remember who else was there on that team. It would have been a pretty good team. Speaker 1: Darrell Griffith (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they wanted me to play power forward, and I'm like, "Y'all out of your mind. I'm not playing power forward. What? I'm 205 [pounds] soaking wet, and I'm not going to play power forward." Story_ID: 668881 Speaker 1: So, Atlanta [Georgia], had you had any discussions with Atlanta [Atlanta Hawks] or--? Speaker 2: Not much. Speaker 1: Or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)I didn't have any discussions. Atlanta came really out of nowhere. And my agent said that "It's a possibility we can get a trade in Atlanta." I'm like, "Whatever you have to do, I don't care what it is, try to make that trade happen." I'm going to be right in my backyard, you know, coming from the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. Staying right in Atlanta, oh man, that would be heaven. And so when the trade came around and I talked to Ted Turner who was the owner at the time, he was like, "You know, we're going to bring you to Atlanta." You talking about a happy man. Oh, man, I was dancing in the hallways. Speaker 1: Okay. So Atlanta in those days was--I've said it a million times this week--was like a mecca to black people. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Especially in those days-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with a black mayor [Maynard Jackson]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It was a booming town. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And Ted Turner, CNN going on. And so many things were happening in those days. So-- Speaker 2: It was. And I didn't--my first visit to Atlanta was probably late 1979 when I just--I visited, you know, with, I think it was either my agent--I can't remember who it was. That was the first time I really experienced Atlanta, and I spent most of my career--well, all of my career in Athens. So, I didn't--I only came to Atlanta every now and then, and I didn't stay very long. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, all right. So you get traded to--did you ever go to Utah for anything before you-- Speaker 2: No, I never went. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Never went, and never spoke to anybody. Speaker 1: All right. So, by time training came to a start, I guess in October or something, you were going to Atlanta? Speaker 2: I was going to Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you do anything special during the summer? Speaker 2: I just played basketball, that's all I did. Play- I played summer leagues. That's all we did in those days. Everybody played summer league, all the top guys played summer league. I used to travel around with Magic Johnson's traveling All-Stars [Magic Johnson All-Stars] with Dr. J [Julius Erving], Iceman [George Gervin], Robert Parish, McHale [Kevin McHale]--all of us traveled during the summer playing basketball. So, I was ready for the league before I came in the league. Speaker 1: Yeah, now--I don't think the average person knows this. But basketball players, it's a small fraternity of players, and they, a lot--they all know each other (laughter). Speaker 2: We're, we're a small family. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: A big small family is basically what we are (laughter). And when I tell you--it was Magic Johnson who kind of discovered me during the summer. He said, "Hey, we got this kid going to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], and we want him to travel with us around the country." So, we had one team with me, Isiah Thomas, Moses Malone, you know, Karl Malone--not Karl Malone, but you had Maurice Lucas, and you would have Clyde Drexler on that team. On the other team you would have Magic Johnson, Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar], Iceman, Dr. J, on one team. And we would play all summer long in different parts of the country. Speaker 1: They used to come to Chicago [Illinois] and play at the Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, we played all over, which made us ready when the season came around. We were ready to play, because we played with all the best players in the league during the summer. Larry Bird would travel with us, you know. Like I say, Robert Parish, Kevin McHale, you know, Artis Gilmore--all these guys played. You know, these are the best players in the league. It was a different time. Story_ID: 668882 Speaker 1: So the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks], where, where were the Hawks playing then? Speaker 2: They were playing in the Omni arena [Omni Coliseum, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, well, tell us who, who was on the team that first year? Speaker 2: It was me, Dan Roundfield, Tree Rollins, Eddie Johnson, and I want to say Armond Hill, were the starting five. And we had, early in that year I think we had Rudy Macklin, who was on that team, and Rory Sparrow. We, we had a pretty nice squad. Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like a good team. Speaker 2: We had a pretty nice squad. But we didn't go to the playoffs until the next year, you know. We didn't make the playoffs that first year. Speaker 1: So who, who was the coach that first year? Speaker 2: Mike--oh, no, it was Kevin Loughery the first year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Kevin Loughery, right. Speaker 2: Then the second year I was in the league it was Mike Fratello. Speaker 1: Okay. I remember when Kevin Loughery was coach of the Bulls [Chicago Bulls]. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, it was a heck of a time to be a part of basketball. Speaker 1: Then Mike Fratello, okay. So, the- now what happened? What was the dissatisfaction? Well, you wouldn't necessarily know, but what do you think was the dissatisfaction with Kevin Loughery in terms of--? He just didn't win enough games or (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aw, the dissatisfaction with Kevin Loughery. I loved Kevin Loughery. He was a tough, crazy dude (laughter). He would cuss you out in one instance, and take you to dinner right after the game. I mean, never held grudges. I mean but he was a player's coach, because he's played the game. Kevin was an amazing coach. He was high strung, but he was a good coach. Speaker 1: What did you get the second year that you didn't have the first year, you know? Speaker 2: Well, experience. We got experience, and they added a couple more players and we did very well that year. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And what--how did you do your first year? Speaker 2: My first year, I averaged seventeen [points] a game my first year, especially with a team with Dan Roundfield and Eddie Johnson. They were the main scorers. They averaged seventeen points a game on that team as a rookie. That was pretty good in them days. You know, that's considered All-Star stats today. And my second year I averaged twenty-one points a game my second year--twenty-three, actually. I think it was twenty-three points in my second year. Speaker 1: Twenty-three is real good. Speaker 2: That was, in those days that was outstanding. And then I went from that to twenty-seven a game, twenty-nine, thirty, you know, (laughter) and it just kept climbing. Speaker 1: You were the NBA [National Basketball Association] scoring champion in--what year was it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)I think it was '85 [1985], I believe. Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]. Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], '85 [1985]. But I chased Michael Jordan for six years. And finally I was like, "Man, forget this. I'm not chasing this guy anymore" (laughter). Speaker 1: By a percentage point. Speaker 2: By a percentage point. It was very close every time, but he would always get me every year. Story_ID: 668883 Speaker 1: We're being joined by Kiara Ortiz, who's observing. Now, now here you are, this is your first year in, in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. We're talking about the earlier years, early years. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, your scoring average the second year is up to twenty-three points a game. Speaker 2: Twenty-three a game, um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, this is 19--? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-- Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay. So, next year in 1984 this is when Jordan [Michael Jordan] comes into the league in '84 [1984] I think it is, and yeah, from North Carolina, so. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, North Carolina seems to be dominating (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, we were dominating with great basketball players, oh yeah, no question. Speaker 1: So, did the Atlanta Hawks--what did you do the third year? What did the team do? Speaker 2: The third year we was in the playoffs, the first round of playoffs. I'm having, again, a great year. I think I was averaging twenty-seven a game that year. Speaker 1: Did, did you get to play with Spud Webb (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Played with Spud. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I played with Spud eight years. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I-- Speaker 2: Eight years. Speaker 1: I thought so. I just hadn't figured it out. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He was a phenomenal player. Speaker 2: Oh, man, unbelievable, especially a guy at that size. Speaker 1: Yeah, at 5'7"-- Speaker 2: It's amazing. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's like 5'7" or 5'6"? Speaker 2: Maybe. Speaker 1: Maybe. Speaker 2: (Laughter) He was a small guy, and lightning quick. Speaker 1: Yeah, and could dunk the ball, you know. Speaker 2: He was a freak of nature, is what he was. And no one had ever seen anybody like him at that time. And still to this day, I'm just amazed at what he was able to do at that size. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So how, how, how far did you get in the playoffs the third year? Speaker 2: I think we went, I want to say we went to the first round the first year, and we got put out in the second round the first year. Speaker 1: Yeah. Correct me if I'm wrong. I think the Celtics [Boston Celtics] were like dominating the Eastern Conference then. Speaker 2: The Celtics. And it was the Celtics at that time, and I would probably say Philadelphia [Philadelphia 76ers] who were the two top teams. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Right. Right. Right. 'Cause Philadelphia still had Dr. J [Julius Erving], you know. Moses Malone, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and Moses Malone. They had Caldwell Jones, and Mo Cheeks [Maurice Cheeks], and Andrew To- [Andrew Toney]. They were, they were a team. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A great team. Story_ID: 668884 Speaker 1: In 1985 is when you win the first NBA Slam Dunk Contest. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, now this is a performance that people talked about all over Chicago [Illinois], I know that. I mean, I heard--I mean, I don't know if your eyes were itching wherever you were, but people were talking about all the great dunks that you made in 1985. Speaker 2: People still talk about it today, that dunk contest (laughter). And that's to let you know how great it was, and why it's the best dunk contest of all time. They're talking about it twenty something years later. No matter who won, the fans got their money's worth. So, I think everybody won. Michael won, I won, because of what we were able to create. Speaker 1: Okay. There was a little controversy over whether you or Michael Jordan won. But you won it, and the--who gave you the nickname the Human Highlight Reel? Speaker 2: I got that name, believe it or not, in the eleventh grade. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: I got that name before I came to the pros, and I hated the name. I'm like, Human Highlight, that sounds--I don't like it. But as I got older I said, "Wait a minute, hold up. I can make a little money off this name" (laughter). So, it stuck after that. Speaker 1: Yeah, the sportswriters love it. They would, you know, every time they would say your name, "The Human Highlight Reel is coming up." Speaker 2: There was a guy named Howard Garfinkel at the Five-Star Basketball Camp who gave me that name. The reason why I got that name, to make a long story short, I scored forty-two points in the All-Star game, and they didn't know how I was scoring the points. We had all the great high school players across the nation in that game. And he said, "You know what? We're just going to call him the Human Highlight Film. We don't know what he's doing." Because a lot of stuff I did was just spontaneous, it was in traffic, able to elude contact and get around people. And so, it was a lot of things they saw in that game that they haven't seen before, and that's how I got the name. Story_ID: 668885 Speaker 1: Can you remember or describe a move that you made that you consider your best, best move in those days? Speaker 2: I think one of the best moves for me is going to the basket--and it happened by accident, really. I was going to the basket and I jumped--actually, I went to the middle and I got cut off by the defense. And I came back to the baseline and I jumped. And I remember playing against the Milwaukee Bucks, and Bob Lanier covered the rim like this. And I turned around in the air, and when I was coming back around he was going down and I was still going up, and I was able to pump the ball down to my side to keep someone from knocking it out of my hand and blocking it. And I came back up and dunked it on the buzzer, and that's how we won the game. And for nine years, Bob didn't speak to me after that play. And so after I retired I said "Bob, I mean, could you just talk to me?" He said, "I'm just starting to like you again." I said, "Why?" He said, "That one play when you dunked on me on the baseline and I went home and my daughter said, 'How can you let that little skinny kid dunk on you like that?'" He said, "I hated you." I'm like, "Are you serious? It's jus- it's sports." But that's just the way it was back then. But that's when I knew that I had a special move. That one play showed me how I can still go up in traffic and let people hit me in the air, and still be able to finish at the rim. Speaker 1: Now, yeah, people were concerned about, in those days, about being posterized, that's what they used to call it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, guys didn't like that. Speaker 1: Appearing on a poster with you dunking their face. You know so-- Speaker 2: They did not, no. They didn't like that, because they looked at it as embarrassment. And so if you dunked on a guy, you--run down to the other end. Don't celebrate. Just, you know, act like it's any other old point, because they took it personal. Story_ID: 668886 Speaker 1: Yeah, now, do, do you think the reputation of being able to do that helped you score easier? Because some- sometimes I wonder if players would rather not be on the scene when-- Speaker 2: Well, it made me score easier, because the dunking was the tool for intimidation that I used to back people up, but it wasn't really who I was. But every dunk I made, people thought that every play I did was a dunk. I had games where I scored over forty, and only had one dunk in the whole game. So, it was just a tool for intimidation. But it did show me one thing, that I, I could create other things in my game to make me more effective. Because the thing I learned is how to play the game on the ground as well as in the air. And what I mean by that is that I was able to become more fundamentally sound, and working on other aspects of the game that makes me unguardable. And that's what I did. Speaker 1: At your best, how would you describe your game? And, and what kind of play (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At my best? Speaker 1: --did Atlanta [Atlanta Hawks] run for you, to make sure you were most effective? Speaker 2: I think that my best was probably the year we took Boston [Boston Celtics] to the seventh game in the Eastern Conference. I think that year I felt like nobody could guard me. I mean I always felt that, period, but (laughter) I felt particularly then that once I got in that groove--and that whole year I was in an unbelievable groove, and I was on an unbelievable pace. There wasn't one guy--you would have to double team me. That was just my mentality--how much or how quickly can I attack you to get you off balance, or to get a foul on you so I can create an edge for myself. So, I was always thinking the game as well as playing the game. Speaker 1: Okay. But what I was trying to find out was like what was your game in terms of--I mean what were you looking for on the court? What spots were you trying to get to, you know, what plays were Atlanta running for you to make sure that you--? Speaker 2: There wasn't necessarily a spot I was trying to get to. It was trying to create an advantage. I was always looking to try to create an advantage. And we used to run a play called five down, which is five down, four down, and three down. Three down was my play, for the small forward. And we were, ran a cross pick to bring me over to the post, so I'd catch and go quickly and do my thing. But a lot of times I just liked to catch the ball out in the wing and clear everybody out to one side and let me go one on one against a guy. Because if I got in a one on one situation, he's basically at your mercy. And so that was one of my favorite plays that we would call a clear out. We'd call three out, and you had the two bigs at the top of the key and the other two guys on the other side of the floor. And so, you were on an island by yourself trying to defend me. And so that was the thing that gave me a major advantage. And the fast break was my bread and butter, to get out on a fast break. You know, but my thing was to outrun everybody. And we would get up and down the floor. Between me, Spud [Spud Webb], and Kevin Willis, man, we would sprint, and the first one down, the first one get it. Speaker 1: You had Kevin Willis, I forgot about him, 6'11". Speaker 2: Seven foot. Speaker 1: Seven foot, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, seven foot. I mean, he was ripped. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: A strong, strong individual. Speaker 1: Yeah, so in those days Kevin Willis, you--who else was on that team? Speaker 2: Me, Kevin Willis, Doc Rivers, Randy Wittman, Tree Rollins, Spud Webb, John Battle, Antoine Carr, Cliff Levingston, Jon Koncak. We had some players (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right--right. Yeah, that's an intimidating team. Speaker 2: Yeah. We had guys that would hurt you (laughter). Speaker 1: Who was the coach? Speaker 2: Mike Fratello. Speaker 1: Mike Fratello. I know in last year's playoffs, the Cavaliers [Cleveland Cavaliers] were playing, and there was a lot of discussion by the commentators about, you know, how much coaching is really going on sometimes in the offense of the Cavaliers. Because many times it appeared like it was cleared out for Jordan [Michael Jordan]--I mean, not for Jordan (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lebron [Lebron James]? Speaker 1: For Lebron, or cleared out for-- Speaker 2: Well, Lebron ran that team, let's make no mistake. He ran that team, no question. He had some coaching going on, but Lebron ran that team, period. Speaker 1: Now he was, he's a team player. That's what everybody says-- Speaker 2: Oh, no question, he's a team player. And he's a very unselfish player. I mean, he's a great player, man. You know, he wants to win. And he makes people around him better, it's no question about that. Speaker 1: But I was just thinking. I guess I'm just raising the issue of sometimes, like, it appears that there's a lot of coaching going on, and sometimes there's not, you know, in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, I think in this situation, there's a little of both. There definitely was some coaching going on, but Lebron, you know, in a lot of situations dictates what goes on out on the floor, because he's a point forward. He's ou- he handles the ball more than anybody on that team. Story_ID: 668887 Speaker 1: What do you think most NBA [National Basketball Association] players prefer? I guess--do they prefer to be on a team where they can give it to somebody that can take, you know, their opponents one on one if they just cl- clear out, or do they prefer running play or what (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, great scorers, and s- particularly-- again, we want to be the one to finish the play, not start the play. What I mean by that, you let the point guard dictate whats goes on. You get down in a position where you run your plays, you run your offense, and you play through your point guard. Your point guard knows who the strong suits are on your team. They know if you got a guy that's averaging thirty points a game, you do everything you can to get him the ball. So you let him be the deliverer, and you be the receiver to finish. And that was my thing, that I didn't want to be the guy to start the play. I wanted to be the guy that finished the play. Speaker 1: Okay and you were the best finisher on the team-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so, and that makes sense. I just wondered what--I guess you can't answer for all NBA players. But mostly-- Speaker 2: Everybody's different (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody's different. Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody's different. But I can tell you all the great scorers, particularly I say a small forward or a power forward--Karl Malone. He didn't want to start the play, he wanted to give it to John Stockton so he can finish the play, that pick and roll, that deadly pick and roll. Probably one of the deadliest pick and rolls in the history of the game was Stockton and Malone. You know, Malone was always the receiver. You know, in different situations, you had Jordan [Michael Jordon], who was much like Lebron [Lebron James] as far as handling the ball a lot. He handled the ball a lot, but he was also off the ball a lot, where he can get a little rest and then come get the ball. So, everybody's different. Everybody's different in the way they, they score. Story_ID: 668888 Speaker 1: Now, in, in your tenure with the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks]--I guess, you played with the Hawks from what eighty- you played until about 19--was it, '93 [1993] or '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: I played until ninety- no, I played longer than that. I played four--I played until '95 [1995]. Speaker 1: With the Hawks (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I played until actually '92 [1992] with the Hawks, from-- Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I--okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I'm wrong. I came in '82 [1982], and I--it was '94 [1994]. You're right, '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982] to '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: Okay. During that, that period of time that's probably the heart of your NBA [National Basketball Association] career, with the Hawks. So, was there--what team gave you the most trouble during those days? Speaker 2: The team that gave us the most trouble was the Boston Celtics, and, and later it became the Chicago Bulls. Speaker 1: That's in the Eastern Division? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did they have that you didn't have? I, I asked [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson a similar question a month ago about the Boston Celtics, and why the Royals [Cincinnati Royals; Sacramento Kings] could never simply beat them. But-- Speaker 2: It's that Boston mystique. It's their talent level, it's their mentality. You got to beat all those things. You're not just beating the team, you're beating the mystique as well. But they always had great teams, always had great teams in those days. I don't remember playing against one bad Boston team my whole career. They were great teams. And then you're battling that mentality and attitude that they had of never losing. They believed that they could win every night out, anybody they play against. And so, you had to be ready to play. If you weren't ready to play, you got embarrassed, simple as that. Speaker 1: All right. Were you satisfied with, with the bench that the Hawks had when you played? Speaker 2: I was satisfied. I thought we could have done better. I thought we could have got some more consistent guys offensively. We had a great defensive team, but I needed one more guy to take some offensive pressure off me. Because if I didn't get thirty a game, then it was hard for us to win. Speaker 1: Right, right, okay, okay. And now, I guess 1986 is your greatest season I guess-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --statistically, I suppose, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I think I averaged 30.3 that year, or something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, you were the scoring champ. Speaker 2: I was, I was rolling that year (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 668889 Speaker 1: How did injuries factor in your career? Speaker 2: I had two serious injuries, one where I tore my Achilles tendon, and afterwards they thought my career was over. As a matter of fact, they said that I wouldn't be able to come back, or if I came back I wouldn't be the same. So, I was determined--again, someone telling me what I can't do. I was determined not to just come back, but to be better than I was when I left. And I got all these sarcastic pats on the back. I remember working every day for nine months, twice a day for nine months. And I came back, and I remember my first exhibition game I went to the basket and I fell. And the first thing I did, I grabbed my ankle and thought I had hurt myself, but I had no pain. And I said to myself, I said, "You know what? If this thing's going to pop, it's going to pop on my terms. I'm going all out." And my first regular season game, I scored thirty against New York [New York Knicks]. And that's when I said, "Okay, I'm back," and I averaged right at thirty points a game that season. That was my best all around season. Speaker 1: Okay, right after the Achilles? Speaker 2: Right after the Achilles. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you tear it? Speaker 2: Tore it completely in half (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --tore it completely in half. Speaker 1: So they had to surgically repair it? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean when I, before I hit the floor, I could see the top of my foot. It was just, just dangling there. And so I said to myself, "I'm done, my career is over." I mean, 'cause that's not normal. But they went and put me in an air cast. I went to the hospital, and something told me to tell the ambulance to take me back to the arena. I went back to the arena in an air cast, and I don't know, to this day I don't know why I did that. And I didn't realize the emotion that was in the building. So many people were in there, and they were crying because I was hurt, and not knowing if I was coming back. And I just kept saying, "I'll be back, I'll be back." Speaker 1: Okay. So you played the rest--you never hurt it again right? (Unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never hurt it again. Story_ID: 668890 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about the, the, the last season with the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks]. What happened the last few seasons? Speaker 2: The last three seasons (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well, it could be. Just t- towards the end of your career (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, towards the end of my career we were leading the Eastern Conference. And then the Hawks made the trade, trading me to L.A. Clippers [Los Angeles Clippers] for Danny Manning, which is one of the biggest mistakes ever in the history of professional basketball (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember Manning was part of the NCAA championship team in Kansas [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Kansas, right, a young player. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: You know, the most satisfying game I ever had is when I came back to Atlanta two weeks later. And I remember playing--I was hyped up before the game. I was so hyped, I was shaking. And I was so hyped up, I went out in the first half and I had four points coming into halfway. And then I had to tell myself, I said, "Okay, calm down, relax, and go out there and do what you come to do." And so when I went back on the court, I looked at Mark Jackson, who was our point guard. I said, "Give me the ball and get out of the way." And I scored thirty-four, thirty-six, in the second half, and we beat Atlanta on their court. That was my most satisfying game. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, how did the Atlanta fans respond to you? Speaker 2: They ran on the floor. They were cheering for the Clippers, (laughter) was the funny thing. I'd never experienced anything like that. The people stood up and rushed the floor, even before the game when they called me out last. And they gave me a standing ovation before I came on the floor. And they pushed me out on the floor, my teammates pushed me out on the floor after I got the standing ovation, because they cheered for ten minutes straight. It was, it was surreal. Speaker 1: Well, what was--these are the moments when, you know, when the average person reading the paper or watching 'SportsCenter' says, "What was Atlanta thinking?" Speaker 2: Yeah, right. They weren't thinking, that was the question. And it was a guy named Stan Kasten and Pete Babcock who made that trade, the worst trade in the history of our franchise. And people talk about it to this day. And I tell you, it took me a long time to get over it, because that really hurt me, because I thought I was going to retire in a Hawks uniform. And today, even though my jersey is hanging up in that rafter, I wish I would have retired in that uniform. And they would never bring me back to retire in a uniform. And so, you know, when my jersey was retired, that was kind of the, you know, making up for it. But it wasn't the same. But it shows you how the city and the fans here have respected me and accepted me. That place--you couldn't stand--there was not another place to stand in that building. They all came out to support that. Speaker 1: Well, history has shown that you--that you consider Atlanta [Georgia] your home. Speaker 2: Yes, I mean the only place I ever had, you know, to really call home was Atlanta. Baltimore [Maryland] wasn't my home, North Carolina wasn't my home. Atlanta has been the only place that's been my home. Speaker 1: Now, by that time were you married? Did you have a family then? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. And, you know, things happen in life. You go through things in life and, you know, things don't work out the way you planned. So, I've always been a guy that, you know, has been through little trials and tribulations, but I always persevered. And so, that was just another thing to, to kind of deal with and--and kind of stay above all the difficulties. Story_ID: 668891 Speaker 1: The Clippers [Los Angeles Clippers]. (Pause) So Mark Jackson was with the Clippers then (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Who else? Who--? Speaker 2: Mark Jackson, a guy named Loy Vaught, Ron Harper. And we had a bunch of other guys. I can't remember. Speaker 1: He's a player who suffered a significant injury to his knee. Speaker 2: Yeah, he did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That changed his whole game. Speaker 2: It did, but he ended up winning three or four championships. You know, so it was a nice tradeoff. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah because he--at one time they mentioning him in the same sentence when they were mentioning you and Michael Jordan. Speaker 2: Early on. Speaker 1: Yeah, very early on. Speaker 2: You know, the expectations. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Well, those are huge shoes to fill, huge shoes to fill. I mean because you've got guys who've done it over a span of a decade, you know, consistently. And you just--and a lot of people can't do that. Speaker 1: He had the potential, they were saying. There was a guy at Miami [Miami Heat], they were calling him Baby Jordan [Harold Miner] (laughter). Speaker 2: He wasn't even close. He wasn't even close. He may have gotten the, the nickname, but he wasn't even close. He wasn't even in the same--it wasn't even the same stratosphere (laughter). You know, it wasn't even close. He was an athlete, that was it. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a hell of an athlete. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A shorter guy. Speaker 2: Yeah, he wasn't, he wasn't Mike. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Unh-uh, no, no. Not even close. Story_ID: 668892 Speaker 1: The Clippers' [Los Angeles Clippers] owner got in trouble just two years ago and had to leave basketball. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, this, this man was the owner of the Clippers, right, when you got there, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. Speaker 1: And I forget, I'm trying to think of his name (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Donald Sterling. Speaker 1: Okay, Donald Sterling, right, right. But the general manager is Elgin Baylor, right? Is that--? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: You know, the funny thing in life, man, you know, a lot of things that--people were stuck in a time warp, and unfortunately that person has to live with that. I tried to stay clear of stuff like that, because I'm not that person who likes to go backwards. And so, you know, people have to live with their own demons, you know, their own insecurities. And it's a lot of people out here with those insecurities, and why they say negative things that eventually they have to pay for. So I kind of, you know, concentrate on the more positive than that negative stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay. When you were with the Clippers, did he have that kind of reputation with the players as being somebody that would say racial remarks (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. I never witnessed anything like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, that whole situation out there was a strange situation, you know, it really was. And that's something that unfortunately brings back ma- bad memories for people. And so, as a person who represents all different type of people, you got to be very careful what you say and what you think (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm just wondering, 'cause they (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And sometimes they get, they get themselves in trouble, because a lot of times people talk too much and they end up getting themselves in trouble. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have an analysis of why--a lot of people wondered why the Clippers kind of stayed in the cellar for so long. They seemed like they never really got it together. Even though good players would go there, it was like a quagmire. Speaker 2: Well, outside of the other racial tensions that went on there, I think more important with the Clippers is that even before that, they always traded away their first picks. You know, after a year or two they traded them, so they never had a chance to build a team. So, that's why they stayed in that cellar for so long, because they didn't keep those guys together. And now that they've totally changed that, with the way they think and the way they draft, and more importantly, how they want to build their team, they keep them guys together a little longer and that's how you build chemistry. Speaker 1: Yeah, they have a strong team now. (Unclear) think they're (unclear) Los Angeles [California] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, they do. And Steve Ballmer is a great guy that owns that team now, a wonderful guy. Speaker 1: Does it start at the top? Speaker 2: It always starts at the top. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You can't start in the middle, because somebody has to make the decision. Speaker 1: Well, you know, there're different views about-- you know, when the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] won their championships, Jerry Krause said, you know, he was famous for saying, "It's management that wins championships, not players" (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, that's not true at all. Management is responsible for putting the talent and players in place to build their chemistry to win, but it's the players who're running up and down that floor. It's the coaches who're building that togetherness and that team concept. So, it's the players and coaches that win championships. Yeah, management plays a major part in that, of course, because they're paying the money to go out and get the right fit for their team. But it's players who win championships, and coaches. Players and coaches win championships. Don't make no mistake about that. Speaker 1: Okay. So Jerry Kraus was wrong (laughter)--? Speaker 2: Yeah h- I don't know where he was going with that one. But that one's way out there. Story_ID: 668893 Speaker 1: You were with the Clippers [Los Angeles Clippers] for just a year, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, just a year. Speaker 1: And then you, you went to Europe, right? To-- Speaker 2: I went to the Boston Celtics after that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Greece, I guess. Okay, that's right, Boston Celtics. That's right, the Boston Celtics. Speaker 2: And then when they had the lockout year, I wanted to do something different at the end of my career. So, I went to Europe and I went to Greece and I played in Greece [Panathinaikos BSA Athens] where I won the first ever European title for that team, which was something like in a storybook. When you win a championship over there, there are hundreds of thousands of people there supporting you in that city. And now since we won that first championship, they've won six or seven more since then. Speaker 1: Okay. So you started a dynasty there. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. You played there one year and you came back and played for--? Speaker 2: San Antonio. Speaker 1: Okay, the Spurs [San Antonio Spurs]. What was that like? Did you-- Speaker 2: It was great until everybody got hurt. All our big people got hurt, so I ended up playing power forward on that team. You know, we were just too small. David Robinson was hurt, and Will Perdue, all those guys were hurt. And so that next year, at the end of the year I went back--I went to Italy [Fortitudo Pallacanestro Bologna 103] and played. Again, just--they made you offers you couldn't refuse. So I went back there for a year, and it was great. We won there, and then I finally came back to Orlando [Orlando Magic] and played there and retired. Speaker 1: (Pause) Tell us about Reebok [Reebok International Ltd]. Speaker 2: Oh, man, I've been with Reebok, oh, for over thirty years. A long time I've been with Reebok. Speaker 1: Okay, how did the deal initially get struck (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually I was with Converse first. Then I went to Brooks [Brooks Sports, Inc.] shoes and then I went to Reebok. And Reebok was just great at that, at that building the brand. Because it was Reebok--at that time it was Reebok and Nike [Nike, Inc.]. It was me and Michael Jordan. Then you had Magic [Magic Johnson] and Larry Bird with Converse. So, it was always a competition between the three companies. Story_ID: 668894 Speaker 1: What is the difference in shoes? I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What is the difference in shoes? Speaker 1: Is there a difference in the-- Speaker 2: What's the difference in the shoes? Style, money (laughter). That's the only difference, really. Style and money, that's all it is. Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to design your shoe in some form or fashion? Speaker 2: Somewhat. I mean at times I was able to be involved with some design of the shoe. The pump shoe was something that I kind of put on the map, and it exploded from there for twenty something years. And so-- Speaker 1: And that's the shoe where you could squeeze a button (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it was a fun shoe. Speaker 1: --and make it more snug, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, all the shoes back then were a little heavy at times. But you know, the shoes got lighter as the years went on. But that shoe, you know, was around a long time, you know. So, I still have a couple of classics left, you know, that I wear from time to time. Speaker 1: So, you had commercials for Reebok [Reebok International Ltd]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Michael Jordan had commercials for Nike [Nike, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Magic Johnson and Larry Bird for Converse. Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, those were the three main ones, you know. And we had all commercials going on. We had our own little competition, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it was great. Story_ID: 668895 Speaker 1: Part of the camaraderie of the NBA [National Basketball Association] was the Dream Team. And you were on--were you on both? Speaker 2: I was on the Dream Team II. I was hurt on Dream Team I. I had, torn Achilles then. So, I didn't get picked for that team because of the injury. But I was, four years later I end up going to Dream Team II, which was another awesome team. Speaker 1: Okay. Who was on that team? Speaker 2: It was me, Shaquille O'Neal, Alonzo Mourning, Isiah Thomas, Mark Price, Larry Johnson, Dan Majerle, Steve Smith. And who else was on that team? Derrick Coleman and Shawn Kemp. Speaker 1: That was a powerful team (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a powerful team, yeah. Speaker 1: That was 1994, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a powerful team. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Did any of the international teams give you any (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't come close. They didn't come close. We had a--our average margin of victory was thirty. We were killing them. It wasn't even close. Speaker 1: And at the same time, there were more European players coming over than ever before. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a lot of European players coming into the league then. But, you know, we were so dominant. Because all the best players, again, was playing in those Olympic Games. So, you know, there was nobody who was going to come close to us. Speaker 1: I'm thinking in those days, maybe the top European guy over there might have been Detlef Schrempf (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Sabonis. Speaker 1: Sabonis. Oh, Arvydas Sabonis. Speaker 2: Yes, it was Sabonis. Before he got hurt he was one of the best big men in the world, before he got hurt. He was 7'5", just athletic, talented guy. Speaker 1: He played for the Russian--I mean the USSR and then the Russian team. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and then he ended up going to the Portland Trail Blazers and played there most of his career, yeah. Speaker 1: Arvydas Sabonis, yeah. And I remember Detlef Schrempf played for the SuperSonics [Seattle SuperSonics]. Sonics, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, he was a good player, too, a very good player. Speaker 1: The African players started coming into the NBA too at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to say the first one was--it probably was Hakeem. I want to say Hakeem was the first one, and the greatest one of all, Hakeem Olajuwon. Speaker 1: I think it was maybe Manute Bol before him [sic.]. It might have been, you know. They were around the same period of time. Speaker 2: I'm thinking that he was a little bit, he was a year after. He was a year after Hakeem. Speaker 1: Was he? They had Mutombo. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Mutombo, Dikembe [Dikembe Mutombo], came a little bit later. But Hakeem, man, he was the best to ever come out of that part of the world. He was unbelievable. Speaker 1: Well, do you think that the black community embraced those players when they came over? Speaker 2: I don't think they cared, you know. Could you play? That's all they cared about. And, again, Hakeem was a guy who never really even played basketball before he came here. He was into soccer. And for him to totally transform his whole world into basketball, was pretty amazing. Story_ID: 668896 Speaker 1: So when you finished, when you finished your career, you were playing with the-- you, you finished with the O- Orlando Magic you were playing with your brother [Gerald Wilkins], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, I wanted to play one year with my brother at the end of my career. And I could have went to other teams and played, but I said, "You know what? I'm going to retire at the end of this year anyway, so I'm going to go and play one year with my brother." Speaker 1: So this is a long, long career, because you retired at age thirty-eight or thirty-nine, right? Speaker 2: Thirty-nine. Speaker 1: Thirty-nine, yeah. Speaker 2: I played a total of seventeen years. Speaker 1: There're very few NBA [National Basketball Association] players who played 'til thirty-nine. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And actually, it's funny. I could have played two or three more years if I wanted to. But at that time, it was time to move on to something else. Story_ID: 668897 Speaker 1: What was really remarkable too with the, with the athleticism that you displayed, is you didn't hurt something else, you know, to the extent that you couldn't play. Speaker 2: You know, again, when I got hurt the first time, I learned how to play the game on the ground as well as in the air. You know, I became, again, more fundamentally sound, where I was able to think the game even more instead of using my athleticism to dictate what the outcome was going to be. So, it had to become more of a thinking man's game. Speaker 1: And there's risk I guess in some moves, I guess. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Some of them moves I did early on, later in my career I didn't want to attempt those moves, you know, because you could have blown out a knee or an ankle or something. You know, unfortunately, Father Time is undefeated. Speaker 1: How far do players go--I remember when the Detroit Pistons used to play the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] I used to wonder at home, how far will they go to win? Because they seemed to knock Jordan [Michael Jordan] out of the air (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whatever, by any means necessary. That was their motto, "By any means necessary." And they won titles because of that. Speaker 1: I think it's different now from the way it used to be. Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: It doesn't seem to be as-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, night and day. Night and day. A lot of things we did, you can't do today. Guys were physical. They had girth, I mean guys were big. Not only were they big and physical, they were talented, they were athletic. They were strong guys that had no fear, and they made you respect them. I mean, hey, they didn't mind you kicking their butt. They lived to fight another day, but they wanted to make sure they was respected. So, the game was different back then. You know, it was different, a different game. Speaker 1: Is it the rules, or is it culture? Speaker 2: Both, it's both. The rules were different. They really didn't have flagrant fouls early on when I came in the league. Everybody had their own rules on their team. For example, if you have a player on your team get into it, in a skirmish on the floor, the rule was everybody leaves the bench. If you don't leave the bench, that's a five hundred dollar fine. It was stuff like that, that you put in your own rules on your team, "Always protect your teammates." Speaker 1: And now, if anybody gets on the court-- Speaker 2: If you come on the floor, you're in trouble (laughter). So guys, they look at that line and they're like, "No, I'll see you after the game, man. I'm not going across that line." And I don't blame them, I wouldn't either. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was a playoff series with L.A. [sic. San Antonio Spurs] versus Phoenix [Phoenix Suns] where that was really dramatized. Somebody was pushed in the last second-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and Horry [Robert Horry] pushed Stockton or something. Not Stockton, but Nash [Steve Nash] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Nash. Speaker 1: He pushed Nash. It was--p- people got up to protect him, but they all got-- Speaker 2: See, that would never have been a--that would never have been really any fines back in our era. They would just break it up and everybody would keep playing. But even though you saw little skirmishes like that in those days, it wasn't a lot of them. It was just that the ones you saw made it seem like there were a lot of skirmishes. But it really wasn't a lot, because teams had respect for one another. So, you didn't--that didn't go on all the time. Only every now and then something like that would happen, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But it was physical. We used to call it laying the wood. A guy comes cross the lane, you got to touch him, and you touched him pretty good. That was just the way the game was. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did--what did you think about that Detroit [Detroit Pistons] team back in the day, the Bad Boy team? Speaker 2: They were rough. They were rough, man, they were rough (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you think they went too far? Speaker 2: No, they just didn't--Detroit just glorified it, but every team played that way. Mostly every team played that way, physical like that. Would hit you, scratch you, do anything. Now, Detroit took it to a different level, but everybody played that way. Story_ID: 668898 Speaker 1: Were there any particular--well, I don't want to ask you that question. I was going to ask you about the most disliked players (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a whole lot. I can tell you. Hey, Laimbeer [Bill Laimbeer] was one of the most disliked players in the league (laughter). But the funny thing about Laimbeer, as much as we hated him, if you would see him away from basketball out in the public, he's the nicest guy you want to meet. That's what was strange. I'm like, "How can you be a jerk, and out in the public you're just, you're a sweet guy?" He used to come to my nightclub [Dominique's, Atlanta, Georgia] here, "Hey, Nicky [HistoryMaker Dominique Wilkins], how you doing?" And I'm looking at him, and I'm like, "You speaking to me?" (Laughter) You know, he was just that way. It was just all about business, that's all it was. But he's a really super nice guy; he really is, you know. But as a player, we didn't like him. This is the thing. None of us liked each other, as a whole. You know, Larry Bird and I never shook hands my whole career. Again, we didn't like each other, because we had to compete against that guy. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, we weren't about shaking hands and all that. Certain guys were like, we were close, but we'd still go at each other. Like, me and Clyde Drexler are best friends. We shook hands, went to dinner the night before the game. But we got on the floor, and it was almost like I didn't know him. He would come at you. Karl Malone, the same way. I've been knowing him over twenty-nine years. Up until two years ago, we never spoke, up until two years ago, and I've been knowing this guy twenty-seven years. And now, we're like brothers, because we appreciate what we did as players and how we competed against one another. And we're able to talk about it now because there's no competition with us. Story_ID: 668899 Speaker 1: Well, it seems like it really changed now. You've got, you know, over the summer you've got Lebron [Lebron James] and Dwyane Wade and Chris Paul, they're vacationing together. Everybody's having a good time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We would never do that. We would never do that. We didn't--again, we were a little too edgy for that. Because you know, we were always, you know, on guard. It was all about competing, so we didn't go on vacations. You know, we went away to play basketball in different parts, but we never went on vacations and stuff like that. No, we didn't do that. Speaker 1: What about--you know, the Warriors [Golden State Warriors] are now vilified in some circles for bringing on Kevin Durant to an already all-star team. Do- would that have happened back in--? Speaker 2: No, no. This is the problem with that. It's that, how many all-stars can you have on the team without there being some type of conflict? Somebody's going to be unhappy. Somebody's going to be unhappy, and just because you build a team of star players don't mean you're going to win. Because, again, that team has to build chemistry and continuity, and someone has to sacrifice. Who's going to sacrifice for that team? Some of their offense. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know we, we used to say in the gym, "There's not enough basketball for all of these guys." Speaker 2: It's going to be tough. I'm just saying, you know. But if they can jell and mesh and some guys can make sacrifices, it's going to be a very dangerous team, there's no question. Speaker 1: Okay. They beat Clippers [Los Angeles, Clippers] last night by (laughter), by about sixty points. Speaker 2: It is exhibition, though. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's the thing. And so, the Clippers didn't play a lot of their guys either. So, that's what--exhibition, you're just trying to find what combination works. You don't care about the winning and losing with exhibition. But once the season starts, you see things change. Speaker 1: Did you ever find yourself in a position either with the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] or either when you left the Hawks, of receiving an offer, or your team even having an offer, to add another super star to your team? Speaker 2: During my time of playing, that never happened. I mean, I wanted another player to take some pressure off me, and that never happened, like a Karl Malone or somebody like that. But it never happened, but I didn't make excuses for it. I still stayed in that franchise and tried to win. Speaker 1: What's the closest to another offensive star the--the Hawks have had? Speaker 2: I think the closest threat of having that type of player was Moses Malone, but that was past his prime. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, we got Moses late in his career. We were very good early on when we had Danny Roundfield [Dan Roundfiled]. Now, if I'd've had the experience with Danny Roundfield and Tree Rollins at that time, we would have been a lethal team, because he was that nice complementary player, Danny Roundfield. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: He averaged eighteen and fifteen, you know. So, he was, he was a hell of a player. Story_ID: 668900 Speaker 1: Now, now you made a--what happened after you retired? You were like thirty-eight to thirty-nine, and you retired from Orlando [Orlando Magic]. But were you still living in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: I lived between A- Orlando [Florida] and Atlanta, and finally moved to Atlanta. Once I became an executive for the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks], I moved here permanently. Speaker 1: All right, 'cause I wondered about the sequence of it. You became an executive first, and you say that's what happened, actually. Speaker 2: That's what happened. I became an executive first, right. Speaker 1: All right, all right. How did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things Stan Kasten, who's the GM [general manager], said, was that once I got traded, he said, "Dominique [HistoryMaker Dominique Wilkins] will always have a position in this franchise." And he held true to that, and so when I retired he brought me to Atlanta. I was the special assistant to the vice president, and I was part of the coaching staff as well. So, I've been part of the organization since I retired. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: About seventeen years now. Speaker 1: Yeah, well what's the primary role that you play? Speaker 2: Well, now I'm vice president of basketball. So I wear a lot of different hats, from corporate sponsorships, from helping players, mainly on the business side as special assistant to the CEO--excuse me, special advisor to the CEO--on a lot of business related stuff. And Steve Koonin, which is our CEO, has been a major inspiration in the last few years on really elevating me in those positions. Speaker 1: Okay. So you've been with the Hawks since 2000 and-- Speaker 2: I've been with the Hawks since 2000 and-- Speaker 1: Since 2000, okay? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 2000. Speaker 1: All right. That's like sixteen years, now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixteen years. Speaker 1: And you do some broadcasting, too? Speaker 2: I'm actually an analyst for Fox [Fox Sports]. I've been doing that for twelve years. I'm the chairman for the alumni committee for the Hawks as well, so I have a team of guys who we collectively vote on who should be recognized in the arena, and continue to build our alumni around that arena. So, I was voted in by my peers as well as the owner, Tony Ressler, who's a wonderful owner for our franchise. And that has given me the ability to do some other things that I want to do for my own business ventures and partnership with things I have outside of that, like basketball floor design. I design my own basketball floors with CBA Sports [Norcross, Georgia], who--we are partners now. So, we do great stuff around the country as far as putting experiences in neighborhoods as far as safe environments and healthy environments. And also do college, professional--we do all their courts, too. Story_ID: 668901 Speaker 1: Okay, so you actually design the court? Speaker 2: We actually design the courts, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, all right. Now who--are you an artist yourself? Speaker 2: Of course, yes, exactly (laughter). No, but actually I designed my signature court. And one of our partners drew out exactly what I envisioned and it came out beautifully, which I had that court in my own yard. And, and also we had that court in a lot of different communities, and a lot of different home residents who have bought that court. So, the court is all over right now. Speaker 1: Okay, what, what are the feat- (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A couple of universities as well. Speaker 1: Okay. What are the features of that court? Speaker 2: Well, the features of the court, you get the CBA [CBA Sports, Norcross, Georgia] logos, which is our company. And I also have my logo in the middle of the lanes. You have the Human Highlight Film on one side of the court, and you have my signature on the court. So it's nice, very nice. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So, it's personal. It's a [HistoryMaker] Dominique Wilkins court. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's exactly right (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now you've been a consistent presence with the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] for sixteen years, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Man, I've been with the Hawks for over thirty years. That presence has been there thirty years, you know. Even though I played on other teams, I still had a connection here. Because I've never seen myself in any uniform but that Hawks uniform, even though I've played with other teams. And there's no other city for me but Atlanta [Georgia], no other franchise but Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. But, but you've been consistent for sixteen years in the front office, you know. And the Hawks have achieved a level of success the last few years. In fact they were-- Speaker 2: Sixty wins, incredible; an incredible season (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, right, it was. Speaker 2: And again, that was something to build off of. We had a good season last year and went to the second round of the playoffs. So, again, bring in some new pieces like Dwight Howard, the great addition to our team that's going to add something. We've got some great young rookies. So, it's just building that chemistry once again to try to win on a high level. Story_ID: 668902 Speaker 1: Sitting at home watching the game with my son, we have conversations about players--whether they're good or bad, or whether they've lost their motivation, or are still motivated, or, or doesn't-- You know, my conversation with my son is always, if you put this same guy on another team with a different coach and a different set of relationships, you'd be a different player, you know. Speaker 2: You would. In a lot of situations, you would, not unless you're a mega player, you know, that can carry a team. Like a Durant [Kevin Durant], he can carry a team. Lebron [Lebron James] can carry a team. You know, guys like Carmelo Anthony and those guys can carry a team. But if you have a guy who's been a major role player on your team, that system may work great for you and the team that you've played for so long. But now you sign a contract and you go to another team or are traded to another team, that system may not be conducive to the way you play. It may not have the same floor. You may not get the same shots, because you know, you got different personnel that, again, don't want to change their game. So, it could be a game changing experience for you as a player if you're not that guy who can carry a team. Speaker 1: Now, you know where I'm going with this. Because Dwight Howard was traded to the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] and came up with a back injury. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He didn't do it himself, but, you know, he hurt his back. And even as he came back, it just didn't seem like it was going to work. Speaker 2: But this is the--this is the thing about Dwight. Even on a tough year he averaged fourteen points a game and twelve rebounds, on a tough season. So, just imagine he has a good season here; those numbers are elevated. So, he already has good numbers on a tough year where they--he played with a team where they didn't give him the ball, which is asinine to me. You have one of the biggest guys in the league, one of the most talented guys, and you don't throw him the ball. You basically want him to play defense and rebound, but that's crazy. This is a different situation for him. They're going to play with him and through him at times. And I think he will be that guy to accept and embrace the culture that Coach Budenholzer [Mike Budenholzer] has built here. And if you listen to Coach Budenholzer, and you abide by that system, you're going to thrive. Speaker 1: Yeah. Budenholzer is known around the league as having a, a very disciplined offensive team. Speaker 2: Very disciplined. Speaker 1: A precision team almost (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One thing he's been able to do is get the best out of what he has, you know. The guy never comes up short, because he's going to get the best out of what he has. And now you add different elements. And as far as quality players, there're just going to have--some other guys, they're going to benefit by throwing the ball in to Dwight Howard and just moving without the ball. You're going to get easier shots when you're not killing yourself coming off of screens all the time. Because you still got to double Dwight Howard, you know. He still is a commanding guy down there on the post. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you're optimistic about this year? Speaker 2: Very, because I know him as well as anybody. So, I think he's going to do very, very, well at home. Speaker 1: Okay. It takes somebody that knows a player to--don't you think so (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no worr- I have no worries about him, none. Story_ID: 668903 Speaker 1: What are your future plans? What--what are you going to do? Speaker 2: My future plans, you know, the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] are always first. And that's my heart, because I am basketball. And I am the Hawks as far as, you know, what I come from, you know, and what I helped build. So, that's always going to be a part of my life, you know. But outside of that, what I'm doing with, you know, the diabetes world, I go all around the country talking about diabetes and help people build some options for themselves in dealing with diabetes. And so, that's a calling for me. Diabetes--because I'm a--I found out I was diabetic when I turned forty. So, that's a big part of me. Because my father [John Wilkins, Sr.] and grandfather died from diabetes, so I'm always going to support that, and I'm always going to promote it. And like I was just saying, what I'm doing in our own business, one of my partners is here, Jamie [Jamie Sartin], he's the owner of our company. And so it's been a great experience being a part of a company like CBA Sports [Norcross, Georgia], building what we are trying to build. We're building an experience for people with these basketball courts and, also, you know, with the backyard court, the synthetic surfaces that we have, along with the hardwood floor. We--we provide a lot of services that people enjoy. And so, that's me. That's a big part of what we do, you know. So we're doing a lot of stuff, again, with college, pro and residents. And also what we've done with the Hawks as far-- all their community courts, CBA Sports has done all of those. Story_ID: 668904 Speaker 1: Now I know you, seen some of your--well, you were in my hometown this summer, Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: For a health fair. Speaker 2: Yeah. I go to Dayton every year. I go to Dayton every year talking about diabetes with some of the city officials and some congressmen that I currently talk to there. So, Ohio is a big part of our market, because diabetes runs so high in that part of the country. So, I spend a lot of time there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I was surprised. I said, "[HistoryMakers] Dominique Wilkins is going to be here?" Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Unfortunately I was doing interviews, so I wasn't there. But I, I wanted to be there. Speaker 2: Oh, man, I spend a lot of time in Ohio, a lot of time in Dayton. Story_ID: 668905 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the evening that--well, the day that they unveiled a statue of you. You, you were talking about it in the other room (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was like dying and going to heaven, it really was. Because when you're growing up, you never think about the hall of fame and statues, that sort of thing. But that day really brought life full circle for me, because it showed not only what you did on the court, it showed what you did off the court, how the fans and the city can embrace a person and make them part of their own. And it was the City of Atlanta [Georgia] that embraced that whole idea of doing that statue and doing the street named after me out there. To this day, it hasn't hit me, how big that is. I ride by it at least twice a week. Twice a week, I ride by the statue, just in awe of it all. That was the greatest moment as far as celebration in my life--to see the city, to see the organization, to see the fans, and see the commissioner and all my colleagues from different teams be a part of that celebration. Story_ID: 668906 Speaker 1: What advice would you give to young black men today? Speaker 2: Well, the first thing I would say is stop being--using being a product of your environment as an excuse to fail. It should be a motivational tool for you. Because if I can make it out of it, anybody can make it out of it. It's just applying yourself and working on the things you're weakest at. Because it's what you do today that dictates what you become in the future, and that's by doing things the right way and not always using excuses, or using somebody else to put the blame on. You got to look at yourself before you can look at anybody else. Story_ID: 668907 Speaker 1: What advice would you give young basketball players today, male or female? Speaker 2: Again, I would tell them that it's not always just about the game. It's your attitude, personality, your willingness to be coached, and more importantly, your willingness to be a teammate. And again, everybody works on things that they're comfortable with. Work on the things you're uncomfortable with. That's one of--that's what's going to make you a better all around player. Because when you see highlights of me, what do you see? You see dunks, that's all you see. But I scored over twenty-six thousand points in this league, and I didn't get them all on dunks. I found creative ways to score--shooting free throws, getting in more than ten times a night at mid-range shooting a three, getting to the post. I scored in various ways, but I worked on those things, I practiced those things. I always was looking to put one or two new things new in my game every year. The problem with young kids today, they try to do too many things at one time. How can you perfect one, if you're working on twenty things? Speaker 1: So, figure out how to solve one problem first. And then-- Speaker 2: Solve one problem at a time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You take one or two things, and you work on those one or two things. Once you perfect those one or two things, you move on to something else. Speaker 1: Okay. Are you satisfied with the state of things in the NBA [National Basketball Association] today in terms of rules and-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I think Adam Silver, who's taken over for David Stern, has done a wonderful job elevating our game every year. And it just gets better and better as far as the experience, the promotion of the game, and the expansion of the game worldwide. Now, we're a global, global brand. And sooner or later, you're going to see a team in Europe. It's going to happen, believe me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 668908 Speaker 1: Do you have--what would be your personal Dream Team, top five players? Speaker 2: Okay. Excluding myself? Or, I can exclude my- exclude my--include myself? Speaker 1: You know, let's exclude you, we'll do--do it like that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Magic [Magic Johnson], Jordan [Michael Jordan], Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar], Wilt Chamberlain. This is a tough one, too. Either Magic Johnson--I mean either Larry Bird or Dr. J [Julius Erving]. It's hard to pick just the top five. I mean, and if you notice, all the guys I picked was from that one part of that era. Because people don't really talk about Wilt Chamberlain. People don't realize that he averaged fifty points a game and thirty rebounds in a single season. Do you know how difficult and hard and impossible that is in an era when the league was so physical? That is incredible. He had more sixty point games than everybody in the league put together. The guy was incredible. And then the next year he averaged over ten or eleven assists a game at the center position and led the league in assists. How about that? Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he knew something about basketball (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was just a phenomenal athlete. He won the state championship in the shot put, high hurdles, low hurdles, discus. He was a phenomenal athlete. That's why you always got to put Wilt in the top five. Story_ID: 668909 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family. Speaker 2: We're a very close family. Like I said, my mom [Gertrude Wilkins Baker] raised eight kids by herself. And there is nothing--no force on the earth can pull us apart from each other. You know, we might argue, fuss and fight with each other, but we're a very close knitted family, and we're always there for each other. And so, we come, my mom comes from a big family, so we're used to having big family environments. And it's, for me it's relaxing when I can have my family around and do fun things. And, you know, I like to cook a lot, so we would cook every weekend over at my house, stuff like that. And then just to see my youngest son [Jacob Wilkins] grow up and become what I strived to be. And he's one of my kids that I don't have to tell him to go play, go play basketball, go do anything. He's just a very driven young kid, and that's kind of a breath of fresh air to see that. Then I got all those girls, you know, and that's a special type of relationship with them, my daughters that I have--and my sons. You know, so it's just fun to see them grow now. As a retired player, I'm home a lot and I can actually see them grow. Speaker 1: And you had said earlier that you reunited with your father [John Wilkins, Sr.] at a certain point, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I reunited with my father probably five to seven years after I left high school [Washington High School, Washington, North Carolina], and found him in a homeless shelter. We heard he was in a homeless shelter in Baltimore [Maryland], and my dad being a very proud man, he never asked anybody for anything. He said it was just a short setback for him, and that he would be fine. He was working, so he was working to get his life together. And we said, "You know what? Whatever you got right here, leave it right here, and you're going back to Atlanta [Georgia] with us." So my brother and I drove him back to Atlanta and we got him a place, put him on payroll, and we took care of him until the day he di- he passed. Story_ID: 668910 Speaker 1: Now, is (pause) there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of. Anything you can think of, Jamie [Jamie Sartin] (laughter)? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No (unclear). Speaker 2: No, nothing I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, the last question is like a compound question. What today would you consider to be your legacy, and how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think my legacy is what I've helped build here in the city [Atlanta, Georgia], and to look back on what the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] was, and how people viewed our franchise to what they see today, and that I've helped build that mystique and build that history of Hawks basketball, but more importantly, building a history and I think relationships here in the city. I want that to be my legacy, as far as how hard I work. I never made excuses, I never took nights off--that I was always there for my teammates. That's what I want to be remembered as, a guy who gave a 110 percent all the time, on and off the court. Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you, brother. Appreciate it...