 Story_ID: 101414 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Alice Mary Windom. The first two names common spelling, A-L-I-C-E, M-A-R-Y, last name W-I-N-D, as in David, O-M, as in Mary. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born March 30th, 1936, in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: All right, but just a caveat here, you were raised in Madison, Illinois-- Speaker 2: That's correct, we were living-- Speaker 1: --in the early years. Speaker 2: --in, in Madison Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The hospital was in St. Louis (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a trained social worker, but I have retired now. I've done administrative work. My last job was with the University of Missouri-St. Louis, where I coordinated the James [T.] Bush Center, named after one of your other interviewees' father, [HM] Margaret Bush Wilson's dad. Speaker 1: Okay and I would characterize you as an Africanist, but-- Speaker 2: Try, yes-- Speaker 1: I think-- Speaker 2: --I would too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As a black nationalist in common parlance among African Americans. I'm a nationalist and a Pan-Africanist. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And now, what, what is today's date? Speaker 2: This is--now you're gonna--the, the 19th of December (laughter), 19--2006 (laughter). Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the office of Attorney Wayman F. Smith [HM] in St. Louis, 3912 Lendell Boulevard. Story_ID: 101415 Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I always-- I'm compelled to ask people. Speaker 2: Go right ahead. Speaker 1: And I--and, they, they, they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I would pretty much have to say chicken, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Africa. Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, I don't think I do, no. Story_ID: 101416 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask about your family history. I'm, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side of the family. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Frances Louise Jones Windom. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: F-R-A-N-C-E-S, L-O-U-I-S-E, J-O-N-E-S, and then my, the same as my name for the Windom. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born January 10th, 1908. Speaker 1: Okay and where? Speaker 2: In Edwardsville, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? I mean how far back can you trace the ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: On her paternal side, oh, of course, my grandfather, oh, was Christopher Columbus Jones, C. C. Jones. Her mother was Anna Armstrong Jones. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They married December 30th, I believe 1903. And my grandfather had a good job. He was principal of the black school in Edwardsville, a job he retained from, I think he started that job in, in '03 [1903], and he kept it until the schools were integrated in '54 [1954] or '55 [1955]. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the black school at--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Lincoln. Speaker 1: Lincoln School, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. It's now a fraternity house. The building is still there. Speaker 1: All right. Are there any stories about your family that come down from the 19th century, any stories about slavery or Reconstruction or-- Speaker 2: On my, well, yes-- Speaker 1: I mean from that side of the family, from-- Speaker 2: --from, from-- Speaker 1: --from your mother's side. Speaker 2: --the paternal side my grandfather's father lived in Murphysboro, Illinois. They had a large family. I would have to check on the exact number of children. Many of them didn't grow up. But they were a, a working family, working-class people. His mother did some time as a coal miner. I'm not sure whether his father worked as a miner or not, but they wanted him to get an education. His mother took him to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] where they had training schools for young people as well as a college. And she was told that he was too black. She should take him home because he was too black to learn anything. And she said, "Well, why don't you just give him a chance and see whether he can learn something?" And they kept them, of course, and he was quite brilliant. And years and years later, one of his daughters, my, my baby aunt was in school at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign], and a professor was talking about this brilliant black student that they had had years and years ago. And it dawned on her gradually that the man was talking about her father and (unclear) how surprised they were that a man as pronouncedly African as he was could actually learn something. And she was never a, a really brilliant student herself, and she said she did not want them to know (laughter) that she was C. C. Jones's daughter. He always used C. C. He did not use Christopher Columbus. But is father was Prince Albert Jones. So, (laughter), so there was something there in the family that leaned toward these European names of accomplished people for their children (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, there a tradition in slavery where slave owners would name their slaves-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --outlandish names as a joke, sort of. Speaker 2: Yes. Well, these were, these are post-slavery-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --people. And now their family had come from Virginia. There are still relatives in the Williamsburg area. Story_ID: 101417 Speaker 1: Now grandpa's [Christopher Columbus Jones] siblings, I knew his, I knew three of his sisters. Several of his siblings had died long before I was born, but he had siblings, Louise, Matilda, and not remembering my-Catherine [ph.]. They were all schoolteachers and never married. Aunt Louise--and they lived into their nineties, all of them did, grandpa did too. He was about ninty-three when he, when he died. And they were very physically fit people. They did not endure long illnesses toward the end of their lives. They were up and moving, or they were dead within a matter of days. With my grandfather at 93 or 94, he was up and around and had breakfast one morning, and then when my uncle went to wake him up for lunch he was dead. He had outlived my grandmother [Anna Armstrong Jones] by three months I think. He lived--she was a bit sickly. And toward the end of her life, seven years probably, she didn't lie down. She had congestive heart failure, so she slept sitting up in her rocking chair in the dining room. And she eventually fell down in the yard, and they took her to the hospital. She refused to go to the hospital before that. And one of the things she lamented in the hospital at the age, I think she was 93, was that she had not gone farther than high school. You know and it was quite remarkable for somebody of her age to have finished high school. This was around 1974 I think when she died, and then grandpa died the following year. But she always, she wrote. We've got lots of stories and things that she wrote. She published a little booklet of poems and sold them for fifteen cents, "A Mother's Musings" she called it. So they were a family that really promoted education, believed in, as I said, my, my grandfather had actually I believe four sisters who were teachers, but one of them had died. I never knew her. They had, my grandparents had ten children, five boys and five girls. All of the girls received the university degrees and all, except one, one married very young, but four of them received university degrees. And all of the boys went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama]. They all received trades. And so they had shoe shops and other trade-related business. And there was some resentment on the part of my uncles, that they had not been given college educations. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: What they had was a trade school education-- Speaker 1: They had a-- Speaker 2: --from Tuskegee. Speaker 1: --trade school education. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But that was not intellectual, and these are all natural intellects. I mean they grew up arguing, and debating, and discussing world issues. But my grandparents had a reason for that. The, the reason they sent, made sure those girls got to college was to keep them out of domestic service and to keep them out of positions where they would be vulnerable to white sex-men's sexual advances, which was just absolutely common and an expected part of the life of a young domestic servant. So they were determined that wasn't going to happen to their girls. And my grandfather did not want his sons to be teachers. He said, "I never made enough money to support my family. The whole town of Edwardsville [Illinois] helped, helped me raise these ten children, and I wanted my boys to have crafts that would let them make a living and pra, provide better for their families than I was able to do." But I don't know that he ever communicated that to his sons. I know what he thought because I asked him, but I don't know whether they ever did. Speaker 2: It's interesting to reflect that the, the one, I mean the, the teacher makes less than everybody else-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --town. You know, that's a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that's the occupation that pays the, the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he had tremendous respect. I mean everybody in, in Edwardsville knew Professor Jones. Speaker 2: That's right, they, that's what they called them in those days, professor. Speaker 1: Yes, he was Professor Jones. Speaker 2: Professor Jones, right. Speaker 1: Everybody knew him. He had tremendous respect, but he did not ever have money. They had to be extremely thrifty. Speaker 2: Tell me this now, did he--he was, do, do you know when he was born exactly, or? Speaker 1: I would have to look that up. Speaker 2: And I would guess he-- Speaker 1: He died around 1974. I came back from Africa in '73 [1973]. I think grandma died the same year that I came back, and grandpa died early 1974, at the age of about 94. But I, I would have to look that up. And I can-- Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: --do that. Speaker 2: --probably, he probably was born around 1880 I guess or so--or abouts, in the 18-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --mid 18--early 1880s [sic, March 21, 1878]. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 101418 Speaker 1: Did, he--now this is a, a question you would be interested, or you probably have an answer for it. Did he [Windom's maternal grandfather, Christopher Columbus Jones] have any stories about the St. Louis World's Fair of 1904 [Louisiana Purchase Exposition]? Speaker 2: No, I never heard him talk about that at all. One of the stories he had about early, his early life in, in this area was that he socialized quite a bit with black people in St. Louis [Missouri] who were doing well. And I asked him "Who were these people. What did they do?" And I was surprised because the answer was barbers. In that day, before the invention of the safety razor, barbers had white and black clientele. And they were very well off, so these were people that he socialized with. But I never heard him say anything about the 1904 World's Fair. Speaker 1: The reason why I ask is because they had some sort of an African village at the Worlds' Fair. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you, you probably know the story. Speaker 2: Like a zoo, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the story of Ota Benga and all that. Speaker 2: Yes, who-- Speaker 1: And so I just wondered what-- Speaker 2: Yeah, very sad story. Speaker 1: Yes, right, right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I just wondered what-- Speaker 2: No, I don't know. I've never heard any black person give first-person accounts of the World's Fair. One of the reasons that the World's Fair was in 1904 and not 1903, which was the actual centennial of the Louisiana Purchase was the labor disputes, because they weren't hiring black people to do any of the fantastic work that was being done to develop the site. That was--I have a friend who's, who has done research on that. And that was one of the reasons that the fair was delayed and wasn't held on the centennial. I, I would imagine that there are a lot of black people who did not even go to the fair- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --as big as it was, because it, there was a lot of segregation in St. Louis. And I don't whether or not those, those Africans who were brought here as ethnological exhibits were, were able to make any kind of a connection with the black people who lived in the community. I don't know. I've never heard it. Speaker 1: Yeah, something I wonder about after knowing the story. I was wondering if anybody had-- Speaker 2: A horrible story. Speaker 1: --any, any firsthand recollection of that. Speaker 2: I have never heard one. Speaker 1: In 1893 in Chicago [Illinois], they had like several black days at the fair [World's Columbia Exposition], you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing. And I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --where the-- Speaker 2: And that's what they did in St. Louis too. There were black days. But I, I never heard even with amongst old black people thirty years ago any firsthand accounts of it, and I haven't seen any in print. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not saying they don't exist. I just haven't seen them. Speaker 1: Okay, be interesting to check those papers from those days and find out if they wrote about it, yeah, what they had to say in those days about. Speaker 2: And this was a very big deal in St. Louis. It's only in recent years that the media and other influential people have stopped talking about that fair as though it just happened ten years ago. It was clearly the biggest thing to hit St. Louis. Story_ID: 101419 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, let, let me--now did your mother [Frances Louise Jones Windom] talk about growing up in, in, and what, what it was like growing up? Did she--what are her stories of growing up in-- Speaker 2: Growing up in Edwardsville [Illinois] as the children of the principal [Christopher Columbus Jones] of the school [Lincoln School], they were, their life was quite circumscribed. Mom was brilliant, easily very brilliant. She was apparently reading when she was less than two years old, and, and the way her parents found out that she could read was grandpa had her with him when he was in the barbershop one day, and she had newspapers. And the barber said to grandpa, "I think your child is reading that newspaper." And, and he found out she was (laughter); she could read. So she was a voracious reader all of her life and a very strong person. Now Edwardsville, they had the run of Edwardsville. There weren't enough black people there for there to be really rigid segregation. The schools were separate. But in their school they could do anything that grandpa wanted them to do. The schools went to maybe the sixth grade, and then every few years they would add another grade. But when they reached the maximum, those children could go to school in St. Louis [Missouri]. They could go anywhere, and this, and the system would pay for it. It was quite a long time before they got a full high school. Those black kids from Edwardsville went to Atlanta [Georgia]; they went to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee]; they went every-Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia], everyplace, to go to high school, and, and everything was paid for them until the year they graduated ten students. And the school board decided we can't keep on paying all these expenses, because that was a very big class, and that was when they got the twelve grades right there in Edwardsville. So, they had--they can't say that they felt that they were poor, even though grandpa didn't make that much money, because nobody had much. They had a house; they had clothing; and mom could go to the library and get books. And she told me how on her twelfth birthday she was allowed to get as many books as she wanted from the library. And I think she was given maybe a quarter as a present. That was a lot of money. And she had been given no information about human reproduction, and she was curious about it. So, she filled up her wagon with books at the library, and she also got a book on bio, human biology. And she put that between her knees under her skirt so that the librarian didn't know she had that one. I don't know if she'd been able to check it out (laughter). And she--that was how she got a book study and find out how babies were made, because when, when they asked grandma [Anna Armstrong Jones], her answer was "they came out of, they come out of a door in the mother's side" (laughter). And, and in though in those days they had wooden stoves. And mom said on time they were, they were, all the girls and grandma were in the room with the wood stove, and grandma was undressing. And they--she caught them, the girls looking at her. They were looking for the door (laughter). And she hurriedly covered herself up. But, you know, some things just were not talked about. But that was one of the stories that she told. Now when, when I.Q. tests came out, she was tested as were other kids. She scored over 200 on the I.Q. tests. They made her take it again because she was black, and they just were not prepared to believe (laughter) that a black child could do this. And of course she kept scoring over that. But she was really brilliant. And later, years later, a friend told me that they had seen in an old psychology book something about a Negro girl who had scored over 200 on the early I.Q. test. And I had told her this story about my mom, and she said "maybe that was your mother they were talking about." I've never seen that psychology book, but it might have been. She was very strong woman. Story_ID: 101420 Speaker 1: They were encouraged to speak their minds and to debate. The parents were one religious; grandmother [Anne Armstrong Jones] was religious; grandpa [Christopher Columbus Jones] was not. Grandpa was a Democrat, and grandma was a Republican. And she would tell the children "I only vote to cancel your grandfa--your father's vote" (laughter), she said. So they maintained a very, very tight bond but lively. They refer to each other all the time that I remember them as Mr. and Mrs. Jones. They didn't call each other by their first names, Mr. Jones, Mrs. Jones and very formal. My grandfather was one of the hardest working people I have ever known, and he did all kinds of work. He did not disdain, oh, the crafts. In fact when he re--was forced to retire as a schoolteacher, even though he was in his seventies when integration came, he was really mad that they made him retire because they dismissed all of the black teachers when integration came. And the children went to the formerly white school, and only white teachers taught them. But grandpa opened up a shoe shop on his property there. He was, he didn't repair shoes very well 'cause he had not gone to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, in Tuskegee, Alabama], but people would bring him shoes because they liked him, you know, and they got a chance to talk to him. But he was a teacher to the bone. If you--if grandpa told you to go and sweep the floor and you got the broom, he would then begin to instruct you on sweeping (laughter). He did not trust you to figure out that here's dirt; I've got a broom; here's the dust pan; I can do this. He would stand over you and tell--he literally did this to me with a mop. I had to mop the kitchen, which was a small kitchen, no problem at all (laughter) to mop it. But he gave me instructions on how to mop, and how to wring out that mop, rewet it, and, and mop some more, just a teacher to the bone. He couldn't help himself, oh, a sweet man, very dedicated person, raised his ten children and then grandchildren, as a couple of his daughters had problems with their marriages, and the children stayed with granny and grandpa. You always had a place, always had a place. So I think we enjoyed to going to Edwardsville when we were young and being there with the cousins because quite a few of the children stayed in Edwardsville. But it's hard to say just what it was like for them growing up there in the early part of the century. Mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom] had rickets I remember. That was something that was common with children, that, who didn't have enough milk that their-- Speaker 2: It's nutritionally-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a nutritional deficiency. So she was in braces for part of her childhood, and that apparently was painful. But by the time I knew her, you know, she had wonderful straight legs. She was a beautiful woman. But that was part of her childhood. Speaker 2: Yeah, it speaks to tough-- Speaker 1: She had-- Speaker 2: --times at some point--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. I mean they really never had enough money. The children were spaced pretty much two years apart rather than one year. But it used to be women had children every year. But those kids were spaced almost two years apart. And finally, not long before my grandmother died, I got nerve enough to ask her how they spaced the children. "Did you ever lose any children, and did you ever use anything to avoid having children?" And she said "Nope, they just came when they came." But that took me a long--and none of her, her daughters had ever asked her (laughter) how she spaced them two years apart. But she told me she didn't use anything, and she had no, no stillbirths or miscarriages. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, now, your mother, did she go to college too, did she? Speaker 1: Oh yes, yes they went. Where did mom go to high school? Now, I can't remember whether she came along after they already had the twelve years at Lincoln School [Edwardsville, Illinois]. I don't--she might have finished high school there, then she went to the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] and to Illinois University at Champaign [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's where she and dad [John Henry Windom] met. (simultaneous) Speaker 2: University of Illinois, okay. Story_ID: 101421 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna, I'm gonna stop here and, and go to your father's side. Now, can you give me your, give us your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: John Henry Windom [Sr.], common spellings, J-O-H-N, H-E-N-R-Y. Speaker 1: All right, and, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 20th, 1910. Speaker 1: Okay and-- Speaker 2: St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 1: St. Louis, okay. Speaker 2: His family lived on Bernard Street here in St. Louis. They owned their own home. And that area was one of the first to go in so-called "urban redevelopment." Speaker 1: Yes, the urban renewal. Speaker 2: Yes, Negro removal, yes. Speaker 1: Of the fifties [1950s], yeah. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in the, in the fifties [1950s]. Story_ID: 101422 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, what, what do you know about your father's [John Henry Windom, Sr.] ancestors. How far back can you trace them? You said they, they go to Alabama, right? Speaker 2: Yes, they came-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --here [St. Louis, Missouri] from Huntsville [Alabama] in the early part of the century. I'm not quite sure when. My father's mother [Mary Davis Windom] gave birth to seven children. Father was the only one who grew up. I don't know how old the others were when they passed away, but that was the case in many families back then. The, the infant mortality and childhood mortality was very high. Speaker 1: Well, you know-- Speaker 2: His father--go ahead. Speaker 1: Well, I'm just gonna just raise the aspect of the influenza epidemic [Spanish Influenza] in the early part of the century. Speaker 2: The 1918, that was like I think the-- Speaker 1: Is that when-- Speaker 2: --the flu epidemic was around 1918. I don't, I just don't know. I have no idea when those children were born. I don't know, except from looking at my father's birth certificate. No, I don't, I don't there were any other living children then, so I don't even know what order, where he stood in the birth order, no information at all. Speaker 1: But he just didn't survive--I mean none of the rest-- Speaker 2: They-- Speaker 1: --of 'em survive? Speaker 2: Six dead children. Speaker 1: And the parents succumbed as well? They, they didn't (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, no, his mother lived until 1951 or '53 [1953] [sic, 1952]. His father [Jackson T.O.P. Windom] died when dad was young, before he went to college. So he's sold coal and did other things to help bring income into the family. His, his mother, and his Aunt Margaret, and his grandmother, Sara Pope Davis [ph.], were living in the same house at, on Bernard Street [St. Louis]. Sally Baby, which is what we called my grandma [sic, great-grandmother] Sara, was twelve years old when slavery ended. She was my living link to slavery. And she lived until--no, she died in 1951. Her daughter Mary, my grandmother, died in 1953 [sic, 1952]. Speaker 1: Let me ask you now, did your grandmother, Sara Davis, right? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Who, whom you called Sally Baby-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --did, did she tell you stories of slavery? Speaker 2: By the time I knew Sally Baby and was old enough to talk to her, she was almost completely deaf, and she was completely blind. And I didn't have enough knowledge and patience to sit--you could scream and she could hear you, but you couldn't really call--carry on a conversation. And I, of course, now real, really regret that I didn't go through what it would have taken to get some stories out of her. But I stopped kicking myself when I figured out, well, I was really only 15 when she died, so I was still really ignorant myself. But she, I know she was 12 years old when slavery ended. And I have no idea of how she was treated or anything, but I know her daughters, her two daughters took very good care of her. I don't know if she had any other children, but I knew my Aunt Margaret and my Grandma Mary. They were both cooks and housekeepers. They worked for white families here in St. Louis. My grandfather worked in a steel mill, and that may have led to his death because he was still fairly young when he died. And I don't know what year that was, but it was before I was--it was before dad went to college. Speaker 1: So we, so he's a single young man surrounded by a lot of womenfolk-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: Yes, and, and very responsible for needing to help take care of them. Now, in addition to their income from housekeeping and cooking, they also had property that his father had purchased, a six, they had a six-family building that gave them income. And that was unusual. Dad took care of that building and kept that going really until he died. But that was a good income for them, that they had six rental units. And that helped with his college expenses, but he also worked his way through college. He waited table, and he did other things to get through college. He was also a very hardworking man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 101423 Speaker 1: Tell us how your parents [Frances Louise Jones Windom and John Henry Windom, Sr.] met. There's got to be a story. Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know that they ever went into a lot of detail about the meeting. I know it was at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign]. And more interesting, and I guess it wasn't really real interesting to them because I don't have any stories about that. But I do know they got married twice, because in those days, female teachers could not be married. You know, we lost a generation of, that we could have had children with educated mothers, because in most states, female teachers couldn't be married, and that was the case in Illinois. So, they first married when mom was teaching in Madison [Illinois]. Dad was the principal. They married in 1933 I think it was, secretly, and then when they were ready to start a family they got married again publicly, and she quit her job. And I think I was born about nine or ten months after that second married in 1935. I was born in March of '36 [1936]. But that, that was, that's the story that, that was most interesting, that they had to, they had to sneak and be married. And that was the case with, with all of the women teachers that they knew, and it was also the case here in St. Louis [Missouri]. Female teachers could not be married. Story_ID: 101424 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, tell us do, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I was knocked down by a dog and bitten under my arm. That (laughter), that was, that was a-- Speaker 1: That's a painful--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --pretty early memory, yeah. And I remember that we lived in, what would about be a shack, you know, in, over in Madison [Illinois]. And I remember my little brother, my, my oldest brother [Jackson T.O.P. Windom] being born. Well, I remember having this other person there, and I did not understand why that was necessary (laughter), that anybody else had to be there as a child. I felt that way about both of my brothers when they were--why (laughter), why have you done this when you had me all (laughter), already. But (unclear) they were lovable kids. That was a good memory. But I did not like losing the, that focus, the sole focus of two devoted parents. But I was three years old, so I had a fairly long time as the only child. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so wh-- you said when you--do you have any early memories of Madison itself? Speaker 2: Not really. I, I was three or four when we left there. And aside from being bitten by that dog, I don't really remember very much, and that was not a serious, that was not a severe dog bite. It was just, it was a frightening experience. But when we went to Georgia, now I have a few memories in Georgia. Speaker 1: Now, before we--you say your, your father was-- Speaker 2: We went Bloomington [Indiana] in the-- Speaker 1: --was getting his degree-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: It was a master's degree at-- Speaker 2: It was he-- Speaker 1: --Indiana [Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana]? Speaker 2: --he to do a, a year of residence. He took courses in the summer, but he had to do a year of residence to qualify for his doctorate in education. So we went to Bloomington, Indiana, for one year. I have almost no memory of, of that place. Speaker 1: So you're like four or five then, or-- Speaker 2: I was four and five, four, I was four, because I was five when we went to Albany. And we just stayed there for that one year. I remember that I had a few little playmates, but I, I really have no coherent memories of living in Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So it's, the family soon moved to Georgia-- Speaker 2: To Albany. Speaker 1: --to all-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Albany, Georgia? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there I can remember that the daughter [Josephine Holley-Jefferson] of the president, Dr. [Joseph Winthrop] Holley was the name of the president of Albany State College [now Albany State University]. I remember she had a Charlie McCarthy doll (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, describe, tell us who Charlie McCar--people-- Speaker 2: Charlie McCarthy-- Speaker 1: --listening-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, because there are a couple of generations now-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --who may not even have heard of Charlie McCarthy. Charlie was a dummy, a puppet that was owned by Edgar Bergen, who was a very popular comedian and, and a ventriloquist. So she had a doll that was a replica of Charlie McCarthy. And Charlie McCarthy was a very big star. Edgar Bergen was the father of Candice Bergen, I think her name is. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And one of her childhood memories is that Charlie had his own room and was more important in the family than she was (laughter). And so she had jealousy of a wooden doll. At least the people I was jealous of were human beings (laughter). But, but the president's daughter had a, a Charlie McCarthy doll, and we could play with it every once in a while, but that was special. We lived in a house I recall there were two floors, and there was another teacher's family who lived in the same building. On campus, there was a, a fenced in area, and it was a crocodile in there, you know. Speaker 1: A real crocodile in the-- Speaker 2: A real crocodile. I don't know why. As I've grown up, and I've wondered about that, I don't know why that crocodile was there. And I believe it was, it was actually on the campus, but my memory could be a little off on that. We had--we could go into town to the movies, and black people had to sit upstairs. And I never thought that made much sense, the way they, they segregated the movie theaters. It was like that in Edwardsville [Illinois] too by the time we started going there in the summers. Black people sat up in the balcony, and I always thought that the people on the ground floor were vulnerable to having popcorn and other things thrown on them, which would occasionally happen. So I didn't understand why the people who were supposed to be disadvantaged were sitting in the top. But that was the way it was in Albany, and I, I remember going to movies very few times there. Story_ID: 101425 Speaker 1: I also have a memory of seeing a-- chain gangs. In those days, prisoners were hired out to do work, not on the campus [Albany State College, now Albany State University, in Albany, Georgia]; I don't remember seeing this on campus, but I remember men in the striped uniforms, the horizontal stripes, kind of chained together, and seeing them taken somewhere. Speaker 2: Were they--was that an integrated group, or were they segregated in, in the-- Speaker 1: These were black people that I saw; these were black people. I don't know where they were going, what they--where they were being taken, but I remember seeing that. And then I remember one day being with my mom [Frances Louise Jones Windham], and she had my little brother [Jackson T.O.P. Windom] in a stroller, and I was walking beside her. And we got to a street corner, and a white man and woman in a car stopped, and they spoke to my mother and offered her a job. They said they would like for her to come and do their housework and stay over. And I remember this because this is a woman pushing a stroller with a baby in it and another little child walking beside her. And these are people offering her full room and board and a quarter a week (laughter). And my mother thanked them, and she said "No, no, I would, I wouldn't doing that said, she said my husband is, has just taken a job here at the college, and so I don't need a job." And they kept on talking to her about-- Speaker 2: Like she-- Speaker 1: --coming-- Speaker 2: --hadn't said anything. Speaker 1: --and, and staying in their house for a quarter a week (laughter). And so we--that was, that, those are a few memories. Story_ID: 101426 Speaker 1: I also was molested by a, the son of one of the, of the faculty members. It wasn't, he didn't try to have sex with me. He put me under a house, where, you know, the house is built on stilts to keep snakes and little animals out of houses. And, and he took my pants down and he fondled me. Well, mom had already told me that this kind of thing might happen. She, my mother was very--we never had baby talk in the house. We never used infantile terms for parts of human anatomy. And she had told me all about this, and she told me, "If anybody ever did that to me," she said "come and right away you tell me and tell your dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.], and it doesn't matter who it is." "It can be an uncle..." she said; she made it clear. The only man that she really excluded for the possibility that I might experience this was my dad. So, after this was over, I went home, and I remember my parents were sitting at the table. And I walked in telling (laughter) what had happened, and, and I told them exactly what had happened. And my mother said, "I have to get a doctor to examine you." I said "No, don't want you to do that because he--we didn't have intercourse." I knew that, but she got the doctor. And I remember falling asleep, and when I woke up, my dad and the boy's father were in the room. And I remember being embarrassed because all I had on was a little blouse, and I was lying on top of the covers, and I didn't have any panties on. I guess I had fallen asleep as soon as the doctor left. And the first thing I heard was the boy's father saying to my dad, "Look what your wife did to my son." And my dad said, "Look what your son did to my daughter." Later on I found out after mama was satisfied with the doctor's exam, she had taken a baseball bat, and gone to his house, and called him out, and then she was beating him up with the baseball (laughter) bat and put him in the hospital. Now, I've, I've told this story--I was not traumatized by the event. Speaker 2: So this is an older boy that did this to you? Speaker 1: He was about fifteen, and I was four. And I wasn't traumatized because my mother had prepared me. And I think much of the trauma that children experience from any kind of sexual molestation is that they're afraid to tell anybody because the person says nobody's gonna believe you, you're just a kid, or they make some threats. But my--I, I knew when my mama was telling me when I was three and four years that she didn't expect I would need this information that early, but I knew what to do, and I knew I was gonna be believed. I didn't know she would take a baseball bat (laughter) and go and hospitalize the fellow, but that's what she did. And I don't think, I don't recall his ever speaking to me again (laughter). And people ask me, "Well, but didn't the police do anything to your mother?" I said, "We didn't have police. We had one old watchman on the campus, and I don't think he had the power to arrest anybody." So there was nothing, was nothing done about that one way or the other. There was no prosecution of him, and there was no criticism of my mother for putting him in the hospital, and life just went on. Speaker 2: Wow, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 101427 Speaker 1: So, well, tell me, now, how long were you in Albany [Georgia]? Speaker 2: One year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] got the offer of a position at Prairie View College [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University] in [Prairie View] Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we, we went to Prairie View [in 1942]. I remember we stopped at tus, we went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, in Tuskegee, Alabama]. I remember just really vaguely a visit to Tuskegee before we went to Prairie View. And then Prairie View was where we spent the next six years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was absolutely idyllic as a place to grow up. Story_ID: 101428 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question and this is a time to ask it, I guess. What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in Prairie View [Texas]? Speaker 2: Well, we had dirt roads. There were, I don't think there was a paved road on the campus [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas]. We lived in wooden homes, each family having their own house, quite close to the campus. And we had every--full run of the campus. It was our, our place. There were no white people there. We knew about the mean white people. They were in Houston [Texas], and Waller [Texas] and Hempstead [Texas]. Those, Waller and Hempstead were the two close towns where we went to shop, and Houston was about 30, 35 miles away. So we--that was a big trip to go to, to Houston. That happened very seldom. But there were mean white people in Waller and Hempstead who would not be nice to us when we were in the stores, who would follow us around and just generally be unpleasant. But they didn't come on the campus, so we could, we ran in and out of each other's houses. We had fruit trees, and you would go and take fruit from people's trees. Very few folk would bother you about that. We had maybe one family that didn't like it when we came and took their plums. But otherwise, we could go and take fruit. We would sometimes go to class--to our dad's [John Henry Windom, Sr.] office. We didn't go to class with him, (unclear), more than once or twice. We had our own school. We had a training school there that was one of those Rosenwald schools that was funded by, they white philanthropist who funded schools. Speaker 1: Yeah, the Julius Rosenwald Fund. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and we-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --had one of those schools there where you had two or three grades in one room, and the teacher could handle them. The classes were small, and we were so compliant. When I look at what teachers are facing today, you know, with kids who curse teachers and who will even hit a teacher, that no, nobody had to contend with children who would even talk back; I mean that, it was just unheard of. So a teacher could handle two or three grades in one room and not have any kind of a problem. It was, as I say, it was idyllic. I don't know for sure what it was like for my mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom]. She, she used to say that when she saw Prairie View, she knew she wanted to have another baby. So I have, my second brother, John [Henry Windom] Jr., was born at Prairie View. Now, I don't know if that meant she was, otherwise she was gonna be so bored she didn't (laughter), wouldn't know what to do or whether the, the atmosphere was so great that she knew it would be an ideal place to have a, another child to raise. But yeah, John came, was born the year after we got to Prairie View [June 6, 1943]. And we just, we just loved it, just loved it. Story_ID: 101429 Speaker 1: I started school there and went to I think the first five or six grades of school-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --at Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas]. Speaker 2: Now, what was in--it was the Prairie View, was it like a-- Speaker 1: A and M. Speaker 2: Was it like a lab school or something that you, that they call it, or how do they, what do they call the school? Speaker 1: Training school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It was just called Prairie View Training School. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, Prairie View Training School. Speaker 1: Yes, and we've gone back for, for reunions. I don't know many people who go to grade school reunions, but, but we've been back for the Prairie View Training School reunions, and wonderful teachers who really, well, they cared about all of us. There were some social distinction within the school because Prairie View had a farming community around it, and so there were children of the farmers who came to school with us. And we were, as kids, we were all together, and the teachers' children, of course, were higher in the pecking order. Looking back, I understand this. I didn't know at the time that the children of the farming community felt that they were not favored, no. But I believe that they, that they did. When they talk about it, I believe them because it was a college campus, and the faculty--the children of faculty members were like the children of the teachers in the school. But the interesting thing about that was that those farm families had land under some kind of a govern, arrangement with the government that they had a period of years that they had to farm that land and could not sell it. I don't know what the contractual arrangement was, but whatev--that time lapsed af, well after we left Prairie View. And Prairie View became an incorporated town with its own little government. And it was the farm families who ran the government and who eventually when they could sell that land, sold land to people who were my father's contemporaries as teachers, so that many of them built houses on land that had formerly been farmland and retired there. So, so the tables turned, and the farm, the kid, farm kids owned the town, which I thought was good, because there was, there was never any rancor or acrimony. But they apparently felt that they were not as respected as we were as children. And I just bring that up because it's just a sociological fact that there, everyplace you go there's some kind of a pecking order. And, and you feel it more keenly when you're on the bottom on the, whatever pecking order that is. Story_ID: 101430 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now, did you have a favorite--well, go on with sights, sound, and smells. I didn't want to stop you, but we, we had kind of started school-- Speaker 2: Well, I just, as-- Speaker 1: --but-- Speaker 2: --we had a campground a, a little bit away from the campus [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas]. You could walk to it, but it was removed, and it was in a wooded area. And in the summer we would have bible camp out there. There were some Episcopal religious people who would come, and they would have camping, camp programs for us, day programs; we didn't stay overnight, and we enjoyed that. Speaker 1: Were these, these black Episcopals? Speaker 2: Yes, they were in fact mixed. As I recall, there was a white priest who came one year. But they were black-- Speaker 1: Some kind of a-- Speaker 2: --white. Speaker 1: --missionary thing or something, or? Speaker 2: I guess so, but we, you know, they weren't proselytizing us to the point where we didn't feel comfortable in the camp. And this camp had an outhouse. You know, there were a lot of outhouses in those days, and, and that was all the facility that this camp had. And I remember one day going into that outhouse and finding a cottonmouth mac, moccasin coiled on top (laughter) of the (unclear) top, and no--I forgot I needed to use the toilet (laughter). I didn't any longer need to use the toilet when I saw that snake. Snakes were very fearful part of the Texas landscape. And the little boys would pick up snakes. We had to learn very early which snakes were poisonous and which weren't because we had snakes in the sandbox. And you (unclear) coral snakes, those beautiful slim banded snakes, one type is poisonous, and one is nonpoisonous. And you had to learn which color stripes went in which order to, to know the difference. So the boys would take snakes and chase the girls with them, and we were all terrified (laughter) of snakes. And one day my dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] was, took us out walking out into the countryside. There was a creek a bit away from the campus, and we would go down there. It was like you were in the wilderness. And we were talking about a snake event that had happened a few days earlier. And we bent down to illustrate what we had done a few days earlier, and we look over, and there was a snake. And we told dad, "There's a snake. Kill the snake!" Now, my dad did not want to have to kill this snake, but he did 'cause we wouldn't stop saying "Kill the snake, kill the snake," so he had to kill the snake and just with a board that he found lying around someplace there. He did not want to do that. He did not like snakes any more than I did. But we had a science corner in the school [Prairie View Training School], and we could take the snake there and put it in, on exhibit. And so there, there were little things like that, that, that interrupted the smooth flow of life, because we did not like these, the snakes. Once we had, we caught an armadillo, and we put it in the bathtub. It didn't get a chance to stay long. But you know an armadillo has that, that armor on it. It's an, an amazing looking animal. We also once had a little crawfishing business because there were crawfish there, and there were a lot of little holes where we could catch crawfish. And I remember one of our, one of the faculty people had ordered some crawfish from us 'cause we thought we were in business. And we took the crawfish to his house in a bucket, and he wouldn't pay us for them. And we, we wouldn't give them to him. We dumped them all over his porch. Now much later, it occurred to me: why didn't we take 'em and eat them? We were so mad that he (laughter) wouldn't pay us that we just threw the crawfish on his porch and left (laughter). Story_ID: 101431 Speaker 1: We--the Second World War [World War II] was on, and like most Americans, we had a victory garden in the backyard. And we grew beans, and corn, and squash, and lots of vegetables. And our house had a little gangway that was bordered with a hedge, a very tall hedge that really leaned over to the house, so there was like a tunnel that you could walk through. And one day we had been out in the garden, and we picked green beans and other things. And we were headed through that tunnel, and my mother [Frances Louise Jones Windom] was in her bedroom window, which faced that little tunnel. And mom said there's some beans up in the hedge. Now, we know there are no beans in the hedges, but we looked up. And there were these garden snakes up (laughter)--they looked like green, long green beans. Boy, I was so through (laughter)--(unclear)--they couldn't run fast enough 'cause I was scared of all of the snakes. I knew those garter snakes couldn't hurt anybody but I was just terrified of them. And mom was teasing us, and I didn't like that at all. I ran out of there. And I don't I did much work in the garden anymore because the green beans reminded me (laughter) of those snakes. Snakes are not fun, no, not if you're scared of them. Story_ID: 101432 Speaker 1: Okay, so you all--Prairie View [Texas] is out in the prairie, isn't it, as such? Speaker 2: It was in the prairie back in those days. Now, it's built up so much now, and the campus [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas] is built up. As I say, we had all dirt roads. One of the last bad whippings that I got--my dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] was, he was a disciplinarian. But the only--I never was whipped when I thought it was really unfair. But I had some lemon drops, and my, my brother [Jackson T.O.P. Windom] and a couple of friends and I were walking down one of these dirt roads. And Jack asked me for some lemon drops, and I said "You close your mou--close your eyes and open your mouth," and I'll put one in your mouth. And I picked up a handful of dirt and put it in his mouth. I did it (laughter), I did it, and of course he told dad, and I--that was one of the worst whippings I ever had. But no matter how much you say, "I'll never do it again." And when kids say that, they really do mean it (laughter), trying to avoid those whippings. But I got one. Boy, I never did anything like that again. I knew it was wrong when I did it. Story_ID: 101433 Speaker 1: Now, did, did you have a--well, what was your personality like when you were a little girl? Now, you, you, you wanted attention, more attention, I can tell that, and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --and did you--what, what, what-- Speaker 2: From my parents [Frances Louise Jones Windom and John Henry Windom, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I wasn't concerned about attention, a lot of attention from other people. But-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --I did not like-- Speaker 1: --those two kids, other kids-- Speaker 2: --having these two people come, mm-mm. In fact, when John [her youngest brother, John Henry Windom, Jr.] was born I was seven years old, but I remember, I started wetting the bed again. And that was just a reaction to having this little baby there. He was as cute as anything. I mean I love him to death, but if only they could've just been somewhere else (laughter). I would have been more satisfied. But I was always a very good student and did my studies. Speaker 1: Did, did, did, did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: I liked everything about going to school [Prairie View Training School in Prairie View, Texas], and I was very eager to respond. If the teacher asked a question, I was always ready with an answer. And I remember one day my mom observed in my class in Prairie View. I don't know what grade I was in, maybe fourth or fifth grade. And I was even more eager to answer all the questions because she was there. And afterwards she talked to me and told me that I shouldn't try to answer all the questions; you know, leave some (laughter), leave some questions for some other people to answer because it may make children feel badly if they did, if they felt that I knew everything and I, I appreciated that, you know. But that's what I was in school for. We were--we had friends, and we were popular, and I guess my personality was very much like what it is now, yeah, fairly, I'm fairly studious. From my mom I saw--I learned so much about standing up for your rights. I remember a Bible, a white Bible salesman came to our house one day. He was an itinerate salesman just going through the campus. And I recall that he called my mother "sister," you know, in the religious sense. And my mother, "Said my name is Mrs. Windom." And he said, "Well, I can call you sister, but I can't call you Mrs.," after he had called her sister a couple of times and she had corrected him a couple of times more. He said, "I can't call you Mrs., but I can call you sister." She said, "No, you can get out of my house, and you can leave," and so he left. She was very outspoken and never belonged to any organizations. She did all of her Civil Rights work on her own, and she did quite a lot. In fact, the, there were--my dad had two reasons for wanting to get out of Texas. One was that he needed to come back to St. Louis [Missouri] to help take care of his mom [Mary Davis Windom], his aunt, and his grandmother. But the other was he was always afraid mom was gonna do something and end up in prison in the South and that he would not be able to deal with that (laughter), because she just simply wasn't going to take anything off of anybody. Story_ID: 101434 Speaker 1: Now, back in those days we had two national black newspapers. We had the Pittsburgh Courier and the Chicago Defender. And we got both of those papers at, in Prairie View, and I used to read them. And they were, of course, full of stories of injustice against black people as well as stories about notable black people and the struggles we were going through. And I used to wonder I said because I knew all these black people, and they were such fine people. Why do white people treat black people so badly? There would be stories of, of murders, of white people murdering black folk, not so many-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they had the lynchings of-- Speaker 1: --in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There wasn't that much of black people killing each other like we have now. And I would figure, I figured out, I said they must eat us, you know, this must be the reason they're killing us, because we had chickens, and some of the families had a pig or two or a cow. And once a year the guys would get together and slaughter the pigs and cows, and you know, we ate this stuff. So I said, "White people must eat black people" (laughter). And I thought this--I was serious about this, but I never checked it with my parents. You know, kids figure out some things, and they just accept what they have figured for themselves. And I said, "That must be why they like to kill black people." Because there was not--we were, the people were just fine, and everything there was being done by black people. You flipped a switch, you got a light 'cause we had black electricians. Your toilet flushed; we had black plumbers. And no, and it was a black college campus, so black people were doing everything. I never had this idea that there was something that white people could do that we couldn't do because everything in my young life was being done by, managed by black people. So that, that idea that white people ate black people stayed with me for a really long time and made me quite frightened when I came to St. Louis and was surrounded by white people. I had never been in crowds of white people except when we went to Houston [Texas], and I thought we might get eaten (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, now those were the days when, when the, I know the Defender, I seen old Defenders-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --when they were, they had photographs of lynchings-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --on the cover, and they would-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --they would follow that story and give you what happened to the person-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --why they were-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --apprehended by the mob, and what happened to 'em afterwards. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and it was pretty-- Speaker 1: And those papers were quite-- Speaker 2: --vivid-- Speaker 1: --the Courier and-- Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: --the Defender were national papers, and almost everybody could read, read them. So they were great unifying forces for us too, but they gave me my ideas of what was going on in the world. Story_ID: 101435 Speaker 1: Now, did you have--I haven't asked you specifically about African American history, but I know if you came in contact with the, the Pittsburgh Courier in those days, you, you may have come across the writings of [Joel Augustus] J.A. Rogers, so, one-- Speaker 2: Oh, of course. J.A. Rogers, my first five books of his, I bought from him because he made the circuit as a lecturer and with his box of books. So I, I bought, I've got five autographed J.A. Rogers books, which I still have (laughter). Speaker 1: But when you were a kid, it was "Your History"-- Speaker 2: As a kid-- Speaker 1: --in the, in the-- Speaker 2: --you know, the cartoons were there-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, "Your History," yeah. Speaker 2: --and the, and "Your History" was there. Oh, but that was not real stories; you know, it was just the cartoons. Speaker 1: Little vignette, yeah. Speaker 2: So the books came later in my life. But yes, I read-- Speaker 1: Well, let's pick up-- Speaker 2: --the things. Speaker 1: --later on the--I-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'cause I wanna know like when you came in contact with that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but did, did, did your family talk about black history much, or was that much of a subject in those days? Speaker 2: Black people talked about black problems, you know, about the way people were treated. One of the girls, a Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas] student was slapped in a store in Houston [Texas]. I think that was Houston or Waller [Texas], one of the town, one of those three cities [the other is Hempstead, Texas]. And dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] want, wanted to organize a protest about that, but he was really stopped by the administration because those administrations of these black colleges, their money came from the state representatives and a little bit of money from some benevolent white people. And they were not for having any kind of Civil Rights protests. So I heard my parents talk about that, that kind of thing and other incidents that people had. In terms of black history, see, we're, we're talking the 1940s now, so we're less than a hundred years out of slavery. And so no, there wasn't much talk about black history. Later on I knew my dad wanted to go to Africa. He would have loved to go to Africa. But no, black folks talked about problems, you know, and they also were interested in what was going to happen to the students, where they would, going to be able to get jobs. The folks who were being educated, what was gonna be in their future? The, the black history interest came later; that came later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I went to Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], Charles H. Wesley was president of Central State. Speaker 1: Okay, well, I don't wanna take, take you to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I know-- Speaker 1: --Central yet. Speaker 2: --we're not gon'-- Speaker 1: But we're, we're--but that's a-- Speaker 2: But now-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I understand--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --that's when you get into history, when I would say more it was college. It wasn't even high school [Sumner High School in St. Louis, Missouri] here-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in St. Louis [Missouri]. Story_ID: 101436 Speaker 1: Now who were some of your favorite teachers at Prairie View [Prairie View Training School in Prairie View, Texas]? Speaker 2: It was Mrs. Wells, who only died a few years ago. I had a chance to see her at one of the reunions we went to. Mrs.--Ms. Burdine was our principal, and she was very sweet. My youngest brother, John [Henry Windom, Jr.], when he turned, he was about four years old, and he wanted to go to school. He went to Ms. Burdine and told her he was ready to go to school and asked her if he could come. And she had the latitude to admit him, four maybe five he was, he went to school; he was ready for the first grade. And he was very successful and has enjoyed a forty-year career as an educator here in St. Louis [Missouri], yeah. She was a sweetheart. All of the teachers were very good to us. I had I think a kindergarten teacher that I wasn't real pleased with, and she did something to me. I told my mother [Frances Louise Jones Windom] about it, and I was out of kindergarten the next day. I learned real early I never lied to my mother about anything that somebody had done to me because she (laughter) was gonna do something about it, you know. After the baseball bat, and then I was out of kindergarten the day after I told her the teacher had done something unkind to me, I was very careful. I never told her, I didn't tell her some of the things people did to me because I didn't know what she would do. She was a lioness about her children, yeah. Speaker 1: So she's gonna do something--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She was gonna do something, and she was gonna believe you too. There wasn't gonna be any question about "Are you telling the truth? Did this really happen?" So I thought that was a good, a good early lesson, don't, don't lie about what people have done to you. Story_ID: 101437 Speaker 1: So, I remember when dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] finally got this Ph.D. in 1948. He had been going away every summer to go back to Indiana [Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana] to get this degree. And when he finally got it, maybe it was before in '48 [1948]. I think we left in Prairie View [Texas] in '48 [1948]. Maybe in '47 [1947] that he finished, finally finished that degree. I sat in school and on my notebook I wrote "Dr. John Windom, Dr. John Windom" over and over. I filled up pages with this, and somebody saw what I was writing, one of the kids. And, and they thought, said I thought I was better than anybody because my dad had his doctorate. And it, it wasn't that at all. I didn't like the fact that he had gone away every summer and that my whole life I had been hearing about this degree. And we had gone to Indiana and spent a year, and he was still going away every summer. And I was just so glad that whatever this was, I knew it was important, and I was proud that he had done this so that now he wouldn't have to go away in the summers anymore and that maybe he'd be able to stay at home with us (laughter). But, but mom, mom heard about that, and she talked to me about that and told me I shouldn't do that. And I didn't do it anymore (laughter), but I was proud (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, so, so the family moved shortly after he got his-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Ed.D.? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He was--yeah. Speaker 1: When he, when he finished that he was able to get a job at Stowe Teacher's College in St. Louis [now Harris-Stowe State University in St. Louis, Missouri]. And we came back North. Story_ID: 101438 Speaker 1: So is this still during the war [World War II]-- Speaker 2: No, this was after the war. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause the war ended in '44 [1944]? Forty-five [1945]? Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945], yeah. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-five [1945], after President [Franklin D.] Roosevelt was die, had died. We were in the blackberry patch picking blackberries that was near our house, behind our house and one lot over, and somebody came and told us the president was dead. And we were so upset, and we cried, and we were scared because he was the only president we had ever known. He had been president for so long, we didn't know, you know, anything about somebody else being president of the United States, so we were very scared when he died. But you know, nothing happened. The, the country went on, but we were really sad. And I can remember, between his death and Lyndon Johnson's, I never cared again about when an American president died. But we knew about him because we bought war bonds when the president wanted us to buy war bonds. So we bought those little stamps every week, and we gave money to the March of Dimes. We had little cardboard holders that you filled up with dimes. And we knew the president was crippled and had polio, so we really felt like we had a connection with Franklin Roosevelt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we were very sorry when he died. But we were glad when the war was over too. We knew about that, but we didn't know the gravity of war and the horrors that people were experiencing though, both the Jews in the concentration camps and the soldiers. We, we didn't know about that. We, we saw heroic films and the movies, and we thought that patriotism was fine, but we were just kids. Speaker 1: Did they, did they ever--do you remember a time when you first found out about the, the Holocaust and-- Speaker 2: That came probably in high school I started to learn about that. And then in college, you know, a, a number of Jewish people came to the states, and they ended up teaching in black schools. They didn't have Ph.D.s, but they had academic training, maybe a baccalaureate or a master's degree. So we had some at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], and I learned more from them about the Holocaust. And it was a subject we, we were by that time studying what had happened in World War II, and we heard about, about that. Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But I did not know--I don't remember hearing anything about a concentration camp when we were kids and right around the time the war ended, no. We just knew the soldiers were, were coming home, and the war was over. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 101439 Speaker 1: Now, now was religion a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: No, no, my father [John Henry Windom, Sr.] had been religious and had been a church person before he married mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom]. But mom had been reared, her dad was an atheist, and mom was an atheist, though she never called herself an atheist, she really didn't. I, I don't want, shouldn't describe her that way. I would say she was an agnostic, an atheist who would consider herself an agnostic. Speaker 1: Now this is unusual in the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --black community. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Very few people-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --admit, if they don't believe, they don't admit it. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so, I mean so is, wa, wa, was it--were, were they pretty open about the fact that they--so it wa, wa, it was Professor C. C. Jones [Christopher Columbus Jones], was he, was he-- Speaker 2: He was an atheist-- Speaker 1: Atheist, okay. Speaker 2: --and remained so till he died, as I said. I watched him 'cause I thought that he might change as he got older, 'cause I had heard people, as they got closer to the end of their life, were likely to develop a, an affection for this Christian creation. He never did, and I respected that. At Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University in Prairie View, Texas], like many of the black colleges then, people went to chapel, and they had church services. I think, I think both of my parents-- Speaker 1: Was Prairie View an A.M.E. school or-- Speaker 2: No, no-- Speaker 1: --was--no, it was a-- Speaker 2: --it was a state school. Speaker 1: State school, okay. Speaker 2: And it, and, and it, as far as I know, never had a black church connection. It was the state school for Negroes. But we did, I remember we did go to chapel, but it was like a social activity. And you didn't have to profess anything. There was no witnessing in church. You know, it, it was, it was an institution, but it was--I don't even know if was denominational. It was chapel. Like in Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], we had to go to chapel, but we didn't have to believe anything; you just went. Now, I decided to get baptized when I was thirteen. Because when we came to St. Louis [Missouri], the kids in the neighborhood went to a Baptist church, which was close, within walking distance of our home, and I went too; it was social. Sunday, we went to Sunday school, and then after Sunday school, we would come up into the sanctuary. And one of the things that the minister would do would be to ask: "Who has not been saved here?" And I would have to stand up, and, and my brothers would stand up. We might have been the only unsaved people (laughter) there. And then he would talk about us and talk about how "If you're not saved, you are going to hell. The only way to get yourself right for your eternity is you must be baptized." So after awhile of hearing this, I decided I, I might as well get baptized. I said, "Maybe after you're baptized you get this revelation that people talk about," you know. So I came home and told mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom] that I was gonna be baptized the following Sunday, and she didn't say anything. But the next day she had cut off all her hair (laughter). Her hair, her--she only had about an inch of hair, and I knew it was a reaction to my being baptized. She couldn't tell me not to do it, but that was the way she (laughter) expressed her consternation. She cut off all her hair (laughter). Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: So I went ahead and I got baptized. I thought that--I had never witnessed a baptism. I, when I saw the font, I thought they were going to bend me forward into this water. But instead, the reverend and a deacon bent me backwards. And I thought they were trying to drown me when (laughter) when that happened. When I went back into the water that way, I said they're trying to kill me. But I survived it, and I waited for the revelation, and it never came (laughter). Up to today it has not come. And they were saying--people would ask me, "Do you believe in Jesus now?" And I knew the stories. I said "Well, nothing has happened. I don't feel any different than did before I got baptized." So I went to church for two more Sundays, and then I stopped. And I have never since that day been in a church for anything other than a baptism or a--I mean to see somebody get christened, married, or buried, that's it, or a program. And mom told me later on that the minister came to my house, oh, a few months after I had stopped going to church. And he came. She invited him in, and he looked around and saw all these books, wall-to-wall books, floor to ceiling. And she said he just looked at the bookcase and said, "I guess this is why she hasn't been back to church" (laughter). And he didn't, you know, didn't bother about it anymore. But I real--in those two weeks, I thought, "It wasn't fair for that man to stand us up and tell us we were going to hell. He knew we were in there without our parents, and he talked to us like that. That was bad, and I'm not going back." Story_ID: 101440 Speaker 1: So, there was no discussion about it at home. I just told them, my parents, I was through with church, and that was the end of it. Speaker 2: Did, did your parents [Frances Louise Jones Windom and John Henry Windom, Sr.] try to give you some answers about some of these things when you were coming up? I mean did you ever ask like what is-- Speaker 1: Like what things? Speaker 2: --what is, "What is Christmas about," or what is, what is, "Who is Jesus," and all that? So did they, did they try to give you-- Speaker 1: Oh, we celebrated that--oh, Christmas, we, Christmas is a big holiday. It's like a neutral day. We knew the nativity story. This is cultural. You know, it's not just religious; this is part of the culture. So, every Christmas we got five dollars to buy gifts. That was a lot of money back then to give the, a kid, because we were getting one major Christmas gift; you could name something you wanted, and you got one thing. We bought Christmas gifts for our friends, but then you had to have a few gifts for people who might come to the house and bring you something, and you haven't bought them anything. And one of the things we found in Houston [Texas] was some laminated pictures of Mary and Jesus. They looked really good. It was like on a wood base and a slick photograph. They were a nickel a piece. We bought those (laughter). We had about ten of those, 'cause for about fifty cent you could get a supply of presents. I've still got one them, and every time I look at it I smile, because these were our Christmas gifts for the unexpected gift (laughter). But it had no spiritual significance, just cultural. And my mother had a, had a, a Bible. They gave me a Bible when I was about twelve. I've, I've got, still got that. I've got in, in my house now, I have maybe a dozen Bibles. And I, you know, studied. I looked up stuff when people quote the Bible, I looked it up. It has no spiritual meaning to me at all. And my dad was not, couldn't have been a strongly religious person because he gave it up too easily. I think it was just part of his upbringing, but he did not regret giving it up at all. And I never heard him have a religious discussion with my mom at all. It was just, it was a nonissue. Story_ID: 101441 Speaker 1: Okay, now when did your family move to St., back to St. Louis [Missouri] area? Speaker 2: We came back here in 1948. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we spent some time in Edwardsville [Illinois]. Mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom] and my brothers [Jackson T.O.P. Windom and John Henry Windom, Jr.] and I, while dad was over here with his, at his mother's [Mary Davis Windom] home and trying to get arrangements for a house. So we went to school in Edwardsville for a semester or a semester and a half. Speaker 1: How, how did you like-- Speaker 2: And that was interesting. Speaker 1: --being back in-- Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause grandpa [Christopher Columbus Jones] was still principal of the school. And it was nice being in their home and with other cousins, because we had cousins who lived on the same property. They had on their house property in Edwardsville, they had three houses. And in the back house, one cousin and her family lived. And in the house, the side house I think that was probably all storage by then. Grandma had, she was a collector of everything, never threw away anything, because said you never when people are gonna need something. So she had, when her kids married or moved, they could come there and get furniture. At one point, she had like four pianos in the house, 'cause all her daughters had had piano lessons, and they never got rid of anything. But she saved everything, paper bags, egg cartons. She would not throw away anything because they had gone through such hard times. Speaker 1: During the thirties [1930s]-- Speaker 2: And she said that--and, and after. They never had real money. And so she said, "Somebody may need something." I said, and I will tell her, "Grandma, they're not gonna need egg crates and paper bags." And not long after she died, there was a paper bag shortage in the area. You had to take your own bag to the supermarket (laughter) to, to bring groceries in. It didn't last long, but we did go through a paper bag shortage. I said, "Grandma was right" (laughter), you know, and she, she saved everything. But you could go to her house and find something that you needed and just take it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we, we were there amidst clutter. Grandpa had a room at the back of the house that was his bedroom, and I never saw the interior of that room and my--I've talked to cousins, and nobody can remember ever going in that room. Grandma, by that time, she was not sick enough to have to sit up with this congestive heart failure, so she slept in a room with the girls, the girl cousins who were there, and then, and we were in that room too. We were crowded, but we were comfortable, so everything was fine. So we went to school there for a semester, a semester and a half, and then we came to St. Louis when my parents found the house that I'm still living in. Story_ID: 101442 Speaker 1: And I went to Cote Brilliante [Elementary] School [in St. Louis, Missouri], which had as a principal a member of the Oklahoma Reconstruction-era congressman. The name is has slipped away from me, but they were, they were an Oklahoma family, and they had a congressman. And one of the relatives was our principal in the school. Speaker 2: Not Edwin McCabe or-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: I know he ran for office in Oklahoma. Oklahoma wasn't a state during Reconstruction, so-- Speaker 1: I think they were from Oklahoma. This was a U.S. Congressman, not, not-- Speaker 2: He was a-- Speaker 1: --not a state congressman. Speaker 2: --a Reconstruction. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he had to represent a state though. Speaker 1: It's gonna come. Yeah, I think he was from Oklahoma, but he, he wasn't in the Oklahoma legislature. He was in the U.S. Congress. And-- Speaker 2: Okay, not-- Speaker 1: --I might have the name--the state wrong. The name will probably come to me, but-- Speaker 2: Not Hiram Revels. I think that somebody mentioned-- Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: --a relative of Hiram Revels-- Speaker 1: --it wasn't Revel, it wasn't-- Speaker 2: --the other day-- Speaker 1: --a Revels-- Speaker 2: --or Bruce-- Speaker 1: It was one of the famous-- Speaker 2: --last name Bruce. Speaker 1: --not names. Speaker 2: Greener? Speaker 1: No, not, not-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Boy, memory is something. Like I told you, you get to the point where the names just won't come. Speaker 2: John Roy--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But we had a, a delicate, slender, light complexioned man who today could not probably go, walk into one of those schools 'cause the kids would be twice as big as he was and would throw him out. But he could, he could keep us under control because we were, we were compliant kids. I didn't like going to school there because for the first time in my life I had teachers who were actually mean to me, and I don't, I still don't know why, two teachers who just took a dislike to me and didn't mind showing it. One of them, I remember Mrs. Allen, who one day asked us where does the U.S. President live? And it happened at that time that the president [President Harry Truman] and his family had moved into Blair House, which used to be for, I think for the vice president, because the White House was being renovated. So I, you know, I answered the question. I was still raising my hand, and I said, "Blair House," 'cause she said where does the president and his family live? The woman balled me out. And I had developed a mechanism because I had two mean teachers that I could block out when I knew I was being criticized. Whether it was fair or unfair, I could just block it out and look at them but not hear them. I wouldn't say anything back. She did denounced me for several minutes, and I didn't know why, because I knew from the paper that the president and his family were living in Blair House. Later on she did apologize, a few days later, because she, she was asking the generic question, and the answer was supposed to be the White House. And when she found out that they were, in fact, living in Blair House, she did apologize to me, though I don't think she did it in front of the class. I think she told me privately that she had her-- Speaker 2: It sound like some other kind of resentment that she-- Speaker 1: I, I have-- Speaker 2: --was expressing that-- Speaker 1: --no idea. I'm an eighth grade, an eighth grader. I'm not anybody who's a, a threat or of any kind. And I, I, I don't know what that was, but I did have that experience. So I, I couldn't say--Langston, Langston is the name. It came to me. Speaker 2: John Mercer Langston? Speaker 1: Yes, one of the Langstons was our principal. And yeah, that's, that's--were they Oklahoma or-- Speaker 2: No, there's a Langston, Oklahoma. But John Mercer Langston was Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, then, then-- Speaker 2: He, he-- Speaker 1: --I had the state wrong. Speaker 2: --ran for--he was state representative in Ohio. He never got to Congress, but he was state-- Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, I had that wrong too. Speaker 2: -state representative in Ohio [sic, John Mercer Langston was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Virginia and not a state representative from Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's-- Speaker 2: He's one of the first black, the first black one I think in-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a Langston. Speaker 2: --a northern state, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, okay. Story_ID: 101443 Speaker 1: Oh, so that was an unpleasant experience. But I did graduate from Cote Brilliante [Elementary School in St. Louis, Missouri]. And looking back at our graduation pictures then, we were children when we graduated from grade school. The girls had on socks; we had on white socks and white dresses; and the boys had on suits and ties. But now, eighth grade graduation is high, is high heels-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --hosiery, and often a couple of babies (laughter), you know, in the audience (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, that's physically, physically most of the girls are women; I mean physically their grown. Speaker 1: And yeah, and their much, their older than we were, because back then, you could, depending on when your birthday was, you could start school in September or January. They don't have those January admissions anymore. So if you haven't turned six by the deadline, you have to wait a whole year to go to school. And so the kids are, they're actually older than we are, we were then. Then we used to skip grades too. If you were good student you could skip a grade. So we were basically thirteen years old, coming out of the eighth grade, and we were kids and thought of ourselves as children. Story_ID: 101444 Speaker 1: And then I went to Sumner High School [in St. Louis, Missouri]. That was a wonderful experience. That was, that was really a very good experience. Speaker 2: Okay, now what, what were some--who were some of the personalities that made the experience to wonderful? Speaker 1: Well, our principal, George D. Brantley, was principal. The schools were segregated. There were three black high schools, Sumner, named after Charles Sumner, Vashon [High School], and Washington Technical [High] School. So, depending on where you lived in the city, you went to either Vashon or Sumner, or if you were considered not college-bound or you had a desire for a trade, you went to Washington Technical School. Our principal, we--there was a board of education, but we didn't know that they had any control over him. He was in control of that school. And he was a heavyset man, dark complexion, loud, and in charge. You did what Mr. Brantley. Later on we found that students were, who were, they knew where college-bound, either based on your parentage or your academic prowess, were guided into certain classes so that we would have the classes necessary for college. This was not a formal advisory system, but they made sure you had the classes that you needed to get to college. And then we had some colorful teachers, people who performed. Our, our history teacher, by the, by junior senior year, ah, his name is not gonna come right now, but he was so dramatic. We would have long homework assignments, and you would turn in your assignment all neatly written up. He might take his pen and smash it across your (laughter), your work, tearing the pages, saying, "This is garbage and laughing;" he would laugh at you, but it was all in good fun. Mr. Davenport, yeah, that was Mr. Davenport, you, you knew he, he cared about you, but he would hurt your feelings (laughter) and talk about your, your production. And he used to recite, when he thought that you were not doing well, the whole class, he usually would tell the whole class. "The boys stood on the burning deck, eating peanuts by the peck. The flames rolled on. He would not go, because he loved those peanuts so." And he would fall out laughing. He might take your notebook with your homework and fling it out the window, you know (laughter). So, you know, it was, it was fun. We had fun. Speaker 2: Well, it sounds like it. Speaker 1: They had a--geometry, now that was, I got, finally got the point where there were thing that I didn't learn. I never could learn geometry. It just made no sense to me. And later on I think I realize I believe I didn't have a good teacher because I wasn't the only one who didn't learn it. I had probably only two people in the class who did learn, but I would have my homework done. I made A's in geometry, and my homework would be done because my dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] would do it. He was working two jobs. He was teaching at the college in the day, and then he taught at a business school at night. And I would wait up for him (laughter), and when he came back from that second job, I would tell him I was having trouble with my geometry. He would come and he would explain everything. I didn't understand him either, so it may not have been Mr. Marshall's fault. He would explain it, and he would say, "Now do you understand, Alice?" And I'd say "Yes, daddy, yes." And he'd write it all down. I said now the next problem. And he was tired, having worked all day and night, so he would end up doing all my homework (laughter), and I didn't have a clue. But the next day I would, I would have all the problems worked. And there might be one other person in the class, a guy named Harry Blackaston [ph.], very smart. His dad also taught at Stowe [Stowe Teachers College, now Harris-Stowe State College in St. Louis, Missouri], and he would beat me all the time. We were, he would be number one, and I was number two in our overall scholastic ranking in the school. And that was the way we graduated. He was number one, and I was number two. I said, "When I can get away from Harry Blackaston, I'm gonna be number one." And I was number one in my class at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] years later. I said, "Now, I didn't think I was smarter than everybody in the world besides Harry Blackaston, but I was convinced if I could just get away from him, I could be number one." But Mr. Marshall would call on me to put problems on the board, and I would go up there and tell him: now, Mr. Marshall, I can write the answers on the board and work it out, but you don't ask me to explain it. And he would laugh, but he knew, he knew what was happening. And he would let me put it up on the board, and then he would ask me questions (laughter), and I couldn't answer any questions. And he would laugh. He was--they were just, they were good folk. Story_ID: 101445 Speaker 1: Many of the--we were so lucky to have gone to school before integration because we had black teachers who had master's degrees and Ph.D.s in the high school, because they couldn't get jobs in their fields. So we had such superior instruction. Whites had much better equipment and supplies in their schools, there, much more money spent per white pupil than it was per black pupil. But we had the teachers (laugher). Now things have changed, and you don't have the same caliber of teachers going in the black schools because they can get other jobs now. The people who, who were good students and who's trained in these professions that we didn't even know existed can go and work in those professions now. So they're not in the classroom in large numbers anymore, but they were there when I was there, and they were fine people. You know, they were gentleman and ladies. I don't know what they did in their private time, but in school they set good examples for us. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the--many people from the generation that became integrated in school, you know, had that same lament. And-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it seems that it's, they're on the--they really don't--and when they look back at it, they really don't know how to have solved it. But they, they thought that the struggle for equal rights and integration was right, but they, they, even the most ardent NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] activist and you know, but they still regret the demise of those schools. They've never been recreated. Speaker 1: Well, yes, because that required sacrifice on the part of those teachers, dreams that they may have had for things that they really wanted to do with their lives. And we benefited, the students benefited from that, but they paid a heavy price. They, had they been--the financial rewards for teaching been better, I think you could still attract a lot more really talented people. Because the commitment to teach another generation is strong in many people, but the, the financial sacrifice is so great that they will not take that as a career path. So we knew we were benefiting from, from crushed dreams. But we--they were wonderful people. Mr. Wiley Thompson [ph.] taught us [William] Shakespeare. He was our English literature teacher, and he taught us Shakespeare and made us like it. He always wore a three-piece pinstriped suit. And we thought it was the same suit every day. He looked neat, but he always had--now he may have had four of those suits just alike, like Matlock, you know, only wore the same seersucker suit all the time. And little orphan Annie only had two dresses, one long sleeve and short sleeve, same dress. But, but there were several of them, but you only saw the one. One day Mr. Thompson came in a khaki colored suit, and we just fell out. We clapped and say "Oh, you look so nice in that suit." And he said, "Now you make me feel like I've been wearing patch pocket overalls every (laughter), every day." And he'd always looked dignified, but it was the same suit or identical suits. And we just--they were characters. They were able to, to be different personalities and expressive, and they cared about us. Story_ID: 101446 Speaker 1: I remember when I decided--I decided very early that I wanted to go to a black school, but I didn't know about the black schools. Wilberforce [Wilberforce University in Wilberforce, Ohio], one of my mother's sisters had gone to Wilberforce, so that was the only black school I knew anything about. Cornell [University in Ithaca, New York], one, one aunt went to Cornell; mom went to Iowa [University of Iowa in Iowa City, Iowa] and Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign]; other, another sister went to Hampton [Institute in Hampton, Virginia]. So I didn't have black, except for Hampton, no black schools in the family. But when Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], they used to send people around to the high schools. And I got offered a, I think it was a half-tuition scholarship from Central State. Walter G. Sellers was their recruiter, and he came to the high school [Sumner High School in St. Louis, Missouri]. And they would have assemblies, and these college recruiters would talk to us. And if we were interested, they would see about trying to get us financial aid. This was before the government scholarships like Pell Grant, things like that. They didn't exist back in the fifties [1950s]. But I remember several of my teachers trying to discourage me from going to Central State, and I didn't like that at all. But I understood that what they were really saying was look, you're bright enough. You can make it in any school. And they still needed examples to show off that we could really learn, and we could be good students. So they wanted their bright students to go to predominantly white schools so that, you know, you'd be an, an example. But I knew that was--I was not interested in being in a school where the classes would be really big, and where you wouldn't have any chance for personal relationships with teachers, or where I'd be in a crowd of white people. I had no interest in that, no. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, but I, I, I still was, I, I was not pleased that teachers actually talked seriously to, to try to discourage me from going to Central State. Speaker 2: Now what year did you graduate from Sumner-- Speaker 1: I came out of Sumner in 1953. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 101447 Speaker 1: Okay, 1953. So, so your parents [Frances Louise Jones Windom and John Henry Windom, Sr.] were fine with Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio]? Did they think that was a good choice? Speaker 2: I think mama would have liked for me to go to Illinois. They had a good experience at [University of] Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign]. They made it clear that I could go anyplace. There was no real objection. I, I just think that was a, a casual desire on her part, that she would have been happy if I'd chosen Illinois. But yeah, they were fine with it, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I had good reasons for where I felt I was in my development and what I wanted out of the school, that I wanted to be around black people, and to be-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --taught by black people. Speaker 1: Now did you have--did you know about Charles Wesley before you went to Central? Speaker 2: No. That was a wonderful surprise to, to find this distinguished gentleman who was an historian of Alpha Phi Alpha, the labor, the Black Labor Movement. I mean he was, he was an historian and had worked with Carter G. Woodson. No, he was a wonderful surprise, again, an excellent model of how you behave, how you sit through long boring lectures when we had to go to, to chapel and sometimes we would be bored. But we would watch Dr. Wesley, and he might, he'd be on the stage and over behind with a guest. And he was always eagerly listening, and I knew if I was bored, he (laughter) had to be triply bored. But Central State brought everybody in the black world who was advancing our struggle, they came to Central State. And because we had those compulsory assemblies, not, not the Sunday service, but the, we had assemblies once a week, they were compulsory. That's all gone now. They don't have those anymore, but we got a chance to hear [Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall, [Joel Augustus] J.A. Rogers. I think I first heard him at Central State. Historians, folk who were doing things were invited speakers. And, and, and that was wonderful exposure. And had it not been compulsory, I probably wouldn't have gone to all of them, and I'm, and I'm so glad that we didn't have a choice. And making it compulsory, since you lived in a dormitory, your, your dorm mother would come around, you, you couldn't be in your room (laughter) when the assembly was going on. You were, that, you were in the auditorium. Story_ID: 101448 Speaker 1: Well, just a little bit about Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], just tell us a little about the, the history of Central State on some level. And this is, is an interesting split off from Wilberforce [Wilberforce University in Wilberforce, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Yes, Central State came about because the African Method Episcopal Church [A.M.E.] had started a school, Wilberforce, of which they were very proud. And that was started sometime in the 1800s. I don't remember-- Speaker 1: Eighteen fifty-six [1856]. Speaker 2: Okay, so that, you're talking about being started before the Civil War. So it had a, a very proud history. The state of Ohio had [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] and other state institutions to which they did not want black people going. So they put money into Wilberforce and really were shoring up that budget. The state was funding, pretty much funding Wilberforce for quite a while, but then there were inevitable conflicts between the church and the state (laughter). There's a good reason for the separation of the two. And eventually they split, and, and there happened to be a ravine that separated buildings. And Wilberforce retained buildings on one side of the ravine, and the state retained the rest of it. And most of the buildings were on state property, and the state had paid to build them. So Charles Wesley I believe was the first president after the split. It had already taken place before I got there-- Speaker 1: I think in '48 was when it-- Speaker 2: --but in the forties [1940s], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, 1940--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It had, it had split. But he was, he was a very elegant, scholarly man who ran a good school. We had, we had really good instruction. I was quite satisfied. And in the, my later work, I proved to be prepared when I went to the University of Chicago [Illinois] to get a master's degree, even though we were being taught by people who had written some of the textbooks we were using. I said they couldn't have gotten a job in my high school. They (laughter), really, as professors, they couldn't have, they couldn't have worked at Sumner [High School in St. Louis, Missouri]. They were inferior as instructors, even though they was competent scholars and had written books, some of them had. Some of them were refugees from Germany who were there be, I guess they had connections. But Central State was a rural setting. It was four miles or so from Xenia, Ohio, and Xenia was rural (laughter). Speaker 1: Sixteen miles from Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, Dayton was a real city now. Even in comparison to St. Louis, Dayton was a real city, but Xenia was not. I remember I, I had an assignment in a sociology class that required me to just, to go around some of the areas in Xenia and just look at housing stock. And I remember looking into windows. I didn't have to interview people. I was really looking at housing stock and seeing dirt floors inside the house, yeah. So that was a poor community and a very small, had a small main street which had a restaurant called Geyer's Restaurant, which was segregated. They willfully didn't serve black people. And the, the room was that the father of the owner when I was there had actually died in a courtroom protesting some effort to integrate something. So I took it upon myself to try to integrate his restaurant because I would go to Xenia. Whenever I wanted to go to Dayton, we, we had a campus bus that would take us to Xenia, and then we could catch, I don't know if it was Trailways or Greyhound but some kind of regional bus service to go to, from Xenia to Dayton. And Geyer's Restaurant was very near the place, the bus station, maybe across the street and in the same block. So I started just going in there and sitting. I would never get served, but I would go. Whenever I was going to Dayton I'd go and sit in Geyer's. Story_ID: 101449 Speaker 1: Okay, so we were at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio]. And-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you were an education major, I guess? Speaker 2: Oh no, social work. Speaker 1: Social work, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I majored in social work-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I always knew that I wanted to do something in the struggle for black folk. And social work at the time looked like a profession that would give me that kind of opportunity. I had already gotten involved in civil rights activities in St. Louis [Missouri] when we were trying to integrate restaurants downtown. There was no place a black person could eat downtown except for a standup counter in one of the restaurants in a dime store. Speaker 1: Now was that with CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, that was with-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --CORE. Speaker 1: --St. Louis. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Was [HM] William Clay [Sr.] part of that in those day? Speaker 2: You know, I don't--Bill had to be a part of it, because he was one of the early members of CORE in St. Louis. They got started around 1949 here I believe, and he was one of the early founders, but I don't remember him. I remember Norman Seay, who's one of the names that I sent into The HistoryMakers as a good subject. But we demonstrated, we, we sat, sat-in. That's what we did, we sat-in restaurants. And eventually several restaurants did agree to serve black people before there was a public accommodations bill passed. Story_ID: 101450 Speaker 1: Okay, but Geyer's [Restaurant] here in Xenia [Ohio] when-- Speaker 2: No Geyer's, one day I made the mistake of staying in that restaurant when nobody else was there except the owner, and a black custodian, and myself. I should have left when the last customer left. But it never occurred to me that, that I needed to get out of there. But Geyer came and grabbed me by the arm, and shoved me out the door, and told me to "get back down to that little nigger school" that I went to. And I said, "That school is open to everybody. That's a state school." He said, "Well, there are no white people in it, and we've got poor white people here who could go to school." But he shoved me out the door. And I went across the street to catch my bus to Dayton [Ohio], but I was crying because it occurred to me I'd, I'd really put myself at risk without knowing I had done it until he grabbed (laughter) my arm. And the bus driver from, that drove from Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] to Xenia was there. And he saw me crying, and he asked me what had happened, and I told him. And I caught the bus to Dayton and went to the film and did some shopping. And by the time I came back to Central State the campus was in an uproar 'cause he had gone back and told people that I had been shoved out the, out of the store by Geyer. And people wanted to know what had happened, and President [Charles] Wesley wanted to talk to me about it, and I told him what Geyer had said. But I found for the first time I could get other students to go to the restaurant. Nobody would go with me before. And we had several people. We, we, one day we took enough people to fill up all the seats so he couldn't serve (laughter) anybody. And his--he wasn't in the restaurant, but staff who were there called him to say that people from Central State are here, and we don't have any seats, and, and can we--what should we do? He told him to serve us 'cause he wanted to make some money (laughter). And they served us that day, but then they went back. They--it wasn't a change in policy. But I was able to get a few people who would go and sit in there. And we didn't break it while I was there, but I remembered after I'd left Central State reading in Jet magazine that about students demonstrating had got a big demonstration of Central State's students at Geyer's Restaurant, and they eventually broke it before there was--it took the law to broke, break most of that segregation. Speaker 1: Was Geyer's on Xenia Avenue--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was on the main street. Was that called Xenia or Avenue, or was it-- Speaker 1: The one you come in-- Speaker 2: --Main Street? Speaker 1: --on, on 35 or, or the other one? Speaker 2: Not--I don't know highways, but I know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was the street that had stores. I don't know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --if any other streets had stores on it. And it was right--I don't know if the bus station is still in the same place because I haven't been to Xenia since I graduated. Speaker 1: Well, it was damaged by the tornado, you know, severely and so-- Speaker 2: Well, the, our campus was-- Speaker 1: Yeah, devastated. Speaker 2: --almost destroyed, but that was in the seventies [1970s]. Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974], yeah. Speaker 2: So I don't know what happened in between it or since. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of the old things in Xenia are now new 'cause they had to--it got blown away, you know, so. Speaker 2: But did the build in the same areas was the commercial strips-- Speaker 1: Commercial strip is now like strip malls, and it's not, it doesn't look like the old Xenia. Speaker 2: Okay, then I, I-- Speaker 1: I mean there's-- Speaker 2: --don't know. Speaker 1: --the courthouse is still there but, with the clock on it, but it's no-- Speaker 2: You know, I don't even remember-- Speaker 1: Yeah, there's-- Speaker 2: --where that was. Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess it's at the, whatever the main corner is downtown. Speaker 2: Okay, well, it was right downtown. The bus station-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was across the street-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from Geyer's. But it didn't break until, until sometime later in the, it, it had to be the--I believe I was in Chicago when I saw that Jet article about the students demonstrating at Geyer's. And so that means it was before '62 [1962]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I left Chicago in '62 [1962]. But that was- Story_ID: 101451 Speaker 1: Good development days at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio]. We had our, a sociology professor named Chapman who was such a genius. He had, I think he had graduated from college when he was about nineteen, and I believe he had his Ph.D. by the time he was twenty-one or twenty-two. He had done factory work during the summers to put himself through school. And he would tell us: "When you go to apply for a job, if you don't intend to stay there, don't tell them you have college education. You know, tell them you have seventh grade, eighth grade," if it's a job that doesn't require a college education like all of us looked for in the summer times. He said, "don't tell 'em." So he would say he had an eighth grade education when he did factory work. But he was the kind of professor, if a student wrote a paper and plagiarized from some book, he could tell you the book and the page number that you had copied from. And he was, he was like a kid 'cause he had missed childhood studying the way he had. He would laugh and laugh and tell you where you were stealing from. And it was good training, tell you, you stop that, brilliant man, brilliant. He was still there. I went back for my 25th anniversary reunion. He was still there then. I don't know if he's there now. But we just had stars. We, we had a few people who would goof off. There was one political science professor that we called "Jitterbug." And I don't know if Jitterbug was an alcoholic or a dope fiend. We didn't have too many dope fiends then. But sometimes he would come to class, and he would look in the door and say "Everybody's here? Fine." And he would wave and leave and just leave us sittin there and not teach, you know. There was something wrong with Jitterbug, but I'm not sure what it was. Speaker 2: What, what kind of grades did he give? Did you-- Speaker 1: He actually did teach a lot of times. Speaker 2: (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: It was just occasionally he would look in and wave at us and leave. So, he gave--I got A's. I got A's in almost everything. Speaker 2: Was it a Dr. Robinson, she, she was there when you were there, right, Wilhelmina S. Robinson, the history professor? Speaker 1: I don't remember that name. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: She might have been because we had several professors. I think I've heard that name, but I don't remember her as a faculty member at Central State-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --though she might, she might have been there. Speaker 2: Some of--Joseph Lewis, political science, Dr. Joe Lewis or--he probably is, was not there. Speaker 1: Now I graduated in '57 [1957]. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. Story_ID: 101452 Speaker 1: Now, well, let me finish that Geyer's [Restaurant in Xenia, Ohio] story. Later, I think after I had graduated, I got a letter from the dean of Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] telling me that that little conversation I'd had with Dr. [Charles] Wesley wherein I said that Geyer had told me that there were white, poor white kids in the area, the dean wrote and told me that it was not, I know it wasn't an outcome that you expected, but Central State started to offer some scholarships to whites in the communities. We always had one or two white students on campus 'cause it was a state school. And by that time, black people could also go to, to [The] Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio], you know. But, but Central State had started to make outreach to some of those whites and had provided some scholarships for some of them. And, and I thought it was nice that the dean wrote and told me that, because I certainly had not thought that that would be an outcome of Geyer's shoving me out of, (laughter) out of his restaurant, yeah. But that was good. Story_ID: 101453 Speaker 1: That was good. Now in the summers, I never came back to St. Louis [Missouri] because there were no employment opportunities here in St. Louis. I had only had one job when I graduated from high school [Sumner High School in St. Louis, Missouri]. I wanted a job, and I could type. I'd learned how to type when I was at Prairie View [Prairie View Training School in Prairie View, Texas]. And there, jobs just weren't here. We didn't have job programs. So if your parents didn't know somebody who had a business or that could employ you in the summer, you could not get a job. I, I did get a job at Belva Hair Manufacturing. I'd started looking in January for a job in June, and I was able to get this job with Belva Manufacturing Company. They made Hair-Rep, which was an oil for hair pressing, and they hired me as a junior bookkeeper. And I was so happy to have this job, and I did a good job of it. I straightened my hair in those days, but my hair would never stay straightened. I would go to little dances at the Y on Friday. And you know, you'd dance and somebody sweating in your head (laughter), so one side of my hair would go back. And I was never that concerned about it to, to try to be straightening it out. And I remember the, the owner told me once, you know, "Alice, we do manufacture hair care products" (laughter), 'cause my hair was not straight enough to satisfy. I didn't do anything about it, 'cause I was doing my little bookkeeping job right. Speaker 2: Now, now when you were there, now these are days where they're very, very few black women would appear in public with their hair, without their hair straightened out. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and my hair-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I straightened my hair, but I never straightened my brain, so I wasn't concerned. If my hair, if I sweated it out, it stayed sweated out. Story_ID: 101454 Speaker 1: But I got sick. I, I had a, a, a cyst on one of my ovaries and gangrene set in. I didn't know the cyst was there, but within like four days I swelled up to the point where I looked like I was seven months pregnant, and I could hardly walk. My mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom] took me to the hospital. And when they saw this big stomach, they assumed I was pregnant. And they didn't do anything except give--my mom left the room 'cause they kept asking me "When's the last time you had sex," and I never had sex. My mom left the room, says they--she told me you can talk to her privately. I didn't have anything else to say. And they just gave me some pain pills because if I was pregnant they didn't wanna do anything that would injure the baby. Well, luckily, a couple of days later, my menstrual period started, and mom took me then to an industrial doctor that she had met while she was doing social work who seemed to be really interested in people. Well, since I was menstruating, he didn't both to ask me when did I last have sex. He said "We have to put you in the hospital," and he operated on me the same day and said with that gangrene spreading the way it was, I would have been dead in a short time. All I could think about was let me get out of this hospital so I can go back to my job. And I was, I had to be hospitalized for about a week. I was maybe off the job eleven days altogether, then I was ready to go back to work. And when I called to tell them I was ready to come back, they told me that they didn't want me to come back, that they had hired somebody else. I was so upset and crushed 'cause I knew I wasn't gonna find any other job. The other jobs that were available were housekeeping, and I'm not a housekeeper today even. So, seventeen years old, I wasn't about to housekeep, but I did put an ad in the paper saying that I would--could type, but I would consider light housekeeping. And I got calls on the housekeeping. A lot of them were just sex calls from men, you know, and I wasn't, I didn't even have any response to those. But I did go to see a couple of the women who called who said they needed babysitters. But then one woman told me she would want me to stay on, in their apartment, take care of their child, do light housekeeping. And I was okay with all of that 'cause I really wanted to earn some money, and then she told me my husband and I go out a lot. And sometimes we might come back in kind of late, and we would want you to get up and fix us something. And I knew then that that was the end of that. So I went home. I told her I'd have to talk to my mother about whether I could take a job where I would have to stay over. I walked in the house and went right to the telephone and called and said, "My mama said I can't (laughter) take that job." So that was it. That's all that was available in St. Louis for black girls. Story_ID: 101455 Speaker 1: But at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] I heard about Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio]. And they said "If you can pass that typing test, they will hire you for the summer. You don't have to tell any lies about you're not going back to school. They have summer employment." So I went to Dayton [Ohio] and took the test, failed it the first time. I said I'm gonna keep on taking this test, and I took it again. I passed it the second time, and there were, they told me there was a colored Y there. You know, it's on, it was on Summit Street, right near Paul Lawrence Dunbar's home. I think there was a high school right across the street. Speaker 2: Yeah, McFarland [High School]. Speaker 1: And next to that-- Speaker 2: That was Dunbar High School then, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, no, I don't think it was Dunbar then. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: In '57 [1957]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or fifth, no, I'm talking about '54 [1954]. It was already Dunbar High School? Speaker 2: Yeah, they made one in '33 [1933] [sic, 1935]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, well-- Speaker 2: yeah. Speaker 1: --his house was next door or in, in the same block. Speaker 2: In the same block, now that's, his house is on Summit, and it's further away. It's not near the Dunbar High School. It's maybe, his house may be five, six blocks away from it. Speaker 1: This wasn't Dunbar High School. Speaker 2: No, it-- Speaker 1: This was a white high school, I think. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: And of course I was there in the summertime. I don't, don't know that I saw students, but it wasn't Dunbar. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The, the Y-- Speaker 2: 'Cause the Y you're talking about is-- Speaker 1: --was now-- Speaker 2: --on, on Summit Street. The Summit Street Y, that, that was, the YWCA, it's in like a white house-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a white-- Speaker 2: --like sort of thing? Speaker 1: It was a-- Speaker 2: In a house. Speaker 1: --big house. And the last time I was in Dayton it was a church. It wasn't a Y anymore (unclear) years, years ago, I guess when I was back for that 25th anniversary reunion. But we were quite close to his house, and it was supposed to have hours that you could go in and visit. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I never found anybody there. I never got inside of that house because-- Speaker 2: It's open now. I, I know what you mean 'cause-- Speaker 1: --and there is a caretaker. Speaker 2: --when we were children, they used to say they had hours, and never could find 'em either. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You couldn't 'em-- Speaker 2: But, but-- Speaker 1: --and you lived in Dayton. Speaker 2: --they did, the state of Ohio finally opened it up, and it's, it's a museum now, and-- Speaker 1: Oh, and it's-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--so you can take a tour. Speaker 1: --staffed, the state? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, that's wonderful because I always wanted to go in because, you know, but Dunbar was always a favorite. So I made arrangements to stay at the Y, and it was, that was a great place. They had women who just took care of the girls like they were their own children. And I wrote mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom] and told her that I wasn't coming home to St. Louis [Missouri]. Then I told her I had a job and that, where I was going to be staying. And I get this hysterical letter from my mother telling me I had to come home. I couldn't stay away. And it was the first time I had to defy my mother, because I said I'd, I had done the right planning. I had a safe place to stay. She thought that I was gonna be in danger. She wasn't worried about me at Central State because those schools were so parental (laughter) in their relationship to students. But she thought in the big city that by myself was not wise. And, and I had to think about it. I called her and said, "I can't come home because I can't get a job in St. Louis." And I knew I was going into the sorority, and, and I knew that I didn't want to have to ask them for money for that or for my clothes. I said "I have to make money." And so I stayed. And she, she was okay with it when she saw I was all right. And I would tell her how Ms. Brown was one of the women at the Y. I forgot, don't remember the other lady's name. But she felt better when she knew I was in a place where there were older women looking after us. And that's what I did every summer until I graduated. I never came back to St. Louis, but my dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] had died before I graduated. He died in '56 [1956]. So in '57 [1957], when I graduated, I did come home to St. Louis to be with mom. And I couldn't find a job, and I tried (laughter), you know, and there were just no jobs. It's so different now, with government programs and with philanthropic subsidies for organizations that run summer programs; most students who want jobs can find them. Story_ID: 101456 Speaker 1: You mentioned (unclear), the control that they had at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] over the students. Just, just briefly kind of give us an idea of that, 'cause I think college students or, or people in the future that listen to this would be for some--amazed at the firsthand accounts of what a student would go through at Central. Speaker 2: Well, you were in, we lived in dormitories because it was a rural setting. There was no such thing as off-campus housing. You lived in the dormitory. You had a dorm mother who often was the widow of somebody, a man who had worked on the campus either as faculty or staff in some capacity, and you had curfew. And of course, the idea of a co-ed dormitory would be outrageous. It to me is still outrageous, but back then that wasn't even on the drawing board. You had curfew, and boys did not visit above the first floor. You had a lounge, living room set up on the first floor, and you could have company there up to your curfew time, and then the boys had to leave. Then we heard later on stories about boys smuggling some of the looser girls into their dormitories. But as far as I know, there were no fellows smuggled into the women's bedrooms. We had compulsory assembly, as I say. We had compulsory, I think chapel was compulsory. I'm not really sure about whether that's an accurate memory. It may have been we just went 'cause we enjoyed going. But they, you, you did what you were told, and there were quite a few things that you were told to do. People didn't have cars then, see. When you--I tell kids here, when we went to Summer High School [St. Louis, Missouri], there was no parking lot 'cause the teachers didn't have cars, let alone talk about a student having a car. The teachers didn't have cars. Now cars started the sexual revolution. People like to say it was in the sixties [1960s], but it started when people got cars in large numbers. Because a car was like a moving hotel room, and that, that freed people up to go distances. But when, when we were in college people didn't have cars, so you, you were confined to the campus unless you did like I said, catch the bus, go to Xenia [Ohio] and catch another bus to go somewhere. So it was not difficult to control us, and we were also compliant. We were not raised basically by single parents. You know, we were raised by--most of the kids I went to school with had two parents in the house, and that's a different kid from the one who has been on his or her own without proper parental supervision. So that was it. I remember as a senior once with a house mother who was like a little bird, very tiny woman whose husband had been I think a dentist, and she was a widow and had the job as house mother, mother, one of my classmates didn't come home one night. And in the morning Ms. Green, I think her name was, was by the door waiting when Geraldine came in. And Ms. Green said, "Where have you been? Where have you been? What have you been doing?" And I can't repeat the word. She gave her a one-word answer, and I can't repeat it. It started with an "F." (Laughter) That's what she--and, and, and I, I happened to be in the lobby when, (laughter) when Geraldine came in. And I thought Ms. Green was going to have a heart attack (laughter) when, when Geraldine told her what she'd been doing (laughter). But that was very unusual (laughter); that was very unusual. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But now, they wouldn't be-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: Yeah, it's whole, it's a different world now. Speaker 2: It's a completely different world. Story_ID: 101457 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you, when, when you were a senior, on the verge of graduation, what was your plan? Was it to go to grad school immediately or get a job or-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was gonna go to grad school. Even though my father [John Henry Windom, Sr.] had died, and the school had offered me, Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] had offered me a full tuition scholarship, which I never had had before. I always had partial tuition scholarships. But after dad died, the offered me a full tuition scholarship. Mom [Frances Louise Jones Windom] made me reject it, but she said, "I'll pay for your schooling. There are people who need the scholarship more than you do." And I still puzzle over that sometimes, that she wouldn't let me take that scholarship, because I, I had earned it as a top ranking student, even though I understood the school made the offer partly because my father had died, and my mother--the, the income was not replaced. 'Cause mom was working as a social worker when dad died, but she took off, she left her office when she found out how sick he was. And she never even went back to clear out her desk. Speaker 1: Now did he die suddenly, or was a (unclear)? Speaker 2: It--he had kidney failure. And in 1956, as far as we knew, there was no dialysis and no kidney transplants. I've just recently learned that the first kidney transplants were done in 1954, and I want to find out whether anybody in St. Louis [Missouri] was doing kidney transplants then. But nothing was offered in terms of real treatment for bilateral failure. I don't know if he had diabetes or any other illness, because the kidney failure was enough to kill you, but he might have had some other un, undiagnosed illnesses. Mom took him out of the Catholic hospital he was in because their attitude was pretty fatalistic. You know, they had the crucifixes over every bed and were telling, telling you to prepare to lose your--I said mom, we gotta do--there's got to be something else. So he was put in another hospital, then she took him to the Mayo Clinic. And she went door to door. There were no hotels that a black person could stay in. And she said she just went door to door around the clinic knocking on people's doors asking if somebody would rent her a room, and somebody did. A white family did rent her a room. But there was nothing they could do. They did examine him and tell 'em just take him on home. She brought him back, and he died in Barnes Hospital [now Barnes-Jewish Hospital in St. Louis, Missouri], which is a very big hospital complex here, one of the best hospitals in the country. At that time, black people, except for maternity cases, were all kept in the basement. And it was a basement with pipes running over your head, and that's where he died. It--from the time she called me, he died February 19th, I believe, in '56 [1956]. And I think she had called me at college in December and told me to come, come home, that he was not likely to survive, so it was like two months, yeah. Story_ID: 101458 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you state your full name for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Alice Mary Windom. Speaker 1: And it is, it is correct that we are continuing an inter, interview we started last December the 19th-- Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Two Thousand Six [2006]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And today is? Speaker 2: Is October the 17th, 2007. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the offices of [HM] Wayman Smith in St. Louis, Missouri. Story_ID: 101459 Speaker 1: Okay, so we picked up--last time we were, we had you at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio]. You were finishing up at Central State-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --University. You had led a successful sit-in at Geyer's Restaurant [Xenia, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --there in--so, when you were a senior, what, what were you--you were considering going to graduate school, right, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, I had been accepted at the University of Chicago [School of Social Service Administration in Chicago, Illinois] and was very pleased with that because they had the most renowned school of social work in the country at the time. Central State was one of the few colleges that offered a bachelor's degree in social work, so I already had that. But for professional employment, one needed to have a master's degree, and the University of Chicago was the place to go. So I returned to St. Louis [Missouri] that summer. Because my father [John Henry Windom, Sr.] had died, I wanted to spend time with my mother [Frances Louise Jones Windom]. And so I did not work at the, at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio] as I had during my previous three summers, as I mentioned. So I came home to St. Louis, hoping to find a clerical job for the summer, and I was unsuccessful in doing that, so I just spent time with my mom. And though at the time when I left for the University of Chicago, the Central High School drama in Little Rock [Arkansas] was taking place. That was extremely painful to see how those, those nine young black students were being treated, and it kind of overshadowed everything else that was going on at the time there was so much publicity around it. Speaker 1: A lot of television coverage. Speaker 2: A lot of television. The black press was really on it. And we still had the national black newspapers, the Chicago Defender and the Pittsburgh Courier at that time. So you had the local black press and the national black press giving it very intensive coverage. But going into Chicago was something brand new for me. I'd never visited there before. I lived at the International House on the campus of the university. And I also had never been in an integrated school setting before. That was interesting and proved to be a bit traumatic, because the whites were just so unprepared to have black people, though there were, had been black people there for a long time. The numbers of blacks in the classes were very small. I think there were maybe six or seven of us in my class of about a hundred people. So we were very much in the minority, and I was not accustomed to that. I, I had not been around that many white people. I had only had a couple of white professors in college. And, but still, it was school, and it was interesting, and I did well. I didn't do as well in graduate school academically as I had done in college, where I was valedictorian of my college class. But I wasn't that much interested in earning tremendous grades in graduate school. I just wanted to get through it. I had never missed class when I was in college 'cause I seldom got sick. But I developed hives. I can't remember whether it was my first or second year at the University of Chicago. I even had the hives, the red swellings. I had them in my hands and my feet and-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) nerves basically? Speaker 2: Well, when I went and got a diagnosis, and they told me it was hives, I knew that it was stress, that this was psychologically stimulated. So I said I need to stop going to class all the time. Let this calm down, and that's what I had to do, because in social work school you're dealing with case histories of poor people. So very often all the case material we were dealing with would be about black people and white case workers. And you had a level of insensitivity on racial issues from the faculty, which was very aggravating, so that I was having to spend a lot of time trying to educate people, educate teachers, all of whom were white. They had no black teachers in the classroom in the school of social of social service administration-- Speaker 1: Now this is a-- Speaker 2: --at that time. Speaker 1: This is a theme that seems to run, yeah, through the stories of a lot of black people that are sociologists or take social work courses that the material, that the scientific analysis they're presented with always does not match their own experience. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 101460 Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Did you-was the University of Chicago [Illinois] in those days--it's been alleged many times by Chicago residents that Woodlawn was used as a laboratory by the University of Chicago for, you know, you know, observation-- Speaker 1: Well, see-- Speaker 2: --and measurement and such. Speaker 1: --I don't know about--sociology and psychology may have done that. Social Work was different. We did practicums in the welfare department or the Cook County, one of the Cook County agencies. We did that. We did not do observations and studies in the community. But in classrooms you had written case histories. Some of them were from the South. They were, they could be from anywhere in the country. But you had little, it would be little things like the caseworker addressing a client by their first name, rather than Mrs. or Ms. Jones. And when you raise that question, the teacher might say "Well, this was in the South, and white people did not call black people," or "colored people," as I think they were saying then, "Misses or Miss. They would call them by their first names." And then I would have to say, "Those of you who are caseworkers now, if you go out here in Chicago and you have clients, and you're calling them by their first names and they have to call you Miss, you are going to have a problem. You might even get hurt at some point (laughter), you know. So this stuff that we've got in this case records is not the way you're going to be able to conduct yourself now and get away with it," so little things like that, but they pile up. And the gross ignorance of the professoriate about actual black people was staggering. So, I thought it, it, it mounted on me, plus I had friends, my colleagues who were students. And I was constantly having to try to explain black people to them because they had come out of circumstances where they did not know any black people. And, and I--it just wore me down. And I finally had to say, "No one is paying to do this." I'm try, I was trying to help develop social workers who would be sensitive and have empathy with black clients. But I say I'm just gonna have to let them go on their own (laughter) and see what happens. So I, I worked on my mind. I got rid of those hives. I think they gave me some red pills to take. And I took a few of the pills, but I knew this was stress induced, and I just had to take a different attitude towards school. Speaker 2: Now how did you professors--did they appreciate your, your correctors and your, your suggestions? Speaker 1: Some did and some didn't. But I was, I was diplomatic in the way that I did it, and they basically liked me. So we didn't have any, any raging arguments, and I got good grades. I'd say I made B's. I may have gotten a couple of C's, which is something I had really never seen before (laughter). But I said we just have to take this because I'm now majoring in getting a master's degree, something Jake used to say: "When you go into graduate school, you are majoring in getting a degree. No matter what you think you're majoring in, you're majoring in getting a degree, which means that you have to please the people who have the capacity to grant or refuse you that degree." Story_ID: 101461 Speaker 1: My second year I was very lucky, 'cause social work is a two-year master's program, to get a black supervisor in my fieldwork placement. While they had no blacks teaching in the classroom, they did have black fieldwork supervisors because they hired or contracted with people who were already employed in those agencies. They were not just employees of the University of Chicago [Illinois]. So I had this wonderful woman named Bertha Swindall, who was my fieldwork supervisor while I worked with children who were in foster care. And she was so bright. She was brighter and a better teacher than anybody I had in the classroom at the university. And I told her she saved me from being a grad school dropout, because it was just such a pleasure to work with her and learn from her. So, she smoothed out my second year, and, and I got through. I got the degree. I did not go to my commencement exercise. I told them they could mail me the diploma because I had seen enough of them for two years, and I had, my mother [Frances Louise Jones Windom] and my grandmother [Anna Armstrong Jones] had come to see me graduate from Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio]. My dad [John Henry Windom, Sr.] was deceased, so there was nobody I needed to have come and see me graduate. I said, "Mail me the diploma." And later on that year I was home visiting and my mother said, "You've got a big envelope here from the University of Chicago," and I said, "I wonder what that is." I had forgotten all (laughter)--it was the degree (laughter). I had forgotten all about it. When the bell rang for commencement, I was going through the area just south of the university looking for an apartment. And it was very difficult to find one because of the segregation in housing. You'll see the for--people used to put "for rent" signs into the, in the window. And you go and knock on the door, and a white person would answer and tell you the apartment was gone or that "We don't rent to Negroes." It was just that crass. This is 1958, middle of 1958 [sic, 1959]. Eventually, I found an apartment on University Avenue in the 6100 block in a nice big apartment building. So I had a studio apartment, and I was you know, very pleased with that. But it had been difficult to find. I didn't go into the Woodlawn area north of the university 'cause I really wasn't interested in living there. And there were a lot of residences. The rent would have been higher. But on the South Side it--the rents were lower, but there was all this prejudice. But I was happy to have an apartment in a fairly large building. Story_ID: 101462 Speaker 1: And I had a job, because the State of Illinois had given me a scholarship, I think toward the end of my first year, yes. And, and I was bonded to work a year for the state for each year of training. I'd had a--they paid all my tuition. I had a stipend of $200.00 a month tax free. I don't think I've had that much money since (laughter). And, and I had a job. I didn't have to go looking for a job. I went to work for the, it was then called the Department of Mental Health. Later on the name was changed to the Department of Children and Family Services. But my first summer I worked in foster homes, working--studying foster homes. My supervisor was Mrs. Miriam Kilduff, very nice woman. I learned a lot from her. And then when I graduated, I just went to that job. I had a commitment for two years of service, very happy to do that. That was not onerous at all. I had no debt, unlike what happens to kids now who come out of graduate school, even in social work, owing thousands of dollars. We had no debt, and, and I had a job without looking for one. I went to work in intercountry adoptions, which meant we were studying homes of people in the Chicago area who were adopting children from overseas. They were mainly coming from Korea, some from China. In some cases, it was family members, an aunt or grandparent bringing over a niece or nephew or a grandchild. The Korean children were coming through an agency. This was after the Korean War when you had a number of children who had been fathered by American soldiers and who were not wanted by the Koreans, so they were readily available for adoption. And it didn't matter what the race of the father was, whether he was Caucasian or African soldier who had fathered the kids. The Koreans didn't want them. And the women who had these children had a--could almost not support them, so they were a lot of children available for adoption, and a number of Americans who were ready to give them homes and take care of them. We also worked with other states. It was called intercountry adoptions, but we also did adoptions from other states where an agency in another state would ask for a home study to be done, and I would do the home studies. This was very interesting work. I enjoyed doing it. And I would go into the suburbs in Chicago, and people would come up to me and say: "Who do you work for?" Because they assumed I was somebody's maid, you know (laughter), since there were no black people living in, in any of these communities that I went into. I don't think I ever had a black couple applying for an international adoption. No, I'm pretty sure I didn't. They were either Chinese or Euro-Americans. "Who do you work for?" And that, that was the typical assumption. But that was very interesting work. And I got a chance to see the children when sometimes the, a group of children would come into the country at the same time, and we could go out to the airport and meet them. The worker might have four or five children, and Chicago would be one of the places where she was delivering some children. And, and so that was very nice to see the parents get those children. Those adoptions worked out well as far as I know. One of my case records was taken by the Child Welfare Society of America for one of their per, for their permanent exhibit, 'cause I did really good home studies, and they were well-written. So I did that, and after I finished my commitment I worked an extra year, because I had decided that I was going to go to Africa. Story_ID: 101463 Speaker 1: During that time on my off-hours, I worked in social activism in Chicago [Illinois]. Chicago was rich with cultural activities, theater, and people doing things to try to make life better. We had an organization called the Afro-American Heritage Association. We had our own office, and our leader was Ishmael Flory. Ismail, who just died a few years ago, I think he reached the age of ninety-six, was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we were--we attempted to interview him at one point, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, he was a very well-known person in Chicago. He was a member of the Communist Party. He ran the Afro-American Heritage Association [African American Heritage Association]. He had endless energy and to, to struggle for improvement in the conditions that black folk were living under. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, in those days, were, was it unusual for a black activist to be a member of the Communist Party? Speaker 1: There were quite a few Communist in Chicago among the blacks. So now, they didn't publicize that they were Communist because people were being--there, there was surveillance going on. There were efforts to stop people from activity. It was nothing to go to meetings and have FBI out taking down license numbers. Sometimes they would openly exhibit documents that indicated they were FBI, just as an effort to discourage people attending activities. Speaker 2: But, but there was a community of I think--well, yeah, just, just talk about that. He was part of a whole community of activists that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but see, we didn't-- Speaker 2: --a lot of them were left with, with-- Speaker 1: Yeah, we knew they were left. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But we did not know how many of them were Communists, because it wasn't something that they talked about people who were not Communists. I happened to have found in, in one box of documents that I was reviewing at one point something that indicated the Communist Party was sending money to the organization. I had never been-- Speaker 2: Okay, so you didn't get-- Speaker 1: --told that, no. Speaker 2: --you didn't get in it because it was Communist--you had found out later that's what-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --what it was, okay. Speaker 1: And I really felt when I found that, that we should have been told. We should have been able to make the election of whether we wanted to be involved with a Communist-funded organization or not. But that information was not given to people who were not Communist. Story_ID: 101464 Speaker 1: However, it was an extremely rich experience, to be around people who were talking political theory, who knew people in the international left-wing movement, and who were exciting. Now Chicago also had the Washington Park Forum, where Nationalists, Communists, Socialists, everybody came together to debate. So we would go there-- Speaker 2: Anarchists (laughter). Speaker 1: --on a Sunday, any--and, and be anarchists. Speaker 2: The one anarchist. Speaker 1: The one anarchist we knew, the only black anarchist I've ever known, a, a man, young man named Jeffrey Stewart [ph.]. They would come and debate, and they would talk about their experiences during the Depression. We had guys who had put people's furniture back in their apartments when they had been evicted during the, during the Depression. And they had had these experiences. There was a man named F. H. Hammurabi [Frederick H. Hammurabi Robb], Professor Hammurabi, whose picture you can, who's portrait is one of the mosaics in the DuSable Museum [of African American History in Chicago, Illinois]. Professor Hammurabi had been to Africa, and he had a building. He had The House of Knowledge where he had lectures about Africa, and he showed slides, and helped prepare people who were going to travel to Africa either as visitors or who wanted to settle. So he, he showed films on Africa. And I believe he invented the black history calendar. I've never seen a black history calendar earlier than the ones he put out in the fifties [1950s] where it would be a large sheet and 5,000 years of history. And it would be jammed packed with--on every date for the year. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He would have something in African American or African history, wonderful. And now-- Speaker 2: It's a collage or sort of. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And he, he did all the work himself. Speaker 1: Yes, he'd have collages. Have, have you seen any earlier black history calendar than the ones he did? Speaker 2: No, he, he continued just to, for the record, he continued up until 1977 to produce those. Speaker 1: Is that so? Speaker 2: 'Cause I have some. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I've got one or two from the fifties [1950s], but of course I left in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in '62 [1962], so I, I never got anymore. Speaker 2: Frederick Robb was his given name. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Frederick Robb-- Speaker 1: I never knew. Speaker 2: --R-O-B-B-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --had a degree from Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois], from the Medill School of Journalism and a law degree too. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: That's what I understand, yeah. Speaker 1: See, Hammurabi, he took that from Hammurabi's code, so I knew something about. I don't know if I knew he had a law degree, but I knew he was interested in the law. But these were, these were fabulous people. You had a pharmacist named Dr. Thompson, who, if you were going to Africa, would prepare you a kit of, of first-aid, first-aid kit and common medicines, not prescription items, but things that you would need just to, to live in the tropical areas. Story_ID: 101465 Speaker 1: And Mrs. Christine Johnson, who was a school teacher who left the saint--the Chicago Public Schools to become head of the Nation of Islam school-- Speaker 2: University of Islam? Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the University of Islam. And if you see the documentary film on Malcolm, called "Malcolm X: Make It Plain." They have a clip in there of the children in the school when Christine was the principal, and it just brings tears to your eyes to see these beautiful kids reciting and doing some marching, little tiny kids. She stayed there until after Malcolm was murdered, and she left the University of Islam when Malcolm was murdered. Speaker 2: So what, what you're saying, too, about--I guess the implications that a person like Christine Johnson, I mean she was a serious historian and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --person who really cared about culture, it says something that, about the University of Islam being not so much influenced by Islam or even the Nation of Islam version of it as it was by an attempt to really teach-- Speaker 1: Oh, they-- Speaker 2: --African history and culture. Speaker 1: --were serious about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --educating those children. And she had free hand to design the curriculum. Now, they had some teaching from the Nation or the Fruit of Islam, I'm not sure, who came in to do that, but there was no interference on the academic side. They were quite serious about educating the children, and Christine would not have been associated with it had not been the case. Speaker 2: She didn't have to teach the mythology of Yakub or anything like that. Speaker 1: No, no, they, they wouldn't even want somebody who was not in the Nation to do that because they handled that in the, in the school, I mean in the temple. During my (unclear) know--I dated a Nigerian guy who wrote the second book on the Nation of Islam. It's called "Black Nationalism: The Search-- Speaker 2: E. U. Essien-Udom. Speaker 1: Essien-Udom, yes. Speaker 2: Essien-Udom. Speaker 1: --The Search for an Identity in America." And he was the one who introduced me to the, to the Nation. When he first told me he was going to do his Ph.D. thesis on the Nation, I said well, why would you want to do that? I knew really nothing about the Nation. I said is that worth a Ph.D.? And he said yes, it is. He had already interviewed the Honorable Elijah Muhammad before then. And so, after he convinced me that this was a worthwhile endeavor, that I started going with him to the temple. I never got it--went to the messenger's home with him. But I would go to the temple because they separated the men from the women so it was useful to have a woman go in, and I can tell him what went in on when the women were searched and on the women's side because we had to sit separately. But so I, I, I got to be very close to the temple, and I knew Christine while she was there working with them. So I had a lot of respect for what the Nation was, was doing, bringing people out of prison, and really sticking with people to help them revise and reform their lives, and trying to build a separate community. There was one point, I think I had finished graduate school [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration in Chicago, Illinois] by this time, when they had bought quite a bit of property I believe on Cottage Grove, and they had the plan-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to build a hospital, a school, restaurant; they were, they were gonna do a-- Speaker 2: They didn't have the restaurant. The-- Speaker 1: --a whole complex. Speaker 2: Right, the salon was built. Your supermarket-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --was built all-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --around in the eighties [1980s] on Cottage Grove. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But they didn't get the hospital, and they didn't do the university there, did they? Well, I went to a community meeting because community people organized to keep them out of the community. These were black folk who were moving out there, getting these nice homes, and they did not want these Muslims coming in there to build anything. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the Chatham-- Speaker 1: I went to one of the-- Speaker 2: --Chatham neighborhood. Speaker 1: Chatham-Avalon I think it was or Avalon. Speaker 2: Chatham, Avalon Park, yeah. Speaker 1: That was it. I went to one of their community meetings. And at the end, after they had, you know, raged about the Muslims coming in, for some reason, I raised my hand, and I stood up, and I said, "You know, you've got objections to them coming in. It might be a good idea if you invite some people from the Nation to come in and talk to you about their plans, and what they want to do, and how much they will bring enrichment to the community." Why did I do that? I thought they were going to kill me. Story_ID: 101604 Speaker 1: Okay, cliffhanger, you're at the meeting then. Speaker 2: Yes. When I finish my little statement, which was simply a request that they ask people from the Nation [of Islam] to come and tell them what their plans were and how it would enrich their neighborhood [Chatham/Avalon Park in Chicago, Illinois], the meeting was over, see, so I was instantly surrounded by people who were so mad they were frothing at the mouth. I was virtually being spat on because they were so mad. And I remember one man said, "We don't want those people coming in our--the women are so ugly. They were their hair all nappy and don't wear no lipstick" (laughter). And I was saying, "But all I said was just let them come and talk to you." I was literally afraid that I wouldn't get out of there without being injured. Speaker 1: Well, to put it in perspective, this is the black community-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --achievers-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: -on the fringe. They were on the frontier-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the white community. They, they moved out-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as far as they could-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In those days, that was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that was a frontier-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --of the, of--they were-- Speaker 2: And they had houses-- Speaker 1: --touching the white community-- Speaker 2: --that they, in many cases, really couldn't afford. Some of the houses had no furniture. You know, they had the house, but they couldn't afford furnish it yet. And they saw the Muslim's desire to come in as a real threat, and they were just hysterical. And I, when I got home, I took two baths. I felt just really dirty, 'cause I hadn't been around black people like that, who, who really hated other black people. So that was an education for me, but I felt really unclean having been (laughter), having been there. Years later, now this is around '59 [1959], maybe '60 [1960]. I don't remember the exact year, but years later I'm in Ethiopia. And some Muslims came through there, and they had heard about me, and I met them. And they told me--they were from Chicago--they told me they had been at that meeting, and they remembered my speaking up for them, and they thought that was good. I said, "You mean you were there? And those people were acting like they were going to kill me. I didn't see anybody coming to say, you know, move back and you know, don't hurt the sister. She's a--you just stood back and didn't do anything" (laughter). I said, "You shouldn't have told me you were" (laughter). But that was interesting, 'cause that, that happened several years later when-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --when I was living in Ethiopia. Story_ID: 101605 Speaker 1: So you get this political education in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You meet [HM] Margaret Burroughs, Ish [Ishmael] Flory-- Speaker 2: Yes, all of them. Speaker 1: --all the, all the people in-- Speaker 2: Just-- Speaker 1: --Washington Park Forum and the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Mus--Nation of Islam. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you meet Malcolm X in Chicago? Did you ever meet him? Speaker 2: Only briefly because he spoke at the temple one day when I was there. He was supposed to have come in at about oh, say he was supposed to be there at 4:00. And so the place was packed, waiting for him, because he already had the rep, good reputation, and we wanted to hear him. He, he was something like four hours late. We were still there. When he started speaking, everybody woke up, didn't matter how tired you were, and it was wonderful. He talked for maybe two hours. He was really the voice of the Nation. He gave all credit for his work, for his own reformation to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad. But by that time, to tell you the truth, the Honorable Elijah Muhammad was virtually incoherent. I don't know if he had ever been coherent, but by that time, you could listen to him for a couple of hours, and he did talk a long time, you could not have told another person what the speech was about because it was filled with symbolism, and Yakub, and other mysticism, and it was basically incoherent. Malcolm was really very clear because one of his strengths was that he broke it down; he made it plain. And he talk, he was talking to people who were not big readers, and he, everything he said he wanted you to understand. Now, without knowing at the time that the Nation was, the property of the Nation was really private property of Elijah Muhammad, which I did not know then-- Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Nobody knew that then. Speaker 1: --that to, to--just for the sake of historical accuracy, it was a matter disputed in the courts of Chicago for over ten years-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --between Wallace Muhammad and [HM Minister Louis] Farrakhan, whether this was his private property-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or did it belong to the Nation-- Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: --so. Speaker 2: --they won, the family won. Speaker 1: They did. Speaker 2: Yeah. What happened was, I would see the daughters, the, the, Elijah's daught, daughters and daughters-in-law would sometimes be up on the stage. And I would see the way they looked at the audience. They were queens. You know, it's like, you know, we own, this, this is ours. But I didn't know what that look meant until years later, that they really were the queens. And now their husbands, none of them were as articulate as, as Malcolm was, so he was the prince. And of course, after Elijah's death, the question of whether this was a family dynasty or a merit, a meritocracy did arise because the Farrakhan-Wallace fight was over that, who would be the real successors of Elijah Muhammad. But that was very interesting, and that helped, even that brief seeing of Malcolm. I think we shook his hand after it was over, but I never had a conversation with him until years later in Africa. Story_ID: 101606 Speaker 1: Now, you raised something I think a lot of historians would wanna know something about. What was E. [U.] Essien-Udom like and--the author of "Black Nationalism"? You knew him very well-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what did he do after he wrote the book? I mean the book was-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --widely available in the community-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --for years, and people read it and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Essien went back to Nigeria. And the last I heard, which was some years ago, he was teaching at [University of] Ibadan. He stayed true to his academic bent and became a professor, yes. Although we were dating at the time, he was engaged to a young woman in New York named Ruby Maloney. If you look at the dedication in the book, she--he dedicates it to Gill, who was Gill Williams, one of my classmates at the University of Chicago. He and Essien were very good friends and Ruby. And then he calls me "Windom" there in the dedication. They married, and as far as I heard, they had one son. And, and I really did not have more contact with him after he went back to Nigeria. So the last I heard of him was from a mutual friend maybe twenty years ago. He was still at Ibadan then. He's probably retired now. He was a highly principled person. He was one of the founders of the All African Students Union of the Americas or, or, or president. He was a founder of PASOA, the Pan African Students Organization of the Americas. We started PASOA in Chicago because AASUA had gotten into serious debt, and they couldn't pay all the, all of their debts. So the, the students disbanded the All African Students Union of the Americas. And we had a founding conference for the Pan-African Students Organization of the Americas in Chicago, bringing students, African students from all around the country. We got $600.00 from the Egyptian Embassy with permission from President [Gamal Abdel] Nasser of Egypt. And so we could use, we used that $600.00 to help some of the students travel in and to pay administrative expenses. So we had the founding conference for PASOA, which functioned for a number of years. In those days, the hope was that there would be African union. And so the students identified themselves as Pan-Africanists. But of course, when the independence came from '57 [1957] on in sub-Saharan Africa, Pan-Africanism, the idea of Pan-Africanism did not spread among the actual governments. You had [President of Ghana] Kwame Nkrumah talking about Pan-Africanism and [Ahmed] Sekou Toure of Guinea and a few others. But basically they there nation, nationalist nation states. And so PASOA probably did not long withstand the strain of the real nationalism on the continent. But many of those students were, were very committed Pan-Africanists. Story_ID: 101607 Speaker 1: Okay. And that's interesting too. Now, do you remember this year is the fiftieth anniversary of Ghanaian independence. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when you were at the University of Chicago at the time [1957], was it--were you keenly aware of it in those days, or did you know-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --and did people-- Speaker 2: Because we had the African Students Organization, and African Americans could be associate members, and, and many of us were. So we had celebrations. Ghana had become independent in March of 1957, and I was still in college [Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio] then. But in 1960 when Nigeria became independent, oh, we had big parties all over Chicago [Illinois]. There was a lot of celebrating going on. That was October 1st, 1960, that Nigeria became independent, and then there were several countries that became independent. And most of them had some, a few students in Chicago. And so yes, we were very much involved, very hopeful that things were going to go well on, on the continent. Speaker 1: Did, did you know the students, the Nigerian students that won the $64,000 question? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: There was a group of them at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], and one of them won the $64,000 question-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: --and had a lot of money. And a friend of mine in Dayton, Asaro M'Tukagu (ph.), retired finally from, from Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio] was part of those black students that help spend that money (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Said they really (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the quiz show "$64,000"-- Speaker 2: I remember-- Speaker 1: --there the same one that-- Speaker 2: --the quiz show. Speaker 1: --that the movie "Quiz Show"-- Speaker 2: But I'm-- Speaker 1: --was about, you know. Speaker 2: --I'm--yeah, because they were giving-- Speaker 1: The Nigerian student-- Speaker 2: --answers-- Speaker 1: --supposedly won. He said one of his friends won, and they, they spent the money. They just spent it up in a year. They-- Speaker 2: Oh no-- Speaker 1: --they had a good time they said with that money. Speaker 2: --they--oh, that's a whole lot of good time. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Back in those days-- Speaker 1: In those days, $64,000-- Speaker 2: --to spend that-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --much money in a year, that's a lot of good time. Speaker 1: They were in Chicago. They--yeah. Speaker 2: Well, that had to have been after I left, because I'm sure--see, I left-- Speaker 1: Could be, yeah. Speaker 2: --in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Could be. Story_ID: 101608 Speaker 1: I left during the Cuban Missile Crisis [October 1962], in fact. My desire had been to get a--to go to Africa by ship because I was moving everything that I had, which was mainly books. I didn't have furniture. And I really wanted to travel by ship with my stuff to go to Africa. Speaker 2: Now how did you, how did it come about? How did you--what agency? How did you hook up on a trip to Ghana, or, or was it through a, a program, or you just decided to go? Speaker 1: I was going. I had to get out of the United States before I hurt somebody or somebody hurt me. I was so mad with the, the, the, the discrimination and the racism that I was ready to hit somebody. And I'm, I'm not a violent tempered person, but I knew I had to get out. Also, it appeared--I mean Africa, that was the hope then. People were coming to the United Nations from Africa. We'd seen all these glorious, gorgeous folk. Speaker 2: Did you have contacts on the other side then, I mean in, in, in, in Ghana that-- Speaker 1: I had-- Speaker 2: --that you know? Speaker 1: --all these friends in Chicago [Illinois]. Several of them were Ghanaians. I knew I was going to Ghana, and so I had a few letters. Christine Johnson had been to Ghana and had shown her slides. I had the medical kit Mr.--Dr. Thompson had made up for me. And it was really on the plane that I really realized I didn't know a soul (laughter)--(unclear)--I was, I was on the plane, and I said, "Well I don't know anybody (laughter) there. Everybody, every Ghanaian I know is in Chicago or New York." But I spent six weeks in New York trying to get this ship. I had failed writing letters from Chicago to, to shipping companies. I wanted to go on freighter. I didn't have the money to go on a cruise ship. And so I had gotten a list of, of freighters, and I had written to these companies. And, and nobody could give me a, a ship going to Ghana. I was in, I got, went to New York. I had spent six weeks there trying to find this ship and also having to work on a visa because I didn't want just a visa that would let me go for a couple of weeks, 'cause I knew I wanted to settle. And so I was asking for at least a year's visa, and I couldn't get that. I eventually found a ship on the black, the Black Star Line had a ship going. Ghana's national shipping company was named after Marcus Garvey's Black Star Line. But I got communication from the person in charge telling me that if they book me on that ship, I would be the only woman on the ship, and they could not guarantee my safety. So I said, "Okay, I got to fly." So I went ahead and got a ticket going through London [England] and then to Accra [Ghana]. And I had packed all my things for a ship, so I had to, had to make suitcase for a plane trip. I went down on 42nd Street, and I got a huge suitcase for $6.00. I told the guy who told it to me, look, I said, "I've got, I'm gonna have to go to London, and then I'm going to Ghana. Will this suitcase make two trips (laughter)?" He said, "Oh, yeah, you'll get three or four trips out of this suitcase." It was a big case with a canvas top, with a zipper that ran along the top edge. I was renting a room from a West Indian couple named Alcantara [ph.] in New York. The morning of my flight, I was to go to wake up two friends who lived a few blocks away, and they were gonna take me to the airport and help me with my luggage. As I was trying to close this $6.00 suitcase, the zipper broke (laughter), and I, I had to have a suitcase. I went down and woke up my landlord. I said, "Have you got a rope? Please give me a rope." They went and took their clothesline down and gave me a rope so that I could tie this suitcase closed and at least get to the friend, home of my friend Alpha Flack. When I showed--she saw he suitcase with the flaps (laughter) open, she said, "They're not gonna let you on the plane with this." I said, "I've got to go today. I must take, go take this plane today." So she ended up, she and her roommate ended up selling me three or four suitcases. I, I had wanted one big suitcase, and I ended up with three or four suitcases again. And then I said--and they hadn't even gotten up out of bed. I said, "You're supposed to help me get to the airport." They said, "You were supposed to be here two hours ago." I said, "Get up, get up." I was crying, "get up" (laughter). They got up, we got to the airport, and I got on the plane. Story_ID: 101609 Speaker 1: Now the Cuban Missile Crisis had started several days before this. The country was in, the U.S. was in a panic. People, it's hard for folk to understand how frightening it was when the U.S. found--the Russians, they confirmed the Russians had put rockets in Cuba. And they wanted the rockets out, and the Cubans wouldn't take the rockets out. Speaker 2: And the warheads on their way over, right, or something? Speaker 1: Well, it didn't get to that point. [President John F.] Kennedy--they were threatening, and [Nikita] Khrushchev was saying "We're not moving them." Later on, of course, we learned that Khrushchev did bargain for some safety for Cuba from the U.S. before the agreed to remove those missiles. I went to London [England] I had a room at Nyaniba House, which is named after Kwame Nkrumah's mother [Elizabeth Nyaniba]. It was a house owned by the Ghanaian government, and they rented rooms to people who were transient either to or from Ghana, and a friend had arranged for me to stay there. It was my first introduction to England, and I think it's a good idea for people who are going to Africa, even today, to one of the ex-British colonies to spend a little time in London. But back then it was really critical, 'cause you got a chance to see how, how they lived in England before you went into a colony that they had in an ex-colony that they had influenced. They had heaters, little space heaters that you had to put money into to get heat. So you put a shilling, which back then was close to maybe to a quarter, and you would get heat for about twenty minutes. If you sat in front of it, your legs baked (laughter). You move four inches to the side, and you were freezing 'cause there was no other heat in the room. And I was sharing a room. Think there were three, maybe four beds in this room, so there were three other women there. And the first night I nearly froze, until I remember that--I knew I couldn't sit up feeding money into this machine all night to get heat. I had to go to bed. And when I got in the bed, even with my coat, and pajamas, and trousers over the pajamas, I was just shaking, and my teeth were chattering. Then I remembered I had some laundry in my suitcase still in the long plastic bag. I took that bag, put that over my feet, and it cover almost my whole body up to my shoulders, and that was the way I got to sleep. So that's how I learned plastic will save your life (laughter); it will retain your body heat, so always have a big plastic garbage bag with you. This--I think it was Sunday or Saturday. The Cu, Cuban Missile Crisis was over. Bells rang all over London. All the church bells rang because the whole world had been involved in this fear that there was going to be a war between the Americans and the Russians. Speaker 2: A nuclear war, yeah. Speaker 1: The--yeah, a nuclear war. And the relief was palpable. People were out greeting strangers in the street. It was wonderful. So I spent several days in London [England] and, and learned a lot about traveling and being in another country. So many things are different that you don't think about. Back then we didn't have the kind of television exposure you have now to other countries. So you can go now to another country and you might have seen sixteen Steve, "Rick Steves' Europe." But back then we didn't have that, so when I needed to mail a letter, and the people told me the mailbox is two blocks down the street, I went out; I walked two blocks. I didn't see a mailbox. I walked another two or three blocks. I didn't see a mailbox, and then I came all the way back, and they assured me that the mailbox was two blocks down the street. I said well, what does the mailbox look like? And then they told me it, "It's a cylinder with a cap on it, looks like a mushroom." Well, see, I was looking for a mailbox that looked like one in the States. To me, that was mailbox. But that little lesson taught me, don't expect to know anything (laughter). When you leave the country you're used to, everything maybe different. Story_ID: 101610 Speaker 1: And so, when I got to Ghana, I had a room booked at the YWCA Hostel. And I also had one pen pal. The only person I knew in Ghana was a pen pal whose name I had gotten out of a magazine, young man. I can't remember his name now. We had corresponded for maybe a year before I went there. He was a custodian in one of the ministries. He was so helpful to me. He took me around Accra [Ghana] as I was looking for a job, 'cause I didn't have a job. I had to go first try to straighten out an immigration status so that I could stay in the country because I was there just on a visitor's visa. I hadn't been able to work out anything better. I ended up actually interviewing with the Minister of the Interior who was in charge of immigration asking to stay. I said, "Look, I came to Ghana. I want to stay here and work here." And he said "Well, why should we let you do that?" I said, "Well, why not?" He said, "I couldn't come to the United States and just decide I wanted to stay and get permission to stay." I said, "I know, because we don't run anything in the United States. If we did, you could stay." (laughter) And so I said, "I came to Africa, and I want to stay." He eventually, you know, authorized me to get a visa for a year. Story_ID: 101611 Speaker 1: And I was able to find a job teaching in a high school, O'Reilly Secondary High School, which was a private school near downtown Accra. It was a wonderful experience. I taught English, and I taught English literature and history, and the kids were wonderful to teach, children who really wanted to learn, was really great. You have very large classes. I might have had 50 or 60 kids in one class. And it was no full wall between my classroom and the next one. And the wall was maybe three feet high, so you could hear what was going on in the other classroom. But the students were very attentive, and there was no problem. If you go into the average school room here in the States now, in a public school, you know, you step into another dimension because of the indiscipline and the fact that teachers have to commit so much time just keeping the kids quiet enough so that the handful who want to learn have that opportunity. That was not the case there. And I remember in my English literature class I assigned the students to do a biography, a book report on a biography, and I want it to be an African. And I said, "You have to bring me the books before you start to do your report. The African must be a black person. It cannot be Cecil Rhodes or any European who has come to the continent. It must be an African." So they, some of them brought me some of the Cecil Rhodes and the, and the Jan Smuts and stuff like that. But a lot of them read Kwame Nkrumah's biography, which had been published by that time-- Speaker 2: "Ghana," yeah. Speaker 1: --his autobiography Speaker 2: "Ghana," right. Speaker 1: Yeah. And I was very pleased. Eventually, they all found books about Africans. Story_ID: 101612 Speaker 1: Now, this just raises a question: what was the curriculum in history, say? We know what--it, it has to be in English literature, but what was it in history-- Speaker 2: It was British history and, and, and denunciation of Africa, basically. My history class I think the author of the book was Faush [ph.]. It was a little slim paperback book. Speaker 1: Oh, Oliver Fay, Fa, Fachia [ph.]? Speaker 2: I think that what was I had to use. See, the, the curriculum was geared to British exams still. Speaker 1: (unclear)(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So students had to read information that would let them pass British written exams for the colonies. So, this wretched book basically credit the, the Europeans for bringing everything to Africa. It went through all the things that Europe had given Africa. The only credit that the Africans got for their pre-European creativity was that they made baskets, and I'm not lying. This was it. But they didn't tell you what did the Africans have to put in the basket. 'Cause from the book you got the impression Europeans brought all the foods that they, (laughter) that they had to eat, have to eat. I said, "Look students, this is terrible. We have to use this book because you have an exam that's gonna be based on this book, but this is not all we're going to do. I said we'll read this book in unison. And then I want you to forget everything in the book until it's time for you to take your exam, then read the book again for the exam." But we had, Earl Sweeting was, was living in Ghana. Earl was an artist from New York who had developed a series on African history. I think it was twelve paintings that he had done on, based on the research that had been done by [William Leo] Hansberry and other, other Africanists. He had brought those paintings to Ghana, and they hung in the headquarters of the Convention People's Party, which was Kwame Nkrumah's party. And I, I said we will, first we'll go to the Ghana museum. Now, the school didn't have a bus, and we were maybe three or four miles from the museum. And so it had to be a voluntary trip. I asked, you know, whoever wants to go, we'll go to your museum. So only boys went. I didn't get a single girl to go on this hike to the museum. And there in the, Ghana has a very nice museum. The last time I visited in 1990, it was exactly like it had been in 1962, same exhibits, everything. But there was a lot of there, so the director of the museum, I got him to talk to the class about ancient Ghana, and their culture, and, and the history of their resistance to colonial domination. And then I invite, I got the principal to let me invite Earl to come. And we also took a trip I think that same day. We went to the museum and the Convention People's Party headquarters. And Earl came to the CPP building and talked to the students about each painting, which dealt with an element of ancient African history, and they loved it. Then I got the principal to invite Earl to come to the school and talk to the whole school about African history. And I went to the library, got some books and, and mimeographed--you know, back in those days you didn't have computers or electric typewriters. You really had to type stuff and no, no photocopy machines even. But I, I extracted some material from [W.E.B.] DuBois and other writers on African history, and that was what I taught the kids. And I didn't keep that job very long. I think that's the first job I got fired from. But they told me when they, when they-- Speaker 1: So you-- Speaker 2: --let me go after about four or five months that they were not going to renew my employment because my degree was in a nonteaching field. It took me a long time--you know, I, I didn't have any animosity about that or anything. But it as years later I said, "That's not why they fired me. They fired me because I was mad that they were teaching these children that they had no history." And I had asked the headmaster, "Can't we do something about this book? There got to be some better books for young African students." And so I was a nuisance-- Story_ID: 101633 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about, did you meet Kwame Nkrumah when you were there [Accra, Ghana]? Speaker 2: No, I never even got a chance to shake his hand. I saw him at several meetings and things, but I never got a chance to even shake his hand. Speaker 1: What, well tell us this? Now what was your, your impression? I mean years ago [HM] Haki [Madhubuti] gave me a copy of "Black Power" by Richard Wright-- Speaker 2: Un-huh, Richard Wright, yes. Speaker 1: --describing the independence. And he's very critical of what's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Richard Wright-- Speaker 1: Was, was there-- Speaker 2: --but was not connected to the movement. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Yeah, but there are people that, people that worship Kwame Nkrumah and those who are his critics. What was your assessment of the, of the, this newest of the African nation, just the, the first one-- Speaker 2: It was so exciting to be in Ghana at that time. I say those of us who took that opportunity and went there were, for a long time were the only black folk who knew anything about freedom (laughter), you know, really, black Americans who had actually experienced freedom and being in a place that was being directed by black people and where it looked like there was forward movement that was limitless. They had money from cocoa. They had so many things going for them in terms of resources and the nicest people in the world, and the kindest, most hospitable population that you would ever want to meet. But there was, there was prob, there were problems always going on. There was the, the tension between the traditional rulers, because Ghana had an elaborate system of traditional rulership, which had been undermined by the British already before independence. So there, there was the tension between whether they were going to be able to develop an African govern society or they were going to take the British model, and they, they had a dual model. There were some powers that remained with the traditional rulership, but basically, the, the central government was British style government. I don't know, I didn't know enough about the society to know what kind of sharing of resources was going on. But Ghana's principal crop was cocoa. And what you found there and in other agro-based economies in Africa was that the revenue from the agricultural produce was being spent in the cities. In the capitol you had electricity; you had piped in water; you had good amenities. Go out in the countryside the people hardly got enough back from their agricultural produce to make the countryside a desirable place to live. So even then, you were already--I went in '62 [1962]. Ghana had been independent five years. You already had people leaving the countryside, coming into the city so they could live a little better than they did in the countryside if they could find jobs. You had a system where everybody had, who had a job had servants. And the house servants were basically men, because it was a cash job, and so men took those jobs. Whereas in this country, women were house servants, but there men took the jobs 'cause it was cash and they could support their families. So there was trouble. You know, we were just, we had our fingers crossed. As a foreigner, you don't have any place in politics in the, in the country. And we hoped Nkrumah was going to be able to make it. Story_ID: 101634 Speaker 1: Oh. There was a famous treason trial, and I attended some of the court, some days of that trial. And I saw that what was going on in court and what was being reported in the papers was different. Speaker 2: Who, who was on trial and for what? Speaker 1: You know, I don't remember the names of the people, but it was a treason case. And I, now I can't even remember whether it was while there were temps, attempts on [Kwame] Nkrumah's life. And there was a bomb thrown in a town called Kulungugu, where at least one or two people died and others were injured. Nkrumah, of course, escaped. And I don't recall whether it was from one of those, I think it was from one of those attempts on his life. Whatever happened, when the, the court later decision in the case, and then Nkrumah decided that the decision had to be overturned. And we kind of knew this was the beginning of the end. If the court could not make a decision that would stick, if politics could overrule the court decision, that it was the beginning of the end. The end did not come until 1966, and I had left Ghana by then, so I was not there when the coup took place, and-- Speaker 2: And you could see it? Speaker 1: Nkrumah was overthrown. Speaker 2: You could see the-- Speaker 1: Well, from the treason trial we knew that his government wasn't going to last, much as we wanted it to, that, that the, the tensions and the contradictions were going to eventually remove his government. The American government was also against Nkrumah. The Americans never really wanted anybody even talking about African unity. But the Americans didn't have the foothold in Africa that the British and the French and the Portuguese had because America had no colonies. Even Liberia was never really a colony of the United States. Story_ID: 101635 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. I, I know that you were there, and [HM] Maya Angelou was there. Speaker 2: Yes, we were roommates. Speaker 1: You all were roommates. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But just to jump, before we talk about her in specific and Malcolm X, can you just give me--did the foreign black community--now Nkrumah was a Pan-Africanist who believed that, in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the unity amongst all African people-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the world. They called for United States of Africa. But did the, the foreign black community, were they, were they made to feel, I mean how were they--and there are people from Trinidad, from United States-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from--how many other (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Many of the-- Speaker 1: --places-- Speaker 2: --of the Caribbean people had been there for a long time because people started coming back from the Caribbean in the early part of the 20th century. And so, many of them were Ghanaians by that time. They had intermarried. They were raising children. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You had second and third and fourth generation Caribbeans there. I don't think that from the, the ones that I knew and talked to that they felt any kind of difference. We were the new immigrants. We had only a few families there like Robert Lee, Dr. Bobby Lee, who may still be in Washington getting medical treatment now. Bobby and Sara had come over either in '57 [1957] or before, because they had known [Kwame] Nkrumah in the States. Bobby was a Lincoln U [University] graduate from [Oxford] Pennsylvania, and Nkrumah had gone to Lincoln. But we had only a few families who had been from the States who had been there even four or five years, so we were all new. Some were married and raising families. The Lees raised their family there and numbers did. The black American community was of two types: they were business people. You had Carlos Allston and Frank Robinson who had started an electrical contracting company there, All-Afra Electric Company. Tom Brown was in refrigeration and air conditioning. You had Lou Gardner, who had a Ghanaian partner named Tamaclo [ph.]. They were plumbing contractors. So you had folk who were making a real contribution in the, on the economic development side. And then you had the nationalists like me and a bunch of other folk who were there willing to do, you know, whatever we could do to make a living and just to be there and lend whatever force we could to assisting the country while we enjoyed ourselves. Yes-- Speaker 1: Basking in the-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, we were just-- Speaker 1: --idea of it. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, it's, here it is (laughter). Story_ID: 101636 Speaker 1: And after I lost my job teaching, I taught English. I took in typing. I did a number of things just to make, just to make ends meet. Speaker 2: So was it difficult to make ends meet there? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was really difficult. [HM] Maya [Angelou] came on her way to Liberia. Maya had been working in Egypt, and she had met President [William] Tubman of Liberia, and he had offered her a job in Liberia. So she passed through Ghana, planning to leave her son, Guy [Johnson], there to go to the university. And she was going on to Liberia. She was staying with a South African who was a friend of mine, her husband. She was married to a South African who had introduced her to a guy named John McKoonga [ph.], and she was just there with him for a few days. We took her son, John McKoonga, Selvian Voosey [ph.], and his brother Winston and their wives, we were going out for a picnic--it was one of the holidays--to another town. I think we went to Winneba [Ghana], and we took Guy with us. He was 17 or 18 years old then, Maya's son. Coming back, we were in two cars, and I, I was in the front car. We got back to Johnny's house, and we were waiting for the next car to come where Guy was and got later and later, and Maya was getting concerned. And they finally, there was a knock on the door. I opened the door, and there was Winston and Voosey's wife with blood all over her. She had little cuts all over her and blood. They had been in a car accident. They had for some insane reason allowed Guy to drive this car when he was just in the country two days, three days. And they had hit a parked lorry that was fairly common kind of accident. And Guy was severely injured. He had a broken neck and a broken leg. Thank goodness his leg was broken because they didn't find that his neck was broken until a day or two after the accident. And since his leg was broken, he couldn't try to move around, and that's probably the only thing that saved his life. So, Maya then did not go to, to Liberia. She moved into the YWCA where I was already staying. And I believe [Victoria] Vicki Garvin, who was a labor activist from New York was all, I think Vicki was already there. A point came when the Y was raising our rent for the second time in six months, so we found an apartment, the bottom story of a two-story home that had three bedrooms, living room, dining room, kitchen. And we moved into that, and that's where we stayed until Vicki left and went to China. And she left for China in 1964, because she had been teaching English at the Chinese Embassy, and they fell in love with her there and offered her a job at the Foreign Language Institute in Shanghai. And in those days, Americans couldn't travel to China and keep their passports. So she came back to the West. I don't, don't remember whether she came to the States or to London 'cause she wanted to see her family again. She was afraid she might never see them again. So she had that little reunion and went to China where she stayed for the next six years. Story_ID: 101637 Speaker 1: Malcolm [X] came in 1964, in May to visit. We had heard he was coming. Essien [E.U. Essien-Udom] had let us know that he was coming. He had been in Nigeria. But we couldn't get a date for his, for his arrival. For a few days we met planes, hoping to see him. And then we stopped that and eventually he called. Malcolm got to Ghana, and he called Julian Mayfield and let him know that he had arrived. He traveled alone, no big entourage, no entourage at all. And we had several things that we had tentatively scheduled for him, but he had to get there before we could really do stuff. So we had a good big night for, for African Americans to meet and talk with him that first night. And then we had a series of, of things organized for him. He spoke at the University of Ghana. Vicki [Victoria Garvin] asked the Chinese ambassador to sponsor a reception for him. The ambassador gave a dinner for him. He met the Cuban ambassador, the Algerian ambassador, and back then, Algeria was one of the revolutionary countries. I don't know what it is now, but back then it was a revolutionary country, so he made good contacts there. We had asked Mrs. [Shirley Graham] DuBois, who had the closest connection to Kwame Nkrumah of any of us if she could arrange for him to see the president. And she didn't want to do it because she had only heard negative things about him through the U.S. press. But she came to the, to the dinner. I think she came to the dinner that the Chinese ambassador gave. And she met Malcolm and fell in love with him. I mean that's all you had to do was just meet him to fall in love with him. And of course he knew her son, David, from, from Egypt. David DuBois was living in Cairo, and Malcolm had spent a lot of time with David. So, Shirley fell in love with David--with Malcolm, and she arranged for him to see Kwame Nkrumah. So he had that audience. The same day we took him down to Winneba to the [Kwame Nkrumah] Ideological Institute where students were studying to be political workers in the country. And he gave a very stirring lecture to them and then came back and went to see the president. He was quite somber after that visit, and we never felt comfortable--I know Julian didn't ask him, and I didn't feel comfortable to ask him what had transpired when he talked to Nkrumah. But years later I was talkin to David about it, and David said "Well, clearly, Nkrumah told him they weren't gonna sponsor the petition that he wanted taken to the United Nations to charge the United States with genocide." That was what he-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: One of his missions in Africa was to get an African government or more than one to sponsor this petition in the United Nations. And when, as soon as David said it was, I said, "Well, that makes perfect sense." So I think every--he had talked to a number of heads of states about it, but they were all sufficiently dependent on the U.S. for economic aid and trade and everything, so none of them were going to present such a petition to the UN. He was invited to address Parliament there, which was really an honor, because they didn't normally ask visitors to do it, to do that. But we, he had so many engagements that we got him late to Parliament House, and they had disbanded. But they did invite him to come in and talk informally to members of Parliament who were still in the building, so he did that. But he didn't get a chance to make his form, a formal address to Parliament. Story_ID: 101638 Speaker 1: I read somewhere that, that Alex Quaison-Sackey, who was a, who was part of the Ghanaian delegation to the U.S., was supposed to do that. They agreed at some point that he was supposed to enter that into the--but he, he didn't, didn't never--they, they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I don't think that--it may have happened, that it got put into the record, the same way you can put stuff into the congressional record that never, that didn't happen during the session. I'm not aware if that ever happened. I know he did not actually make the address, but I don't know about that. That would be interesting-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I pause on that too. Speaker 2: --if it did happen. Speaker 1: I've read a lot of stuff, but not all of it's reliable necessarily-- Speaker 2: But I, I know-- Speaker 1: --so I don't know. Speaker 2: --he didn't make the address-- Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: --but I, I don't know whether it's part of, part of a record now. But he did go in and talk. I think probably most of the parliamentarians were still there, but it was an informal session, yeah. He--we were able to put a lot of stuff together for him. The press conference had a swar--the press, the journalist organization had a soiree for him. And later on he wrote that, that he--we were, people were dancing, and he thought we should have been more serious. We were--he didn't know what we had been doing politically and Ghana--'cause we had all, we had had a big demonstration at the American Embassy to coincide with the March on Washington in August '63 [1963]. And it happened to be the exact night Dr. [W.E.B.] DuBois died. And Julian Mayfield's wife was DuBois's doctor, so she was with him when he died. And I was at Julian, at their house making picket signs when Ana Levia [Cordero] called Julian to say "The Doctor just died." That's how we referred to him. And Julian jumped in the car to go to DuBois's house, leaving me there with my picket signs, and I ended up having to walk to the demonstration. We were doing a midnight demonstration because of the eight-hour time difference. We did a midnight demonstration there, which would be right at the time the people starting to march in Washington. And I had to walk, and walking in Africa at night with no lights, you don't know what might be crawling on the ground. I was so scared, but I had to get to the demonstration with my picket signs, and I, and I did that. Then we marched the next day wearing black armbands for, in DuBois's honor. Speaker 1: Yeah I remember the announcement--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So we had done that kind of thing. We presented a, a petition to the Cherchez d'affaires at the embassy. So Malcolm really, he mused in, in, in the Autobiography ["The Autobiography of Malcom X" by Alex Haley] about seeing us dancing and feeling like, you know, we should have been doing some polit--I said he didn't know what, what we had been doing to try to relate to the American problem, not to the Ghanaian problem, 'cause we really did not do anything politically relating to, to Ghanaian politics. Story_ID: 101639 Speaker 1: And, and just for the record, Julian Mayfield's an actor who was in the-- Speaker 2: Yes, an actor and a writer-- Speaker 1: --film "Up Tight!"-- Speaker 2: Yes, he was in the film-- Speaker 1: --help, he wrote-- Speaker 2: "Up Tight!"-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --wrote three novels, the, "The Hit," "The Long Night," and "The Grand Parade." Those were his three novels. He died at the age of fifty-six (unclear) was about 1983 or so [sic, 1984]. Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: He was teaching at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], had severe heart trouble, and he was an al, Julian was an alcoholic. If he could have stopped drinking-- Speaker 1: He was a big, big guy. Speaker 2: Big guy, left two sons. One of his boys is a pilot for American Airlines. And I spent a day with his family a few years ago. They live in Florida. And-- Speaker 1: And his wife was a doctor, you said--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She was a physician-- Speaker 1: Physician. Speaker 2: --from Puerto Rico. She is, she's passed now. But they stayed friends even though they divorced, and he married Joan Cambridge [Mayfield] from Guyana, very brilliant writer, very dynamic woman. She was married to him when he passed. Story_ID: 101640 Speaker 1: When [HM] Maya [Angelou] wrote the book "The Heart--no, "All God's Children Need Traveling Shoes," that's the volume of her autobiography that deals with our time together in Africa. And it's the book that Random House really didn't push because it's the one that has the most appeal for black folk. Her other, the other volumes of her autobiography have been neutral, racially neutral, and they have spoken very directly to women of all races. Random House even had the nerve to issue a boxed set of her books for one Christmas, and they omitted that volume. They, they put, published all the other volumes of the autobiography, and a volume or two of poetry, and omitted "All God's Children Need Traveling Shoes." But that's the book that tells about our time-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --in Ghana. Speaker 2: Now did you ever meet [W.E.B.] DuBois himself and talk to him? Speaker 1: Oh yes, I interviewed with him for the Encyclopedia Africana. I wanted to work on that. I was willing to volunteer. I would have been glad to be paid. But I did get a chance to interview with him. Speaker 2: So did you work on it? Speaker 1: I did, yeah. I did some work. DuBois last public appearance was at December 1962 at an Africanists convention. It was following a big conference in, in Accra [Ghana]. A group of Africanists got together to talk about the Encyclopedia Africana, which was going to be, at his insistence, written by Africans. So you had these people who came in from Britain and other places, and they were livid to think that these so and so's, are going--we've made our whole career being experts on Africa. Speaker 2: Writing about you and-- Speaker 1: Yes, and now you're-- Speaker 2: How dare you write your own-- Speaker 1: --saying you're going to produce an encyclopedia and we can't write? I remember Melville Herskovits. You remember Herskovits? Speaker 2: Yes, of the Northwestern-- Speaker 1: It was at the conference. Speaker 2: --the Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], right? Speaker 1: That's right, prime Africanist. They were livid. And I got a chance to sit there. You know, they were around the table, and I was in the back. There was a little room for, for spectators. And that was DuBois's last public appearance. Speaker 2: It wasn't long after that the black scholars here, led by John Henrik Clarke, walked out of the African Studies Association-- Speaker 1: Yes, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --as a result-- Speaker 1: Well, there-- Speaker 2: --of that kind of tension. Speaker 1: And then that was, as I recall, December of '62 [1962]. I hadn't been in Ghana very long then. He was already quite ill, but his mind was intact to the end-- Story_ID: 101641 Speaker 1: Dr. Alphaeus Hunton was there as the person who was to take over [the Encyclopedia Africana]. And Alphaeus was still running the encyclopedia when the coup came in '66 [1966]. And he and his wife, Dorothy, were deported. He was a great man. Dorothy wrote a book about him called "The Unsung Valiant." Speaker 2: Dr. Alphaeus? Speaker 1: Alphaeus Hunton. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: His own book before he left the States was called "Decision in Africa." Speaker 2: How do you spell his last name, H-U-N-- Speaker 1: T-O-N. Speaker 2: T-O-N. Speaker 1: Yes. I may have an ex--well, I, I-- Speaker 2: And his book is called--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: "The Unsung Valiant." I'll give you a copy of that because I've got several copies of it. She, she wrote that after his death. He died in Zambia while I was there. I got a chance to, to, well, I went to his funeral. I went to [W.E.B.] DuBois's funeral. But I've got copies of that. It was poorly put together. The pages, you know, just fall apart, but I'll give you a copy of that book. Because she took a course in creative writing. Speaker 2: That's-- Speaker 1: And she really did a very good biography of her husband. But-- Speaker 2: Where was he from (unclear)-- Speaker 1: I'll give you the book. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: I don't remember. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Elegant, elegant man. Speaker 2: Let me just, let's see-- Speaker 1: A lot of time in New York, but I don't know if he was a New Yorker. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Very political; he was involved with the Presence African and all of that. You know, he just--we had these men who were giants, and you knew they were giants when you saw them, and he was one of them, refined, dignified, principled, and strong. And his wife, they had no children, so they were so close, very close, Dorothy [Hunton], wonderful woman. Dorothy lived to be about ninety-eight. He, Alphaeus died in Zambia I think in '72 [1972], and then Dorothy came back to the States. He's buried in Zambia. But he ran the Encyclopedia Africana until the coup. The encyclopedia was sacked. A lot of their records were destroyed. Ghanaians took over. The name remained, but the encyclopedia was never published. What did come out was "A Biography of African Personalities," something like that, published by the Ghanaian who was directing the project, who banked revenue from this book, which I have never seen, in his Barclays account in New York. And he was eventually sacked because of the fraud that he had committed and the theft from the Ghanaian government. But that's how that, that's how the Encyclopedia Africana project ended up. And it's never been done, but the European and American Africanists were happy at that. Speaker 2: [HM] Henry Louis Gates [Jr.] has claimed to have finished the project. I believe they, they take credit for--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: He doesn't have the--he's not connected to the movement either, and he doesn't, doesn't have the mind to do that. He heads the DuBois program at How--at Harvard [The W.E.B. DuBois Institute for African and African-American Research]. But he's no W.E.B. DuBois (laughter). Story_ID: 101642 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, now in terms of Malcolm [X], just to, for the record, before we leave Ghana, you shot the famous photo of Malcolm in the Ghana-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --airport with his hand. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you do that for us, just, just so people can see. They can't see me, but-- Speaker 2: Let's see-- Speaker 1: --with the finger-- Speaker 2: --well, I've got-- Speaker 1: --to the cheek like that. Speaker 2: --the picture. I'm going to-- Speaker 1: All right--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: That would be one of the pictures-- Speaker 1: All right, all right. Speaker 2: --that will be-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in the-- Speaker 1: He's the, he has a dashiki over the suit and tie. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And he's got his finger up to his cheek in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in a very pensive mood. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's a, one of the most famous pictures. Speaker 2: And the reason he has that expression is we were warning him to be careful when he came back to the States. We thought, having been out, all of us had been out of the States at least a year. We thought the main threat to him was from the U.S. government. He knew better (laughter), you know, he knew better. And he had given us quite a bit of information about the, the real, the intensity of the problem that he had with the Nation [of Islam]. But it, it wasn't till much later that I realized how serious it was. Speaker 1: Do you have any doubt that it was the, the Nation itself that, that really was more responsible? Speaker 2: No doubt at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: None at all. Story_ID: 101485 Speaker 1: So, now, you're in Ghana until 19-- Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974] Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974]? Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], right, okay, yeah. Speaker 2: See, I'm skipping-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --decades now (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, and-- Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: --and you go from Ghana to Ethiopia. Now what-- Speaker 2: To Ethiopia. Speaker 1: --what happened? How did, how did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, are we, are we rolling? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, what happened was that (unclear) with between Vicki [Victoria Garvin], [HM] Maya [Angelou], and I, we had about eight different jobs. Maya was doing things for the University of Ghana [Legon, Ghana]. And we were struggling to make a living. I can remember one day opening up our refrigeration and there's a glass of water sitting in it and that's all. So we, we had a very difficult time. I had friends in Ethiopia who were working for the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa [UNECA], Alice Bettis, who had been a Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio] colleague of mine and her Sudanese husband, Osmond Abdul Salaam [ph.]--they now use the name Hashim--were working there. And Alice intervened and got me a job offer, and I left. Julian Mayfield, Maya, and I all went to Cairo [Egypt] together, hoping to meet with Malcolm [X]. Because we had started this organization there, we were going to be his African arm. And he was starting the Organization of Afro-American Unity [OAAU] in the States. So we wanted to meet with him. Speaker 1: Well, what was the name of yours, your-- Speaker 2: Oh, we were, we were gonna be the Organization of Afro-American Unity there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the three of us, and I think Julian's wife [Ana Levia Cordero] was on that trip too. We flew this big Russian Aleutian they, that stopped in Kano. I had visited Nigeria for a few days, and I joined the flight in Kano, Nigeria. And we went to Cairo, had a real good time there. Since Maya had lived there, and she had friends there, and David DuBois-- Speaker 1: Her son and David-- Speaker 2: --was there. Speaker 1: --yeah, David DuBois was there, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, David was there. But we couldn't--Malcolm was gone. He was traveling in East Africa. I left and went down to Ethiopia, got there on October 1st, which was Nigerian Independence Day. And I was staying at the Ras Hotel. The second or third night I was there eating in the dining room. And the back door opened, and in walked Malcolm. He was in Ethiopia. And I told him we were just in Egypt looking for you. And he was hoping to meet with Haile Selassie, which did not happen. So I was able to give him almost no assistance in Ethiopia. He was so impressed with what we had done in Ghana, he--I've got the one letter I have from him he wrote after he left and continued his travels in East Africa, saying I'm coming back to Ethiopia. Can you arrange for me to see the emperor. I just go there. I didn't know anybody who knew the emperor. I, I knew some people who were like three degrees removed, and I made, I tried, but Haile Selassie would not meet with him for the same reason that the Ethiopian Ambassador wouldn't meet with him in Ghana. I was working at the Ethiopian Embassy in Ghana when he was there. I couldn't get the ambassador to meet with him and because the, Ethiopia was a client state of the U.S. at the time. So he came back to Ethiopia two or three days and left, and that was the last time that I ever saw him. That was all in October of '64 [1964]. And the following year he was murdered, yes. Story_ID: 101486 Speaker 1: My job in Ethiopia with the United Nations where Kofi Annan was then our assistant director of personnel at, at that agency. I worked in the industry and housing division under Bax Nomvete, a South African economist, an African South African economist, who's back home now running a consultancy. And I got I--it was a good job. I think I earned something like 11 or $12,000 dollars, which was really good, very good. Speaker 2: Oh, that is-- Speaker 1: Much more than I needed to-- Speaker 2: --astronomical for those days. Speaker 1: --live on in Ethiopia. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Had a nice apartment, traveled quite a bit. But it was a very difficult country to live in. The Ethiopian population was so suppressed under the emperor that people were not free. There was also a rumor that the United Nations employees were being paid with Ethiopian money. So in a country with the most intense poverty I have ever seen in my life, they thought these foreigners were there chopping their resources. So there was a generalized-- Speaker 2: Taking their jobs, their money. Speaker 1: --hostility toward the United Nations personnel from the population outside Africa Hall-- Speaker 2: Now, this-- Speaker 1: --not from the Ethiopians who worked for the UN. Speaker 2: Let me, let me just put this in a kind of perspective. Ethiopia, you know, home of the conquering lion of Judah-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Ras, Jah Rastafari, who Rastafarians-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --sing the praises of the only continuous independent African nation-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --that didn't have to go through colonialism, not, not as much. Speaker 1: Five years, doesn't count at all-- Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: --blink of an eye. Speaker 2: --under the Italians-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --when, during the war. Speaker 1: --blink of an eye. Speaker 2: But you know, Haile Selassie is considered by many black people today, who with dreadlocks, to be a hero, conquering hero, great hero. Speaker 1: And I-- Speaker 2: And you're saying that the-- Speaker 1: --even having lived there, I have tremendous admiration for him as a person. I got a chance to see him in a number of programs, the bearing of the man. He could sit for four hours. He was like char--he reminded me of Charles Wesley. He could sit like this for four hours. He tried to modernize the country. He loved Kwame Nkrumah. When I worked for the embassy, one day a big crate of pineapples arrived at the embassy, and they were a gift from the emperor to Kwame Nkrumah. And after the coup in '66 [1966], he said "Now we Africans are becoming ridiculous." He loved Kwame Nkrumah. But you know, he's on top of a futile dynasty that had lasted for centuries. Speaker 2: Now that's an interesting nuance, that, the way you explained that. Speaker 1: Yeah, yes. Speaker 2: People don't, don't think about that. But he, he-- Speaker 1: Life is-- Speaker 2: --inherited a dye, an empire-- Speaker 1: --is so complex. Speaker 2: --in all the rules-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and morays, and codes, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --customs that come with that. Speaker 1: And you can't break that up easily because the people were, everybody was armed. Now the women, women had guns in their purses. People who worked in the United Nations had guns. So it was a, a country with a lot of violence in it, short tempers. It was scary; it was scary. Story_ID: 101487 Speaker 1: It was, it [Ethiopia] was different, much different from Ghana then I guess in that respect. Speaker 2: Oh, completely, completely, altitude is high. Addis Ababa, the capital is 8,200 [sic, 7,726] feet high, so most people had some problems with that. Even I developed a temper, and there would be times when I would get so mad I was ready to throw something. And I knew I needed to come down because it was having an effect on my brain. And we could go to Bishoftu to a little resort town that was way down in altitude, probably under 5,000 feet [sic, 6,300 feet] and just a few miles away from Addis. And after a day or two you'd be calm. But that was very interesting. I got a chance to meet people, economists and government people from all over the continent because they would come into Addis Ababa for conferences. And I got several chances to travel out to their countries because I was doing administrative work in the industry and housing division. I supervised the secretaries. So when we had a conference for my division, I would travel to whatever country we were going to, to run the administrative work there. That was very interesting. And just the social life with the foreigners who were working there was good and with Ethiopians who worked in the UN, not with people on the outside. Now I went back to Ethiopia in 1995. I went in December and stayed for a month and got a chance to travel around the country in a way that I hadn't traveled when I lived there. And I found it much different. People had changed. They had a better sense of themselves as African and not this hermetic thing that they used to talk about, which separated them from Africa. And that was-- Speaker 1: And I've seen books where they were, they're actually considered white in the book (laughter), Speaker 2: Yes, they're, they're black-- Speaker 1: Caucasians. Speaker 2: --Caucasians (laughter). You know, white folks are so crazy, really. Because that's all their fiction. The Africans didn't invent any of that. White folks invented that and said "Well, now they're black, but they're Caucasian." And when they come to this country, some of them want to adopt that. When they see how badly white folks treat you when they think you not white (laughter), then "Yes, I wanna be white no matter how black I am" (laughter). But most of them don't want that; they don't want to identify with that. And, and under Mengistu Haile Mariam, who was one of the leaders after--well, he was the one who overthrew Haile Selassie, the, he connected the people with Africa in a way that they were not connected before. He's now, he's an exile in Zimbabwe. That's where he lives now. And so I, it was quite different, even in Addis. People identified with Africa in a way that they had not done in the '60s [1960s]. So I was glad to see that. And I'm, I still have, still have friends from, from that period. I stayed there until January the 23rd, 1969. Story_ID: 101488 Speaker 1: I had an offer of a job in Zambia in the Department of Labor and Social Services that had, the job had been obtained for me by a woman who used to work in the United Nations who had met, met a Zambian when she was traveling for the UN and had married him. And she'd gotten me, gotten me this job. But I knew I had to wait for my ticket, so I decided to travel in Asia. You know, Malcolm [X] talked about the Bandung Conference in what, 1955 or '56 [1956] in Indonesia, and I really wanted to see how Asians related to an African traveling. So I went by myself, something I probably wouldn't do today. But I went, in those days, I just took a map and I drew a line to all the places I wanted to go. I took it to a travel agency, and I said, "Give me a ticket with these stops on it." And then you could change your ticket if you wanted to, didn't cost you anything. And so, when I was in a country, if somebody said, "Have you seen Angkor Wat," say, in Cambodia, and I said "No," my rule was when the third person said, "Are you going to such and such," then I would go and change my ticket so I could go to such and such. And that's how I got to Angkor Wat. I spent a month in India, fantastic. I would love to go back there again, wonderful hospitality from Indians who had met African Americans while they were traveling in the states. And they had had hospitality from African Americans, and they offered me hospitality, had a great time. Thailand, everyplace was magical. In Hong Kong, you have all of these bazaars and shops. And the shopkeepers would come out and say, "Soul sister, come into my shop," because that was the way we were projected back then. And I felt really good about it, 'cause so much was going on in the states, people knew about it. "Soul sister, come on in." My nephew, who is a Navy, a commander in the Navy, was stationed in Japan in 1998, and he said Japanese shopkeepers were coming out saying, "O.J., O.J., come into my shop. We have knives" (laughter). That's how, that's how we have sunk in the estimation of the world, from soul sister to, "O.J., we have knives," (laughter). So, I went to Japan, and Indonesia was the only place that I can say I had a problem with people just being so astonished to see a black woman. Now, it wasn't this with black men. They were used to seeing soldiers on R and R [rest and recuperation] and the African diplomats, they would, but to see a woman by herself, people would just get hysterical. They would laugh. And some days I would wear African dress. It was worse when I wore African dress. Now, Indonesia was the site of the Bandung Conference (laughter), so I realized that this was just a paper thin veneer of any kind of solidarity, that there was none. In other places, too, I was an object of curiosity, sometimes just because women don't travel alone in those days. To see a woman by herself was strange. But color played a big part in it. I've sent Julian [Mayfield] letters, and at the end, when I talked to him after the trip, he said, "Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Windom], your trip sounds like one of the great horror stories," (laughter), "of the Western world." I said, "That could be because I was emphasizing troubles that I had, but basically, it was a great trip." And to be able to change a ticket without paying a penalty was something that you really miss now if you try to travel. You simply can't do that anymore. So I had hoped to spend a couple of months, say, bumming around on, in Asia again on the fortieth anniversary of my trip. I couldn't think about doing that now. First place, around-the-world ticket back then was $1,625. It's several thousand dollars now if you just wanna girdle the globe. But it was $1,625. My average expenditure per day including hotels and food was ten dollars. Now, if you can do it for three hundred dollars, an average, you're doing well. So I'm so glad that I did that when I did it. And I was, you know, I hadn't broken my knee yet. I could go, if I had to crawl someplace I could do it. I was physically in better shape than I am now. So that was a memorable trip. Story_ID: 101489 Speaker 1: And when I came back to the States I had to wait about five months before my ticket came for Zambia. And I had to threaten them, say "Look, it's starting to snow. If I have to buy new clothes for snow, I'm not gonna be able to come to Zambia. Please send the ticket." I got the ticket, and I think I got to Zambia--well, no, it's, it was late '69 [1969]. On the way I met Alphaeus Hunton and Dorothy [Hunton] at the airport in Nairobi [Kenya]. Alphaeus was in a wheelchair, and Dorothy was pushing him. And for the first time, I saw that glaze in the eyes that lets you know spontaneously that the person is dying. And I had never seen it before, but I knew when I looked him in the eyes that he was dying. And they had been to London [England] where he had a diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. They had, I believe, operated on him and just closed him back up. Dorothy said that it was, it was too advanced, nothing they could do. And he did die shortly after we got back to Zambia. But he was taken good care of by the government, given a beautiful funeral. Dr. Kaunda spoke at his funeral, the president of Zambia-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at the time. Speaker 2: Kenneth Kaunda, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, Kenneth, he was the independence leader of Zambia. Speaker 2: He's not still, he's, he's not-- Speaker 1: No, the last I heard he was in Boston. Boston [University in Boston, Massachusetts] has a program where they bring some ex-African presidents, and he was there. He came to St. Louis [Missouri] during that time he was in residence in Boston. This has been several, a few years back. He was, he was a very good man. But there were a lot of bad plans in Africa, like the Ujamaa plan that-- Speaker 2: [Julius] Nyerere, yeah. Speaker 1: Nyerere had in Tanzania, things that European scholars and consultants had convinced folk to do that really were just not African model, and they just didn't work. Now in Kaunda's case, they have a very sparse population spread over a large country. At that, at the time I was there I think there were maybe four or five million people in the country. And what they were trying to do was, was to create-- pairing urban areas, bring people together so they could provide pipe warm water and electricity for larger groups of people because you couldn't do it in these very tiny villages spread all over the country. And it just didn't work on a lasting basis. Speaker 2: Is it the problem with Zambia is that the land is not very productive or something that the people are spread out that far over? Speaker 1: Well, no, it's just the way that the, that you have a number of different ethnic groups, and they all have their own areas. And they had a, a lot of very good soil, didn't have a lot of large scale farming though, because copper at that time fetched such a good price that people were drawn to copper mining. That's where you had the large accumulations of people, that they mined. Other parts of the population had gone into South Africa. Yeah, they had a lot of, of Zambian exiles in South Africa. But somehow they did not have a tradition of industrial-type farming. The large scale African farmers in Zambia were from what is now Zimbabwe. It was Southern Rhodesia then. But they were the people who had the skills. I have never understood why [Robert] Mugabe waited twenty years after independence to take those farms and to redistribute that land, because they had Zimbabweans who had large scale farming skills back then. The Zambians were very nice people, but everywhere that Europeans settled in Africa in large numbers, you had a change in the personality and character of the African people. So they were not as open, and warm, and friendly as people in, in West Africa, where the mosquito and malaria limited Europeans settlement. They had to use indirect rule there, so it didn't change the people's personalities that much. But in East Africa and Central Africa it did. They suppressed people because the Europeans settled there. Story_ID: 101490 Speaker 1: Oh, my old boss from the UN [United Nations] eventually came into Zambia. I can't remember whether Bax was still working for the UN then, but he had--it was--and I was glad to see him and his family come in there. So, there were several folk I had known in Ethiopia who, who came into to Zambia. Speaker 2: What's his name again, just to-- Speaker 1: Nomvete, N-O-M-V (as in Victor) E-T-E. His first name is Bax, B-A-X. His wife is Corah. And I encountered his daughter when I visited South Africa in 1996, sheer serendipity. I went to a play one night in Johannesburg. And the play let--there were two plays in the same building [The Windybrow Theatre]. The play I was attending let out early, and we had to wait for the other play to let out so the people who had come with us on our transportation from the hotel, we could all leave together. So I was looking around the walls where they had lots of newspaper clippings posted. And I saw one that said "Pamela Nomvete is home to stay." And I said, "I wonder if this could be my little Pamela, who was just a little girl when I had last seen her in the sixties [1960s] in Ethiopia." And so I asked the man at the information desk, "How can I find Pamela Nomvete who's an actress here in this theater?" He said "Well, her play will be out soon." "So you mean she's in this play?" And she was, so I waited, and another twenty minutes they were through. And I asked the man point her out to me because I haven't seen her since she was a tiny girl. And he did, and she didn't recognize me. And I told her "I'm Alice Windom." And she just shouted "Auntie Alice," and we embraced. And so she told me that her parents were in Cape Town where I had, my tour had already been to Cape Town, but I was able to call him up and talk to him on the phone. So, things like this happened. You know, you get these serendipitous events that just make your life. And I was so happy to see her and to talk to her family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then, I think we have just about reached the end of what I consider to be the most interesting time of my life. Speaker 2: Well, you came back to-- Speaker 1: The last thirty years we can-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --forget about (laughter). Story_ID: 101491 Speaker 1: You came back to St. Louis [Missouri] in '73 [1973], right, and-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --worked, you worked for the city corrections. Now there was a--you had to--it was a big case-- Speaker 2: Yes, I was-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --director of social services at the St. Louis Medium Security Institution, which in the olden days had been called The City Workhouse designed for people who had sentences on misdemeanors where they would serving one year or less of a sentence. By the time I got there, the most of the population was overflow from the city jail, people who were awaiting trial on felonies. We hardly, we had very few people who were serving a year or less. And now there hadn't been anybody in years now who is a hold, just a jail population. We had money from the Law Enforcement Assistance Association which was programming money. We were able to do a lot of things that were developmental for the inmate population. And eventually conflict developed between me and my supervisors. St. Louis had two institutions, the medium security institution and the city jail. So you had a structure to administer two programs. The, our big boss, the director of welfare was [Edward] Ed Tripp. No, he wasn't called director. He was a commissioner I think. I've forgotten what his title was, Ed Tripp. And then we had under him a person who was directly in charge of the jail and the workhouse. And, and we--I got into conflict with the young white fellow [Jeff Tallent]. He had promoted, when he got promoted, he promoted this guy out of the jail social services department to run the two institutions. And he just kind of got beside himself and issued some, some edicts to us that we felt would put us in jeopardy if we carried them out. And I declined to do some things, and we, it got to the point where there was a lot of conflict between us. And we called each other "Jeff" and "Alice," very informal. And I wrote him a memo on something, "Dear Jeff." He sent it back to me with Jeff crossed out with a pen pressed so hard the paper was torn, and he wrote "Mr. Tallent" on that. And I said, "That's okay with me. I'm Ms. Windom; you're Mr. Tallent." But he insisted on calling me "Alice," and I had to call him "Mr. Tallent." I said oh no. I reported them to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. At that time we had a dynamic NAACP here. And they got to Ed Tripp and told him "You can't have this white man insisting that she call him Mister and he's gonna call her (laughter) her by her first name." And Ed, because he's social friends with these people in NAACP, was furious with me. Then they created another job that was going to put another level of supervision between us and them. I said, "This is too small for you to be having a three--tiered administrative structure over us. We, we could use that money for other programming in here." I said, "But if you're gonna create the job, I'm going to apply for it," so I did. And they (unclear)--the rule is that the top three candidates for a job get interviewed. The appointing authority can select any of the top three. They didn't even rank me and said that I had inadequate training and experience. When in fact, I had more training and more experience than the three men that they ranked for the job. So I filed an EEO [Equal Employment Opportunity] complaint, charging sex discrimination. They were too, too new then. People weren't used to those. Despite the fact that you're not supposed to dismiss a filer in retaliation, they did; they fired me. Jeff sent the police to the workhouse to, to take me out of the building. Knowing I was gonna get fired, I had removed papers from my office. Everything I knew I was going to need for a lawsuit had been out of my office for some weeks, because I knew that my time was limited. And when the police came and said you have to leave. I said, "Well, I don't drive. My brother picks me up. Can you give me a lift home?" "No," so I had to wait for my brother to come, just as I would have if he hadn't sent the police to remove me from the building. And I did file a lawsuit, which I lost. The judge just didn't understand why I was suing these men over a job. And there were no female inmates in the workhouse. It was an all-male institution. I was the first woman they had hired who worked behind the gates. And the inmates knew how hard I was working six, seven days a week, and they really liked me. I got a letter from one of them asking me if they wanted me to kill Jeff Tallent (laughter). And of course, I did not want that (laughter) done. I, I wish I had done it myself, but I wasn't gonna authorize anybody else to, to do it. Story_ID: 101659 Speaker 1: All right, now, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Your name is Alice Windom, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: And our videographer is Scott Stearns. We're continuing the interview we started almost a year ago, but-- Speaker 2: Yes, December 8th [2006] was the beginning. Story_ID: 101660 Speaker 1: All right, so this is our third session. And we had just concluded I think a discussion about a lawsuit against the State of Missouri. Speaker 2: The City of St. Louis. Speaker 1: The City of St. Louis, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes, and this is, this tape-- this has us in what, 1967, '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Oh no, that's 1974. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], and because of the publicity surrounding that lawsuit, which was favorable to me. It was very difficult for me to get professional employment. So after that, I worked at almost volunteer jobs. I was really available for community organizations. And one of the things that I did was to run a summer job program for about fifty students with a, a grant from the Ralston-Purina Corporation from their foundation. We had students in, that we placed in black businesses so that they would get some mentoring and some real experience, like internships, but they were paid. And that was run under the Institute of Black Studies, which was the organization started by Dr. Robert Williams, the man who coined the term "Ebonics" and developed an intelligence test [the Black Intelligence Test of Cultural Homogeneity] that was very difficult for white people to score high on. Speaker 1: Oh, that's Robert L. Williams, right? Speaker 2: Yes, Robert L. Williams. He-- Speaker 1: 'Cause we, we have two famous-- Speaker 2: --was called-- Speaker 1: --Robert Williams. There's Robert F. Williams-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of "Negroes with Guns," Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: --NAACP activities. Speaker 2: Who was Julian Mayfield's very good friend. Speaker 1: And Robert L. Williams, who with [HM] Jack [Arnett] Kirkland founded-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --the Black Studies Department-- Speaker 2: And you've already interviewed Jack-- Speaker 1: --at Washington University [in St. Louis, Missouri] Speaker 2: --for HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And yes, the Institute of Black Studies was an organization that he founded, and he owned the building that it was located in, and with various scholars from Washington University [in St. Louis, Missouri] and St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri], they conducted research on aspects of black life. Story_ID: 101661 Speaker 1: Now tell me this, now this is--we interviewed [HM] Jack [Arnett] Kirkland, but he didn't get into detail about this. Speaker 2: Well, [HM] Jack [Kirkland] was--I don't know that Jack was on the board at that time. I don't think he was involved with this project. This was 1976, I think, that we had the summer job program with the students. And I don't recall that Jack was on the board. Wornie Reed, Robert Johnson, there were several scholars who, who-- Speaker 1: I guess what I'm asking is-- Speaker 2: --were on the board. Speaker 1: --how, now Robert L. Williams was at Washington University [in St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: That's correct, yeah. Speaker 1: But did he leave to form this [the Institute of Black Studies in St. Louis, Missouri], or was he still there? Speaker 2: No, no, he was doing, he had this while he was at Washington-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --University, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And he's the, he's the one that popularized the phrase "Ebonics" and-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --came up with the I.Q. tests for whites. Speaker 2: Yes, it was called the "Black Intelligence Test of Cultural Homogeneity" or "BITCH," for the acronym was BITCH. And this was a test that almost any black person could pass and score very high on and almost no white could, because it was culturally relevant to black people, and he was making the point that much of what is called I.Q. testing is really cultural knowledge testing. Speaker 1: Right, and this is serious business. Speaker 2: It was very serious. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --there, there now exist studies. There are voluminous studies about the cultural bias in testing. And as used, there was a discussion in Chicago [Illinois] recently about the Chicago police test and the Chicago fire test being culturally biased-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, and, and-- 1. And he showed-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that it was pretty easy to do. That, and that test almost no white people then could score about the level of what you could attribute to idiocy; you know, they would be morons without actually being morons. And the same thing is true with cult, test that are culturally biased against black people. We're all morons without being morons. And white people with normal cultural knowledge that they would have from growing up in a society that values their values would all be geniuses or close to it, at least average. So the institute, back in those days, was, was quite dynamic. And they did a number of studies that were relevant to the community. I don't know whether it's still functioning since Bob retired from Wash U[University]. And he's had some health challenges. I think he's enjoying himself playing golf now, but he did publish a book recently. I don't remember the title of it, but he's still doing some research in, in childhood education. So that was one of the things I did-- Story_ID: 101662 Speaker 1: We had our Homer G. Phillips Hospital, which was a public hospital opened, or built in 1936, which was closed by the city [in 1979], and it was a serious community struggle to maintain the hospital in operation. We lost that struggle, and then we-- Speaker 2: Now, now, now there was a, there was a city council member, I think a white city council member whose middle name became "Close Homer G. Phillips." What was his, what was his--do you remember who is? Speaker 1: Well, actually it was our mayor who-- Speaker 2: Was the mayor. Speaker 1: [James F.] Conway was the mayor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at the time. Speaker 2: Close Homer G. Phillips Conway. Speaker 1: And he, he was the one who had the courage to close it. It had taken quite a long time. The private hospitals really have opposed these public hospitals because of dollars. Are the dollars going to flow into the private hospitals? Are they going to be public hospitals competing for patients and money? So that was, that, that was core issue at the time, but we un, we understood that Homer Phillips had trained probably 70 percent of the African doctors in the country. Even 20 years after it was closed a, about 50 percent of the black doctors in the whole country had interned at Homer Phillips. So it had been-- Speaker 2: Close to-- Speaker 1: --along with Harlem Hospital [Center in Harlem, New York] and Cook County-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Chicago [now John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County in Chicago, Illinois], these were prime training grounds for black doctors to go into all of the specialties. Speaker 2: This is true. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean half the doctors I've, retired doctors I've interviewed interned at Homer G. Phillips. Speaker 1: Yeah, this was where they came. They could get all of the specialties. It was a, a good facility for its time. It was state of the art, so it was a great loss to the community to have it closed. And a group of us formed the Campaign for Human Dignity, and we collected signatures to get a citizen's initiative on an election ballot to try to get the hospital reopened. And we got a mayor elected, Mayor Vincent Schoemehl who promised that he was going to reopen the hospital. And so when the vote came up, many of our people believed that if the mayor was going to reopen the hospital, they didn't need to vote for the initiative petition. So we lost all of that, and of course, the mayor didn't reopen the hospital. One does wonder when people will stop believing (laughter) that some politicians are going to help them. But that was a very big effort, and I worked on that as running, helping to run the campaign and also as deputy treasurer. I kept all of the books for the money that we raised and spent. And so I did things like that, that didn't pay a lot of money, and of course had no benefits, but it kept some income coming. Story_ID: 101663 Speaker 1: In 1975, I went to Africa a couple of times with a friend named Dr. Emily Maliwa. She was a woman from Malawi whom I had met at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. She was working on her Ph.D., and I was doing my master's there, fiery little woman, and she had the idea of creating a Pan-African Research Council. She wanted very much to have a council that would be continent wide doing research on history and culture, on medical needs, all kinds of things relevant to Africa. And the first--she paid my way because I couldn't, didn't have a job. I couldn't afford to buy tickets even. But we went to the OAU [Organization of African Unity] Conference in Kampala [Uganda] in 1975. And there she met with the president of Libya, Muammar Gaddafi, who introduced her to Yasser Arafat, because she needed funding. She was willing to commit a good deal of her own money, which just came from her salary as a professor at John Jay College [of Criminal Justice] in New York [New York City, New York]. And I remember she wanted me to come up and meet Gaddafi and Yasser Arafat close to the time the conference was ending. But there had been an attempt on Idi Amin's life. He was the president of Uganda at the time, and he chaired this OAU meeting. And I told her, "No, we need to get our tickets fixed so that we can be sure we can leave here and get to Nairobi, because with the attempt on his life, I don't intend to be in Kampala when this conference is over because his smile is gonna disappear and people are going to be in trouble." And the reason that we were gonna have a difficult time getting out of the country was that there had been a coup in Nigeria. And all of the huge Nigerian delegation had come in on a, on a plane. But when they overthrew president or prime minister--I've forgotten what his title was--Yakubu Gowon, who was there-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --at the conference, the Nigerian government recalled the plane. So you had a hundred and some folks there (laughter) who needed another way out. And, and that was, it's, it's funny now, but it was quite serious then. When the day of the coup in Nigeria, when the news came, this whole delegation was sitting around in the lobby, and they were crying the blues because they didn't know whether they'd be able to go home, whether they would be jailed. When, when a coup took place in Africa you didn't know what was going to happen, if you had been a member of the overthrown government. By the next day when the Nigerian government had announced that nobody who was on the delegation was going to be tried for anything, even Gowon was not going to be tried, but the plane had to come home. Sitting around in, in the lounge with these same people who were crying the day before, and they were saying "Foolish boy. I tried to tell him he was going too far," talking about Gowon (laughter). "I tried to tell him he was going too far, but he wouldn't listen to anybody." They knew they were gonna be safe. But they also were gonna be trying to get out of Kampala on East African Airways. And East African Airways had not announced that they were gonna put anymore planes in there. And they were the only airline flying out of Kampala. Speaker 2: Now this is, to put this into context for someone watching this who doesn't know about Africa, Uganda's a long way from Nigeria, isn't it? Speaker 1: A very long way, and, and the, the fact that you had an extra hundred and twenty or thirty people or maybe even a larger delegation who were going to be looking for tickets on the same planes that everybody was looking for. And there are hundreds of people there at the conference. So Emily got very upset with me, but I would not get out of line when she told, when she came down and said, "come up and meet President Gaddafi and Yasser Arafat." I said, "Not to, not now, not until I get this ticket rewritten." So I stayed in line. I got my ticket fixed, and by that time her meeting with them was over. Gaddafi did indicate to her that he would be willing to support the work of the, of the Pan-African Research Council. But in the end nothing came of that, and unfortunately, Emily had to hire a car to get to Nairobi [Kenya] because she had not gotten her ticket fixed. And I couldn't do it for her. You had to handle your own tickets. So she had to rent a car to go to Nairobi, which was expensive. Story_ID: 101664 Speaker 1: With it, we [Windom and Emily Maliwa] went to Zambia; we went to several different countries where she talked with either heads of state or with university people. And all of the university people were eager to cooperate with this. They thought it [the Pan-African Research Council] was an excellent idea, and they were ready to cooperate with her, but the money never came. She later on made arrangements to visit Somalia where President Siad Barre had, she hoped, would intervene and make this link with [Muammar] Gaddafi. Because even though she had met Gaddafi, there hadn't been any settlement of when you might come to Tripoli [Libya] to really discuss this. So we wit--we went back to Africa later that same year [1975], and we spent a month in Somalia. And she was, she saw President Barre, but I was not able to meet with him, even though they, they had told us we had to wear white dress, long white dresses. But they said "She can't come. Alice cannot come because she's from the United States." And at that time, they were getting help and economic assistance from the Soviet Union. And so, the mere fact that I was from the United States meant that I was not able to meet with the president, although I knew the foreign minister, had known him in Ghana because he had been the Somali ambassador when I was working in Ghana. So that was a disappointment to me. But still, he was not, Siad Barre did not arrange for Emily to get back to a meeting with Muammar Gaddafi. And his government was overthrown, and the Americans moved in. So late--another year or two later--and I could be a little wrong on, on the time lapse--Emily went back to Somalia. I didn't go on that trip with her. She said by that time, the Americans were, were there. And she said it was just so chaotic because the Americans, she said they had, the hotel where we stayed in they had turned most of the Somali women that they met into prostitutes. Whereas the Russians had, you know, kept to themselves. But with the Americans it was just, just chaos and disaster because they, they had just were being licentious and cultivating promiscuity and drunkenness amongst the Somalis. And this was some years before the Americans went to Somalia to try to straighten out some stuff and ended up-- Speaker 2: Muhammad Farrah Aidid with that, that-- Speaker 1: --in a war, yeah. Speaker 2: --Black Hawk Down Incident--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the Black Hawk Down Incident, but this was long before that. And so, anyway, we, we spent time in Zambia. And did we go to Tanzania? No, I don't think we went to Tanzania together. She was never able to pull this off, but very brilliant, very dynamic-- Speaker 2: Now what's the name of-- Speaker 1: --woman. Speaker 2: --the idea again. I'm sorry, what's the-- Speaker 1: The Pan-African-- Speaker 2: Pan-African Speaker 1: --Research Council. Speaker 2: --Research Council, okay. Speaker 1: And she had written up the documents for it and really did have professors lined up across the continent. It was going to be university based in each cooperating country. But it's, it was very difficult to get a multilateral kind of organization going when she was just a, a professor herself, and a woman at that, and did not have a government fully backing her. Story_ID: 101665 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you this: do, do you think that--I mean what was the--I've heard--we've, we've interviewed ambassadors and the Dawsons [HM Horace G Dawson, Jr.], for instance, are over as part of the U.S. Foreign Service--(unclear)--there were ambassadors in, in Africa at one time. But they, they were--one of the, one of the topics of, of discussion that we've had with people in Foreign Service was the treatment of women in Africa or the, or the respect or lack of respect for women in Africa, I mean African women in Africa-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --by the--now how did--was she, did she [Emily Maliwa] have like a handicap, being an African woman going to Africa trying to get support? Speaker 2: She would have less clout than a man, but even a man who was not representing a government would not have been able to pull off what she was trying to pull off because she had a really big idea. And, and no individual could really have done that. She had--had she been able to get a government to back her or even say if the Organization of African Unity [OAU] had wanted to take it on as a project, it would have had a chance. But without that happening, there was no opportunity for it. In most African countries, the non-Muslim African countries, women were in Parliament far more than you had in the Unites States-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at the time. And women, the women counseled people for the municipalities or the townships. But the status of women is, was definitely subordinate to males, and it still is, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that the present, president of Liberia is the first woman elected to-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: --a presidency in Africa. Mrs. [Ellen] Johnson Sirleaf, she's the first woman elected president in Africa. Speaker 1: Now Liberia did have one of the first black women assigned to, to the UN, I think was Angie Brooks back in-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, years, years-- Speaker 1: --in the mid-seventies [1970s], yeah. Speaker 2: --and decades ago, yes. Speaker 1: Angie Brooks-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I remember that, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 101666 Speaker 1: But tell, tell me this now, you were just--I don't wanna throw you off your story, but there are two things that I wanna ask you about. In Uganda, did you run across Idi Amin's physician from Chicago [Illinois] who was--there was a man from Chicago [John M. Branion], a physician who was accused of killing his wife and actually escaped to Uganda and served as physician for Idi Amin for many years, eventually came back to the U.S. Speaker 2: I didn't meet him. Speaker 1: --this-- Speaker 2: I was only there-- Speaker 1: He's a, he's a relative of [HM] Oscar Brown, Jr.'s, I know that, but I, I can't-- Speaker 2: Okay. I was only there that, during that visit for the conference, and that was what we did. We stayed at the pavilion where they had the conference going on because Emily wanted to meet and talk to-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --delegates from as many countries as possible. But no, I don't think I ever even heard the story about this man. Speaker 1: Well, I have to talk about that later then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They even did-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --they did one of these TV show, "Unsolved Mysteries" about this-- Speaker 2: No kidding? Speaker 1: --the case. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: No, I didn't hear about that. Speaker 1: And it's, it's well known in Chicago--(unclear) you know. But the other question is did you, and you may be getting to this, but did you visit the chicken farmers in Tanzania, the African American-- Speaker 2: I did that-- Speaker 1: --colony that went over? Speaker 2: Well, I had done that before I left Africa in 1972, when I left, was traveling from Zambia. I went up to Tanzania and spent a few days there, and that was when I met the people who were from the states who had the chicken farm. And it was quite a big operation that they had, a com, it was a real commercial operation. And I met Queen Mother Moore there. That was the first time to meet her. Or, yeah, I met her first there, and then I met her I believe she was in Uganda for that OAU [Organization of African Unity] meeting [1975]. [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan was there; there were quite a few people from the States there. See, '75 [1975] was not long after Elijah Muhammad had passed away. Speaker 1: One year. Speaker 2: And, and you know, it was a year [sic, Elijah Muhammad died in February of 1975]. And so Minister Farrakhan was still what he later referred to as being in the wilderness, those seven years in wilderness. But he was there at that meeting, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Stokely Carmichael was there. There were quite, quite a few people from the States there. Story_ID: 101667 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, continue. This is a '75 [1975] trip. Speaker 2: Yeah, so, those two trips to Africa with Emily [Maliwa] were quite illuminating because I was hoping she could start that council. It would have done a lot of good for, for Africa. Speaker 1: So you went in '75 [1975] and, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, twice. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: We went twice in-- Speaker 1: --twice in '75 [1975]. Speaker 2: Yeah, twice in the same year. We came back to the States while she was making arrangements for another trip. She was a very dedicated sister. My understanding I lost touch with her, and I understanding that she's passed away. And I have got to get, get that really firmed up because she was a real African patriot. I remember when I first met her at International House in Chicago [Illinois]. That was where we lived. We were going to demonstrate over Lumumba's capture. This was within a few days of our finding out that [Prime Minister of the Congo] Patrice Lumumba had been murdered. And as we were getting ready to leave the building, there was an Englishwoman who was also a student and was living there who knew Emily was from Malawi, which was a British colony at the time. And this woman told Emily "You shouldn't go out to a demonstration like this. Remember, you are a British subject." And Emily told her, "No, if anything I'm a British object (laughter). I'm not a British subject, and you cannot tell me what to do." She was fiery (laughter). Speaker 1: "I'm a British object." Speaker 2: Yeah, "I'm a British object, if anything" (laughter). Speaker 1: That's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was a memorable meeting. I never forgot that about her. But I'm, I know that something has happened to her because I would certainly have heard from her. Story_ID: 101668 Speaker 1: But things as being fired by the city [St. Louis, Missouri] and not being able to get professional employment for an extended period let me do things like that and work with organizations that I would not have had time to do if I had been fully employed. Working in the jail the way I was, was very time consuming, at least six days a week, sometimes seven, because to run any programming for the residents I had to be there 'cause the guards would not let them out if we arrange for people from outside to come in and do some programming with them. The guards would not necessarily let them out of their cells so that they could go into the educational area for any programming, so I had, I had to be there, yeah. So in a way they did me a favor, both by freeing up my time and taking the street of, of a job that required that much work and that much time on task, yeah. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But it-- Speaker 2: Was it hard to make ends meet though during this time period? Speaker 1: I was, I was living at home with my mother [Frances Louise Jones Windom] who had a pension, and she, she handled bills. For six months I collected unemployment compensation, which was maybe $50-something dollars a week, and I enjoyed it. I found I could live on that, and, and I would say I was looking for a job. And I wasn't really looking for a job. I was enjoying myself and, and distressing from the, the, all of the, the turmoil. And the fighting had gone on before I actually got fired. Then I fa--as I said, I did these little part-time things. But the fact that I had a place to stay, and I really didn't have responsibility for a lot of bills, I've, I've not owned a car, and I just didn't have a lot of the expenses that people have when they live a regular life, yeah. So eventually, through the help of some of my political friends, I did get a, get a job with a health center. We had community health centers back in those days, and the Yeatman/Union-Sarah Community Corporation ran two health centers. And I worked in the Union-Sarah Health Center as director of their social services program. We helped patients who needed medication and couldn't afford it, who had other social problems, needed housing. We could make referrals for them and try to assist them in ways that would support the health care they were receiving from the medical staff. And so I had a staff of four or five social service technicians who were basically community people who knew board members. That's the way those places get staffed. Sometimes it was interesting. I hadn't worked in a medical facility before. We had, at that time, people were getting some free medication, quite a lot. You might have folks with a shopping bag full of medicine. They did not know how they were supposed to take it, just what it was for, because they were often elderly; they were not well-educated, and sometimes they would come into social services with bags full of medicine and ask us to help them sort it out, or they would come with papers from social security or other agencies. And they really could not read well enough to comprehend what these papers were about, so we would help them sort papers and determine what they needed to keep and what they could discard. Story_ID: 101502 Speaker 1: So, so we're about, we're, we're with the, the Yeatman, the Sarah House-- Speaker 2: Yeatman/Union-Sarah [Health Center in St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 1: Yeatman, yeah. Speaker 2: And I enjoyed that. I kept that for, I think that was probably two or three years. The Health Center had medical, mental health services, and social services. And I used to try to tell my staff, though, that they needed to be looking at going back to school. I said "if you go outside this building, which is in, on Delmar, just east of Euclid, it says some kind of cleaning and laundry. That's what this was built for. And right now, there's a sign, a temporary sign that says 'Health Center.' But one day that will be gone, and the building may be demolished, or it'll be something else. And you need to try to get some education." The corporation initially offered tuition reimbursement, but they made the mistake of giving the people the money on the front end, when they should have waited until they actually completed a semester. And so people messed that up by taking the money and then dropping courses and dropping out of school. So within a few years that was no longer available to staff at the Health Center. And of course, the Health Center eventually did lose its funding just like those programs around the country. There used to be community health centers everywhere. And if they weren't able to get some separate funding, almost all of them are gone now. The, our mental health survived because they became a separate entity, like Bobby Wright's health center in Chicago [Bobby E. Wright Comprehensive Behavioral Health Center in Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --which I guess--is Carl Bell still there, [HM] Dr. Carl Bell? Speaker 1: No, he's at another one actually. He at-- Speaker 2: Okay, but he took over after Bobby died. He was running the community mental health center here. Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he runs another one now on the-- Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause-- Speaker 1: --South Side and a Mrs.--a Dr. [Lucy Lang-] Chappell run's the Bobby Wright-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --Mental Facility. Speaker 2: Well, that was the same kind of health, mental health center that we had here. And Bobby, in fact, we went up to Chicago and met with him. He helped us get this set up, and then he came down and did some in-service for us here in St. Louis, another great person who passed away too young. Speaker 1: Right, he passed in '81 [1981] [sic, 1982], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in Chicago for the Association of Black Social Workers Conference, and he was on the program scheduled to do a workshop the day after he died. And so we, most of us hadn't even known that he was ill. And so when the news came that he had died, that was a big shock. Speaker 1: Just for the record, what would you, what is your assessment of Dr. Bobby Wright? What did he offer in terms of an analysis that, you know, was unique and okay? Speaker 2: Well, his concept of menticide was highly popular, popularized when he talked about the mental destabilization of black people coming up from slavery and through the brutalization of segregation and just the constant pressure of life in the United States, which is extremely stressful, even today for conscious black people. And he coined that term "menticide" to, to describe what had happened. He also in the mental health treatment area talked about and developed protocols for a culturally sensitive and relevant treatment of black people's mental disturbances. He was very energetic; he was charismatic; he was a good teacher. Yeah, he was quite an outstanding person. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanted to get that in there about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah, he, yes. Speaker 1: But, Dr. Bobby E. Wright. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now- Story_ID: 101503 Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were you at the, at the [Yeatman/Union-Sarah] Health Center [in St. Louis, Missouri] when you were there? Speaker 2: That was, that job lasted until, I think it was about three years, then I transferred from social services. We opened a, a mental health center, and I've helped to write the proposal and some of the protocols, administrative protocols for that effort. And, and then we, conflict arose when it was time to write a new grant, a renewal grant that was going to let us really operate. Our board got into a heated conflict with our director and the associate director, or the psych, the, the director of the psychological services. And it became so bitter that we knew they were going to fire Rodney Robinson, who was our director. And even, it was right at the point when we were writing the new grant they actually broke into the offices. Board members broke into the offices at night. And the next day there was a claim that there'd been a robbery, but the computers were still there, the typewriters, everything was still there. Only drawers were broken open, file cabinets were broken open, so we knew they had been searching for the grant, in hopes that they would be able to get somebody other than Rodney to sign off on it and they could fire him. Well, a group of us had made a pact that if they did fire Rodney, we would quit. And the head of the board came to me and asked me if I would be willing to take over the job if Rodney was no longer there. I said, "No, oh, of course not; that will never happen." Well, they did fire him, and three of us did quit. Another two stayed, even though they had been part of the pact. They, they said when it came right down to it, it's not easy to, to just leave a job when you don't have another one. But three of us did quit, and I think I might have been the only one who actually had no job, because we had a professor at Washington U [Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri] who was working with us part time. And that, and no, I think one other person didn't. Oh, no, the psychologist did have a private practice. But I was once again with no (laughter), with no job. And it took awhile to get another. Yeah, that took awhile. But I ended up back in that same building some years later with another organization that was, a private organization that was running a rehab service. Story_ID: 101504 Speaker 1: But meanwhile, I worked for the Booker T. Washington Foundation out of Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: So what, what year is this now? Speaker 1: Oh, do you know things are fading, things are fading. I cannot--nineteen-- Speaker 2: It has to be in the eighties [1980s]. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981], eighty-two [1982]-- Speaker 2: Now were you, now Bobby [E. Wright] died in '81 [1981] [sic, 1982]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Were you still with the [Yeatman/Union-Sarah] Health Center, or were you with the Booker T. Washington Foundation. Speaker 1: I might have been in between jobs then, because I, I joined-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the Black Social Workers in 1975, and I'm still a member. That's an organization very dear to my heart. So I was in the Black Social Workers throughout. The Booker T. Washington Foundation had a, a nationwide contract with the Defense Department to try to increase minority-owned business participation, minority-owned and women-owned business participation in defense contracting. So I had an office in the old Sears Building wear, which is now the Victor Roberts Building [St. Louis, Missouri] that Steve and Mike HM Steven Roberts, Sr and HM Michael Roberts, Sr.] own. And I, I think I-- Speaker 2: So now how did you--was there, was it through a political association with-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --Congressman Clay. Speaker 1: Congressman Clay [HM William Clay, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I-- Speaker 1: Yes, congressman, each congressman was able to recommend somebody in his or her district to run the office because they had offices in just about every city where there was a black congressperson. And I was the person that Bill Clay recommended to run the office here. I had worked in his campaigns too in the '70s [1970s]. And he was a great congressman. He was really extraordinary. Story_ID: 101505 Speaker 1: So I had to study and write reports on all of the businesses that were owned by blacks in St. Louis [Missouri]. I did very few women-owned businesses that were white-owned because they just didn't come forward for the program. We tried to market and let people know it was available, but at that time, we had so few black businesses that were out of the receipts in the shoebox operation that we just did not have--the people we had who were eligible to do government business were already getting government contracts. I was not able to get a single person, a new business, a contract. And that was very, that was really frustrating because the foundation people in Washington did not understand, even though they, they had all my reports. I had profiled almost every business in town. And, and I said, "We've got some people who, who can do government, but they're doing it. Of the folk who are not able who are not already getting those contracts, their businesses are too small. If you get a Defense Department contract, that's, you need to be (laughter) really functioning as a, a corporation." So eventually--I think that contract nationwide lasted about four years, then it was lost. But it wasn't failure that killed it, even though they never, the foundation never came right out and said it, and it might have taken them sometime to figure out what happened, it was success that killed the contract nationwide. What happened was that there was an electronics contract. I think the Chicago [Illinois] office was the prime office on that. I believe they were. They had a, a contractor who was eligible to handle this. It was like a $32 million dollar contract--to make sure--and, and they were working with a contracting officer from DOD [Department of Defense] who believed the rhetoric. They said, "Wherever there is an eligible minority or women-owned business in competition for these contracts, they get the contract, even though some large firms may be vying for it." This poor fellow believed that he, that's what he was supposed to do. So he worked with this company in Chicago. He also matched them with some other minority-owned businesses. I think there was one in New York and one somewhere else because none of them had by themselves the capability of handling this contract. So he put together I think three black-owned firms. But General Electric was also vying for that contract, and when they did not get it, well, they just went berserk. And at one point--now this, see, this is a long time ago, so $32 million dollars was worth a lot more than it is now. At one point we were brought to Washington [D.C.]. All of the people who were running the offices were brought in for a training session. And one of the people who talked to us was this poor fellow who had been the contracting officer who was a major in the service, who had left the Army because a ton of bricks fell on him when he had gotten this contract for these black firms. He, he still didn't know what hit him. But he had come to work for Booker T. Washington Foundation to shepherd this contract through, to see it all the way through. And as he talked to us, you could see the pain. He was almost in tears because he didn't understand that he was not actually supposed to have done what (laughter), what he did, that the rhetoric was just that, and he had taken it seriously (laughter). And you know, you run into white people like this from time to time who haven't really understood the game and who thought that, you know, we're supposed to be decent people, and, and there isn't supposed to be discrimination, and, and you know, we can help the black people. Well, that's what had happened to this guy, and his career was over after that. And then, the next time the contract came up for renewal, the whole deal, the contract, they didn't renew it. And so I figured this out. It took a long time. I said, "We didn't lose that because people were like me and not able to get contracts. We could have done that probably for decades (laughter) and not gotten contracts." It was success that killed the program. But that was, it was very interesting. Story_ID: 101506 Speaker 1: The guy from Seagram's [The Seagram Company]. He's a vice president of Seagram's, black man, who's the brother of Jackie Robinson's widow [Rachel Robinson]. And I can't remember his name now, but anyway, he was chairman of the board of the Booker T. Washington Foundation. And I got a chance to meet some people in the business world that I would not have met otherwise. There was a dinner that they set up to honor black businesspeople, including [Atlanta Mayor] Maynard Jackson, who had done so much for black business in Atlanta [Georgia] with, with Hartsfield Airport [now Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport] and getting, insisting on 50 percent of the contracts going to blacks, rather than 10 percent, which was the original figure that they had talked about. He said "Oh no, no, no, we want 50 percent," and they got 50 percent. So I had a chance to meet him there and later on in Atlanta when I was down there for one of the national black arts festivals. And [HM] Maya Angelou gave a party, she, at her home in Atlanta, and he was there. So I had a chance to tell him that I thought he had done so much for black business around the country with what he did at the airport. And he told me something I had not heard up to then, that not only did we do 50 percent of the building of the airport, but we now own over 50 percent of the concessions in the airport. And he told me about all the concessionaires there who were African American, so his contribution was, was outstanding, absolutely outstanding. So through the foundation I got a chance to meet some people like that. But they really did feel like I should have been able--in fact, one time the director told me if you don't have business there that are qualified to take these contracts, you should create them. I said "With what?" (laughter) Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: But I understood there was just frustration there, you know. Speaker 2: So-- Story_ID: 101507 Speaker 1: So this takes us to the mid--we're in the mid-'80s [1980s] now I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: We're, we're in the mid-'80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And during that time, I--after that, I worked for the University of Missouri [St. Louis, Missouri]. And I got that job because Dr. Marguerite Ross Barnett, who came here in 1986, I believe, to head up the university, asked Pearlie Evans, the, the last donut on the plate I was showing you (laughter) in those photographs, who was [HM] Congressman [William] Clay's district assistant, to give her the names of two or three people who had been activists in the community and who had had difficulty attaining steady employment because of that. And my name was one that Pearlie gave her. So she hired me and Norman Seay, another person that I recommended, I've nominated for HistoryMakers. And I've worked for the university coordinating first a program to get high school students prepared to go to college and major in math and science areas and then running a center named after the father [James Thomas Bush] of [HM] Margaret Bush Wilson, another person you interviewed here. And, and that center, the [James T.] Bush Center, I was able to sponsor lectures with Dr. Ben [HM Yosef ben-Jochannan] and Dr. [John Henrik] Clarke, and I was able to bring in several people, Charles Finch. Have you, you know Finch, don't you? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah from Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yes, yes-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the-- Speaker 2: --all--I, I brought-- Speaker 1: --physician. Speaker 2: --in as many ASCAC people as I could, James Brunson came in; Runoko Rashidi. Story_ID: 101508 Speaker 1: Well, well, tell us about your involvement in ASCAC. Now, ASCAC was formed in eighty--well, it was assembled first in '84 [1984] and then-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --formally established in '85 [1985]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But, so how did you get involved in ASCAC? Speaker 2: Well, I heard about ASCAC in '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: And it stands for the-- Speaker 2: The Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations. I first heard about it when they were marketing the Egypt conference, which was Return to the Black Land. And I said well, I've got to go to this, because Egypt, I'd been back and forth to Egypt every year when I worked in Ethiopia. And I had gotten interested in, really interested in the ancient African history, partly for Van, Ivan van Sertima's work. His book entitled "They Came Before Columbus" was an inspiration, which I read when I knew he was coming to a lecture at the University of Missouri, St. Louis. This is before I went to work for the university. This was 1983. I think he came at the invitation of the student association, the Black Student Association. And the next year I was listening to Bob Long's radio program out of New York and heard Dorothy Anderson and (unclear) Grant say that they were going to have a tour of Mexico, which Dr. van Sertima was going to lead. So I called them the next day to say, "Can I get on this tour?" And they said "If you can get us, I think it was like $800.00, within the next week, we, you'll have time to get on the trip." And I had a check for just about that amount in, in IRS refunds still sittin' in the drawer. I hadn't even gone to the bank. And I said well, this is your destiny, so I went on that trip. It was my first time ever to travel with a group. Traveling with a group was scary to me. I like traveling by myself, but this was so great, to have van Sertima doing lectures and going to these archaeological sites and seeing these magnificent statues and the little tiny Terra cottas of African people that, you know, dates back 3,000 years. It was absolutely life changing. And I did a lot of photography, and I started to offer lectures on, on the Olmec. Because, even though [Joel Augustus] J.A. Rogers had written a little bit about the Olmec decades before, people just didn't know about this. And so, and it's so exciting to see the rulers, that clear evidence of African rulership in this hemisphere. Speaker 1: Now, now when did you first go to see the Olmec--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-four [1984]. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-four [1984], okay. Speaker 2: Yes, that was the-- Speaker 1: So this is before-- Speaker 2: --first trip. Speaker 1: --your involvement with ASCAC--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, this is before. So, so that primed me for ASCAC. Story_ID: 101509 Speaker 1: And when I heard about this trip to Egypt I had, I, I decided I had to go. I had injured myself in 1986, falling off a bus. I broke my knee in two places. I had had to have surgery. I've got a steel plate in here now. And I spent months just lying in bed trying to heal this. And I knew that David DuBois, or I figured David DuBois would let me visit in his home. So I asked him, I said "If I come to Egypt now, can I spend an extra week in your flat," 'cause I knew he had this wonderful apartment that Shirley [Graham DuBois] had bought when she went to Egypt after the coup in Ghana, when she had to leave Accra. And I knew he had plenty of bedrooms, two full bathrooms so that if he didn't have another guest, I would not be a problem staying them. And he said, "Sure, come on." So I, when I interviewed at the university [University of Missouri-St. Louis], I told Dr. [Marguerite] Ross Barnett that I would be going--she wanted me to start within two or three months before the conference in Egypt. I said, "Well, I can start, but I've got to go to Egypt, and then I'll resume when I come back. And if--I hope that's all right." But, you know, if it wasn't all right, I wasn't gonna take the job. And she said yeah, that's fine. So that, I just enjoyed that conference so much. It was just fantastic. Even though I had been to Egypt before, maybe five times, I had not had the background to understand the African history of, of the sites. I just didn't know at that time. And so learning from Dr. Ben [HM Yosef ben-Jochannan] and from [HM Jacob H.] Caruthers [Jr.] and all the other people on that trip who knew so much, was just wonderful, just wonderful. And we had a, a study group here in St. Louis, which we got started right after that conference 'cause there were several folk from St. Louis on the conference. And-- Speaker 2: What was the name of your group here? Speaker 1: We just called ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] St. Louis Chapter, and now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --now there's a, a new group that had started because that one, after a few years, kind of faded away. And they call it Sabayon [ph.] I think. I have not gotten involved with that one. But we just call ourselves the St. Louis Chapter of ASCAC. And quite--we had a few pro, good programs and quite a lot of people learned a lot from that. ASCAC is a ec, a wonderful organization, or it has the potential I think to become wonderful, even though we've lost several people with J. Caruthers' death and [HM] Asa Hilliard [III] and Roosevelt Brown. We've lost-- Speaker 2: Roosevelt-- Speaker 1: --several people. Speaker 2: Roberts (unclear), yeah, and-- Speaker 1: Roberts, yes. We've lost several people-- Speaker 2: --Listervelt Middleton's-- Speaker 1: --who made real-- Speaker 2: --a lot, yeah. Speaker 1: --contributions to ASCAC, yeah. Story_ID: 101510 Speaker 1: Is there a particular highlight of that trip [to Egypt] that you remember? I mean what, what, what do you think the high point was of that trip in '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: Going into the Valley of the Kings for me, in addition to the lectures. We had really good, good lectures, but going into the Valley of the Kings, which I had not done before. All my previous trips to Egypt had concentrated on Cairo, and I never really traveled anywhere else except to Alexandria, oh, and going to Hatshepsut's temple and into Tutankhamun's tomb, those, those were highlights for me, yeah, really spectacular. To see the modernity of Hatshepsut's temple is, is, I mean it could have been built five years ago. It's a beautiful structure. And I had read a lot about the discovery of Tutankhamun's tomb, so that was very powerful, going into there. And you know, recently now they have put the mummy on display. And so we can now see Tutankhamun's face, what remains of it. And it's a face you will see anywhere in Sudan or Somalia. If you go, this is, this is the face, not from Greece or Rome, but from the Somalia, Sudan, Ethiopia. It's that physiognomy that, up to today, is still common in the streets of those places. And it was also very interesting that we had over 800 people on that trip. It was the largest tour group that Egypt had ever had. And, and they were really happy to see us because 800 people bring a lot of money. And we were welcomed; we were treated beautifully. It was, it was inspiring. What did we have, 16 buses or 18 buses of people that--so it was just, it was a wonderful trip. I thoroughly enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Okay, so in, so you started working at the University of Missouri at St. Louis [Missouri] after you came back from-- Speaker 2: Well, I worked for a little while-- Speaker 1: --your trip. Speaker 2: --before we went. And then I took that break, and I did spend my week in David's [Davis DuBois] apartment, which is a, a big building on the opposite side of the Nile. It's on right, it's in Giza; it's right at the border. And you come out of that building, and walk across the street, and walk down three or four steps, and you can sit and put your feet in the Nile, 'cause it's that's, that's where the building is located. I don't what has happened since David died in 9--in 2005. I have no idea what happened to the apartment or to his memorabilia, because people wanted that apartment. He had people who lived on the back side of the building who did not have the Nile view. One had offered him a million dollars just to change, switch apartments so that they would have the Nile view. And he had to go back a couple of times. He was living in Amherst [Massachusetts] and working at the University of Massachusetts. But he had certain residence requirements in Egypt that he had fulfill not to lose that apartment. So he had had to make a couple of trips back to go to court because the people were trying to get him out of the apartment. And the landlord wanted the apartment for his family, so that they could build--the family would have the top two floors of the building. Story_ID: 101669 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, we're in 1987 or so now? Speaker 2: That was 1987. Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987], yeah. So-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --well, you were telling us that you coordinated certain activities, lectures and, and at the University of-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --Missouri at St. Louis. Speaker 2: --able to do a, about thirteen altogether, including I did one on Mexico and the African heritage in Mexico. But I had [HM] Dr. [Yosef] ben-Jochannan, Dr. [John Henrik] Clarke, [Charles] Finch, Yan Karu [ph.]. You know Karu? Speaker 1: Yeah, Yan Karu. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He used to be at Northwestern--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right. He came and he's, he's an outstanding lecturer. James Brunson did two for me. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was at Northern Illinois University [DeKalb, Illinois], yeah. Speaker 2: Un-huh, is he still there? Speaker 1: He kept, I, I believe he was on-- Speaker 2: I'm not-- Speaker 1: --some sort of sabbatical last time I-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I know, but he-- Speaker 2: He's done-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --outstanding work on the African presence in Asia. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And he did, I saw him lecture in Egypt. And that was, the people I invited were people that I had heard. I had heard Yan Karu years before, but I try to get as many of the ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] people as I could. And the reception in St. Louis was quite good. And with each lecture, I had a contract signed to be able to sell the tapes of the lectures. And that was one of the ways that I tried to raise a little money for the program. And I had Dr. Sylvia Boone from Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut]. Speaker 1: Oh, Sylvia Ardyn Boone, who-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --wrote a travel book about how to travel in Africa, right. Speaker 2: "West African Travels." Speaker 1: "West African Travels." Speaker 2: I'm so glad you know about it. She was a very dear friend from our days in Ghana. She was, she was in Ghana with me. And I talked to her literary executor a couple of weeks ago. And Random House was willing to send her back to West Africa to redo the accommodations and shopping sections of the book. Her cultural essays are still strong, but her health was, was not robust enough to let her undertake that trip. So Vera Wells, who's her literary executor, and I were talking about the possibility of trying to recommend somebody else to do that for Random House so that that book can come back into print. Speaker 1: How about you? I mean you seem like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, it would need to be somebody who was bilingual, French-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and English. Sylvia had lived in, what did, where was she in Guinea or Senegal. She was bilingual, so she could handle the French. And, and much of the, many of the countries that she covered were the Francophone West African countries. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So the person would need that capability, which I definitely don't have, despite classes, private tutorials, small groups. When I went into a French-speaking country, would eat ham sandwiches three times a day because all I could remember was "jambon" (laughter). That's all I could ask for. So no, I, I, I wouldn't be the one. But that book is so powerful because it will still today teach a person who wants to travel in West Africa how to behave yourself so that the African people will think you were civilized. Then she wrote "Radiance from the Waters, Ideals of Feminine Beauty in Mende Art." That's still print. And it's a wonderful book on an African aesthetic of desirable traits in a woman, both external and interior, in terms of culture, and character, personality, and cultural traits. Story_ID: 101670 Speaker 1: So she [Sylvia Ardyn Boone] did a lecture for me, and, and I made the mistake of relying on her oral agreement to allow her lecture to be videotaped and audiotaped. And when she got here she said, "I don't think I want the lectures taped." And I didn't have a contract signed. (Unclear), had I had a contract, I would have held her to it. And that was the on, she was the only person that I didn't get a contract from. And I did not know that she was going to at the last minute say that she wouldn't give agreement, so there's no tape of, of the outstanding lecture she gave. Sylvia was, was quite obese, and she did not like to be photographed as, as a grown person. And I, I, she had let me photograph her a couple of times, but that's why she didn't want the videotaping done. It wasn't because of her slides. She used wonderful slides, and she did the dual projector presentation, beautiful lectures. She did one on, on, on beauty, 'cause she, she was a scholar on beauty. And I, no, I can't remember the other topic. She did the both in the same day. Now she did, got her Ph.D. the same year she published "West African Travels." Now you just don't do that (laughter) (unclear), you just (unclear)--that people just can't write a book and get a Ph.D. in a different field in the same year. So she was--the people at Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] loved her. Speaker 2: And tremendous-- Speaker 1: And she was invited-- Speaker 2: --capacity is what you're saying. Speaker 1: --to be on the faculty. She's a brilliant, brilliant woman. So she was on the faculty at Yale until she died, and she died prematurely because, partly because she was not treated with respect by the medical practitioners at Yale. They, they have an excellent medical benefits for their staff and faculty. But they didn't treat with respect, and it was both racial and physical. She felt it was more because she was so big. And she got to a point where she said she'd rather die than go to them for treatment, and in the end that's what happened to her. Speaker 2: A sad story. Speaker 1: Yeah, she did, she died. She had an apparently, a longstanding heart condition that she might not even have known that she had. But she left those two books. And "Radiance" [Radiance from the Waters, Ideals of Feminine Beauty in Mende Art"] is still in print. There was a Mende man from Sierra Leone in the audience when she lectured here. And he was just amazed, because she learned Mende. That was her Ph.D. research that was the basis for that book. She learned Mende. She really knew the culture, and this man was so amazed that she understood his people so well. It's a wonderful book, wonderful book. Speaker 2: Thank you, 'cause this is another-- Speaker 1: Wonderful book. Speaker 2: --scholar that has flow under the radar that people-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --don't understand the significance of-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But Sylvia Ardyn Boone-- Speaker 1: Yes, her-- Speaker 2: --was a scholar. Speaker 1: --Vera Wells, who was a, a student of Sylvia's, Vera was in the first class of women at Yale. And so she met Sylvia while she was a student, and they became very close friends. And when Sylvia died, Vera was just determined that she wouldn't be forgotten. And so she as formed the Sylvia Ardyn Boone Memorial Project. She has instituted a prize in Sylvia's name at Yale, and that prize is open to students in any department. And then she also, from her own funds, she's funding the, the prize and a scholarship in Sylvia's name. And then she does, she's had conferences, and she's done other things to try to keep her name before the public. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, she would, she, yes, you're right. She was under the radar, but she did outstanding, very conscientious work. Speaker 2: Yeah, I sort of came across the book accidently. When I read it, it captivated, you know. Speaker 1: And before she died, Vera was telling me that there was some guy who had taken her cultural essays and was acting as though they were his own work and was going around the country giving lectures on, on this, to prepare people for the cultural contact of going to Africa. And she was furious, but she didn't have time to do anything about it. Yes she-- if you go to, to New Haven, and go into the cemetery there's a--it's a Yale cemetery. There's a beautiful, she has a beautiful headstone with a picture of the Sande mask. When, in her book "Radiance" she deals with the Sande mask in the women's societies and initiation ceremonies. Because that, in Sierra Leone the women wear this, use this Sande mask, and it's one of the few instances in Africa where women use the wooden masks. And-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and there is an etching of, of Sande mask on her-- Speaker 2: Let me ask you this, as, as a woman-- Speaker 1: --gravestone. Story_ID: 101671 Speaker 1: As a woman, as an African American woman who's traveled in Africa for many, many years, how do you--is there--what have you learned about the position of women in Africa that is, could be useful for African American, you know, today, yeah? Speaker 2: Well, when you deal with, with people whose cultures have not been completed smashed and, and reorganized by other people, you, you see that there is, where the families are intact. And this is one of the big things in Africa, first thing you, you find out, family is everything. Now, family has different definitions. It may, they may be a polygamist family with a man having more than one wife, or it may be a nuclear family. But the relationship and the care for the children is so strong no matter how poor the people are. They are struggling to take care of their children. And women have a role in the family as bringers of peace. They are nurturers. They may have to support children in, in a, in a polygamist family. The woman will be supporting her children as well as helping to take care of common property of the husbands. The roles of women in different societies vary quite a bit, with a big distinction being made between Islamic cultures and non-Arabized traditional African cultures where the women had clearly a place of, of high respect, where the creation mythology has the deification of males and females. There's no such thing as a male god by himself like Christianity posits, a man-- Speaker 1: Or, or Islam. Speaker 2: --a son, and a ghost, which is also masculine (laughter). Put the three of them on an island, and you could never have a baby (laughter); no babies would emerge from this, this construct. But the patriarchal realis, religions, Judaism, Islam, and Christianity have mythology that is anti-female, and that establishes dominance for the male quite in a ridiculous fashion, in my view, because human society is based on the joining of male and female. It's not based just on women, and it's not based just on men. So my own view, as I think we discussed before, is that this is so absurd I can't even imagine why it's lasted so long (laughter). But in Africa the creation myths all deal with male and female. I never heard of one where there was one sex elevated above the other. So, the cultural influence of religions that view both sexes as having an irreplaceable part to play, these, these are more healthy cultures. But they've been now tampered with, even though in West Africa the European contact didn't completely smash the cultures, there's been an alteration. And Arabs, when they converted people to Islam, one of the things they complained about was the freedom that the Africa women had. So that was, part of their mission was to put the African female into a more submissive role than she was carrying before the, the Arab incursions into Africa. Story_ID: 101672 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you were at the University of Missouri [St. Louis, Missouri]. How, how many years have you-- Speaker 2: I, I stayed there till I was sixty-two years old, which was ten years ago. I'll be seventy-two in three months, and-- Speaker 1: We got you at 1997. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so and I, and I left then. I, I was worn out. I was completely worn out. And probably suffering from a, a mild depression. As I look back now, I've got, you know, packets of mail that I never opened, telephone message cassettes I never listened to, just, I was not functioning then. So I was time for me to come out and-- Speaker 1: Now what happened? Speaker 2: --at, at 62. Speaker 1: Can you tell us what, what happened, or, or is-- Speaker 2: Just a, a combination of, of what--when I broke my knee, that, that was very debilitating. And I was in pain almost constantly for about ten years. And then, you know, you keep on healing and eventually I said oh, this knee is not hurting me. I know it's still there, and I can feel, I can, I can't predict the weather, but I can tell you when it's raining without looking out the window from it. So I went through ten years of, of a kind of a low grade constant pain from that. My mother [Frances Louise Jones Windom] died in 1992. My father's [John Henry Windom, Sr.] cousin, who was the only relative of his outside of his mother [Mary Davis Windom] and grandmother that I've ever know, who came to live with us after he had cancer surgery, got very sick. Within months after my mother died and we had to put him in a nursing home, he eventually died. There-- a lot of things, you know, were just happening, and I, I was working very hard with a number of organizations, just wore out, just wore out, and was not in functioning well. And then looking at the condition that black folk are in and, and just the low level of so many of our folk was very depressing. I said after all of the effort that, you know, thousands of people put into trying to improve conditions and succeeding in improving conditions for our people in this country, we get to a point where 70 percent of babies are being born to unmarried women. Come on, this is a sign of near total collapse. And, and the prisons, they cannot build prisons fast enough to accommodate the black people that they're putting in prison. They're able to pass culturally biased laws and make activities that are more typical in the black community criminal offenses and get away with this kind of stuff, that this is going on. And then in, in beloved Africa there is so much conflict going on. People are suffering and with grim poverty. So this all of this, the political things as well as the personal things just became overwhelming. [Nelson] Mandela's getting free in '91 [1991] was about the best thing (laughter) that had happened in a long time, you know. But there wasn't a lot of encouraging signs of progress. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: And I always had wanted to see progress. Speaker 1: Now- Story_ID: 101673 Speaker 1: Now did you retire or what happened? Speaker 2: Well, I actually just, I can't say I had a neat (unclear) retirement. I just quit going to work and, and really just had no motivation. Finally, somebody got in touch with my brother and said look, if your sister wants to get her pension, she'd better come on in here and fill out some papers. The program that I was working with, we didn't have funding. I was the only staff person, didn't even have a secretary. And so to sponsor those lectures, I had been able to get--the chancellor had given me some money one year, and I spent all of that on the lectures. And from one other program I had gotten some money, and we had more lectures. But there was no stable source of funding. One of my legislator friends had told me look, at if the university [University of Missouri in St. Louis, Missouri] will put the [James T.] Bush Center in the bud, university budget, we'll find it. But the university had a whole lot of more priorities. This was not a priority at all. Once Marguerite Ross Barnett had left the University of Missouri and went to become the president of the University of Houston [Houston, Texas], the commitment to programs for black folk left with her, we can say. And in terms of raising money in the St. Louis community amongst the corporations, we were told you can't do this without going through the university fundraising department. And they're not gonna let you do fundraising to Anheuser-Busch and Ralston [Ralson Purina Company] and the big companies here, because the university priorities will, other priorities will come first. So I told him, I said look, I, I don't--I know how to spend money. I have never had to raise money on a job. And so you need people who have those grant writing skills who can look around the country and see who might have a few dollars lying around that we can get, and I'm not the person who can do that. So my hope was that they would bring in somebody who was younger and who had those skills. They haven't hired, they never had hired, even hired a replacement. So I filled out my papers and started to get my pension and my social security when I turned sixty-two. Story_ID: 101674 Speaker 1: And, and really, I did not--I would say I was still really depressed until after my house caught fire in 2001. And I went to live with my brother and sister-in-law. Speaker 2: Now tell us about the fire. Now what, what happened now-- Speaker 1: I had--(unclear)--I was out of the house when it happened. I was actually at, at a casino and was staying overnight at the casino downtown [St. Louis, Missouri]. And when I came home, I could smell the smoke. I ride the bus and I had a block to walk, I could smell that smoke. And I knew there had been a fire somewhere, then I got, and there was my house boarded up. Luckily, my nephew who lives next door was at home, and he came out and told me, gave me an idea what to expect when I got in the house, 'cause I was just about to fall out. What had happened was that--(unclear)--a, an extension cord had overheated and caught fire in my library. But I said, "I know I turned off the appliances that were connected to that." I'd had a heater and a little television set on that. I said, "I turned those off before I left the house." And the arson investigator from the fire department confirmed that those appliances were turned off. It was about three nights later I woke up in the middle of the night, and I said the toothbrush charger. I had an Oral B electric toothbrush, and that charger is always on, you know this, and I said that had to be what it was 'cause it was nothing else connected to it. And, and the fire was not at the wall end. It was at the appliance end. And I said it had to the toothbrush charger. I will never buy (laughter) another electric toothbrush or leave a charger in, connected for an appliance that has one of those always on chargers. Speaker 2: Now, now did you lose a significant amount of material? Speaker 1: It was my library, and so I had, you know, wall-to-wall and floor-to-ceiling bookcases. And I lost hundreds and hundreds of books. I, I managed to go through the, through the--the pile of debris was like two feet tall. And I went through it, took stuff out, outside and went through to try to make a list of the books that I had lost. And, and, and it filled like ninety-some pages in a spiral notebook, one of the stenographer's notebook. Yeah, yeah, I lost a lot, but that, the fact I had so many books and magazines in that room kept the fire busy. There was so much paper in that one room that the, I didn't lose the whole building. And the adjoining rooms suffered some fire damage, but not severe. I didn't lose everything in the adjoining rooms. And I didn't even lose all my books. I've still got probably more books than the average 10 or 15 homes you would go into of college educated people (laugher), because I had books in the basement and books on all the floors. It's a three-story house, so a lot of stuff survived. And my bookcases had books too deep in them, so the books on the outer side all burned. And everything that was on the top of the bookcases all burned up. I had the history, that revised History of Africa, United Nations. I had seven, I think I may have had eight volumes of that. Speaker 2: The UNESCO. Speaker 1: My, yeah, the UNESCO-- Speaker 2: History of African-- Speaker 1: --History of Africa-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: My [Marcus] Garvey papers, I was buying those a volume at a time. And I had about, I think I had-- Speaker 2: (Unclear) Bobby Hill [Robert A. Hill] release, yeah. Speaker 1: --four volumes of the Garvey papers, and they were all really on top of the bookcase, burnt to a crisp, not even a few pages survived. And I think it's because on the top, the, the, the wooden sides of the bookcase I think absorbed some of that fire. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But what was on top, everything just is comp, was completely gone. Speaker 2: But you, but you didn't lose your home, you, you-- Speaker 1: Didn't lose the house. Story_ID: 101675 Speaker 1: Oh, it-- Speaker 2: Now, let, let me, let me ask you this, now since, now you've been basically retired since '97 [1997] then you're saying? Speaker 1: Oh yes. Speaker 2: Have you been able to travel since that time? Have you gone-- Speaker 1: Well, the house-- Speaker 2: --to Mexico-- Speaker 1: --once-- Speaker 2: --or, or, or Africa since-- Speaker 1: --Mexico, I went back to Mexico in '89 [1989] and '90 [1990] because I was determined to photograph all of the great, the sixteen Olmec heads that had been excavated by that time, 'cause some-- Speaker 2: And these heads are-- Speaker 1: --people had written-- Speaker 2: --what-- Speaker 1: --that some of them were Asian, you know, and I, so I wanted to see them all and photograph them. And that took two more trips. I had to do a lot of research to find out where they were located. And I was working with Arimitha [ph.] Grant, who had led the tour with [Ivan] van Sertima and, and then had started a private organization called the African American Cultural and Arts Network, which offered tours to Mexico, to Brazil, and to Spain, and Morocco, and Ghana. And that was a business enterprise. Pearlie Evans and I both made small investments in that, because Arimitha [ph.] is just the perfect person to travel with. She does such outstanding research. So it took three, two more trips to Mexico to see all of the great heads. They are, each one African. There's not an Asian, there's not an Indian in the bunch. They're all African. And-- Speaker 2: And just to keep it in--how, how large are these and what do they weigh? Speaker 1: They range from four feet nine inches tall. The one that van Sertima's book "They Came Before Columbus" has a picture showing the African braids in the back of the head. That's about the shortest one. That one is four feet nine and the first one they found in Tres Zapotes. I haven't seen the measurements given in a book, and I couldn't measure the statute myself because it's up on a pedestal. But I'd say, my guess is it's about five feet tall. The tallest one is 11 feet tall. And that one sits in, in a park in Santiago Tuxtla [Veracruz, Mexico]. And it is not re, it's not a refined sculpture like the, the wonderful portraits that most of the represent. This is shaped, it's like, shaped like a mountain actually, but it's about eleven feet tall. Speaker 2: And they, they-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --weigh I think, I've heard they weigh six, seven, eight tons. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, up to, that one is estimated at about forty tons. And these are beautiful sculptures. And it's clearly portraits because they have individual features, and they are serious looking people. There's one smiling face in a museum in Villahermosa [Tabasco, Mexico], looks like an adolescent. This one looks like a, a youthful man. Most of them appear to be men in their late 40s or 50s. But, but that, one of those in the Villahermosa museum is the only one with a smile on his face. Most of them look like you would not want to cross them. Speaker 2: So would, would you say that this collection of sixteen multi-ton heads in, in Mexico are at least a hint that there were African people in America before-- Speaker 1: Yes, they would stand to be a hint. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: Now the heads are all men, but there are small Terracotta carvings of females, so that they, it was clear that the African ships contained both men and women. Speaker 2: Now, now, now the German scholar, [Alexander] von Wuthenau-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --is he still alive? Is he still there? Speaker 1: Von Wuthenau died in 1994. He was 94 years of age, a wonderful elegant man with a collection of over 6,000 Terracotta sculptors, not all African. They represented the, all of the races of mankind. Clearly we're in Mexico in this prehistoric time. And von Wuthenau, who had been a dip, a German diplomat in the United States, who had to leave the diplomatic service when Hitler came to power I Germany, and required that all diplomats sign affidavits that they were pure Aryans. Story_ID: 101518 Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were trying to think of [Alexander] von Wuthenau's book-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 1: --"Unexpected Faces in Ancient Places," [sic, "Unexpected Faces in Ancient America"] is that-- Speaker 2: It think that's it. Speaker 1: And, now, now, the importance of, of having you talk, talk about von Wuthenau is that in this instance, as in many other instances, you go to the source. You're on the scene when Malcolm X is in Ghana. You're on the scene, you know, with von Wuthenau in, in Mexico. You're on the scene of a lot of historical activities and remember lots of detail. We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today? Speaker 2: Well, I would, I have always hoped that African Americans will recognize the importance of their, their connection to Africa, not be distracted by the problems in Africa and the fact that our media mostly tells us about problems, but look long term and know that the place of an African in the world is going to be based on what happens in Africa and that all efforts must be made to help Africa regain her rightful place in the world, because only then will her scattered children be respected. For the, for individual African American, I would love to see us have respect for learning. Try to learn. Whatever you're interested in, learn as much as you can. Develop skills that are of value to your commit, community. Learn how to spell marriage, and combining, having a family, a marriage license, not just a piece of paper; it's the founding document of your family, like the Constitution is the founding document for your country. Have respect for each other. America is not going to be a kindly place for black people in my lifetime. It may, it may be in, in the future. But our community needs to be strong, to be respectful of each other, to be absolutely unwilling to kill each other over trivialities as we do so that we can bring a strong people to bear on all of our problems that we have. That's my hope for, for black people. I would hope, looking back on my life, and I've enjoyed doing, doing this interview with HistoryMakers because it has really made me concentrate and try to remember things that happened decades ago, I would also hope that people could just have as wonderful a life as I've had. People have been so good to me. When I look back and at all the people that I've met who have been wonderful friends to me, I appreciate so much. I just wish that every little kid coming up would, would be able to make good friends, to be a good friend, and to have people be encouraging to you. Story_ID: 101519 Speaker 1: Okay. We always ask this question too: when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: You know, it's, it's a true, a trite truism to say I've made mistakes, but the mistakes I've made have been a lot smaller than the things that I did right. One thing I would try to figure out how to make more money than I made (laughter) coming up because I could use money now. With the, after the house fire, which took all of my resources and resources from family members who could use them on their own families, I would, I would go into a field which would earn more money than I earned before. There was not really much of an option when I was coming up, but it is now--and that's money just to not have to worry about money, not to be super rich and pile up money, but just not to have to worry about it, be able to travel when you want to, to do things and not be a burden on anybody else for money. But most of the things that I look back on, I say "how was I smart enough to do that?" (laugher) Going to Africa, that's the one big thing that I say, how was I smart enough to do that, when I did it, with as little to work with as I was working with, but I did it and had ten wonderful years there. Story_ID: 101520 Speaker 1: Now the other question we always ask is this: when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, for people who have no children, he, the legacy is always something external. I have talked to a lot of young people, and I've had some of them tell me in later years that they were positively influenced by something that I said to them. And so I have to say that that would be the legacy, the effort that has been consistent over the years to talk to young people, try to help them see possibilities in their lives, try to enlist them in the struggle for African liberation and redemption. Until that is solved, till those problems are solved, we're gonna be in trouble. So I would always hope that, like [Marcus] Garvey, I would have a few little tigers and lions out there trying to solve these problems. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 101521 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about, well, your family right now, what, what would you consider to be your family today as we, we talk? Speaker 2: I'm very blessed. I have two brothers who, Jackson [T.O.P] Windom, who's named after my paternal grandfather, whom we never knew, who is a retired lieutenant colonel. He has a wonderful wife named Charlotte. The both retired from the St. Louis [Missouri] Public School System together a few years ago. He is three years younger than I am. They have three children, a son, Rodney, who lives next door to me with his wife and stepdaughter; a son, John, who is a Naval commander, who next week will be going to Iraq because he is a contracting officer with the [U.S.] Navy. And he will be leading a team of contractors to go over, who are going over to try to sort out the, the mess of fraud and corruption that they have had there. So he'll be in charge of that, and we will have our fingers crossed for him. He has two children, a son a--no, three children, two sons and a daughter. And then their youngest child, Jacqueline [ph.], has a son who may one day play profess, professional baseball, he's that good. He's just in his first year of college in Indiana. And then my youngest brother John [Henry Windom, Jr.], has from his first marriage a daughter, Leslie, who has about five children. She was an only child. And she is trying to start her own village. She's got five or six (laughter) good children, fine children all of them. Then his two younger daughters, Jasmine and Diana, are not yet married. They're both still in college. His wife, Celestine, is a teacher. And he is in charge of the Community Education Program for the St. Louis public schools. He started that program thirty-nine years ago, and he has run it ever since. There are sixteen schools in the community education here in St. Louis [Missouri]. And then I, we have raft of cousins from my mother's [Frances Louise Jones Windom] side of the family from Edwardsville [Illinois]. They've scattered around the country now. But my father's family, we really don't know, except for the cousin I told you about who lived with us for most of his last years, we never knew any of the rest of the family. My brother, Jack, remembers some relatives came after my father [John Henry Windom, Jr.] died and introduced themselves to him, but I never saw those people. I have no idea who they are. So that's my, my real family. Then I have friends and my sorority. I'm an Alpha Kappa Alpha woman over fifty years now--the Association of Black Social Workers on a national level, many, dozens and dozens of dear close friends, and the people that I met in Africa that I keep up with. So, I've got, you know, a, a, a good support base. Story_ID: 101522 Speaker 1: Okay, now is there any question that I--well, I, we can probably do a whole 'nother series on the things you have not talked about, but is there any question we should talk now before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Look, we, we, we have really, you've done wonderful interviews. I will just leave that to you. Go ahead and ask your last question. Speaker 1: All right, the, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, that's a, that's a very difficult question to answer. The first thing is you want to be remembered. You know, you would like for more than six months to pass before your name is brought up in a conversation and some, the person says "Alice who?" You, you would hope (laughter) that it would last longer. I would want to be remembered as an African patriot. That's, I would sum that up, that that's been commitment since I was a young woman, to, to the elevation and restoration of the dignity and respect for black people. That's really all I've ever cared about. And those black folks are the ones I see on the street. They're my family and then the whole black world. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: And I hope they would remember me kindly. That's all I can say, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you for spending the time with us. Speaker 2: Well, thank you for-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --surviving this. (Laughter)...