 Story_ID: 24388 Speaker 1: Alright. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Cardinal Warde. That's C-A-R-D-I-N-A-L, last name is W-A-R-D-E. Speaker 1: Alright. Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Cardinal? Speaker 2: There are many stories (laughter). I told my parents they must have been drunk when they came up with this name. And clearly an Episcopal Priest would let it go, but a Catholic Priest certainly wouldn't let a child be named Cardinal. So it wasn't an Episcopal priest. They denied they were drunk. They said it was my aunt's fault. She saw the word--name somewhere and decided that's what she wanted me to be called. And it stuck. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's good enough. And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 14, 1945 in the small, tiny, sunny island of Barbados. Speaker 1: In the particular town in Barbados? Speaker 2: No, it was a little village. I think the exact area was called Hopewell, still is. Hopewell Christ Church. Speaker 1: Hopewell Christ Church? Speaker 2: Yes. It's in the southern part of the island. Speaker 1: Alright. And sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am Professor of Electrical Engineering within the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: MIT. And sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October 11th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in my office at MIT. Story_ID: 24389 Speaker 1: Okay now. Before we get into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Gee, I have so many. My favorite fish is definitely salmon. And I like my Caribbean food. I like rice and peas. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Small tiny Caribbean islands. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Recently, I have a new one and that is I believe that the next Google can be developed in the Caribbean. Story_ID: 24390 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side. But separately, so we don't get them mixed up. So we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Rosetta, R-O-S-E-T-T-A, Irene. And that's Warde, W-A-R-D, no E. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: That was her maiden name. Her married name is actually Chase, C-H-A-S-E, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Depends on which one you wanna use. Speaker 1: So she--wait--so her maiden name is Chase? Speaker 2: No. Her maiden name is actually Ward. Speaker 1: Alright. But with no D? Speaker 2: No E-- Speaker 1: No E. Okay. Alright. And Chase is-- Speaker 2: Chase was--is now her-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --married name. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: That is December 8th, 1925. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: Hopewell Christ Church (laughter). Speaker 1: Alright. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were their occupations? Speaker 2: Gee. This is complex. Well, her father was actually--well he did many things; he was a farmer and a butcher, and a carpenter. He did all those things. And my grandfather on her side, I don't--never knew him. I'm not sure what he did (laughter). Unfortunately, I don't have a good family history. I don't have any details. Speaker 1: Well you're not alone in that regard. A lot-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of people kinda struggle with this-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --but it's a--just give us what you know, or what you--or even the stories about what it might be 'cause it might help somebody else in your family--you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --figure it out. So, so your grandfather was a farmer? Now this is your maternal grandfather? Speaker 2: That's my maternal grandfather. Speaker 1: Alright. And what was his name? Speaker 2: Henry. Speaker 1: Okay. That would be Henry Ward? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Alright. And what about your maternal grandmother? Speaker 2: She was a homemaker. I'm not sure if she ever really had a job. Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Oh gosh. It's just--Elvira (laughter). I had to think. Gosh. Elvira, E-L-V-I-R-A. We never called her that, so that's why I had to think. We had a nickname for her. Speaker 1: What did you call her? Speaker 2: Well she was called mother most of the time. But her nickname was Shuggy (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (laughter) A lot of the neighbors called her that. We couldn't call her that though. Speaker 1: Alright. And so she was a home maker. And so are there any stories--did you know your grandparents on your mother's--I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew them pretty good, yeah. Speaker 1: And did they tell you any stories growing up about them growing up? Speaker 2: Not much. I think I was closer to my father's side of the family than my mother's side-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but, yeah I think the stories--they're a lot of Wards in Barbados, and there was--I guess there was an old slave master with the last name Ward. He had lots of children. And so there were Wards scattered all over the island. There--the family lived in the northern part of the island and we lived in the south. And they are the ones who were the owners of the--there's a famous rum called Mount Gay Rum. If you buy a bottle of Mount Gay Rum, you'll see the words 'A.Y. Ward'. Speaker 1: How do you spell Mount Gay Ward? Speaker 2: Mount-- Speaker 1: M-O-U-N-T-- Speaker 2: G-A-Y. Speaker 1: Mount Gay Rum. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And on the bottle is the words-- Speaker 2: It says A.Y. Ward. You'll see that written on the bottle. But it's believed that the name--the family name Ward comes from there. And while we don't claim their religion, they probably are very distantly 'cause we're in the south, they're in the north. But if you go through the phone book in Barbados, you'll see lots of Wards, and a lot of people say they're all related. That's where they all came from. Speaker 1: Well, they're all at least related to the Ward-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Because--and then he had children with the slaves, and his wife, and that's about everybody. So--but anyway, that's the story. Whether it's true or not, I don't know. But-- Speaker 1: Barbados history revolves around sugar, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Sugar and Rum. Speaker 1: Right. And slavery existed there when? Until 1830 or so? 1838?-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Slavery was abolished in the Caribbean a little bit before it was in the United States. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think--I think maybe twelve years before? Speaker 2: Something like that. I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah. So. Here, people can, in some parts of the country. For instance, all of the Hamptons-- Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: you know, can trace themselves to Hampton Road-- Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: that's what's been said. If everybody named Hampton here can go to Hampton Road or Virginia, you know. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: there are other names like that that people know. But, okay. So now what about the other side of your mother's family? Did you know the other grandparents? Speaker 2: Beyond the grandparents, no. I didn't know any great-grands or anything like that. Speaker 1: No, but that--on the other side of your mother's family, the other grandparents on the other side-- Speaker 2: Oh. Okay. Speaker 1: The paternal grandparents. Did you know them? Speaker 2: Oh. Well, I gave you my mother's father and my mother's mother. And I don't know their parents. Story_ID: 24391 Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Okay. Now, did your mother [Rosetta Ward] talk much about growing up? Can you kind of give us a story how she grew up, or what her aspirations were? Speaker 2: The--I mean it was a poor little village in the south of the island. And, you know, my father made his living as a farmer and a butcher and a carpenter. The--she has three sisters and one brother. And basically, they went to the local elementary school. In those days, very few people went to high school. And that's where my mother stopped. With a basic--I doubt she went to school beyond age fifteen, sixteen. Right. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this is the British system. Speaker 2: Right. This is the British--well, this--yeah. It was the British system, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now was Barbados still--is it still--I'm not even sure--Barbados is independent now, right? Speaker 2: It's independent now, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but then when she was born-- Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. No. No. Speaker 1: it was all British colonial (unclear). Speaker 2: There was a local boys' school and girls' school. My father went to the boys' school, she went to the girls' school. Speaker 1: Now, did your mother ever express what she want--now what did she do? Speaker 2: Oh, she, she went to work basically as a--the people who had money of course in those days were the white people. She worked--she started out as basically a maid, working for some of the white aristocracy (laughter) so to speak. And then she later left them--'cause they got elderly and they passed--some of them passed away. So she ended up working in the hotel industry in her basically second job in the, you know, working with the machines that do the laundry in the hotels. That was basically her job. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, did she ever talk about what she would prefer to have been doing, or did she seem kind of satisfied with that? Speaker 2: Oh she was quite happy with doing that kind of work. I think she actually liked it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 24392 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name is (laughter), well, it's pretty funny because his actual name on the records, in the books, his actual name is Davidson Chase. But nobody--very few people knew that was his actual name because he went by the name of Arthur. And he signed a lot of documents as Arthur Chase. Speaker 1: Chase (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Chase. Speaker 1: It's Arthur and Chase, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah. So when he died, we had some problems cleaning up his records because officially, he's Davidson Chase. He named his first son after him, Davidson. And, but he himself hardly used the name. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this presents a dilemma. I'm trying to figure out now. I'm trying to figure out now where does the Ward with the E come in? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Well, turns out--half of us took on our mother's name, half (unclear) took on the father's name. So, it's a long story. Then, I was baptized in the Episcopal Church. The priest made a mistake. He added an E onto my last name and it stayed there ever since. So none of my other siblings have an E who took on the Ward name. So that's, so my last name should have been just W-A-R-D. Speaker 1: Okay. Well was the priest just seen as that kind of an authority? Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous). No, I think he was probably sloppy; probably not paying attention. My baptismal certificate has it right. 'Cause in those days, you got two certificates. I'm sorry, my birth certificate has it right; my baptismal certificate--'cause you gotta (unclear) baptized, they give you a certificate also. And that had--so that's the one I took to school. So in my school records, page five or whatever, the E was there. They didn't bo--my parents never bothered to correct and I didn't either later. So it just stuck. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The records were that loose. Speaker 1: Okay. So--but some of your siblings are named Chase. Speaker 2: Some was named Chase. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There are only three of us. We had the three boys. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The last boy's Chase and the first two are Wards (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So my older brother is just Ward. Speaker 1: Now. Okay. Now, what is your dad's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 26, he's deceased now, 1919. Speaker 1: Okay. 1919. And, okay. Now, how far back can you trace your father's family? Speaker 2: Well, his mother, my grandmother, I spent a lot of time with her. I was the, I guess, the darling of her eye. 'Cause my older brother did too. He spent a lot of time with her. We liked staying at her house and sleeping at her house. And she talked a little bit about her parents, although I don't have a lot of details there either. But my mother--my father's mother was like one of many children. I don't know how many there were, but there were two boys that I can think of and at least three more girls and her and as her siblings. And, and two of them moved from Barbados to Trinidad. Two of the girls moved from Barbados to Trinidad, so I have a lot of relatives in Trinidad now because of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Those are your great aunts? Speaker 2: They're all--these people are all deceased. But their children and their grandchildren are around. So I used to go to Trinidad on summer vacations. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was your grandmother's name? Dorothy. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Dorothy Chase? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. And do you remember her family name? Speaker 1: No, I don't (laughter). Unfortunately. Speaker 2: Okay. And so, now are there any stories from that side of the family about what life was like in Barbados? Speaker 1: These--at that time--yeah, they had a really hard time in those days because her mother had several children. I don't even know if I named all of them. And they lived in an area called Goodland, G-O-O-D-L-A-N-D. And, you know, in those days, they didn't have running water in their home, or electricity. Electricity and water came to the village where they lived when I was probably about ten years old. I'm digging back in my memory now. Speaker 2: This was about 1957, or no 1955, I guess, right? Speaker 1: I was born in 1945--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. They didn't have any electricity when I was--when I was born. And I--you know--my grandparents on either side, they did not spend a lot of time talking to us about, you know, stories of their past. It wasn't a cultural thing that we sat around and talked. I mean she had mentioned a little about--and she was a homemaker for the most part, at least when I was growing up. I don't know--I don't even know what job she did when she was younger, but by the time I was born and was growing up, she was not working anymore and so I'm not even sure that she had a full-time job (laughter). And if she did, I don't know what she did. But in those days, it was a question of survival. You know, you had to plow the land. She planted potatoes and carrots, and sometimes sugar cane and pumpkins and vegetables, and basically that's--the land supplied all of the vegetables, and there were people in the village who fished and she would order her fish from those people. And when she did go to the store, she was buying things like dried cod fish, which they called sol fish down there and so it would alternate between dried cod fish and fresh fish. So we ate a lot of fish 'cause it was plentiful and cheap. And a lot of rice and peas and pumpkin and sweet potatoes and stuff like. It was actually pretty healthy food looking backwards. Speaker 2: It sounds like it. Speaker 1: And a lot of stuff from the can. Oh yeah. And she died in her 80s. Speaker 2: Did you know your grandfather? Speaker 1: No. Not well at all. They had separated and he lived somewhere else and had another family, and I hardly knew those people (laughter). So, unfortunately, I can't tell you any stories there. Speaker 2: He was a--he was Chase, I guess, right? Speaker 1: I don't think he was. I think his name was--I think his last name was Barker. Speaker 2: (No audible response). Speaker 1: I don't think they--they never married as far as I could tell. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: And so--but he had another family somewhere else and some of his grandchildren are--I don't recognize them. I didn't even know his children when I was growing up. I saw them and I knew they were related somewhat, but we were never close. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did any of your relatives migrate to New England? There's so many people I meet here that have ancestry in Barbados. Like-- Speaker 1: Yeah. None of them--some--my mother had a sister--one of my mother's sisters migrated to New York, but that's about it. And later, one of my father's cousins moved to Florida. Yes, in fact two of my father's first cousins moved to Florida, but yet it was not a big wave of my family to the United States. Story_ID: 24393 Speaker 1: Okay now, one of the big movements of the early part of the century was the UNI [Universal Negro Improvement] Garvey movement. Any members of your family involved in that? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Not that I know. Speaker 1: Okay. I thought I'd ask 'cause there are millions of members all around the world so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I've met people from Barbados who were members here in this country. Speaker 2: Yeah. My family didn't do anything illustrious or--exciting (laughter). I'm not from that kind of stock. Speaker 1: Okay, but you know things are-I mean, changes are going on all around. You know, even people that are not in the mix, you know (unclear). I just wondered what kind of stories they might tell you growing up about life on Barbados and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about Barbados 'cause you grew up there and--most of the people we interview grew up in the states. Speaker 2: Barbados was a British colony. It's one of the few islands in the Caribbean that never changed hands. The British came in--I guess the Portuguese discovered it and they named it 'Barbaadose' or something like that and there are many stories as to how it got its name, some of which I don't believe but anyway, once the British captured it--the Portuguese discovered it but they really never claimed it. They never did anything. So the British came along and took it over and brought in slaves from Africa and planted sugar cane and then in 1966, I think it became independent. And so it's still part of the Commonwealth [Commonwealth of Nations] so we share the same status as Canada and Australia and places like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we have a governor general who is the [British] Queen's representative on the island. But we have a prime minister. The governor general basically cuts ribbons and stuff like that, but the place is run by a parliamentary system. They're basically two parties and there's a prime minister. Speaker 1: Who is the prime minister now? Speaker 2: Right now, the guy's name is Fruendel Stewart. Funny first name. Speaker 1: How do you spell his first name? Speaker 2: I may get it wrong, but it's F-R-U-E-N-D-E-L. And the last name, I think, is S-T-U-A-R-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Stuart like the British Stuarts. Speaker 2: Like the British, right. Story_ID: 24394 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, well, okay now. What is your--did your father [Davidson Chase] ever have a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: My father finished the elementary school. I would guess he finished at age fourteen, fifteen, somewhere around there. And he didn't go to high school. In his day, the high school system was not so well developed as it was when I came along. And so he became really a self-taught man. And I always tell people that the man--his brain was better than mine. It's just that he didn't have the opportunities. So he started out basically as a carpenter and then he got into the furniture-building business, and then he became a building contractor. And he taught himself most of what he knew. He was an avid reader. Speaker 1: What kind of materials would he read? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, what kind of materials? Speaker 1: Yeah, did he read? Did he specialize in? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, well, one of the things he loved doing is reading his Bible. But a lot of the stuff that he read were things that had religious overtones to them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he knew a lot of stuff that was in the Bible that I never read and didn't know, and probably will never know. And in his spare time, when he wasn't working, he'd be reading all kinds of books that were semi-religious, that maybe they told him about in Church or whatever. That's what he enjoyed reading. Speaker 1: Okay. Now your parents were Episcopal, or (unclear)-- Speaker 2: No, what happened is my parents were Seventh Day Adventists at the beginning 'cause my father remained Seventh Day Adventist basically through his whole life. And my parents divorced at one point and my mother [Rosetta Ward] basically didn't adopt any religion after that. My father continued going to the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well actually, that's not true. He stopped going to Church for a long time and then later in his life, he started going back to the Seventh Day Adventist Church again. In fact, he built a Church right next to our house, a Seventh Day Adventist Church on his land. The Church is still there today. Speaker 1: Next to her house? Speaker 2: No, no, next to his house. Speaker 1: Oh, to his house. Okay. Speaker 2: Once they separated, he had his own place and she basically stayed in the house she was born in, and he later built a Church right--a Seventh Day Adventist Church--right next door on his land. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: That story I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That story I don't know how they met. I mean it's a small village so I don't think there's anything intriguing about--you know, low population density in those days, yeah. Speaker 1: There's no romantic story-- (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: I don't know any romantic stories I can tell you. Speaker 1: --talk about. Speaker 2: Small--I'm sure they knew each other from very young. I mean it's a small neighborhood. Speaker 1: Now what's the largest city in Barbados? Speaker 2: The capital city is Bridgetown. Speaker 1: Bridgetown. That's right. Okay. And how far was Hopewell from-- Speaker 2: Oh, it seemed really far in those days. But I would say maybe twenty--fifteen--well, it's probably fifteen miles because the road isn't straight but if you could fly it straight, it's probably more like ten or twelve (laughter). Story_ID: 24395 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their habits, their hobbies, their mannerisms, their looks, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a blend--I look--well, of all my siblings, I'm the darkest of them all, so--my father [Davidson Chase] was darker than I am, and my mother [Rosetta Ward] was like your complexion, much lighter. And I guess from a facial point of view, I'm really a blend of the two of them. I'm bald, or balding, and my father had more hair than I have when he died. So, obviously, I inherited the exact same trait from my mother 'cause her father was bald. I think from--attitude towards life perspective, I am indeed a blend. My father was a very strict man. He didn't like playing sports and didn't like me playing sports. This was kind of foolish. "You're gonna get hurt and injured, why bother?" And my mother's attitude is, "Do what makes you happy." And my mother gave us a lot of freedom. Her attitude was, "You go there and go your thing, make your mark. I'm not gonna tell you what to do" was often her attitude. "Use your best common sense, use your best judgment--you know--and go." She didn't set down too many rules, whereas my father wanted more rules. So they were different in that regard. And my mother's--she's still alive--she's still that way today, you know? And she was--(unclear)"whatever it was, if it doesn't work, you can't blame me 'cause I didn't tell you what to do." She was more hands-offish. And that was helpful to me because it--and to my other siblings because we had to take on responsibility and we had to think about what we were going to do before we did it because she gave us that kind of attitude. I think that's--in growing up, that to me was the biggest difference between the two of them. Speaker 1: Okay. And you think you take more after your mother in that respect? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I--intellectually, I'm closer to my father. I mean he was the brains in the family. The man was--you gave him two large numbers to multiply in his head, and he does it as fast as you can do it on your calculator. And you give it to my mother, she's much slower at doing it. She needs a pencil and the paper. He did it in his head. He was able to jump into almost anything that involves mathematics or, or understanding of mechanics and structures and stuff like that 'cause he basically was a self-taught architect. He drew his own plans and that kind of thing. He was able to grasp that stuff so easily and so readily, even though he had no formal training. So anyway, he was my little genius at home, okay? My mother was more into cooking and baking and that kind of stuff, and taking care of people. She loved taking care of people so. You know, acting as a maid in someone else's home, that gave her a lot of joy, you know. So they were different in that regard. Story_ID: 24396 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how many siblings do you have, and where do you fit in their order, and can you name them all for us? Speaker 2: Oh, my oldest brother, his name is Davidson, same name as my father. And that's all one long word, Davidson. And my--I'm the middle. And my younger brother, his name is Christopher. And--in fact, I have a half-sister on my father's side. After my parents were separated and divorced, my father had another child, a sister from another woman, and she and I actually are very close. And she has a daughter that I'm very close to so we get along very well. Even when we were growing up, we got along well. Speaker 1: And what's her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Rock--Roxanne. Actually, it's Roxanne, R-O-X-A-N-N-E. Speaker 1: Are any of them involved in science? Speaker 2: No. I'm the only hard-core scientist-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the family. My older brother also inherited a lot of my father's genes. He has a nickname which is called 'All Trade'. He can fix just about anything you bring to him, and his house is full of, I call it junk. His backyard, he's got one of everything in his backyard, so people in the neighborhood who need something fixed, they bring it to him and he has a part (laughter), and he can tell you what's wrong with it and lots of times, he fixes it. So, he's a very popular man. Speaker 1: Now, he's All Trade as in the jack of all trades? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I know the kind--the type. Backyard full of stuff. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a collector. He doesn't throw anything away-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: and very ingenious is how he puts different things together to make new things. Speaker 1: Now that's probably a valuable trade to have on an island, I would think. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Where you don't have-- Speaker 2: It was even more valuable earlier on when you couldn't get parts for things, or get things repaired. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about your younger brother? Speaker 2: My younger brother, he ended up working very early on at a dairy on the island that, you know, produced pasteurized milk and stuff like that. And for many many years, that was what he did, and then he retired. Speaker 1: Okay. And your sister? Speaker 2: My sister works with one of the local airlines. She works on the ground for one of the regional carriers in the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay. Does Barbados have an airline? Speaker 2: No. Well, we do and we don't. The local carrier--there are two regional carriers. One is called LIAT, which stands for Livert Island Air Transport, and that's basically--the largest stockholders are the governments of the Caribbean region, of mostly English-speaking Caribbean. And then Trinidad has an airline which is now called Caribbean Air, and I think that inherited Air Jamaica, which it still exists. Speaker 1: So Air Jamaica is-- Speaker 2: Air Jamaica was bought over by Caribbean Air. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it used to be called--in the old days, it was called BWA, British, West Indian Airways, and they got--that's when the British owned it and then the Trinidad government ended up buying it, changing the name, acquiring Air Jamaica, and my sister works for the first one. Speaker 1: LIT? Speaker 2: LIAT. Speaker 1: LIAT. Okay. Okay, LIAT and it stands for-- Speaker 2: Livert Island Air Transport (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay, alright, now I got it right. Speaker 2: I don't think anyone talks about Livert Island Air Tran. Most people probably forgot what it stands for. But that's what it used to stand for (laughter) when I was growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. And Caribbean Air took over Air Jamaica and British Western (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right. And that's owned by the government of Trinidad. Barbados theoretically has an airline, but they can't get it off the--it's owned by one of the local businessmen in Barbados but the theory is that it will compete with the one that the governments have put their money into, this Livert Island Air Transport, so that getting landing rights in the various islands have been difficult. So that plane is grounded right now (laughter). And the businessman, unfortunately, I'm sure he lost a lot of money 'cause the planes are there, but gotta get agreement from all the governments to what the fares should be, what birds should fly, and it's really a sad story. Story_ID: 24397 Speaker 1: Oh. Okay. Now, when you grew up, your household, did it consist of just your mother and father and you and your brothers? Speaker 2: No. In those days, when my parents first got married, they actually lived in my mother--my grandmother's house, my paternal grandmother's [Dorothy Chase] house. Everybody lived in that house. And then, I think once we were born, my parents moved out to another home, and I can vaguely--I don't even remember living in that house, but they showed me where the house was (laughter) where they lived when we were very young. But that's the way it started. And that was typical in those days. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Young people didn't have enough money to go out and buy a house and there was no mortgage. You know. They were--banks weren't gonna lend them money. They didn't have that kind of capital. Speaker 1: Okay, so these houses were all in Hopewell [Christ Church, in Barbados]]? Speaker 2: There's a whole area--Hopewell is just one village. Hopewell, there's Goodland, was the two that I mentioned, and there were all kinds of neighbors. There's Enterprise and St. Christopher. All those are basically little villages and they still have the same name today. All in the same area. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you--do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory goes back to the day that my younger brother was born. I'm three years older than him (laughter), and I seem to remember that day when he was--there was something going on in the house and I probably was walking around the house, I was walking at the time, and there were all these people coming and going and I--next thing I know, there was a baby (laughter), so I figured afterwards, that's the day he was born. Speaker 1: Okay. So you would have been what, about three, two or three? Speaker 2: I think I was, yeah I was three years old, I think, yeah. Speaker 1: This was about 1958 I guess? Speaker 2: No. '48 [1948]. Speaker 1: '48 [1948]. I'm sorry, 1948. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That's about the earliest that I could remember in my life. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't have a lot of details, but I knew I was conscious of the fact that something was going on. I'll always remember that particular day. If you asked me stuff that happened after that, between then and five years old, I don't have anything I can tell you. But I do remember around five going to school and not liking it so much (laughter). Story_ID: 24398 Speaker 1: Well, tell us--we always ask this question this way. Kind of describe where you grew up, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, Barbados cooking. In terms of smells, yeah, most people who cooked in those days, they cooked--the staple dish was rice and peas. There's another--the national dish is something called Kakoo (ph.), which is basically cornmeal with okras made into something that looks like polenta (ph.) or tastes like polenta when you're done. But it's an African dish basically. Lots of okras and cornmeal, and it has a very thick consistency. Speaker 1: Is it--are they combined together in kind of a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're combined together and it's--it's made into a--it's served in a lump about that big [demonstration] on your plate. And it's kinda tricky to cook because you have to be able to stir it and not have it end up with any lumps. And then they serve with fly fish, which is the fish that's popular around there. And the smells used to be the smells of the fly--of the gravy that goes on top of this Kakoo. Or even if they cook rice and peas, the Bagians (ph.), as the Barbagian people were called, always made a gravy. And that was the last thing they made when they cooked. And that would go on top of the rice or on top of this Kakoo and it always filled the area. You can tell what people were cooking as you walked around the villages, you know, you could smell it. And it was--in the old days it was stuff that probably wasn't good for you because they used to use lard a lot times as the base, you know. My grandfather was a butcher. He killed pigs, among other things, and sold the meat on Saturdays and from the fat--people craved that because they would use it as a stock to make gravy. And it smells very good. Probably wasn't good for you. Cholesterol. But nobody worried about those things in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Any other sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: No, the food was the one that always got to me. I seemed to be always hungry in those days. I had a good appetite. The sounds. Well, as I was growing up, the sounds that I remember were steam hissing from the sugar mills that were grind into sugar cane. There was one, not in our village, but in a village about two miles away, and it was up on a little hill. You could see the smoke coming from the towers and, and you could hear sometimes the machinery grinding the cane on a bright still night. And even that had some smells associated with it also, which were very pleasant, 'cause I used to like raw cane juice when I was growing up. And then of course on Sunday mornings, you had the Church bells tolling. These were--you know--Barbados is very much an (unclear) community, not Catholic, and people still go to Church in large numbers on Sundays. And the local Church, which was in the village called St. Christopher, would ring the bell on Sunday mornings, and you could almost tell the time by when the bells were ringing. Those perhaps were the noises that I remember most as a youngster. Story_ID: 24399 Speaker 1: Okay. Sights, sounds, smells. I guess we got 'em all. Now did--was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, what happened first was, of course the Church had choirs and people sang in the choir. Local people and--I never had a good voice but my younger brother thought he was a good singer so-and--but he was not good enough to make a career out of singing. But the first thing that came to the villages was a radio. And the radio was basically a speaker. Wires were strung along poles at the side of the road and run to houses. And every--there was no tuning. It was only nob and it was volume. And you got whatever came over that radio. And that's where we got the first--well, I shouldn't say the first--that was one source of music in the home. Whatever the radio station played, it wasn't broadcast through the air, it was actually run on just a pair of wires from village to village, and it was called--Ready Fusion was the name of it. Speaker 1: It was called Radio? Speaker 2: I think--I might spell it wrong. I think it was--well maybe it was--I thought it was Ready Fusion. R-E-D-E-I-F-U-S-I something, F-U-S-I-O-N. I might get the spelling wrong. I don't think it was Radio Fusion. Speaker 1: So that's the station you got most of the time? Speaker 2: That's all you got. This was the first introduction to radio. It was just a speaker; a single box in the house. And people who were fortunate had these Victrollas. I don't know if you've ever heard that name. It basically was a mechanical device where you could--it had a spring and you could wind up the spring and the spring turned the turntable, and you had the old fashioned, you know, plastic or acrylic records, and an arm with a big heavy needle on it that hooked up to a loudspeaker. I think RCA [Radio Corporation of America] used to have that as a symbol, right? The master's voice and the-- Speaker 1: Is that the same kind of speaker that you all had, that big-- Speaker 2: --yeah, it was a big speaker--it was one big box with everything on it. A speaker and gramophone was the other thing that it was called, I think. So, our neighbors had one of these things so that was our earliest form of music. Speaker 1: --the kind you have to wind up? Speaker 2: Have to wind it and take the head and--with the big heavy needle--and put it on there and it spun, and to us that was a big deal. And then the radio came next. And so on the radio the songs were calypsos and sometimes classical music, and news of course. But that was also our time piece. That was also sort of a clock. You could tell the time by the program that came on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that came even before there was running water, which was interesting, in my particular village because my village was remote; it's in the south of the island. There was running water closer to Bridgetown [Barbados]. But we were out in the countryside so to speak-- Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: --and that's all when I was seven, eight, nine, ten years old, the period I'm talking about now. Speaker 1: When you got a-- Speaker 2: When this Readyfusion and Victrolla and all that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by the time I was about-- Speaker 1: --so that's like about 1958, I mean 1955. Speaker 2: --around the time I was about ten, eleven years old is when we start getting running water into the village. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then electricity came afterwards. Story_ID: 24400 Speaker 1: Alright. Now Barbados is largely a black island right? This is in terms of the population. Speaker 2: Yeah. The population is mostly black and white. A lot of the other--some of--you know every other is a little bit different. Trinidad is almost equal mixes of equally black and Indian where, after slavery was abolished, Indians came over from India. And then the rest of the people are whites and Chinese and Trinidad. And people they call Syrian. They might come from Lebanon, but they call everybody from that part of the world Syrians. And Jamaica--similarly, Jamaica--their Indian population is not as large, but they have a lot of people from middle east and large Chinese--relatively speaking, large Chinese population also. Speaker 1: And then Barbados is mostly just black and white? Speaker 2: Mostly black and white, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And the black population, would you think is percentage-wise-- Speaker 2: I would say at least eighty percent. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's what I was thinking, maybe about eighty percent. Yeah. Speaker 2: It all has--a lot of it has to do with, of course slavery, and how it was practiced and abolished and so on. Speaker 1: That was one of the islands where it was really intense. Speaker 2: Yes. It was brutal in Barbados--the problem was--it was brutal in Jamaica too, but the slaves could run away into the mountains and hide. Barbados was flat; there was no place to hide, so the slave masters can do anything they want 'cause they gonna catch 'em anyway, so you either put up or you get punished severely. And there are a lot of theories as to why the Jamaicans are so creative with their music and the Barbadians aren't, you know. And people try to link it back to how they evolved from slavery in Jamaica more free runnin' and rebellious up in the mountains, and the maroons are comin' down and attackin' at night, and the slaves in Barbados too afraid to attack (laughter). So, so you raise a whole bunch of docile Barbadian black people and more rebellious and creative free thinkers in Jamaica. I don't know if the hypothesis is worth the words I've just said, but some people believe that. Speaker 1: But that's the talk--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: That's the talk--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: --in the Caribbean, I guess. Speaker 2: Well, it's--I guess I should say it's not necessarily the talk, it's what a lot of writers are saying. Story_ID: 24401 Speaker 1: Okay. Is tourism big in Barbados? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. That's the biggest generator of foreign exchange right now. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's not rum right now? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, not rum; rum is up there too, but it's tourism right now and financial services. They are the big ones. Speaker 1: So like the Cayman Islands in that sense, you can-- Speaker 2: Yeah. In terms of the financial services. Speaker 1: --you stash your money-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)--probably not as--probably not as well-known as a center for financial services (unclear). But it's a growing segment of the economic portfolio. Story_ID: 24402 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you say you didn't like school. You started school at five, you said? Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't like it at that age, as far as I remember. I had to walk to school. I think that's probably part of it. It seemed far. But it wasn't that far. But that didn't last long. And the--I remember that there was one teacher--I don't feel that he liked me and I didn't like him. I didn't learn much from him in my primary school. But once I got past that teacher into another form, I was fine. And-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your first school? The first school you attended? Speaker 2: St. Christopher Boys. In those days, the boys' schools and the girls' schools were segregated. Today, they are mixed. And actually, it was a Church. It was the same Church house that functioned as a Church on Sundays, and on Monday mornings we arranged--the students, we arranged the benches and the desk to make the school. So, I think the ministry of education and the Episcopal Church--they call it the Anglican Church down there. They don't use the word Episcopal. But anyway, they call it the Anglican Church-- Speaker 1: Church of England? (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: Church of England had this agreement to use the building in that way, so the pews and the benches were all ready for school children. So if you walked into the Church in those days, you sat down as though you were a student. In front of you was a desk. And so they would re-arrange you for the Church on Sundays, and during the week days it would function as a school. Same building. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how many students? Was it like--did you have separate classrooms for grades or-- Speaker 2: No, you sat in the same place and the teachers came to you. Speaker 1: Okay. Like a one-room school house? Speaker 2: It was a--yeah. It was shaped--it had a shape of a cross. If you took a picture of it from an airplane, it has a shape of a cross. It was one building. Speaker 1: As a cross? Okay. Speaker 2: And the building is still there today. Now it's a Church only. 'Cause they built new school many many years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't like it at first, but you kind of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I mean--I think the teachers had a lot to do with influencing me, I think. I guess in those days, I responded to caring, and loving, and attention. Maybe perhaps much more than I do now. But once I left that form and went to another form where I had a different teacher, I think I-- Speaker 1: What was your-- Speaker 2: --because in those days, there was corporal punishment also in schools. If you were asked to add two and two and you got it wrong, you got lashes. It was a crazy system. Speaker 1: What would they lash you with? Speaker 2: Well the favorite thing was either bamboo, a bamboo rod, and there was another tree, a tamarind tree which they also liked the branches from the tamarind tree. And the head master and most of the teachers had these rods to punish the students. So if you were slow, if you were a slow learner, you got a lot of lashes. It was somewhat demeaning and somewhat insulting. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Although some parents lauded the teacher for being a disciplinarian and it was fine. Nothing happened to these teachers. In those days, corporal punishment in school was understood, accepted, and that was the way it's gonna be. And if you disrespected your teacher, you can go home and get more lashes from your parents. So children were actually punished with physical corporal punishment. And that was the way discipline was administered. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The same thing that the slave masters did to the adults, the parents were doing to the children (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24403 Speaker 1: So, you had a teacher, you said it was a male teacher, that did not--he wasn't very--you didn't like him. He didn't treat you very well. Speaker 2: I don't know that it was me in particular. Maybe it was the way he taught and the way that I perceived him 'cause I don't have a lot of--I don't have a story of any incident I can tell you about, but I know that in that class I did not stand out. Whereas, when I left that class--I was still very young of course. I was probably seven years old or so. So, it's all very foggy. Speaker 1: Did you go to another school? Speaker 2: No, I stayed in the same school. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--just another class? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I advanced to the next class and then I started to shine. Speaker 1: Okay. And what areas did you shine in? Speaker 2: Oh. In those days, the classes were very simple. It was arithmetic, it was, you know, english comprehension, english reading, and writing short stories and stuff like that. There was music, but I didn't do very well at that and they didn't teach much of it. But it was in the arithmetic that I was best. I found that I had a talent for understanding that kind of material and was among the top students, at least in arithmetic, in those early days. Speaker 1: Okay. Now can you remember your first exposure to science? Speaker 2: It was not in that school. Because that school, you could stay in school, I think I left there in--they call 'em standard [grade] I think--I left there in standard four, and they probably went to standard Ssx or something like that. But basically, I left when I was about ten years old and then I went to high school. Speaker 1: Now, were there any teachers along the way, before we get you to high school, that you remember as having a special interest in you or really in bringing the best out in you? Speaker 2: In that school, there was one woman who taught me. Her name was Doreen, and I actually resonated with her probably better than with most of the other teachers. Doreen Daniel was her name. Speaker 1: What's her last name? Speaker 2: Daniel, D-A-N-I-E-L was her name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was a strange environment in that school because in my class, before I left, there were about four students, all male of course because this was a boys' school, who were always jockeying and vying for number one position, and we all left and went to high school at the same time. And I think, of those four, I'm probably the only one who has gone so far as to get a Ph.D. Speaker 1: Now so you competed with these four academically? Speaker 2: Academically. Speaker 1: Okay. And you were also involved in sports. I hear that you were a sprinter, a soccer player. Speaker 2: Not at that school. This was before--that was too early. My father was not in favor of sports at all. When I went to high school, I wanted to play football or soccer, as we call it here, and he was vehemently against that. I mean I would go kick the ball around after school a little bit, but I couldn't let him know that I was out there kickin' balls around, you know-- Speaker 1: Would he consider it to be a frivolous activity? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, he was a very serious man (laughter), but he was not the fun-lovin' type (laughter). Story_ID: 24404 Speaker 1: Okay. So now was Boys' Foundation School like a middle school or something? Speaker 2: Boys' Foundation School--we consider that a high school. You go there from age ten until about age seventeen, eighteen. Yeah, from ten to about eighteen. There was, there was like no middle school. You went from this primary school, where you can leave around ten. Although people like my older brother, he went all the way through the primary school, if I can call it that, up to age fourteen, fifteen. But he stayed in the school. And I left to go to high school. And in those days, the high school--we had to pay school fees. There was--and buy books and all that. It wasn't totally free, but I think nowadays it looks like it's totally free but in those days, you had to pay a minimum amount for school fees each term, which my parents paid, and we had to buy books. But it was--I mean it was still money for us even though one would look at it in those days and say it was pretty cheap. We didn't have a lot of money running around the family so had to scrape up those school fees every semester. Speaker 1: Okay. So now, by the time you got to high school, did you have a sense of--I mean, say electricity wasn't that old to have been in Barbados in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. By the time I got to high school (simultaneous), I was ten years old and water had--was comin' into the village. Electricity had not reached there yet, but the school had electricity. I mean from our home to the school was about maybe two miles. So, at first I took the bus, then I had a bicycle, you know. But the school had electricity. Yeah. Before-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In those days, what happened is that the closer you were to Bridgetown the capital, the more likely you had water and electricity. As you moved away from Bridgetown, it became more rural, and we were twelve miles away from Bridgetown and so the rural areas were the last places to get water and electricity. Speaker 1: Okay. So, high school. Were there any special teachers in high school? And did you take science there for the first time? Speaker 2: Oh yes. That's where I started to--I took first general science in the beginning, and I liked this, I realized in addition to mathematics which I loved, I also liked science. And I can use my mathematics in the science. So, so high school is where I really started to blossom. Speaker 1: Okay. You liked general science you said. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, the general science was--I can't even say I learned a lot but I liked the idea of science. I don't think the teachers were very good. Looking back at my high school, most of the teachers were not very good. Speaker 1: Now, had your brothers started to take things apart and put 'em back together again and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, my older brother was always doing that, yeah, yeah. And he didn't go to this high school, he just stopped and started working. But the--there was one woman, you know, I was at her high school until I was sixteen, fifteen, sixteen years old, then I left and went to another school. But there was my first role model that really had a significant impact in my life was my chemistry teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. In high school? Speaker 2: At the Boys' Foundation School. Speaker 1: At the Boys' Foundation, okay. And what was his name? Speaker 2: Her. She--her name was Shirley Richardson. She's also deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she is the one--and this is where I started to run track. I couldn't play cricket; that was considered dangerous also by my dad, you know. I can play cricket at home with the boys, you know in the neighborhood, but cricket for the school with a much heavier and harder ball and all that, no he was not--and football--no, he was not enthused. So I started to run, to run 100 yards and 220 yards and 440 yards, and my chemistry teacher, not only was she very supportive in the classroom, but she used to come out when I was running track and she'd be at the side lines, you know, pumpin' me up. "Run boy, run!" She'd want me to come first. So she took a really active interest in me, and when I outgrew that school in the sciences, she suggested I go to another high school, which is now in Bridgetown, which had much better equipment and which had a so-called six form, and that's where you could take the advanced examinations in the sciences. Speaker 1: Now, is this Harrison College or is it-- Speaker 2: Harrison College, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was that high school. I was only there two years. My last two years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Basically sixteen and seventeen, I would say-- Speaker 1: So this was like going to college prep or something, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's not--it's not a college as we use the word for a university, it's just a--or that's high school. They call 'em colleges and that was all boys at the time, and the one next door was called Queen's College for the girls. But they're, they're just high schools. British in those days was calling those kinds of things colleges. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And these colleges, you know, these colleges was where the white aristocracy and the white farmers who owned the plantations--that's where their children went to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They didn't go to school at my elementary school. My elementary school was primarily black. And the Boys' Foundation School was a mixture of black and white, and then Harrison College had even more white percentage-wise than the Boys' Foundation School. Story_ID: 24405 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, alright so I have a note here that you and your friends--well, the first thing is that you converted your father's carpentry shop into a chemistry lab. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Right. Speaker 1: That's age sixteen. That's before you went even to Harrison College, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Correct. Yeah, what happened there was my father [Davidson Chase] basically wasn't using the shop anymore. He was into his, into his contract work, you know. Building buildings for hotels and private people, and so there was an exam. In those days, the exams at--the examination boards were all in England. There was Oxford, and Cambridge examination board would set exams for high schools and they had ordinary level which you would take when you're fourteen, fifteen, maybe fifteen. And then they had advanced level or A-levels which you would take when you were sixteen. So, I had already taken all levels at Boys' Foundation School before I left, and I was getting ready for A-levels also at Foundation, and that's where we set up this chemistry lab. We had a few physics experiments too, but I took over the shop, put his tools away, and we started building--basically, all the experiments that were recommended in the text book, we would either steal, find out the trade name of the chemicals and buy them down in Bridgetown [Barbados] and hide 'em in the right bottles all labeled, and on weekends we would be--in the summers, we would be turning the pages in the books and say "Let's do that experiment next. Now how do we get the chemicals for that? You need this, you need that. We don't have it. And you need this kind of apparatus. We don't have it. Can we make it?" And that's where the innovation started. So it was me, my best friend at the time, who is now in Atlanta. He's a gastroenterologist, and then one of the--the daughter of one of our neighbors. There was the--three of us were studying for these exams at the same time, and that's--but we had fun just doing the experiments. We didn't really have to do these experiments, you know. It was just fun to be able to actually do it ourselves. And it was like a challenge. How do we get the chemicals, 'cause we had to do all the backward searches to find out if the chemical exists under a trade name because we're not buying it from a big chemistry house, we're buying it from a drug store. And a lot of times, they had a trade name and made--we had a little table of trade names and chemicals or--some were pure, some weren't pure but--and we also borrowed some from school. We borrowed from the chemistry lab the things in our pocket. I remember putting some sodium hydroxide pellets in my pocket and came home with all these big holes in my pocket (unclear) stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever do anything that was truly dangerous? Speaker 2: Oh Yeah. That's how we got into the rocketry. The rocketry stuff was really dangerous. We found out that you could make rocket fuel using ice and sugar and potassium chloride, and the two powders that can be mixed together. We found it in a book somewhere. And-- Speaker 1: Oh. Did you go to the library for these books, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) library, yeah. We were very resourceful. There were basically--there was another kid who joined us actually, later on. And so between the four of us, we (unclear) anything we can find and tried to be innovative and creative, and so, I forgot where we found the recipe for the Rocket stuff. But-- Speaker 1: Now where--did you build the rockets yourself? Speaker 2: --yeah, we built them. We took circular cylindrical cardboard. I forgot where we got those. But there was--it was like cardboard tubes, and we would pack this fuel in there, the cap off the top, and then we took straws and we'd fill those with the same material. So, we had the cylinder and packed with the ice and sugar and potassium chloride. And then the straw came out, and then we would put the (unclear) like the ones that you buy for fireworks. You put it on a stick, a long stick that we can put into the ground or into a bottle is what we used most of the time. And then we would light the straw, and the thing would take off. And so we would take 'em--we couldn't build in the neighborhood, so we had to take 'em down to the beach, you know. So it was a little bit safer. And, I used to go back and-- (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (unclear) Speaker 2: Sorry. Speaker 1: No. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah. I used to go back and forth to Trinidad 'cause I told you I had relatives there in summer vacation. And I remember one summer I went to Trinidad. I forgot how many weeks I was there, but these guys continued to work in my father's shop on this stuff, and they had the brilliant idea to put some of the rocket fuel into a bottle, glass bottle, to put the straw in and light it. And the thing exploded, of course, and one of the guys got a big gash on his leg while I was gone. So yeah, some of the things were dangerous. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I read that you actually would capture mice and send them up in your rockets, is that true? Speaker 2: Right. A lot of this was inspired by Sputnik. The Russians had took something up there and had some sort of monkey up there in space, and so we said we can probably do something, or we can probably--let's put a (unclear), so we now extended a rocket and we had this little cone on the top, 'cause the rockets were flat on the top at the beginning, and we captured a mouse and we made a bigger rocket this time and put the mouse on there and said "Let's see if this thing can actually lift off the ground (laughter) with this extra weight." Speaker 1: Did you acquire a proper white laboratory mouse, or did you-- Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no. This is probably a field mouse that we caught. I forgot where we caught it, but yeah it's a white mouse runnin' around. Speaker 1: Did they ever survive the trip? Speaker 2: The thing was too heavy for the rocket. And we weren't doing calculations on how much thrust there was, and what the weight of the fuel was. Yeah, this was all for fun. So the thing did--you know, so we had the bigger rocket, mouse on top, lit the thing, right? And it did lift off with the mouse on board, but it was sort of top heavy. So it spiraled back to the ground and the mouse ran away and then it crashed (laughter). Yeah. But yeah, these weren't rockets that were going into orbit. They're maybe going up several-- Speaker 1: And you used like sugar, and what else? Speaker 2: Ice and sugar and-- Speaker 1: Ice? Speaker 2: Ice and sugar. The sugar that bakers use to make stuff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, ice and sugar (simultaneous). The fine grained sugar. Yeah. Speaker 2: --and the other thing was yeah, confectionary sugar. We called it ice and sugar in those days. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Alright. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: I couldn't tell if you were saying "ice and sugar" or "icing sugar." Speaker 2: Yeah, icing sugar. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And sulfur. Speaker 2: No. Potassium (simultaneous) chloride. Speaker 1: Potassium chloride. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: We had to find the trade name for that also in order to be able to buy it. Speaker 1: Okay. So where-- Speaker 2: This was (unclear) bought at local drug stores in Bridgetown. I think we bought it under trade name. I forgot what the trade name was, it was so long ago. But we couldn't tell people what we were doing, and we were always asked "What are you buying this for?" "Oh yeah, my parents sent me for this thing, I don't know." We had all kinds of stories to get our hands on these chemicals. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were there any special teachers at the-- Speaker 2: This was at Boys' Foundation school. Speaker 1: Okay. That was the only boys' foundation? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did that, we did that [experiments] just before I left to go to Harrison College. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's--your chemistry teacher there was Shirley Richardson? Speaker 2: She wasn't involved. Speaker 1: Did she know about any of this? Speaker 2: No. No. She didn't know. No. She didn't know. Story_ID: 24406 Speaker 1: Alright now, Harrison College-- Speaker 2: In fact, I continued--that's not true. I actually continued, we continued doing this rocket stuff in the lab even when I was at Harrison College. It didn't just die on the day I left her foundation. Because while I was at Harrison College, my--one of my friends, he was still taking more A-levels and I was kinda helping him too because his mathematics was not as strong as mine. But it all stopped during my second year of Harrison College. We were all done. Basically, we shut down the shop (laughter) so to speak. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so now at Harrison, was there any special teachers there that guided you or counselors that-- Speaker 2: No. The teaching was better than it was at Foundation [Boys' Foundation school]. This was a noticeable difference because what I found in those days, and I didn't appreciate it, like my Spanish teacher at Foundation was horrible. Basically, the way--I can't even call it teaching--he would come in and test you on vocabulary almost every time. Their way of putting sentences together, we didn't do that very often. There was a text book and it was like him reading the text book. I don't know, I didn't learn my Spanish that way. I couldn't learn that way. The same was true with history. I hated history at that school because (a) it was all British history from the British perspective, and the teachers were not really teaching history. I mean they had a text book and you would read--he would--you're supposed to go home and read the history book and then you come back into class and the teacher would sit there and start to read the sentence, then he would stop and basically ask you for the next word. And the next word was the name of a town or a city, or the name of a person. And I wasn't getting the big picture. It was like, can you memorize--and the students were cheating with the book under the table and stuff like that. I didn't learn history. In fact, it was only after I came to the United States that I realized how deficient my high school education was, especially in history because here, students study Russian history, French history, Russian poets, French poets. The same thing was true for literature. It was all Shakespeare. That was their idea of literature. It was called English literature. So you didn't learn anything with French poets or Russian poets or any of that stuff. And so it was very narrow in that sense. So, but yet you would hear several of my colleagues at the time saying what a great education they had. And I used to say that too until I saw what others had, and then I realized that mine wasn't that great. Speaker 1: Now, so many--there are writers from the Caribbean I think that really made a big impact over here. Did Barbados have a decent education in terms of writing? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean there's a writing style that is still sort of prevalent in the islands. It's still very formal and, and some schools were really good at propelling that and perpetuating it and doing a good job. The--so--but I think even for the good writers, I think a lot of them came into their own in spite of how not-so-good the schools were. This school at Harrison College was the best on the island. So there, the quality of the teaching and the quality of the teachers and the quality of the infrastructure and the laboratories were all, you know, miles ahead of say Boys' Foundation School. So you would see that a lot of the writers that you're talking about, they probably went to the best schools in the Caribbean. You know, it would be Harrison College in Barbados and the other one is called Queen's something. Queen's Royal College in Trinidad, and so on. So there were--and these schools were all government schools. They were taxpayers' money. There were a whole bunch of high schools--the Foundation was too. Boys' Foundation was--that were private, were started by individuals. And they were often second tier. So the elite, so to speak, their children went to the best schools. We weren't elite, but because I had someone who looked out for me and mentored, I ended up, at least my last two years, going to the best school in Barbados. Story_ID: 24407 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did you get--what kind of counseling did you get about what to do next? How were your--I suppose, I'm imagining now that you got great grades. (Simultaneous) Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Yeah. Especially in the mathematical sciences. In mathematics and science, I did well 'cause I loved those subjects. Didn't get a lot of counseling. This lady at Boys' Foundation School was my--I got the best counseling from her. She told me, "You should leave here and go to this Harrison College." And I followed her advice and she paved the way and got all the forms filled out for me and all that. She helped me to make that transition. She did that not just for me, but for others as well. She really cared about students. She wasn't even from Barbados. She was actually from Trinidad. Once I got to Harrison College, I did not have that kind of a mentor in the school. I basically saw what the other boys were doing and where they were (unclear), and sort of having in my directions based on what others were doing. But it was a family from the Massachusetts area that turned out to be in Barbados at the time, and there was a man, his name is John Herzog (ph.). He was a graduate student at Harvard [University, in Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time doing his field work in anthropology. And he was studying the Barbados school system and I met him on a beach not far from my home in Barbados. And he's the one who started asking me--he and his wife--asking me about universities. What am I gonna do after I leave Harrison College? And I said I'd probably go to university in the West Indies because there's a branch in Barbados. That's what my other friends were doing. And he said, "Have you ever considered going to the United States?" "No. Can't afford it. Too expensive. Too far-fetched." And his wife basically--she was a guidance counselor at the schools here in the local area for about--maybe it was--I forgot what school she was at at the time, but anyway she ended up in the Belmont High Schools as a counselor. But she--they went back to the United States and they sent me forms for application to Harvard and MIT[Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Stevens Institute of Technology Hoboken, New Jersey]. They were the ones that really had a big turning point in my life. After Shirley Richardson. Shirley Richardson got me to Harrison College. Beyond Harrison College, it was John and Dorothy Herzog who came to Barbados, lived in my neighborhood, met 'em on the beach, and they planted the bug of leaving Barbados to come to the United States. Speaker 1: Okay. So this was in 1965? Speaker 2: Well I left Barbados in '65 [1965]. This was around '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. We became very close friends and I was a youngster. They were much older. Now I look at our ages and I say, "Oh, they're not that much older than me" (laughter). But they were very influential. So my friend, my other friend who is the doctor in gastroenterology in Atlanta, we both filled out these forms. He applied, he got into Harvard. He wanted to be a doctor; he always wanted to be a doctor. And I applied to MIT at Amherst. I also applied to it 'cause that was his alma mater and I wasn't really interested in going to Amherst, but he thought it was a good school so I applied there. And I applied to Stevens Institute of Technology. And the only place where I got financial aid was at Stevens. So, I took it. Talked to my father, said, "Would you help me if I want to go abroad to study?" and he said "Yeah." He says "Go." So, I left. Speaker 1: Okay. Now at this time, now you were--I neglected to ask you too much about track and stuff. You were running sprints? Speaker 2: Yes. I started at a Boys' Foundation school. That's where I started. I didn't do it at Harrison College. That was a very short stint in my life where my last two or three years at Foundation I started to run. Speaker 1: Did you play soccer too? Speaker 2: No. He wouldn't let me play soccer. He was not a--he was against that, so--I played soccer after I left Barbados and I got to Stevens [Institute of Technology]. Speaker 1: So you didn't play on the teams but you knew how to play. Speaker 2: I knew how to play, but I didn't play on a team. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so after I left Barbados, and I was at Stevens--now he's no longer around. He's in Barbados so I can play all the soccer I wanted so then I joined the soccer team there. Story_ID: 24408 Speaker 1: Alright. So, 1965 Stevenson--Stevens Institute of Technology [in Hoboken, New Jersey], and that's here in Massachusetts? Speaker 2: No, that's in New Jersey (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: New Jersey. Okay. Speaker 2: --it's right across the Hudson River from Manhattan [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I taught for one year at a local high school before I left to come to the United States because when I finished Harrison Col--I took some more A-levels at Harrison College [in Barbados]. I ended up taking math, chemistry, physics and A-levels. And then there was a year where I basically had to look for a job and I taught at one of the local private high schools for a year. And then I came to the states in '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Stevens College. Tell us a little bit about--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: --Stevens Institute of Technology. Speaker 1: --Stevens Institute. Yeah. Right. Speaker 2: Of Technology. Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about it. It's not as well-known as some places. Speaker 2: No. It's not like MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in Cambridge, Massachusetts] but yeah, it was formed, you know, in the late 1800s of course, by John Carl Stevens and it's on the banks of the river across--basically across from the Empire State Building on the New Jersey side. And at that time, it was an all-boys school. It was--I--when I was there, there were--I only saw three black people in the school. There was one ahead of me and there was another black--no, no, there were--I'm sorry, there were two other blacks in my class. So there were at least four of us black people in that school in 1965 when I got there. And I left home, I said okay I'm gonna do engineering, electrical engineering. But I was so much in love with physics, I stayed in physics for the four years. I couldn't get myself to migrate over to electrical engineering. Speaker 1: What was it about physics? Speaker 2: Oh, I liked--I think I liked the idea of problem-solving from first principals. I just liked the challenge of trying to understand why things are the way they are from a more fundamental perspective, rather than worrying about applying them to the real world directly. Although I saw the appli--I always saw the applications. But I enjoyed just solving the problems. It was very challenging for me. It's something I had to--I have to understand this. I've got to conquer this. There must be some joy here. Speaker 1: Well I know in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], especially like--Albert Einstein was held up as an example of a genius, what a genius ought to be. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He's a theoretical physicist-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But did you have any scientific heroes in those days before you came over? Speaker 2: Not in Barbados, no. Speaker 1: I mean not necessarily native Barbadians, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I--there was no one scientist that I looked up to and say I wanna be like this person when I grow up. I just enjoyed the stuff and whatever, wherever it takes me it takes me. I didn't--I just followed my instincts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't have role models in Barbados in physics to follow, and I didn't have any on the national--international scene either. I didn't identify with any role models at the time. Story_ID: 24409 Speaker 1: Okay. What about at Stevens [Institute of Technology]? Did any professors really, you know, stand out? Speaker 2: The physics professors were the ones I enjoyed most. And the mathematics professors. I had a chemistry teacher, didn't like him as much. Didn't relate to him at all. These were tough days, you know. This was days of the Civil Rights era [Civil Rights Movement] and people are rioting and stuff like that in different cities and I'm a foreigner in a foreign country and trying to understand these race relations 'cause the place where I grew up, it was a very different scenario. Most of the people were black, and so I'd seen black lawyers and--I hadn't seen too many black scientists, but I'd seen black people in power and control in the government because by that time, the Brits had decided that--they gave a lot of these--several of the islands--full internal self-government, so we had black prime ministers and stuff like that, and so I left home with a lot of confidence that basically, I can do anything I wanna do. Then I came here and I'm seeing yes, the black people here are struggling more for equality. My background is different. Some people don't understand it. Probably more optimistic and always smiling and laughing, and more confident in my outlook. Maybe it's a false confidence, but--and it took me a while to understand how my background differed and my confidence and my attitude towards life was different from the typical American black at the time. And eventually, I did understand the picture. But it was kind of shock to me when I first got here that we all looked the same and we behaved differently. Speaker 1: What were some of the differences as they manifested themselves? Speaker 2: Well, I told you a whole docile. The Barbadian blacks were relative to the Jamaicans, and so manners and politeness and respect for old--elderly people or even older people, respect for your teachers in general was something that was part of our culture. And I remember--I told you when my sister--my mother's sister moved to Brooklyn [New York] and lived there and raised a family. So she was already in Brooklyn when I arrived from Barbados. And I just remember that first night, going downstairs from her apartment, walking on the street and these little kids on their tricycles and bicycles almost running us over. No "Excuse me, sorry," nothing, you know? And I was just shaking my head. I said "My God." I'm not used to this. I'm used to people saying 'good morning' on the elevator or on the train or on a bus, and people don't say--don't do that kind of thing, you know? And I don't know how much time you've spent on the islands but people actually talk to one another. Strangers and stuff like that, and there was no--you don't talk to strangers here. You get robbed or mugged, I don't know. So there was a cultural adjustment I had to make. Understanding that the people in America are from all over the world whereas in Barbados, they're from either Barbados or they're from England. And most of them that are from England are tourists. They're not there very long anyway. So, yeah, these cultural adjustments were things I had to learn fast and try to understand what was going on and, you know, in the streets, and why it wasn't safe to go out at night and--you know--I was a youngster and--yeah. Story_ID: 24410 Speaker 1: Did you live on campus? Speaker 2: Yeah, I lived on campus. I went over to visit her [Warde's maternal aunt, who lived in Brooklyn, New York] on weekends. Speaker 1: This is like-- Speaker 2: '65 [1965], '66 [1966], '67 [1967]. Yeah-- Speaker 1: Now, it's just across--it's in New Jersey, in Newark, or-- Speaker 2: No. It's not that far over. It's right across--if you were--it's on the bank to the Hudson, so if you were in Midtown Manhattan, and you could swim across the Hudson, that's where I was. Speaker 1: So that would be Patterson, or--? Speaker 2: 34th--not that far in. Right on the banks. Right on the banks. Hoboken is the name of the city. Speaker 1: Hoboken. Alright. Hoboken, New Jersey. Speaker 2: Their claim to fame is that that was the town in which Frank Sinatra was born. And that was a yuppy neighborhood with all those brownstones. You can't pay the rent there anymore, but in those days, it was like--there were shipyards. There were, you know, the ships would get repaired and the boats would get repaired on that side of the Hudson. So it was like shipyard after shipyard after shipyard, and bar after bar. Shipyards on one side and bars on the other side. It was not a pleasant place to live in those days. (Unclear) --today. Speaker 1: How were you treated in those days, I mean in general? Speaker 2: Well, I was scared because I didn't know where I was gonna be accepted and where I wasn't, so I was always treading on thin ice and not taking any chances. I wasn't gonna assume that I can walk into a place and people are gonna hug me and love me. I was just scared. I was just feeling every situation out day-by-day, and that was true amongst my fellow students, also of my professors. Because I keep hearing of all this race stuff, race stuff everywhere and so--and all this racial discrimination, so I'm looking for it. I don't wanna get beaten up or mugged or anything, so I'm very very careful (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 24411 Speaker 1: Alright. Now, how did your studies go? Were you prepared for Stevenson? Speaker 2: Well, it turns out that from my high school, Harrison College, I had a good preparation in mathematics and physics. And enough chemistry that during the first year--first semester--I didn't have to work very hard. So, so from that perspective, I was well prepared. From the perspective of literature and so on, I was not as well prepared. I hadn't read as much as some of my other colleagues had read, and I found it easier to do the sciences than to do the literature. It was partly because of interest. Excuse me. So, so I looked--like I was a young, black, smart kid, you know, 'cause when all the other guys were struggling with calculus and all that, that was second nature to me. And so I was helping people after a while with homework, so I made some friends, you know. And after the first year, I realized that things weren't as bad as I had imagined and that yeah, I could survive here, and you just have to pick your friends carefully and you feel people out first, see where they stand before you say too much or do too much and I was--I try to use some common sense in all my inter-personal relationships. I always waited to see if I was gonna be accepted before I, you know, opened up, so to speak. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you had good grades I take it. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) I was on the Dean's List. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What area of physics did--were you drawn to? Speaker 2: At that early age we didn't--I mean, it's too early to specialize. In physics, normally one starts off with mechanics, and under the British system, applied mathematics looked a lot like physics, like mechanics. So I had no trouble with that kind of physics. And then we moved on to electricity and magnetism. I have a little bit of it at Harrison College. (Unclear) --and that kind of thing (unclear). So, but I didn't have it--it was not calculus-based physics at the time. So then, introducing the calculus into physics was new to me. But it was a piece of cake because I really like calculus. So the physics was what I would call general physics. It was mechanics, electricity and magnetism, and then later on it was waves (ph.). And I still didn't have a specialty in physics, so when I graduated with a bachelor's degree in physics, I had taken a whole bunch of basic physics courses in different disciplines, but I wasn't a specialist in any of them. So I sampled around, I took some special relativity, I took thermodynamics, electricity magnetism, advance mechanics, and I took one astronomy course--astrophysics course. But I didn't specialize. Only after I got to graduate school did I start to specialize. Story_ID: 24412 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you played varsity soccer at Stevens, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so, what position did you play on? Speaker 2: I played right wing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were pretty good? Speaker 2: Well I was--I was a fast runner. And, no, I would say I was kind of average. I really wasn't--I was not the star player, you know. But--and that's the position the coach put me in. He didn't ask me what position I want to play, and maybe he need a right-winger and so he says "you play there," and the coach didn't spend a lot of time with us going through drills. Basically, we got to practice and he was very much hands-offish so my soccer skills didn't get much better. Well, I played for two years I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I think the last year--you had to go on Saturdays to all these games. I just got tired of riding the bus on Saturdays away from school to play soccer, so the last year I gave up. I says "I don't want to do this anymore." Story_ID: 24413 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, in 19--you graduated in '69 [1969] but 1968, Dr. King was killed. Was there trouble in Hoboken after Dr. King was assassinated? That would be April 4th, 1968? Speaker 2: I don't remember any trouble in Hoboken. I mean Newark is a big city. That's where things happen. Hoboken, not much happened. The neighborhood was pretty white neighborhood. I mean there were very few black people in Hoboken. You know, it was still a blue collar--very much a blue collar neighborhood. So, Newark was where the action was. So if you wanna see a lot of black folk and do things, you gotta go to Newark. I hardly ever went there. I didn't have a car. A friend of mine had a car because to actually to pay my--'cause I got a partial scholarship from Stevens. I think it paid partial tuition and I still had to buy books and stuff like that. My father was helping me and I took odd jobs in the summer to do that, and I had a--sort of a job which was like a--with the janitorial service where we--on Sundays, we would clean up the cafeteria after the students had their parties--the Saturday night parties. You know, we'd go in there on Sunday mornings with our mops and all that. And one of my guys there, I think he was Puerto Rican, he had a car, so occasionally we would drive over to Newark. But I didn't have any transportation in those days. Story_ID: 24414 Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, did you run for any class offices or anything? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. I was--I took up photography as a hobby, so I worked for the class year book and the newspaper--the student newspaper. I took pictures at baseball games. Didn't understand the game, but I'd go there and sit and either watch the batter and try to take pictures and get action on first base, and they would get published in the student newspaper. I got some good shots. Story_ID: 24415 Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So, in your senior year--you ended up going to Yale [University, in New Haven, Connecticut]. Now, did you have good counseling? Speaker 2: No, I did the same thing again. I--after I--well at Stevens, what happened, I had to do a bachelor's thesis in physics, and there was a new laboratory set up called the cryogenics laboratory and it was run by a British guy who was on the last leg of his career in physics. And somehow, he ended up at Stevens. I don't know why he chose Stevens or how he ended up there, but anyway he had a building, a whole building. It wasn't a large building, which was dedicated to cryogenics. This is the study of the ultra-cold, basically. And so I went over to him--he was British origin and I'm from Barbados, so I figured there might be some resonance there. So I went over there and I talked to him about doing my senior thesis in his laboratory and he accepted me. And he was trying to build this refrigerator. It's called a helium dilution refrigerator, which goes down to, you know, a couple of--in those days maybe a degree or so above absolute zero. Really cold stuff. And he gave me a small project to work on, which became my bachelor's thesis. It was making heat exchangers for this helium and dilution refrigerator. And that's what got me interested in the--in low temperature physics. So when I left Stevens to go to Yale, I started looking around to see who else was doing low temperature physics. And low temperature physics often involves--no, it can involve--because a lot of things solidify at low temperature, there's a branch of solid state physics that overlaps with low temperature physics. So, I found an advisor at Yale who was working with cold stuff and I basically went to him and asked if I can join his research group. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's when I started to specialize. Speaker 1: Okay. So, at Yale, did you choose Yale because they had a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I chose Yale again based on money. Just the same as I chose Stevens. Speaker 1: They offered you a scholarship? Speaker 2: They offered me a fellowship (unclear) teach. The--some of the other schools I applied to offered me teaching assistantships, which means that I had to come in and grade papers, and maybe help do tutoring to undergraduate students. So I picked Yale because it was like I just got paid to go to school. Money was still very important there. It still wasn't a lot around. We were sending dollars from Barbados to--at that point, I told my father [Davidson Chase] he doesn't have to help me anymore. I'm fine. So, even in the last year at Stevens [Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey], I told him "Stop, I don't--you know, I can manage from here. I can work in the summers, I can piece this together and I can make it work." I took some loans from Stevens instead of having, you know, trying to send money up here. Horrible exchange rate. So, in fact I don't even know from the junior year I had him send money. I try to stop him from doing--from that commitment as early as I could. Speaker 1: And did you get back to Barbados at all after (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I went back maybe every two years or so for a couple of weeks. I didn't stay very long. Once a year. I'm sorry, not even every year. About every two years I would go back and I would stay a couple of weeks and I think my longest stay away might--at any time--might have been three years, but I always try to make sure I got back within three. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright now in Yale, now who was your--you went--most of the (unclear) you were gonna go right straight through the master's degree. That's just a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I just went straight-- Speaker 1: --speed bump. Speaker 2: I just went straight to the Ph.D. Never stopped. Speaker 1: Who was your advisor? Speaker 2: My thesis advisor, his name is Robert Wheeler, W-H-E-E-L-E-R. And he had a joint appointment in physics and also in the Department of Engineering and Applied Science. And so I came in to him and told him what I had done and what I'm interested in doing. And I had a fellowship also, which means it wasn't gonna cost him anything for me to come work in his lab. The fellowship didn't last for the whole stint that I was there for the Ph.D. It was a fellowship, I think, for the first year. And in the second year, they gave me a partial fellowship from some other fund, and then the last couple of years I took a loan and supplemented whatever they had given me. So I ended up with loans from Stevens and loans from Yale by the time I was done. Story_ID: 24416 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you were still like focused on a low temperature physics? Speaker 2: Yes. Well--I--my thesis topic became the--basically the physics of solid oxygen. And it's a fascinating area because oxygen is a gas that we breathe every day. You can see through miles and miles of it. When you cool it down, it becomes a liquid, and the liquid is like blue in color, almost the color of your shirt, and it's a magnetic liquid. If you put liquid oxygen in a test tube and you run a magnet outside the test tube, it follows the magnet up and down the side to the side walls. So this became very interesting. I don't like to think I don't understand how things work, so--and then if you cool it down further, it freezes and you get solid oxygen, and that's also light blue and it's also magnetic. So there was this magnetic material that I want to understand the blue color and the magnetism. Speaker 1: So, is oxygen magnetic as a gas? Speaker 2: No. It's to dilute. It's--the molecules and the gas are very far apart. And so there is not that interaction. Speaker 1: It's more concentrated when it's in liquid oil. Speaker 2: And the liquid--they're much closer together-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then you can really see the magnetic properties. But the molecule itself inherently has the property for magnetism. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that was your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That became my Ph.D. thesis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. That became my Ph.D. thesis. Speaker 1: The properties of solid (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) solid oxygen. Optical and magnetic properties of solid oxygen. Speaker 1: What would be the optical properties of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's just that it was blue. Why is it blue? Why is it not some other color? Does the blue property in a magnetic thing--what's the correlation? Is there any? Speaker 1: Well why is it blue? Since we're-- Speaker 2: What happens in oxygen is that double molecules, two molecules seem to cooperate and they absorb light outside the blue region. So in transmission, it looks blue. So it was a double molecule transition as we say. I'm using jargon here on you. So there was this cooperation between molecules that normally would have been unexpected that causes the blue color. One molecule by itself didn't do it, but this cooperation between pairs of molecules that cause it to absorb seeing red so it would look blue in transmission. Speaker 1: Okay, now you did something extraordinary at Yale from what I've read. You invented a new interferometer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Interferometer, right, right. So, it--the reason for that is to study the optical properties of the oxygen. My thesis was actually to study the optical properties much closer to absolute zero. If you cool it down from the gas to the liquid, it's still not very cold. It's like ninety degrees (unclear). And if you cool it down even further, it becomes a solid, light blue solid. Now you can cool it even further, and then it breaks up into little small pieces. We call it polycrystalline. And then it looks like snow. Looks almost white. But my thesis advisor wanted to study the lowest temperature phase, so every time it goes from, you know, the molecules that--in the first solid--right after it came from the liquid, were packed like the corners of a cube. So that was the crystal structure. It was a cubic crystal structure. The lowest temperature phase is a so-called monoclinic structure. Packing of the molecules at the corners of the (unclear) are very different. And that's a--that's the one we wanted to study. And because it broke up and looked like snow, I could not get any good--I couldn't get the experiments done to figure out what the true color of this thing was. And so I had to invent a new instrument that will allow me to study this low temperature phase without having it break up. So basically, we took a shortcut where it went from the gas straight to the low temperature phase. We call it inverse sublimation. Sublimation is the process where a solid goes straight to vapor without becoming liquid. We were doing the inverse of that. We had gone from the gas straight to the solid. And so I had to trick the system into doing that. And so when we did that, we got a very thin sheet of this solid oxygen on a grass sub-straight. And so this interferometer basically had two little prisms on the other side of the glass and we were bouncing light back and forth between the top and the bottom of the glass. (Unclear) one (unclear) it bounced around the glass and came up through the other prism. And every time it bounced off the surface, it interacted with the thin film of solid oxygen, and that's how I got to find out what colors it was absorbing. So, that instrument with the light bouncing around inside of it--some German scientists had studied that instrument for a different reason a long time ago, and I modified it basically to get my experiment done. Speaker 1: It resulted in something new that had never been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So it was new, yeah. It hadn't been done like that before. It--I had to get two things. I wanted to know the thickness of the oxygen I had deposited, and I wanted to know what colors it absorbed. And then I had to go back and do all the che--the physical chemistry to--and the physics--to relate that to the magnetism. So I got the first absorption spectrum of that flow temperature phase of solid oxygen. Story_ID: 24417 Speaker 1: So this is--this is--now did you--was there--now you're at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] during this time and you were hired almost, from what I understand, almost immediately by MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Right, so-- Speaker 1: --after you got your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: --after I got my Ph.D., I decided I really wanted to stay in science and--(simultaneous) I was not a citizen. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. Speaker 2: I still wasn't a citizen. And I needed to find a job where my employer would have let me apply for at least permanent residence. So I applied at big companies. I applied to IBM [International Business Machines Corportation]. I don't know which other ones I applied to. And I applied to a whole bunch of universities 'cause I knew universities would do that. I picked all the ivy leagues [ivy league universities]. And IBM called me first and says they'd like to interview me. And I told them also I didn't want to do solid oxygen. In fact, I didn't want to do solid state physics, I wanted to do optics because it was the optical thing that really got me out of the hot water when I was trying to do my research. I said, "this optical field, I like this stuff." The laser had just been invented also, and people were talking about fiber optics and integrated optics and all kinds of stuff like that. I thought it was fascinating, and that's when I said to myself, "I also want to be an engineer now. I'm ready to be an engineer." No longer theoretical, you know. No longer doing physics, or science for the sake of science. So I applied to IBM in Fishkill, New York and they invited me for an interview. I was up there two days interviewing. I also applied to MIT and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]and Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], Yale, you name it. And MIT was the only school that called me for an interview. And IBM had not yet made its decision, so I came here, I gave a job talk, they liked it, and a couple of days later they said "we're interested in hiring you." So I called up IBM. I says "I have a job. I'm gonna take it." So, IBM actually never made an offer formally. And I came here, and I've been here ever since. Story_ID: 673666 Speaker 1: Okay. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Cardinal Warde. That's C-A-R-D-I-N-A-L, W-A-R-D-E. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 14, 1945, Barbados, West Indies. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Professor of electrical engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October--I'm sorry (laughter). Today is-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): April 28. Speaker 2: --April 28, 2013. Speaker 1: All right. And-- Speaker 2: The last one was in October. Speaker 1: All right, yes, and--that's right we're finishing an interview that we started in October of 2012. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at my home in Hopkinton, Massachusetts. Story_ID: 673667 Speaker 1: So, we're going to pick up with you--we're going to start with, you just got your Ph.D. from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and you're--what did you decide, this is nineteen seventy-- Speaker 2: Four [1974]. Speaker 1: --four [1974]. And now, most scientists do a postdoc [post doctorate] somewhere, but you decided not to do that, right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: All right. Well, tell us your thinking and what you did? Speaker 2: Well, after I got my Ph.D. from Yale, or just before I finished, I started sending applications, job applications out. By that time I had decided that I would love to be a professor of physics or electrical engineering at a major institution, preferably university level, because I wanted to continue research. And so I wrote letters to many, many of the Ivy League and prestigious universities in the United States telling them what I had accomplished as a graduate student. Speaker 1: And just to, just say--talk about that, because you invented a low temperature interferometer-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --at Yale. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And this was a big deal, this was something that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, for me it was because it helped me to get a Ph.D. But, yeah basically, it was a German instrument that was around in the 1920s used for a completely different purpose, and I basically modified that, so it could do the job I wanted it to do, which meant we took the substrate that they used and we made it many, many times thinner, almost like a hundred times thinner, to accomplish my job which I wanted to do which was to look at the optical spectra of solid oxygen which was experiments we were doing pretty close to absolute zero, to--I'm sorry to zero degrees kelvin, same thing. Speaker 1: So this really made you--you were, you had seemed to be moving with the confidence of someone who knows that you're ready to join a faculty and didn't need to do a postdoc anywhere, right? Speaker 2: Well, I would have done a postdoc if I had to, but I believe you shoot for the stars and if you land on the moon, it's still a victory. So I took the chance and I gambled; I asked for a faculty position. I had interviewed at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] because that was the first industrial company that responded to me; and then I wrote these letters of course to all the, you know, Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], Yale, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], Cal Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California], so on. But MIT offered me an opportunity to come and do an interview, and I was granted a position there before IBM made its decision; so I told IMB I have a job, I'm happy, you don't need to scratch your head any further to make a decision, I'm going to go to MIT; and I've been there ever since. Story_ID: 673668 Speaker 1: The focus of your work changed at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right, to-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --optics? Speaker 2: Correct. But what happened was my research focus was low temperature physics, and in particular, I was studying the optical properties of solid oxygen at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And while that was interesting in itself, I realized that the applications of solid oxygen were few and far in between in terms of finding a (laughter) a job in that particular area. There was an interest in physics, an interest in physical chemistry, but the fact that I had made this discovery in optics and this breakthrough which allowed me to basically finish my thesis because I could not think of any other way of doing, of achieving the result that I was looking for. I decided that a focus in optics made a lot of sense for me and that I could then apply it to electrical engineering departments, as well as physics departments. And, at this point in time also, integrated optics was becoming an interesting field where people would try to miniaturize optics and put them on--you know, in addition to electrical circuits and so on to build (unclear) signal processing devices. And so I became interested in applying my knowledge of optics in combination with electronics and maybe trying to make a career along those paths, and that basically those are the kinds of things I proposed to MIT and to all the other places where I applied--that this is what I would like to do if I joined your faculty. And so my research indeed did shift away from physical chemistry, low temperature physics, a combination, to mostly signal processing in optics. And so that got me into a career that started developing novel kinds of optical devices which was more en- much more of an engineering focus. Story_ID: 673669 Speaker 1: So your time at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I mean your average day would be spent on research, right, and not on--because you taught, but you didn't have to teach as much, right. I mean what would be the proportion of teaching to--? Speaker 2: Oh (unclear) I joined MIT as an assistant professor right out of grad school [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. All professors, at least in my department, must teach. If you carried a title of professor, they expect you to teach. We don't have like research professors in our department. So, typically, most professors in my department will teach one course per semester; and the other activities, of course, would be a lot--big focus on research, of course, because we're an outstanding research organization, and service, service to the department, service to MIT. Those are the three things that professors do, and some people do service outside, you know, at the national level, to help the nation make decisions on, that involve science. But the three internal things are the service to MIT and the teaching and the research, and that's basically how the career started. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, who is the--you joined the physics department, right? Speaker 2: No. I joined--electrical engineering [Electrical Engineering and Computer Science]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Electrical engineer- okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yeah. Electrical engineering made the offer. Speaker 1: All right. And well, who was your department chair? Speaker 2: At the time, the guy who actually hired me is a man, his name is Paul Penfield [Paul Penfield, Jr.], he's now retired. He was the associate department head. Keep in mind our department is very large; we're the largest department at MIT. We have typically 110, 120 sometimes, professors, or faculty members in general. And we are a joint department. We're electrical engineering and computer science, combined. And when I got there in '74 [1974], that's the way it was and it still is that way. There used to be debates before I got there as to whether or not they should break up the thing and have it be two departments, but the department has always voted to stay together. We don't have those discussions anymore. We do realize and appreciate the admixture of computer scientist and electrical engineers working together; it's a very powerful combination, which makes us allow- which allows us to do interdisciplinary stuff that we probably would not have done as, if we were a single department. And we encourage professors to cross boundaries where, you know, people like me on the electrical engineering side would be encouraged to teach a computer science course and vice versa. So, we stay together, and I think this worked well for us, but it's a big monster to govern and manage. And I always admire the department heads who are able to--so we have three department heads, we have a, the top guy and then we have two associate department heads, one for electrical engineering, one for computer science, so there're three people managing this big department. Story_ID: 673670 Speaker 1: In terms of the research that you were doing [at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I guess, what would--so I would guess a lot of what you would do would depend on computer science as well, right, in? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you don't have to--if you look at the electrical engineers, they do everything, they're greedy--it's a greedy department. We have people who just do pure mathematics. They--typically they're studying systems, but their underpinning, and it's a lot of mathematics, right. Then we've got people who do material science also--materials of interest to people in our department [Electrical Engineering and Computer Science], of course, are electronic materials, optical materials, biological materials now have become very fashionable, and people look at materials from all kinds of level, from the microscopic level all the way down to the quantum level in our department. So you see that some of our professors will have joint department- appointments in the physics department [Department of Physics]. And, of course, electrical engineers do circuits and they do motors and they do electrical transmission systems, like the ones you'll find for the grid in--the electrical grid in the United States. So we do big things and we also do microscopic things. We do communication systems, I mean, your cell phone, for instance, a lot of electrical engineering is in there from the electromagnetic waves that go through the atmosphere to take the signal from here to Australia; to the circuits inside; to the optics for the display. And they always use that as a good example of things that electrical engineers do. There're not a lot of moving parts in it, although engineers are working on things like micro electrical mechanical systems that have motion inside as a hybrid of mechanical electrical engineering going on there. But we do a lot of things that affects everyday life from hearing aids, and trying to understand the ear and how it works and machines that would translate an amplified voice for the ear and so on. If you can think of any field, we can make electrical engineers--we can find electrical engineering in that field, basically. Speaker 1: And today there's so much information being passed around the world in a number of different ways, you know, through wires, through optical cable--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Fiber, yeah. Speaker 1: --fiber, the airwaves, you know, the radio waves, so electrical engineers are involved with all this? Speaker 2: All of those are-- Speaker 1: Transferring money, you know. Speaker 2: Yep. A lot of our students end up on Wall Street [New York, New York], because the same modeling tools that we use to study complex systems, well the financial industry can use those to create new derivatives and use security instruments in bungling stuff and we can also help to cause crashes on Wall Street. And they do hire a lot of our students. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, this is a big field and getting bigger and bigger-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --expanding, you know even as we speak, into new areas. Speaker 2: But my area is very s- you know mostly optical materials, optical devices and optical systems--that's my niche. Story_ID: 673671 Speaker 1: Now, you didn't do a postdoc, but was there any particular faculty member there that, you know, was like a mentor to you when you started, or kind of helped you learn the ways of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yes, when I joined the faculty. Typically, at most universities they try to pair up a senior faculty with a junior faculty because they worry about faculty members getting lost in the department, because it's a huge department, of course, not being noticed and then they come up for promotion and tenure and need letters from the mentors inside MIT, and they also, of course, go outside and get letters and so on. So, and being basically the first minority and faculty member in my department, I think there was, there was probably a lot of question marks about what do we do, how do we handle this, you know, and so on. I got, I had mentors; I had several people who were helping me in terms of mentors. One of them I didn't get along with very well, so that didn't work out too well, and another one I did get along with better; and then I developed relationships with other people in the department who would answer questions and steer me in the right direction. I basically had to go out and find the people in the department who'd be sympathetic and they were not necessarily the people the department had in mind to help me, but it worked out and I think I got reasonably good advice from talking to several different people. And what I learned is that along the way is that you have to know the system in which you're immersed; you have to understand how it operates. And that's the kind of information that a young assistant professor, or young lecturer in the university setting--doesn't, it doesn't come spontaneously, you have to go network, talk to people, and try to find how the system works. So you can navigate it, otherwise the system can strangle you. And yeah, there were times when I was being strangled, but I went and got help and studied the system and it, eventually I was able to navigate through the morass and make the right decisions. Speaker 1: Now, who were the good advisors that you found. You--it's good to name them; name the good ones. I don't want you to name the bad ones, so; but who were the good ones? Speaker 2: Well, Robert Kennedy [Robert S. Kennedy], he's now retired. He was a professor in the department who helped me. There were others who were very, very sympathetic, Jim Melcher [James R. Melcher], he's al- he's now deceased, was also very helpful, and Steve Senturia [Stephen D. Senturia], he's retired but still hangs around MIT once in a while. These were all people who in my department were very, very helpful in terms of giving advice. Speaker 1: And now you--were you the first person of African descent to work in the department? Speaker 2: As far as I can tell, I was the first person of African descent on the faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at MIT. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. This is a huge department. So well just tell us about you research then? Speaker 2: Okay. I can tell you before you, we go there is that the department has hired several others since then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was the first one to be tenured. Now we have at least three who are tenured who've come after me, but se- there were several in between who came in and didn't make it through the system. They basically went through the revolving door and out. And so you know, between 1974 and today, you just gave the date, which I got wrong, (laughter) you know we've ended up with three or four tenured black faculty in the department. Speaker 1: Okay, that's still out of 110-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --people? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So that's like less than, well-- Speaker 2: It's a very small percentage. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--very small percentage. Story_ID: 673672 Speaker 1: All right. So integrated optics, what are we talking about? Speaker 2: Okay. So my, my research--I was interested in integrated optics when I was a grad student [at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] applying for these positions. But once I got to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I first had to build the laboratory from scratch, and I think the department gave me three thousand U.S. dollars and as a startup package, I bought an optics table for twenty-eight hundred or something like that. I forgot what I did with the other two hundred. But I started writing research grants; and in particular, I collaborated with the same person there, Robert Kennedy [Robert S. Kennedy] and his research group. They were working on optical transmission through the atmosphere for communications. Basically, the same way that radio waves leave the radio station or the antenna and come to your home, you could do the same thing with light. The problem is that the wavelength of light is so short that when the light goes through the atmosphere because of the turbulence in the atmosphere, the light beam bends, and if you have clouds and haze and fog, the light scatters and it doesn't reach its destination in a wholesome form, to use laymen's terms. Speaker 1: A wholesome form (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. So it's hard to decode the message that you put on the beam. And the challenge there was to, can we build a device where we can put out the receiver and--to clean up the beam so you can get the message. And so I joined that group and went to their group meetings, and they posed that problem to me; and we had all these joint meetings about what the device needs to do, what it doesn't need to do; and so I then focused on solving this particular--helping to solve this particular problem. And the solution was not an integrated optic solution. So integrated options, while it was a dream when I left, I had to be practical, I wanted to collaborate, of course, with my other peers at MIT, and this sounded like an equally interesting problem. And, and so working with another of my colleagues, his name is Jeffrey Shapiro, who was a student of Kennedy initially and then became a professor, we together invented a device called the microchannel spatial light modulator. And basically, that device would accept an incoming optical signal--it could be a picture, it could be just light that looks like it was sort of random and didn't necessarily make a picture. But you could take that information on the light beam and the microchannel plate would put charge on the surface of the, of a lithium niobate crystal. The charge will induce electric fields, the electric fields will change the refractive index which will change the phase of the light. So we had a way of manipulating the phase of the light in two dimensions with this device. And we patented that, and he and I are co-inventors on the patent for that microchannel spatial light modulator. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, that's how history changed (laughter) the path that I had in mind to get me into spatial light modulators (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay so--how is the, is a spatial light modulator used now in some way--some practical way? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's, I still use them today. They look quite different from the ones that we invented then. That microchannel spatial light modulator is now obsolete. People have subsequently build, built liquid crystal spatial light modulators that are cheaper and easier to build. Doesn't have some of the characteristics and flexibility of the one that we designed. But because the laptop computer and digital cameras have invested a lot of money in liquid crystal displays, it is cheaper to get a liquid crystal display or buy one today than to build the one that we invented. And price is everything, of course, performance too. So today you can buy spatial light modulators based on liquid crystals, which are equally or better performing than the one that we invented; so ours have become obsolete. But during that time, Hamamatsu Photonics [Hamamatsu Photonics K.K.], Japanese company, purchased the license to build our device. And they've built several of them and sold them commercially. And they too have moved away from it and they're the liquid crystal displays now. Speaker 1: What were they--were they used for those large display boards, I mean? Speaker 2: Yeah. Our device was meant mostly to modulate the phase of an optical beam--the phase or the intensity, right. And it really wasn't meant to be used as a display for human beings to look at. But the display industry, of course, wanted to make displays for human beings to look at; and it turns out that there's some changes in the technology, not massive changes, especially just for the liquid crystals, you could make it do what we wanted it to do also. So the devi- so the field benefitted from the commercial activity that was going on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I hope I'm not going too far afield, but. Speaker 1: Now, so is any of this technology used in televisions today, that sort of thing? Speaker 2: The technology we invented, no. But of course the liquid crystal thing is now used in televisions and the laptop computers and everywhere. Story_ID: 673673 Speaker 1: And, you know, to make a long story short, we eventually, or I could say, I eventually got into the liquid crystal display business. Because one of the things I did while at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was I started a company called Optron Systems [Optron Systems, Inc.]. And Optron Systems won several contracts to work on novel types of liquid crystal displays. But these now are different from your laptop computer and the big TVs in that we were trying to build something the size of a fingernail with the same kind of resolution, so we called them micro displays. And we spun off a company from Optron Systems called Radiant Images [Radiant Images, Inc.] and Radiant Images eventually got purchased by Hoya [Hoya Corporation], a corporation in Japan and the technology moved away from United States. And I'm not sure where it is today (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, Optron Systems started in 1982, as I understand (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Okay. And so the, what were the micro displays used for? Speaker 1: The- those micro displays were meant to go into camcorders and digital cameras, at least the high end disp- high end devices at that time. Whereby when you look through the view finder, you weren't looking directly at the subject that you were trying to capture, you were looking at an image on a micro display that was magnified. And they were also meant to go into display eyeglasses, where you can put on a pair of glasses, you have two displays, one on either side; the light from the display reflects off the lens and into the eye and you have a big image, virtual image suspended in space in front of you; you can watch TV and read a newspaper or whatever. And you, in those days of course, the idea was to have a belt worn computer with all the imagery on it. And it was very interesting what had happened because we were one of the first players in that game trying to make these virtual displays, and we made some mock ups and prototypes. And there was a lot of complaint at the time because I think there were a couple of companies that started trying to sell these things. And I know, I remember Virgin Atlantic used to have them in the first-class where their passengers put on these glasses and watched TV. And the industry started to get complaints about eye strain, you know, kids are going to use these for video games and all that. And a lot of investors didn't want to get into the area because they're, figured it was too dangerous. And now all that stuff is coming back. People are now again talking about wearable computers and virtual reality glasses and all that, and I hear less talk about the eyestrain; so, these things seem to go around in cycles (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. And it makes you wonder too like what is more convenient, you know, for someone, you know, I mean I think that was the discussion that, with Steve Jobs that he always had about, you know, what do people want in terms of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --convenience, and in terms of the glasses and all that, I mean, in a--you're wearing the computer, is that more convenient than holding one in your hand. And I mean, a friend of mine has a phone that's as almost as big as a laptop, you know, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --it's got more, it's bigger-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(unclear) think it's better, but-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --a few years ago, smaller was better. So I don't know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, is it? Speaker 1: Well, it's always like that, one size fits all doesn't work. But you want one size that fits the majority and that's where you make your money and so. I don't like the phone too small because I can't find it, and I don't like the screen too small because I can't read it. But there're younger people probably want it tiny. I--so, but the market and people know what--or hopefully they know what most people want (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know, I mean it seems like it's shifting sand- you know shifting sands of-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --human caprice or something, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in terms of what is you know popular and why at that time. Story_ID: 673674 Speaker 1: So MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachsuetts]. So, all right so '82 [1982] you started Optron Systems [Optron Systems, Inc.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Optron Systems, right. Speaker 1: --and this is--so this is your business, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, but it, you said it morphed into another--Radiant Images [Radiant Images, Inc.]? Speaker 2: No. We--that was a spin off. Speaker 1: Spin off, yeah. Speaker 2: What we had, Optron Systems was concerned primarily with building devices that the, primarily the [U.S.] Air Force, [U.S.] Navy, [U.S.] Army could use for optical computing. In those days the interest was, you know, there's an object on the ground, I can see it; is it a friendly tank or a hostile tank; is it ours or is it someone else's. And the idea was to be able to process imagery very fast from air planes and maybe even from space, if necessary. And they wanted to do that with optical system- all optical systems rather than converting it to bit zeros and ones and processing it serially, you'd like to process it on the fly. And that's where these spatial light modulators would come in. So Optron started looking at some of the applications of these kinds of devices. And then we realized soon that there was really not going to be much commercial benefit to be gained from building spatial light modulators to look at these military targets; only the military was interested. So we decided that we would like to run these things backwards, where instead of having them produce an image, we would shove light into them and have them--well they would produce the image rather than shoving image in and process the image, we would run it backwards where we put a uniform beam of light and then have the modulator create an image, that was called a display. And that's how Optron decided that it would go--instead of just servicing the military market, we would try to make displays. And their first attempt was to make a large screen display for the--for amphitheaters and stadiums because our technology was sort of high-end technology. It was going to be hard at that time to make large numbers of it. So we decided to focus on the high end. And then we had this brilliant idea also to focus on very tiny displays as well. And that particular project, which got funded by the Navy to begin with--because the government also at that time started looking at high resolution displays and put money into them. In fact one company here in Massachusetts, Kopin [Kopin Corporation], got large amounts of money from DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency] to build their transparent liquid crystal micro displays. And we decided that we would also try to tap into some of those resources to build our novel crystal display. But eventually we took that technology, the tiny liquid crystal displays and we separated that off into a separate company because it looked as though it was going to take off commercially faster than the large amphitheater displays that we were looking at first. Story_ID: 673675 Speaker 1: Continue to talk about Optron [Optron Systems, Inc.] and Radiant. Speaker 2: Okay. So I had a--with me in Optron was my business partner who was a man, his name is Ali Ersen, and he really ran Radiant Images [Radiant Images, Inc.]. And what he brought that was novel was the idea of a transparent substrate to put the liquid crystal on. And it was actually sapphire was the material that he and his other grad student--he had worked on silicon on sapphire technology, how they grow single crystal silicon on sapphire. So he brought that to Optron, and he became the president of--or vice president of Radiant Images, and he actually ran the company and we raised corporate venture capital from, from Hoya [Hoya Corporation]. And this is why Hoya ended up purchasing Radiant because we were running out of money, and we were looking for another partner who was going to put in as much or more in Radiant--more to Hoya, and they didn't want to be diluted, so (unclear) so they had a choice either to be diluted and bring in others who might actually buy the technology later or they can buy it themselves, and they decided, look, we're going to buy it. And so that's how Radiant basically ended. And this was a time when it was really difficult to raise money because the dotcoms were big and bold and everybody wanted to do a dotcom, and that's where the deals were being made with the VCs [venture capitalists], and they didn't want to see or hear of a hardware. Speaker 1: So this is in the early '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: No, I think it's later than that. Speaker 1: Ni- okay. Mid-'90s [1990s], late '90s [1990s]? Speaker 2: I--no. I think we were into 2000 by then. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And Hoya is spelled H-O-Y--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: H-O-Y-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm sorry I don't have all the dates in my head as to when that actually took place--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Ali Mersen? Speaker 2: Ersen-- Speaker 1: Ersen--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --E-R-S-E-N (simultaneous). Speaker 1: E- E-R-S-E-N. Okay. Speaker 2: E-R-S-E-N, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Turkish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you know so we spun off Radiant, and Optron Systems still exists today. It's--still working on displays, mostly infrared displays. Basically infrared projection displays rather than focus on the visible where human beings can see it, the images are all now in the infrared; and the government is still the largest consumer for those kinds of devices. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: They're basically used to create infrared imagery that would be used to test rockets or plooms from rockets or hot bodies, airplanes flying through the air for the, for missile guidance so you can test your stuff in the laboratory before you actually send it on a mission. Our systems will provide this fake imagery so you have a missile there sitting watching TV basically (laughter), and it thinks it's seeing the real thing, so it's a piece of test equipment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's basically what we're doing today. Speaker 1: All right, all right. And so Radiant Images is still-- Speaker 2: Radiant Images is gone. Speaker 1: --is gone. Speaker 2: Hoya purchased it; they had some deal with Citizen [ph.] in Japan and some of the technology or all of it got transferred to Citizen, I don't know, I'm not sure where, what Citizen is doing with it--whether they put it in moth balls or they're building products around it. Speaker 1: Okay. So Optron is still--? Speaker 2: But Optron, the parent company--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: The parent company is still-- Speaker 2: --is still around. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I'm--(unclear) I thought that Optron--well, but Radiant was spun off by Optron? Speaker 2: Correct. Right. Speaker 1: Right, but it stayed intact? Speaker 2: Yeah. And Optron is looking for a buyer now so I cannot be an entrepreneur anymore (laughter). Speaker 1: Why not? Why not; are you saying that you're basically a research scientist and not an entrepreneur? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean, first I'm a research scientist. I'm a professor first of all and a research scientist, the company is an appendage. It's something a lot of MIT faculty do--I mean, if I had stayed in Barbados where I grew up, I probably never would have started a company. But I came into an environment where I look around, and a lot of our faculty members have started companies, some of these companies have grown very large, they've donated billions back to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and they provide scholarships for students, all kinds of things; and I says well, maybe I can make a contribution like that also. But had I not been in that environment, I probably would never have started a business. Story_ID: 673676 Speaker 1: All right, so back at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], now you, you became engaged in research that, that had to do with neural computer systems, right? Speaker 2: Right. Right, so, the--yeah, going back we made, we made several advances in the spatial light modulators for optical communications working with Robert Kennedy [Robert S. Kennedy], Jeff Shapiro [Jeffrey Shapiro] and others. And that was funded primarily by National Science Foundation in those days. But, you know, things moved on. Robert Kennedy retired, Shapiro became one of the associate department heads; and my research interests shifted towards problems that I thought optics could make a significant contribution and basically in the computing area, because, again, I'm being fertilized by people in the computer side of the department. And optical computing by itself turned out not to be a viable field because what had happened is that the electronic microprocessors got faster and better and smaller, and even though it's a serial machine that processes, you know, things in the pipeline, one behind- one process after another after another, and you can do some parallelization, people have done that. The speeds of the processors were fast enough that--and the size was small enough that optical computers, as (gesture) afield was not going to be able to compete. Systems were too big, too power hungry also and not cost effective. So what I did was I looked at the weaknesses of the traditional electronic processor and asked, can optics help it rather than compete with it. And that's what got my research to start moving towards optoelectronic neural, we call them coprocessors. And we know that the electronic computer today is great for balancing your checkbook, you know, banks now make very few mistakes and you know that certainly is the most significant digits from your--of your checking and savings account; and they have that kind of reliability and accuracy that is necessary for a lot of transactions--not only financial, but also scientific and otherwise. But we have another computer, we have this one (points to head), all the animals have it; it's called a brain, and it does computations, too, of a different kind. It doesn't do zeroes and ones. But I can drive my car down the street at maybe a hundred miles an hour, miss all the potholes and not hit any oncoming cars which are also coming at me at a hundred miles an hour and I'm not processing zeroes and ones and doing any complicated arithmetic, algebra or anything of the sort. So how does it work? Why can't we complement the microprocessor today--it's called an Intel microprocessor--with a neural machine. Now, hopefully, now it's small, not like the big ones that we were looking at for optical signal process and optical computing many, many years ago. And so we took it upon ourselves to start looking at architectures that we can build in optics that would help. So one of the disadvantages of having electrical wires in a circuit is that when they get close together you get crosstalk--signal travelling a long wire, if it gets close to the other and (unclear), feels some currents in the other wire and then you can hear on this wire the signal you were sending on that wire. And whereas with light, I can send two light beams through one another and have them not interact--where one is carrying signal A, the other is carrying signal B; and signal A gets to its destination without sending any of its information onto the other wire. So we figured that optical interconnections make sense; the brain is a highly interconnected structure and maybe we could build a brain-like machine where we use light beams to communicate between neurons--neurons are the processors in the brain. And so these are, be like artificial neural networks. But again my research is, would be very hardware centric. We wanted to use things that we knew how to do well: holograms. Holograms people think of them making pretty pictures. In our lab, holograms are used to take a light beam and break it up into many other light beams and to allow us to put information on one beam that wouldn't be on another and so on. So we use holograms to distribute the light where we want it to go, and that's something our lab became very proficient at. Story_ID: 673677 Speaker 1: The other thing that was needed was we--you know, the silicon devices that are out there today, it's difficult to get light out of silicon; there have been breakthroughs now where people are beginning to make emitters in silicon; still very dim, not very versatile and I'm hoping that one day that that will change. So we were not going to wait for s- for optical silicon. The traditional means of getting light out of semiconductors has been gallium arsenide--that's the material that compliments silicon; that allows you to make your laser pointers and so on. And people have made now LEDs [light-emitting diode] also in organic materials, and so you can buy an old ad display today. So the technology has evolved where we have materials that can emit light, but they're not silicon-based. And the, and to me the Holy Grail would be silicon circuits and silicon light emitters. So we ended up having to build hybrid systems where we can take in an image; suppose I wanted to process your face to figure out whether you were Larry [Larry Crowe] or whether you were Cardinal [HistoryMaker Cardinal Warde]--you know, put a lens or image you into perhaps a silicon photodetector array, because silicon can make nice photodetectors, and then I can do some processing in silicon, as a traditional electronic microprocessor does. But then I really wanted to make my decision, I really want to build a highly interconnected network, like the brain, and I want to use light to do the interconnections between the neurons. So from the silicon, I have to go to a light emitter; and today we're looking at organic light emitting diodes. You know, they're organic LEDs basically as the emitters, and then holograms to do the connections. So this is the kind of work we're doing right now--I have several undergraduate and graduate students in the laboratory working on building a very crude prototype of this idea. With the goal towards having it miniaturized so that in the end we end up with something that's maybe on a six inch wafer because that's the size that silicon devices start or either six inch, eight inch wafer and then it's diced up, of course, to make like Intel microprocessors, but we would use the whole wafer, and a sheet of holograms behind it--well first of sheet of light emitting diodes, maybe organic base and then my hologram; and then this gets repeated layer by layer to make our device. So, so that's how the technology has changed; research interests have sort of morphed into this optoelectronic neural network system. And the goal is to make it tiny and integrated so we're looking now at micro optics: how small can we make the optical elements such that they're compatible with the size of silicon circuits. So that's where we are today in the research. Story_ID: 673678 Speaker 1: The overall goal is then, is to make a device that will be able to, or to enable devices to--? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, make a long story short, well, we want to do--we want to build devices that will perform operations that are difficult or complex or cumbersome for the traditional electronic microprocessor, and those are the things that the brain does well. The example I started to talk about was like face recognition. I don't have to digitize every point in your face to figure out who you are and compare that against some reference. So the machines that we're looking at are trained, not programmed. What we do is we will take your face and we will get a picture, image from the front, and inside the machine these light beams that I talked about that the hologram does, these holograms are--well, they're holograms sometimes, sometimes they're lens that are rays and stuff like that, but it's material that change the direction of light. There're some dynamic interconnections that we can make inside the machine. So we look at your face from the front, we look at it from the side; we probably won't look at it from the back. And we will train this machine and tell it, no matter what direction we look at it from, your output must be a certain pixel, maybe the pixel four, three--row four, column three, for instance. And it will adjust its internal weights of the brightnesses of the lights and where the lights goes inside of the machine until that pixel lights up, that might take an hour to do, and we call that training. So we force it to put all this light there and configure itself internally so that happens; then you take my face and you do the same thing, my pixel now is 2-2, and we will train it. After we've trained it, the information that the--we call them weights that are stored for your face, we store in a traditional electronic computer, and then for my face we also store it in electronic computer. When we are done, we upload all those weights to the machine. We point the machine at you and eventually in, you know, in a few nanoseconds your pixel, 4-3 lights up; pointed at me, 2-2 lights up. So once you've trained it, it's very fast, but the training can take long. And so we have students in our group who are looking at training algorithms, to speed up the training to make it faster. But yes, these devices would be used for face recognition, guessing, interpolation, extrapolation--things that human beings do well. So when I drive my car down the street, yes, I'm not processing zeroes and ones in my brain. We do a lot of mid-course correction. It says, okay, this is good enough. If I missed a car by one inch that's oncoming, I'm okay; and it's a perfectly good solution. I might be nervous, doing it as a driver, but that's a good enough solution. I don't have to go right down the center between the sidewalk and the oncoming car to be successful, and that's a much faster operation to do than to try to calculate the distance of the wheels from the other car, the sidewalk, and you have to process that information, and it's changing very rapidly the faster you drive. So we're trying to shortcut--and I think that's what the brain does, it takes a shortcut to all these decisions and it makes a guess. If the guess is good enough, it keeps it, and it keeps making iterations on the guess and you get to your destination successfully. So for Mars rover or some other autonomous vehicle that you might send to some distant planet, my claim is you cannot write enough lines of computer code to cover every eventuality that this thing is going to see. And at some point what we're doing right now is not scalable. We're gonna have to make this thing have a brain like a human being or like a mouse or something where it can make a decision given its environment to go left, to go right, to go around the obstacle, you know to go look at that mountain over there; and you have to train it on lots of examples on Earth before you send it off. To me that's the way to go in the future--not to write more and more code. The code gets complex, you make one error in the code and the whole thing fails, and we've seen that happen before on some of our missions. Whereas with these neural networks, if one neuron fails, the machine still works, and we've proven that in a laboratory. We've gone in and killed neurons on our machine, and it still recognizes Larry's face. So to me that's where we should be going. And I think more money should be going into, into neural networks and into making artificial brains, because we can't take the brain right now out of a human being and stick it in a machine. Maybe that's coming later on, I don't know, but for today it's an artificial neural network. Story_ID: 673679 Speaker 1: So people who are dealing with artificial intelligence now, they're--the cutting edge is trying to do what you just described? Speaker 2: Well, no, there is--maybe they're looking more and more at this now, but artificial intelligence as we have known it, as far as I'm concerned, has been a big failure. It was a lot of nice hype, but a lot of the research got focused on serial electronic machines, von Neumann machines. And that was fine, we learned a lot of stuff in artificial intelligence, but if you take the words literally, we really haven't done it. And there was a big debate in the government earlier on whether they should be funding more neural stuff; or more silicon, electronic signal processing, serial machine, von Neumann machine stuff. These two camps were vying for the same part of attention from DARPA [Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency], mostly which funded a lot of the early work on artificial intelligence. And the other guys won, the neural network people did not win; and so most of the resources have gone there. I think it's only now people are beginning to realize that, yeah, we probably should have put more money on the other side. So I've been a misfit in my department because most of my department is on the other side. There are some courses now offered in neural networks, and I'm really glad to those. I don't teach any of them, but there is a recognition out there that there is some merit in looking at things from a different perspective. And yes, their hardware is different, it didn't exist at that time; and it still is not far enough along now where I can really build a complex brain the size, you know, with the intelligence of a mouse. But we're far from that now. The components have gotten better; and on the electronic serial machine side, people have built neural networks because you can write the program, you can write software to take that serial machine and simulate a neural network. And some companies have capitalized on that; there are some washing machines that have neural network chips in them, okay, but it still has all these bottlenecks and interconnections and so on, it's still not scalable in my mind. The way to do it is to build it from scratch and to build in--if you can capitalize on properties of optical materials and properties of electronic materials that are intrinsic to the material, you use those properties, you don't have to do a lot more computation; and that's what we're trying to do, we're trying to look at materials that have built in properties that allow us to simplify the design where we use the intrinsic property of the material to our benefit. Story_ID: 673680 Speaker 1: We've interviewed a few, three scientists in robotics, and I think what--they're trying to program computers to make decisions--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, precisely. Speaker 1: --to do things like that, but you say that's never going to be? Speaker 2: Well, it's working, it works, I mean I can--you have, your motor cars are built by robots, yeah, you can do a lot with that stuff and we should continue doing that. So there's absolutely nothing wrong with that. Speaker 1: But it's never going to be like a-- Speaker 2: I don't think it's going to solve the problems that I'm interested in solving. I'm interested in solving more complex problems where I have an autonomous robot that I send off to a planet, I says, go look around for life, period, tell me what you find. And it's got enough smarts, you know, you want it to be as smart as a human being, it picks up a sample, you know, it first decides where it has to go, so it looks at the environment, says, ah, the probability is that I'll find it more here than there. From earth I couldn't tell that, but my machine up there with its sensors processes all this information and it makes a decision; it may be a poor decision, but human beings make poor decisions too. But that's the kind of machine I want to see us have because then I know that we can solve problems that are basically too difficult to solve right now with the traditional microprocessor even if you write billions of lines of code. Speaker 1: Which is what you definitely have-- Speaker 2: Which is what we're trying to do right now, we try- the code, it's getting--you know, and that's great that we have all these smart people who can write such nice code that's error free and they--they have machines that check the code for errors, so that's great. You know, and maybe there are machines who check the machines that check the code for errors, but that's what you've got to do to make sure that there are no errors in it. And we're probably going to have to do this for as long as we can until we build machines that are more brain like. And I accept the mistakes that the machine makes because I think the one we're doing right now will also make mistakes, because you have to tell it, go there, and you're trying to make that decision say from earth, and there where you thought had the pot of gold, probably doesn't. And now you don't have enough time to write enough code to say okay now go there or you do a random search in the area, you could do that, you know, and hopefully you'll get lucky, but it might be better for the machine to make its own decision. Speaker 1: Now, you were saying that we are close to replicating the intelligence of a mouse (unclear) you were saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, I think so. I think we're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's within sight (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: We're--that's within--I think that's doable, that's doable. Speaker 1: And I think human beings play mice cheap in terms of intelligence--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean, I'm just saying that we don't consider a mouse smart, but in terms of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No. It's smart enough to know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --how to find food and know when it's in danger and to sense heat and light and, you know, so a mouse is pretty smart as far as I'm concerned. Speaker 1: Yeah. And in terms of artificial device, if an artificial device was as smart as a mouse, it would be--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I think so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --in terms of decision making, it would be-- Speaker 2: Yeah. We have to find scalable ways, I mean, you want to get to the mouse, and I think we can get there, but to get to something like a human being, it's going to be very difficult because we have so many billions of neurons. We need a lot of neurons to replicate this, you know. My idea is that a machine should be able to dream in the way that human beings dream and come up with perhaps new ideas. Some people claim they've invented, you know the DNA, double stranded thing [double helix] by falling asleep and looking at flames and somehow it influenced their thinking. But the point is is that I would like to take this machine if it has enough neurons and have it maybe scour the Internet for as much information as it can to shove it into the machine and look for new trends that we human beings probably would not have noticed between disparate pieces of information, and bring those together to create something new. I mean that's one definition of creativity is to--you give people disparate pieces of information and you say, okay, tell me what you see. Some people see nothing, just trash that you've given me, junk; and other people see that if I mix A with B and subtract C and divide by D, I--my god, I have something new, and you've created, you know, for an entrepreneur, you've created a new business. Well, us human beings aren't thinking about all the things that are out there all the time, but a machine can run twenty-four, seven; it doesn't need to sleep. So if you say, okay, the machine is idle, it's done its task, put it to work on just looking for patterns, information that's out there, and you can probably double or triple or quadruple the creativity of mankind. So to me that's where we should be going. All right, you can call it dreaming, call it whatever you like, but that I think is a possibility. Story_ID: 673681 Speaker 1: Now, your specific scientific research is more on the processing end of it, but you--I hear you're going actually beyond in terms of your--you're trying to come up with a neural processor, but I mean, but at the same time, you're talking about--the way you're discussing it, it indicates that you've been studying more than just, you know, processing, I mean, in terms of how people think and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So do you consult with psychologists or psychiatrists or bi- or I don't know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --behavioral scientists in terms of how--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I probably should be, but I don't, you know. My wife [Dinah Sah] is a neuroscientist so she helps me with models of the brain and things like that; all neuroscientists see the brain, because they're the ones who first developed these models of the neuron, and how it fires and all the electrochemistry that's involved, and so on (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Right and a question that I have, it occurs to me, just me because I'm here having the privilege to ask you this question. Do, is the way a brain works that much different in a human and a mouse say, or a human and a shark, or what--and is it just the ability to store information that makes us different, or are we actually--is our thought process different from-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 1: --another cre- I mean, I don't know if you even know, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's an excellent question. Let me finish answering the first question first, and then we'll come to that. At MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], we have a department called Brain and Cognitive Science [sic. Brain and Cognitive Sciences] and I should be talking to those people more, in fact they're having a big workshop at MIT where they're going to talk about human brain and how it works and all that kind of stuff in June, and I'm basically going to go there and be a sponge. But I didn't feel that at the point in my research that I'm really ready to talk to those guys; they don't talk hardware, they're more into philosophy and in some cases, maybe psychology and so on than I am. I'm an electrical engineer, physicist by training. So we have a little bit of overlap in the way that we're looking at the brain, okay. But, yes, there needs to be more communication there. With regard to whether our brains are different from that of a shark or pigeon or whatever, I think the brains are, as far as I understand, are very much alike. There are neurons and they have synapses and they connect to other neurons and they have a lot of interconnections--you know, hundreds of thousands of interconnections from the one neuron to another neuron. And that's hard for us to do in the laboratory, even with my lasers and my holograms. But the building blocks of brains seems to be pretty much the same as far as I understand across (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So would the difference would be size and the storage capacity and that sort of thing, or? Speaker 2: One is a big differences in number; the bigger the brain apparently the more intelligent the species. And so when you see people with big heads you should congratulate them, they probably have hopefully a lot of neurons, right. So, you know, your little, your little rooster probably has a very small brain and human beings heads are as big as a rooster, so. The more neurons, at least according to the theory, the better; the more you can store, the more decisions you can make, the more intelligence, intelligent you are. Story_ID: 673682 Speaker 1: Well we were saying--I was just mentioning off camera that President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] just announced, I think, the week before last, the White House backed initiative [Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies] to study the human brain at a more intense level. And I don't know what this all includes or entails, but do you see yourself as part of that, do you welcome that kind of announcement to--? Speaker 2: Yes, I certainly do. I think if we can understand how the brain works it can lead to a lot of scientific breakthroughs, a lot of novel new technologies that we aren't--probably beyond our imagination right now. And the truth is that today, we really don't understand how the brain works. We don't understand the thought process, we don't understand dreaming; we have barely scratched the surface. And to build a machine, which is what we're trying to do that replicates the rudiments of how we think the brain works, you know, what we're doing is still laughable; we're still so far away. And so this Obama initiative might open some new understandings that may help people like me who really want to build a piece of hardware, to mimic it and put it into a machine and have it do something intelligent. But that program is still in the embryonic stages, and they're not sure exactly what they want to do, and I think a lot of the people on the think tank are going to get together; and the question is, you know, do we have the right people on that team trying to decide what should be done. There's a lot--even that's being debated and discussed (laughter) and there are people who are not on the team who say I should be on that team and that kind of stuff, but we'll see where it goes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, it seems appropriate for a scientist to do, to figure how to learn more? Speaker 2: Yeah. The criticism I heard of the de- of the thing is that the government shouldn't be dictating how the research should go; that some of the best research is done with independent investigators in their laboratory doing their thing rather than being pigeonholed into think in a certain direction. But that discussion has been going on for a very, very long time, and I think a combination of both is probably always the best way. Story_ID: 673683 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about what you thought of--just two years ago, maybe a year and a half ago, there was a computer constructed to compete in 'Jeopardy,' did you, did you have any thoughts about--I forgot the name of the computer [Watson], and I think it was produced at UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], I think, do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know too much about that particular computer, but it probably is the same old traditional computer, just special programming. Speaker 1: Yeah, it won hands down, I mean, it beat like three experts (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah well, this has been going on for a long time, you know, we had the IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] computer Deep Blue playing chess, so; and yes, I think you can write clever and cleverer programs that will remember more, make more pattern comparisons than maybe your smartest 'Jeopardy' player and will beat you (laughter). So I'm not at all surprised. Speaker 1: Yeah. There were a couple of questions, though, that really threw the computer, I mean, you know, because they just didn't have-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: And I can't remember them now, but the computer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, hopefully, one day the neural computer will beat that kind of electronic computer, and also the human being (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, but the startling thing about the mistakes the computer made was that they were so far away from the answer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It had nothing--I mean, the computer said something that had nothing to do with the-- Speaker 2: It's impossible to write enough code. I'm sure we can get it right eventually, but you need a much smarter program, and where do you stop (laughter). Speaker 1: So the computer was processing--was retrieving data, but not really thinking, you know, that, I mean that's what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's--and it's good for that; it's good at retrieving, you know, straightforward facts, but then doing the logic to put those together and being imaginative, doesn't have that, whereas a neural network you can tell it to guess, based on what it has, and it probably should make a better intelligent guess than the traditional serial electronic machine. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's exactly the capacity this device did not have and could not guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, but there're areas where it would beat the human beings hands down just because it can just retrieve those facts with accuracy. And human beings--I can't remember what today's date is, but, yeah, eventually, I'll get it but in all these games it's what you blurt out first that matters, so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: I just wondered if what you're working on will ever have the--will ever be able to magnify human capacity-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so you'd put on a thinking cap and you--all of a sudden, you may be able to remember everything you want to remember (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, there're people working on trying to put chips in human brains and get information out there into the--back and forth. Who knows where it's going to go, we'll have bionic brains one day, but--but yeah I, those things, I think, can happen and probably will happen. I mean, right now we produce artificial organs and we put things in there like pacemakers into the body to regulate the heart. I would have to believe that in the future some of these electronic gadgets are going to be also controlling our brains, or our brains controlling them. It's not too f- maybe, and it may happen in my lifetime. Speaker 1: Yeah. Sometimes I wonder if some gadgets aren't controlling brains today. Story_ID: 673684 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But at any rate, now you've had--how have you enjoyed being a professor [at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], a teacher, do you--in the classroom. What, do you have a teaching philosophy? Speaker 2: Well, yeah. I like what I do. I enjoy the teaching because personally, I learn a lot when I teach; even though I might have taught the same class for many years, and preparing for the class, sometimes I see connections that I should emphasize. And connections that maybe I hadn't seen before and sometimes it comes through stimulation from research, going to conferences and being able to make analogies between stuff I teach in the classroom and maybe research that's going on out there. And I think that benefits the students because I would pause and then tell a story about how this is being used in the field that I had known nothing about but I learnt yesterday. And then I teach; I try to get the students to focus on the fundamentals--on really understanding the fundamentals. I hate to put up an equation on the board and not say a few sentences about it, on what it really means to an engineer in this field if we're talking electronics or optics. Because a lot of our students at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] they are good mathematicians, they can take the equations and they can manipulate them and get the right answer; but if you stop them in the middle and ask, well what does the equation really mean, draw me a picture, explain what it's saying in words--several of them are not able to do that, and I was like that at one time. And so from that experience, I come to the classroom, and I said look, this equation has a meaning at this point in your derivation. Tell me what this term means, what that term means, what that term means; and they're all added together and multiplied together. And sometimes they're shocked to find out that, yeah--and I says draw a picture for this term, draw one for this term, and it's the way I was not taught, it's--but it's something that I learned over the years that as an engineer, we make things, we build things and if we're talking optics, which is my field, I should be able to bring that down to the simplest terms so that perhaps my grandmother can understand it. And so I always emphasize the practical aspects of what we're doing--no matter how complex the mathematics is, there is a simple underlying theme, it's a lot simpler than you think; you look at this complicated equation, oh my god, it's not that complicated; each term can be broken down and has some sort of meaning. And so that's what I try to do in the classroom, I force myself to understand it from that perspective, and sometimes it's not even in any of the textbooks that you can read. So I'm preparing my textbook and hoping I'm doing a better job of explaining this stuff than some of the others before me. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's something that's a weakness of the general public when they read, even read statistics in the paper, they don't necessarily know what they--what's being said when a certain percentage of the mean of something that's--you know (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) so. So any rate, that's-- Speaker 2: Anyway, and I think that, hopefully, that approach, if I can get it into the high schools, if the high school teachers are teaching like that and the, even the undergraduates are being taught like that, you may get more people to stay in science; take away some of the mystery. But you still need a good background in mathematics to do anything. Speaker 1: And would we be--I mean science is about measurement, right, and so you'd have to understand what you're measuring and what part of what you're--(unclear) the equation is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It's partly about measurements. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's part- it's not all about measurements, but it's partly about measurement. Speaker 1: (Unclear), measurement. Speaker 2: Yeah. There is, there is a lot of intuition, interpretation that goes into making a good scientist. Yeah, we do measure things, and we do try to understand how big the measurement is, going all the way back, maybe the first principles and (unclear) well why is it that big, you know, what do we know about the fundamental level (background noise) and try to explain it. But that analytical part of it is really, really very important, because you could measure something and not understand why it is the way it is, and we don't consider that good scientist, good science. We say measure it but interpret it, and a good Ph.D. thesis does both; it makes the measurement and it shows you from first principles, if necessary, all the way up why things are the way they are; we can now explain. And the thing about science is, it has to have a predictive nature, which means that if you change one of the components in that system, whether it's the weather or whether it's an electronic circuit, you can predict this behavior, because if you cannot predict this behavior, you cannot really design anything. So a good scientist measures, understands the measurement and creates enough value in the thought process that whether it's an equation or whether it's a list of numbers, or what--it can predict the future; it can predict what would happen if you make some changes to the system, and that's what you need to know. If it's a bridge, you have to know, yeah, if I put one more motor car on it, is it gonna break? So you have to be able to predict that before actually breaking the bridge; and that's what we consider good scientists, those three components. Story_ID: 673685 Speaker 1: Well who have been some of your students over the years, or have you had a chance to--well maybe should put it like this, who have been some of the students you've been able to shepherd towards their advanced degrees in, that you? Speaker 2: Oh. There're several ones, several of them have gone into academia. There was one point in my life as a beginning professor where I had people of very different religious faiths in my laboratory at the same time. We had one guy from Saudi Arabia; clearly he was Muslim faith. And then I had another guy who was American Jew, so, and he was very much into his religion, as well. And there was me who was neither fish nor fowl, and then there were some other students, and you know, in those days we were in the lab midnight, long hours making measurements and arguing about theory and you know, and every four hours the Muslim guy had to go face Mecca, I--that's how I found out what direction Mecca was, and he would pray, and then he'd come back, and we'd work as a team, you know, there was no religious conflict; (laughter) there were no wars in my lab, and we got a lot done. And so he went back, eventually, to Saudi Arabia; he was dean of engineering at one of the universities there. There were actually three Jewish students I had who did quite well, and they were all born in America. And for some reason they all went back--they went to Israel to live, so two of them are in Israel, one is a professor at Ben-Gurion [Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel]; the other is at a research institute in Israel right now. And I've gone to Israel to at least visit the one who was a professor. There is one of our African American students, he's a professor now, I think, at Norfolk State University [Norfolk, Virginia]; he was at Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia] before that. Some have gone--left my lab and gone into finance, so one is a venture capitalist in Menlo Ventures in California; he's done quite well for himself. I hear he has his own airplane, that kind of stuff. They've gone all over the place and done all kinds of things. Some are in government research labs here in the United States. Some are at computer companies, some- doing software. I think one of them is right here in Massachusetts doing--at one of the local companies. But there have been a whole variety of them. And in fact (laughter) the last one that came back to visit me is a medical doctor; he's at Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland]. He's working on devices that will stimulate the heart, you know, if you have heart failure to, you know, you don't want to put those big electric shocks on the patient where the patient jumps up six feet in the air and then get the shock. He's working on machines that are (unclear) that will apply those shocks, and he's an electrical engineer at heart, but he's a medical doctor; he's at Johns Hopkins, and he came back to visit me most recently and I remember his thesis very well because it was one of the best undergraduate theses that was ever done in my lab and the MIT's [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] alumni magazine had a whole feature about him, and he had mentioned me, and so I said okay, why don't you come up, we can talk when you visit the campus, so it was a great reunion. But he's using his electrical engineering in medicine in very smart ways. But, so, yeah, when I look back over my career, and it's not finished yet, of course, and I see what some of the students that I've worked with have done, it's all, it's very fascinating. Speaker 1: And what you're saying too is electrical engineering can lead to a number of different--a myriad of different career choices, right? Speaker 2: Yep, yep, yep some of them are very successful entrepreneurs also. Story_ID: 673686 Speaker 1: Now, you're involved in mentorship too, for high school students-- Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: --through a project called MITE [sic.], right? Speaker 2: MITES, yeah. Speaker 1: MITES. Speaker 2: About fifteen years ago I was, I got a phone call from a lady, her name is Laura Robinson, she was the director of MITES. MITES stands for Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science, right, engineering, technology and science. So she was the executive director of this program, which was going on long before she even took the position. I think it started in the '70s [1970s], and there were several directors. I think the first director passed away, and I forgot whether there was one between her and him, I think there was, between him and her. But anyway, she called and asked if I would be interested in helping out in this office, which was really interesting in bringing high school kids from all over United States to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for, at that time, I think it was six weeks of intensive, it still is six weeks of intensive science and engineering, total immersion twenty-four, seven during those summer months. So I said yes, and I've been doing that ever since. Now she has moved to other places and left MIT and there have been three directors since her, but I've survived all that time, so I'm the link of continuity. But my job is the faculty advisor, I don't worry with the money, about bringing the students to the campus, I don't worry with their housing at all, I don't worry with their food. I worry about the curriculum--what's taught, how it's taught, who teaches it and that consumes a lot of my time during the summer. So I hire the instructors to teach; and what we do is we do exactly what my philosophy is, which is, focus on the, making the students understand the fundamentals of science. We also have humanities in the program, by the way. I can rattle off a list of those topics that we teach, but--you know, it's calculus, physics, chemistry, biology and biochemistry. They get to choose between biology, chemistry and biochemistry. And then we have humanities, which talks a lot about race relations in America and ethnicity and so on. And then we have hands-on to- projects: robotics, electronics, computer programming, architecture, genomics, and they get to choose one of those. But the point is, is that these students in high school are, all think they interested in science and engineering, and they want to pursue probably careers in those fields. Some of them aren't sure. And so these are among the brightest, and most of them are from minority groups. They're African Americans, Latinos, you know, American--Native Americans and so on. And, and we try to make--to service the population that is at risk. These would be single fam- from a single family parent, single family homes, low income homes, but the students are bright. We figured that the ones that, even if they're African American and they're from wealthy schools and wealthy neighborhoods and wealthy parents, they're gonna do okay; they'll probably go to all the best schools, their parents can afford to pay. And most of them might stay in the discipline, but the ones from the broken family homes and so on, and from low income homes, we see them as kind of at risk. They're bright and they probably don't see many role models that are in science and engineering. So we bring them in and it's a whole cross section, there're whites in the program, there're South East Asians, there're Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, black people, they're all--a whole mixture, okay. Story_ID: 673687 Speaker 1: And when these students leave, after six weeks, they're the most confident people that you can meet. They're confident that they can go to any university anywhere in the world and compete with the best. Whereas when they came in, they weren't really sure, you know. But what we do is we ground them in the fundamentals. We tell them, look, forget the way you were taught physics in high school, as an example, because a lot of the physics in high school is, they plug numbers into equations that someone gave them, and they get an answer, and generally they get the right answer, so they get an A. And we have to tell them that's not physics. Where did that equation come from, what does it mean, what are its limitations, when can you use it, when you cannot use it. You can't use it for every problem in the world. So there's a thinking that you have to have if you're going to be a good scientist, which is, you have to question everything that's given to you first of all; and secondly, you have to understand where it came from. And so we would probably re-derive the equation for them, show them its limitations, when you can't use it, but more generally this is forget about the stupid equation; if you understand the fundamentals, you can generate that equation if you need it. Sometimes you don't need it to solve the problem. So we can try to get them to think critically and analytically, where--especially in physics where you can generate a lot of information from scratch, if you need it. If you were in the middle of the desert and you forgot the stupid equation, you can still solve the problem. And so we do that in chemistry, we do that even in biology, we try to get this thought process going where it's analytical, it's critical, it questions itself, it doesn't rely on rote learning. And that's what we do in the MITES program [Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science]. So I've been the faculty director for fifteen years and we think that approach works. I think it builds confidence in the students because they feel that, yeah, I can figure this out, I know how to--I know the kind of thinking I need to have. And physics, they always pick up physics, because that's the one where they have the most problems. Physics is not plugging numbers into equations; physics is not about equations, it really isn't. Speaker 2: Okay. So a lot of people--it's a common thing to say that physics is math, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but it's different from--it is but it's different, isn't it? Speaker 1: Yeah, you need to have the mathematical--I mean, the way physicists and engineers see mathematics, it's a tool. It's a tool that you need to have, and you have to be able to use those tools really well, you have to know your tools well to apply it to solve the problems. So physics is worried about all kinds of, you can call it a study of energy if you really want to simplify it, rather than set the microscopic level where, you know, an electron and nucleus are interacting or you go inside the nucleus and you break it down and you see all these forces and there's a lot of energy stored in the nucleus and you can make bombs and all kinds of things. I mean so physics studies these things, but to study these things you need mathematics to model them. First you have to have a model. Some, maybe it's a guess as to how these things are interacting, and then you have to put numbers on the model, equations and so on and come with your model; and then you have to perturb the system and see how it behaves and measure it to see if that's true, and that requires very sophisticated mathematics. So if you're not a good mathematician, you're not going to be a good physicist. But in addition to having good mathematical skills, you have to have good intuition skills in order to be a good physicist, because it's not just pure math. Mathematicians, most of them probably don't care about what's going on inside the nucleus. They proved their theorems and they do really good stuff, but they're not really concerned about how it's being applied. So there's a lot of mathematics out there that the pure mathematicians have done, which is sitting on the shelf waiting perhaps for physicists to come along and use it, and I think that's great. So the more math- the more mathematics the physicists knows the better off he or she is; so it's a tool, and the same thing is true for engineering. We just, we just consider that as, you know, some of the errors and their (unclear) that we use to solve problems. But we need mathematicians. And the good physicists can have a rapport with mathematicians and talk to them in their language, and the poor ones can't. So--and I'm speaking here mostly for theoretical physicists because they're the ones who are in, you know, they're worrying about astrophysics and origins of the universe and trying to understand the gravitational feel in black holes. Those guys are very good mathematicians. They need to talk to the pure mathematicians and ask them, "Well, what are you working on these days," and can that help me solve these problems I'm trying to solve. So the engineers who are building things for us on the ground, you know, they probably don't talk to those mathematicians. They claim, I have enough math to make sure that my train stays on the tracks, you know, and it goes 350 miles an hour. Story_ID: 673688 Speaker 1: In that regard, do you make it a point to emphasize the difference between science and engineering to students that come in MITES [Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science]? Speaker 2: Yeah, we--they, most of those students don't have a clue as to what engineering is. They've heard the words and they, depending on their background, you know, they may give the answer Bill Cosby gives, a man who drives a train is an engineer, right. And as I pointed out earlier, my cell phone was designed by engineers, and there is no train in there, right? And I said earlier, electrical engineers do all kinds of things, things that you probably wouldn't even think of as engineering, but that's the definition of engineering at least in the United States. And so, yeah, we try to point out what we call science and what we call engineering to the students. I mean you have to spend--science they kind of understand, but engineering, they don't, they have very narrow views. So I always give a talk where I talk about all the different branches of engineering that are going on at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] from mechanical to aeronautical to electrical to chemical, and so there's a lot of eye-opening that goes on because I said all these are career paths for you, but they all require science as a background and mathematics if you really want to be an engineer; and yeah, you can make breakthroughs in any of these fields and you can become as rich as Bill Gates if you're at the right place at the right time and pick up some technology that people want and you manage it well, it's not a complex thing to do, but there are a lot of ifs and ands that you have to have, but it's possible, these are all career paths. You don't have to be a doctor or lawyer or an accountant which is where a lot of our people go who have the acumen to do good science. You can make your- you can make a living as a career path in science and engineering. And so there's a lot of eye opening that goes on there. Story_ID: 673689 Speaker 1: And in the Caribbean, I have to do the same thing. Because what we did is--well I did is I started a similar program like MITES [Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science] in the Caribbean; it has a different name, it's called SPISE. Speaker 2: Okay, and what does that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And there it's even harder to do. Speaker 2: Is that because of the facilities (unclear)? Speaker 1: Partly because of the facilities and partly because of the lack of role models. Speaker 2: Okay. So SPISE stands for? Speaker 1: Student Program for Innovation in Science and Engineering. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it's similar to MITES. It's like, I call it a sister program, because MITES is not open to foreign students; only Americans can get into MITES. And SPISE is not open to American students. (Laughter) I tell American students who want, either if they're born in Puerto Rico, you know, or U.S. Virgin Islands, they're eligible to apply for the MITES program, so please apply there, so I send those guys to MITES, and I send all the others to SPISE. Speaker 2: So if I was in Ohio, and I say, I want to go to SPISE, because I want to go to Caribbean and learn (unclear)-- Speaker 1: I write you a nice letter saying you're eligible for the MITES program and I tell them all the benefits of the MITES program: it's older, it's well established, it's got all of these things that we don't have in the Caribbean, you should really apply there. So I don't deny your admission, I just send you somewhere else. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: All right. So SPISE, now, does that take place--does it, you do MITES in the summer? Speaker 1: They're both in the summer. Speaker 2: Both in the summer, okay. Speaker 1: And SPISE has only ran once before, this summer is the second summer. And there is an overlap; so I have to leave one, start the other, come back and finish the one and then go back and finish the other. So in the summer I'm running back and forth. There's no way to avoid the overlap. I tried last year, and I tried to start SPISE after MITES was finished and students have to go back to school and they were missing the first week of school, so I said, no, I can't do that. I will have to just--the students' needs come first, mine comes second; so, I'll take the inconvenience. But SPISE is, SPISE is a project of the Caribbean Science Foundation, which we can talk about later, whenever you get to that (simultaneous). Story_ID: 673690 Speaker 1: Tell us about the development of the Caribbean Science Foundation; what is that, is it a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --is it a cooperative government project or how is it--what's its character? Speaker 2: Okay. Well, it's non-government, it's independent. What it was--how it started was, there were a bunch of us in the diaspora; we were in United States, we were in Canada, we were in the UK, some in the Caribbean region, mostly scientists and some businessmen who were frustrated by the fact that the Caribbean governments are all in debt, they cannot pay back their loans to the IMF [International Monetary Fund], they rely primarily on tourism for foreign exchange, except for Trinidad and Tobago [Republic of Trinidad and Tobago]; and the governments weren't doing enough to try to build leaders in science and technology so that, if I can quote myself, in my mind, the next Google could start in the Caribbean. Because I claim one Google could supply all the able-bodied people in Barbados with work. And we don't have any such thing in the region. So we decided, and there's a long story here, but I'm going to cut it short. We first started an organization called the Caribbean Diaspora for Science, Technology and Innovation, and we would meet at night by telephone in all our different time zones around the world to talk about how can we help the Caribbean, and I was asked to be the president and the leader of that organization. It's the Caribbean Diaspora for Science, Technology and Innovation, it has an acronym, CADSTI, C-A-D-S-T-I. Speaker 1: And that was--what year was that started? Speaker 2: Probably around 2007 or 2008, somewhere in that neighborhood. I should get--didn't come prepared with the numbers, but. Speaker 1: Okay. That's good, that's good. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So CADSTI? Speaker 2: CADSTI. It has a website, it's cadsti.org: C-A-D-S-T-I dot O-R-G. That organization decided that the best way to help the region was to start the Caribbean Science Foundation. So where the Caribbean Science Foundation has its headquarters right now is sitting on the campus of the University of the West Indies in Barbados. But it's not an entity of the university. The government of Barbados pays most of the bills for the University of the West Indies, Barbados; and when I went to the government asking for space, they sent us there. So we are on the campus, and we do a lot of programs in collaboration with the campus, so it's a good thing we're there because SPISE [Student Program for Innovation in Science and Engineering] would not have worked if we were not on that campus. Whereas CADSTI, the umbrella organization doesn't have bricks and mortar, we're just a collection of people around the world who want to help and we're organizing ourselves into branches. So right now there is a UK branch of CADSTI [Caribbean Disapora for Science, Technology and Innovation] that's being formed. So I'll be running back and forth to the UK to help get that off the ground; there's a New England branch [CADSTI-New England] that's being formed, there's an Atlanta [Georgia] branch [CADSTI-Southeast]. Speaker 1: So these are chapters and branches (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: These are like chapters of CADSTI because I guess like (unclear) said, resources are local (laughter); and from here in Hopkinton [Massachusetts], where it's where we consider the headquarters to be, you're sitting in the headquarters of CADSTI. We cannot orchestrate what happens in London [England] and Atlanta, so we're letting the local people there come together in groups and decide how best they want to help. Speaker 1: Okay, and they can help through money-- Speaker 2: They can help through money-- Speaker 1: --information-- Speaker 2: --establishing collaborations between companies there and companies here at universities there, universities here. Some of them want to be venture capitalists to fund start-up companies down there, each one has a little bit of a different emphasis and flavor, and that's fine, because people have to be excited or otherwise it doesn't work. I can't legislate what they should do except in a very broad sense. So let them give back the way they want to give back. And that's what's happening. Speaker 1: So that's an attempt, too, to stem the brain drain too from the country (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, it could help, in fact, we can reverse it because people like me who have left the shores of Barbados, I never went back to teach or to do research there. First of all it's difficult to get a teaching position, there's really only one university on the island at that time. There's very little research going on there. But more people, even if they go abroad to study, will go back if there are jobs. And so we have this chicken and egg situation. There are no jobs because the people who could form them decide not to go back because it's too hard to do, and so we think that by creating more entrepreneurs down there and getting them funding they'll create companies and there would be something to go back to. So, we want to break that cycle, let's end this cycle. We don't go back because there are no jobs, and there're no jobs because we don't go back (laughter). Story_ID: 673691 Speaker 1: The first SPISE program [Student Program for Innovation in Science and Engineering] was last summer? Speaker 2: Last summer, yes. Speaker 1: And what was it, and how many students participated (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: We had ten students from about six different countries in the Caribbean. They came from Belize; they came from Saint Lucia; Barbados, Trinidad [Republic of Trinidad and Tobago]; Jamaica; Saint Kitts. Did I miss any? Speaker 1: Okay, you said Belize, now is [HistoryMakers] Arlie Petters involved in this? Speaker 2: Yes. He is involved, in fact, we just asked him to help look at the--to help pick the cla- the next class for 2013. It turns out he's very busy, but we have a lot of helpers all over the place. Speaker 1: Okay, so Belize, Saint Lucia, Jamaica? Speaker 2: Belize, Saint Lucia, Jamaica, Trinidad, Barbados, Saint Kitts Nevis. Saint Kitts and Nevis have the same government. Speaker 1: Now is Dale Morgan [HistoryMaker Frank Dale Morgan] involved? Speaker 2: He has decided to stay in the background (laughter). So he hasn't helped us much. Speaker 1: Okay, but there are like, I know we've interviewed quite a few people. Speaker 2: You've interviewed some of them. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Dr. Petters and some others, but so who besides you is, are real- I mean beside yourself who else is really-- Speaker 2: There're twenty-two of us on the so-called governing council. I can try to think if there are any others that you might have interviewed that are on the governing council; I have a feeling not. But did you interview John-Paul Clarke at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 1: John-Paul Clark, no. Speaker 2: Okay. He might be good, he's Jamaican ancestry in aeronautics, astronautics; he's on the governing council. There's Maya Trotz, she is professor at University of South Florida [Tampa, Florida], she's on the governing council. I'm thinking of ones in the United States. I'm trying to get more young people on the governing council because I'm trying to do some succession planning here, and so that not all of us have gray hair. Who else in the United States that are academics? We have Ravi Ramkeesoon [ph.], he's an oracle in California, he's probably the youngest of us all, and he helps us with a lot of the website work. But, yeah, and it turns over because people have like three-year terms. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, good luck on this. I think it's a fine idea that needs to--so it looks, what does it look like for this summer? Speaker 2: This summer we're trying to double the size of class to twenty. We got forty-six applications this summer and we have to pick twenty. And it costs about six thousand U.S. dollars per student for the program, so I have to raise 120,000 U.S. dollars this summer to run it. And I'm working on it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: That seems like a lot of money, but I know--per student. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have to fly them in, I got to feed them, I got to pay for the housing, I got to pay the instructors, I got to pay the tutors and then I have to buy some equipment (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Yeah I guess--I can see it. Speaker 2: Because University of the West Indies doesn't have a lot of things that we need, so we have to put our hands on projects, and then I take them on field trips while they're there. And you know so, it adds up rather fast. Speaker 1: It sounds like this kind of project, too, that could increase understanding and cooperation amongst Caribbean--these bright minds from the Caribbean. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And meet each other-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and stay with each other for-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a summer, you know, focusing on science and technology and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we hope that the Caribbean Science Foundation will be a unifiying force in the region, because as you pointed earlier there many governments each have their own king or queen and they don't cooperate as much, and they cooperate at least--the English speaking ones cooperate on cricket and there's an overarching body called Caricom [Caribbean Community] which is like a trade body between the islands; and hopefully one day they'll see the Caribbean Science Foundation also as a unifying force. Story_ID: 673692 Speaker 1: We have two programs; this is only one. The other one was funded by a company in the region called Sagicor [Sagicor Financial Corporation], it's an insurance, financial (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Now how do you spell Sagicor? Speaker 1: S-A-G-- Speaker 2: S-A-G-- Speaker 1: --I-C-O-R. It's a financial services insurance company. And this one reaches into the high schools and asks students to form teams that will carry out projects that would help their school or their community. And the projects in the schools compete against one another in each Caribbean country, and then we have a winner for that country. So we call that the national competition. And then the winners from each country compete against one another for the regional championships. And we just had the regional championships in Barbados two weeks ago, and Belize won that, it turns out. So this one is not catering to the superstars necessarily, it's getting in there amongst the students and trying them to think about science and technology and generating innovation and ideas and come up with projects that will do something meaningful. So we got one for the superstars and one for the rank and file, if I could say that. Speaker 2: Well superstars could emerge from the rank and file (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: They can. I'm sure in that, those rank and file, there are some superstars in there too. Speaker 2: So, they're being asked to come up with a project-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that could be applied to an existing-- Speaker 1: An existing problem (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --science or technological problem (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: Well it's a problem, we want them to use science and technology to solve it, okay. So they have (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All right. So the problem is not necessarily science and technology (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: They have to identify the problem and propose a science and technology solution for it. And the teachers help them, and we find the mentors. This same group in the diaspora, you know, that, we have a big data base, we pick mentors from there to help each of the schools with their project. Speaker 2: Okay. So it's like a science fair, but it's not so much I understand theoretical science, but applied--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --science applied to practical problems? Speaker 1: Precisely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah that would seem like--yeah, that sounds like a real exciting (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Those are the two things the Caribbean Science Foundation is doing right now. And we have other things in the pipeline that we can talk about later. Story_ID: 673693 Speaker 1: I think we covered all the things that we were going to cover. Speaker 2: Yeah, I (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: And we just have some, some philosophical questions for you, sort of reflective questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We ask everyone this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: That's an excellent question. I'm an optimist, so I have a lot of hope, (laughter) probably more hope than concern; yeah, I do have some concerns. I would like to see the African American community do more to help itself. I would like to see our youngsters--and since I'm a scientist, of course, I'd like to see them given the opportunities and shown the way that they can use their God-given talents to be--to make a contribution to themselves and to the nation by embracing science and technology. That's the place where I feel I can help; but more generally, you know, I want to see advancements made and I know, yes, we have great athletes and a lot of us go into medicine and that's a very noble career and into financial services but we don't have enough who are scientists; and I claim that some of the wealthiest people in the world today, money is important to them or--have made it through science and technology. It's the stuff that builds nations, it's the stuff that employs lots of people. You know your average doctor will have an office and maybe employ ten, twenty people--more if he's lucky, but often less. But a scientist, starting an organization, starting a company an entrepreneur, can employ--can employ millions of people. And most of them could be African Americans depending on where it's located. Speaker 1: Here would you make the distinction between a scientist and an engineer in this regard, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well--between a scientist and--no, scientists do to. I mean most of the biotech companies, we call those people scientists, and some biotech companies grow very large; they become large PhRMA [Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America]. So you don't have to be necessarily an engineer, but whether it's science technology or whatever words you want to use in that arena, science, technology, engineering, STEM, mathematics--you know, you can make a living in mathematics too. You can start a mathematics company. Some of the software tools that we buy are developed by mathematics companies. MATLAB is one of those--MathWorks [MathWorks, Inc.], I think it's called, you know; we use their tools all the time. But we need to show our people that we could reduce unemployment through the use and the applications of science and technology to solve problems that need to be solved in our society. That is a viable option for us and not enough of African Americans go into those fields. The schools are partly to blame; mathematics is poorly taught, science is poorly taught, not enough of its taught, not enough of it is emphasized; we don't have enough role models to show these kids, yeah, you can be the next--name the person on your list that you've interviewed who they may consider successful. Success seems to be different in the eyes of different people. But--so, I'm hopeful, that you know, during the next twenty years this trend will change where more and more African Americans see hope through science and technology and not wanting to become the next Michael Jackson or Michael Jordan. If you have to write initials upon it, you can make money and not all of us have those talents, or the right initials. So, that's the message that I would like to convey; that's where my hope is and there are a lot of obstacles and problems to be solved there I mentioned in the school system and all that; so the governments of the country, whether it's at the state level or whatever, they've got to help and do their part. But I think people like me and others that you've interviewed could do a part, at least as a role model. And I know some of us are talking to these people and encouraging them and showing them, yeah, this is possible, you can be the next Steve Jobs or Bill Gates, if you want to be. That's probably more likely than being the next Michael Jordan, because you can work at it slowly if you don't have those physical, mental, high on coordination skills, you can, you can do it. Story_ID: 673694 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question too. When you look back at everything you've done to this point and--is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: Yeah, probably would. Given the way that my career has evolved, I probably would have done more engineering earlier in my life perhaps than more physics, because the things I ended up being passionate about right now don't involve a lot of the stuff that I learned in physics, and you know. There's no way that I could have predicted that I was going to be looking at neural network systems today. But, so, so then I got my first job, I guess my first and only real job at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as an assistant professor in the electrical engineering department [Electrical Engineering and Computer Science]. I had never taken some of those courses taught in that way before. I had to teach myself all that stuff. It would have been easier had I majored in electrical engineering rather than physics, because I ended up in the electrical engineering department. So, but you know, hindsight is always 20/20, I would have taken more of those classes, it would have been easier for me, I wouldn't have to work as hard to teach the courses from an engineering perspective. Yes, I've seen the stuff taught in the physics department [Department of Physics], but the physicists are somewhere between a mathematicians and the engineers. The engineers look for shortcuts to solve problems very efficiently. The physicists see those shortcuts, but they don't really care; they are more fundamentally interested in how the thing works rather than trying to get a quick answer. And so a lot of the theorems that I learn in physics, especially as applied to circuit theory, electrical engineers actually use the theorem, and you get the answer just like that. And so, so there are these little differences that would have been helpful and emphasis also on the practical things that electrical engineers do that the physicists don't do that affect everyday life, you know, like transmission lines that carry currents and voltages across the country, you know. Engineers study those things to the T. Physicists say, yeah, they exist and this is to govern the equations, but it's not exciting to them anymore because it's too much engineering. They want to solve the next iteration on how to make the thing better or how it works and so--so there are those differences that I wish I had learned more of those before I got into electrical engineering. So, but I was the winner in the end, because I can now talk to both sides of the fence; the physicists, I can talk with--astrophysics to the astrophysicists, I can talk now about, you know, mundane electrical engineering things to electrical engineers, so I became wiser by being thrust into a department that I had not majored in. And the only reason that worked is because as I said electrical engineering is so broad, there are a lot of people in my department with degrees in physics and so I was in the building with them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, so I was not like a misfit. A lot of us have joint appointments in physics and electrical engineering because the two do overlap and they live off one another. I mean there's a lot of cross-fertilization. Speaker 1: To tell the truth there are very few people we've interviewed who knew in high school what kind of engineer or physicist-- Speaker 2: They were going to be (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --or chemist they were going to be. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They started taking courses and got involved with--and met somebody along the way, a mentor-- Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --or a problem that they wanted to solve and that's how they got there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Precisely. My first job, as I said earlier, was in a cryogenics lab. He was a world renowned researcher in that area, so he was in the physics department so I went in there. And I love physics. I must admit I really love solving physics problems, and I couldn't give that up to do engineering. I had a cho- I had to make a choice, and I chose, I'm going to stick with the physics, I really liked this stuff. And then I had to look for a job. I says, well now I have to be practical now, you know, I think I can make a better living or make a bigger contribution to mankind if I moved over, and so I did. And I think for all scientists and engineers up there, we have to remain flexible because--especially for the Caribbean people, they need to solve, have to solve some of the problems in the region. We're not United States of America in the Caribbean. We have some pressing problems that need to be solved, and I think some of the intellectuals there should indeed address those problems, and sometimes they're very practical, and you've got to be prepared to do that if you want to help your country. In the United States, we have a choice, we could afford to work on a lot of our theoretical problems that have applications, if any, twenty, thirty years from now because we are a big nation, we have lots of scientists because there will be enough of us left to solve the real problems of the real world. But, yeah, had I had to do it all over again, I probably would have taken more engineering courses as an undergraduate [at Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey], but my head wasn't saying that at the time. Story_ID: 673695 Speaker 1: Now likewise, when you look back over your career, what today would you consider to be your legacy? I know you're still young, and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank you, you're very kind. I think, in two areas, I think my contributions, certainly, to--trying to inspire the youth hopefully will be one of the things that people remember me for because I do spend a lot of time with that, both here in the United States and in the region. And I'm hoping that the research that I'm working now which is really pushing these neural network computers, which is probably the last big thing I'll do in my career (laughter) will indeed--it's not going to solve all the problems, but hopefully it will point the way for direction especially for experimental engineers who are trying to build artificial neural networks, that there is a direction here that makes sense and that others will come along with better devices, better technology later and build something that hopefully will go beyond the intelligence of a mouse, because I don't think I'm going to get much further than that. That would be, you know, in the next twenty years, closer to the capacity of the human brain so that we now have another way of doing science and running missions that are almost impossible by writing billions of lines of code and that people will indeed recognize that this kind of a machine is indeed useful, viable and can be cost competitive, because ha- that's important too. You can build it, but if it's not cost competitive even NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is not going to use it or I'm not going to have one in my car. Because eventually our cars are going to drive themselves. I hope you realize that, right. And so you want to do that with a lot of lines of code, or do you want to do it with a neural network, because I started with that example. But, but I'm hoping that this piece which is a culmination of all the things that we talked about in my early career with spatial light modulators and optical signal processing, you know, will culminate into the manifestation of something that mankind has that's actually practical--because I changed from physics, basically, to focus on engineering. I'd like to leave something engineering behind. So yeah, the breakthrough with the interferometer--that was nice back then, but if that's not part of my legacy it's okay (laughter). This, what I'm doing now I think has much broader and wider applications to the way we live and the way we will live in the future. Story_ID: 673696 Speaker 1: Now, do you have children? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever get married? Speaker 2: Twice. Speaker 1: Twice, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. All right. Well maybe we'll just leave it there (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: You could leave it at that. Speaker 1: Leave it at that, but-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --no children. So do you have family members still in the Caribbean in Barbados, no? Speaker 2: Yeah, most of them are there. So I go back often. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have an aunt here in New York City [New York], mother's sister. And then I have some second, third cousins in New Jersey; but my brothers and sisters are all still in Barbados. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And my mother [Rosetta Irene Ward]. My father [Davidson Chase] has passed away. Speaker 1: All right, all right. So, is there anything I need to ask you about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything right now. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh (laughter). Yeah, you're right, it's very similar. I felt I almost covered that in terms of legacy. Yeah, I'd like to be remembered in terms of my legacy. I don't see a big distinction between the two. You know, someone who is passionate about inspiring youngsters, whether they'll be here in the United States or even in China or in the Caribbean--wherever they are, especially the groups that have been impoverished and that are disadvantaged to see science and technology as a vehicle for betterment of themselves and large sections of their community, truer combination of s- you know, science and engineering and entrepreneurship because I think the entrepreneurship pieces is important if we're going to use--have science benefit the masses; and job creation is important. I'd like to see more jobs created in the minority communities. These are jobs based on science and technology. And I'd like to be remembered as someone who helped to make that happen. And in addition, the--as I said earlier, the neural network stuff I'm working on, I'm hoping that I'll be remembered as one of the pioneers who tried to get this kind of machine off the ground where it was compact, it was compatible to electronics, and it looked--it showed the potential and the way forward for these kinds of new types of computing. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, good luck. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Thank you for spending the time with us. Speaker 2: Thanks, Larry [Larry Crowe]. Speaker 1: All right. Okay...