 Story_ID: 369804 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Denise Gines. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Walter Fuller Young [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young]; that's W-A-L-T-E-R; Fuller, that's F-U-L-L-E-R; Young, Y-O-U-N-G. Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date and birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in 1934, in New Orleans, Louisiana, at Flint-Goodridge Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay. What's the day and the month of your birth? Speaker 2: August 18. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a dentist. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: I think this is October 12. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. In 2006, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in my office, 2265 Cascade Road Southwest, Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 369805 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that the office asked me to ask, and they only require a short answer. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Hm, not really. I have a lot, I enjoy lots of dishes. I guess you might say gumbo. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: File gumbo. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And soft shell crabs; New Orleans [Louisiana] type foods, but I can't eat those foods too often. They're so rich. You know, you can't, they're not sustainable for normal living, but they're good, it's good food. Speaker 1: Good for a treat, uh-huh? Speaker 2: Yes, for a treat. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summertime. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I like the water, the beaches, maybe down in the tropics, the Caribbean, Caribbean beaches. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, I really don't. Story_ID: 369806 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Andrew Young, Sr.] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Daisy, D-A-I-S-Y; Valentine, V-A-L-E-N-T-I-N-E; Fuller, F-U-L-L-E-R [Daisy Fuller Young]. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: New Orleans [Louisiana]. I think she was born in 19--I really don't remember her date of birth, but she would have been around 106 now if she had lived. Speaker 1: So, about the turn of the century, 1900? Speaker 2: Yeah, around that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: We can trace it back to when my grandmother [Louisa Czarnowski Fuller] was a little girl, her mother was, I think, married or the mistress of a very wealthy sea merchant, and he gave my grandmother her freedom before he died, but he owned vast fortunes, from what I understand, in New Orleans, and an area of land which is now called Lee Circle [New Orleans, Louisiana], which is a landmark, that slaves were never allowed to inherit money or property with, but from what I understand she was granted freedom when she was five or six years old. Her mother's name was Louisa Valentine Czarnowski. Speaker 1: How do you spell Czarnowski? Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter). We have it written down somewhere; I can't recall, though. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is your mother's mother, Louisa Valentine Czarnowski? Speaker 2: This is my grandmother's mother. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother's mother-- Speaker 1: So, that's your great-grandmother. Speaker 2: That's my great-grandmother, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And, so she inherited this property, I mean, no she didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she didn't. The slaves--blacks could not inherit property in the South back in those days. They were fortunate enough to get their freedom. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's how she got out of slavery? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes. Speaker 1: So this has been prior to 1863, then, when she was freed? Speaker 2: It had been around that. I think it was after that, around that time, yes, um-hm, when my great-grandmother was freed, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Around the Civil War, yes. Okay, yeah, okay. Are there any stories that come down from that time that you remember? Speaker 2: No, I can't remember any stories back that far. Speaker 1: Or, stories that are passed down to the family about her, you know, other than that. Speaker 2: I can, there are stories about my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother raised lots of children. Back in those days a lot of people were poor and she was a very good and Christian person, and she took in a lot of children and raised them as her own, and they grew up with my mother and my aunts, so they became aunts and uncles, my Aunt Teenie [Florestine Perrault Collins], my Aunt Marge [ph.]. Story_ID: 369807 Speaker 1: And I had an uncle named Leonard [ph.], who became the manager of Rubensteins clothing store in New Orleans [Louisiana], but he was what we called passe blanc--passed for white--so he stopped speaking to my family after my grandmother [Louisa Czarnowski Fuller] died, but my grandmother raised him as her son so he was like a brother to my mother [Daisy Fuller Young], but he passed for white, when he became an adult, with a very prominent job as manager of one of the largest men's clothing stores in New Orleans, which still exists, called Rubensteins on the corner of, I think it's, Canal [Street] and St. Charles [Avenue], I think. The store is still there, but we lost track of him after my grandmother died. He used to come by when I was a little boy to visit my grandmother and I remember him, vaguely, and after my grandmother died he stopped coming around, and when I was about a teenager, my mother and I were shopping downtown and we went in the store and she pointed out, she says, "There's your Uncle Leonard," and when he saw us, he took off. He disappeared. He didn't want to be confronted, which we would never confront him, but I guess my mother would have said hello and how are you, because she grew up with him like he was a brother. Speaker 2: Was it, what, was it, the custom in those days to-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. A lot of people who were very fair passed for white. We called them passe blanc in French, means passed for white, because life was easier than being black, and they got jobs and good positions. That went on for many, many years. Speaker 2: Was it customary among the colored population or the black population to let those people pass and not interfere? Speaker 1: Usually we did not interfere with them. We really didn't. We may have talked about them and criticized them, but we didn't, rarely would we confront them or make life difficult for them. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: Because they were family. They were family people. Speaker 2: So, even though they ignored their family in public-- Speaker 1: Even though they ignored their family, we didn't alienate them from us. If they wanted to back or visit in any way, we always accommodated them and treated them with courtesy. Maybe not respect, but with courtesy and love. Speaker 2: I see. All right. That's a very good way to describe it. Story_ID: 369808 Speaker 1: There any other stories from your [maternal] grandmother [Louisa Czarnowski Fuller]? So, now she raised all these children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, my grandmother raised lots of children, but when I was a little boy, what I really remember, she was a real good strong Christian woman, and I was born right after the Depression [Great Depression], and there were a lot of people still walking the streets who had gotten used to the soup line and could never readjust and were still having hard times. My grandmother used to bring them off the street. They weren't called homeless in those days; they were called hoboes. My grandmother would bring them in off the street and feed them, and sometimes, if they were halfway decent and clean, she would bring them into the kitchen and sit 'em down and eat right in the house. I can remember one person that she was feeding, she fed him dinner, and after dinner, he said, "Well, where's the dessert?" She said, "Well, we don't have dessert today." He said, "Well, I know you people have dessert every day." She said, "We don't have any today." (Laughter) But she was just that giving and she fed people many, many, many times, and that's the kind of family that I grew up in. Then, my mother [Daisy Fuller Young], I can remember my mother volunteering to work with the blind. Every Friday, she would pick up blind people in the community, and she would take them to a center where they could have learned skills and trades. She did that, oh, as long as I can remember; maybe about until she was too old to do it. I think my mother must have done that for about thirty or forty years. Speaker 1: Now, did your grandmother have a lot of resources? I mean, to be able to feed all these people? Speaker 2: No, she didn't, and Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I wondered, how did she do it in those days? We really don't know. How did she, but an old saying in Louisiana, said, well, we just make do. (Laughter) That's an old Creole expression for whatever you have, you do the best you can. They call it make do. Have you ever heard that? Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: Yeah, but how they did it, we don't know. And Andrew and I talk about it to this day. How did my grandmother do all of these things with limited resources? Story_ID: 369809 Speaker 1: Now, my Uncle Walter [Walter Fuller] was one of the oldest boys in the family, who happened to be rather successful in his day. He was the maitre d' at Roosevelt Hotel [The Roosevelt New Orleans], one of the wealthiest hotels in New Orleans [Louisiana], and he made a lot of money on tips, and from what I understand that he had a little--during Prohibition, he had a little distilling business going, so when the wealthy hotel customers came and wanted something to drink, from what I understand, he would sell 'em a little half pint and a little pint, and made a lot of money bootlegging whiskey in the hotel. So he was one of the prominent members of the family, and after my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] and father [Andrew Young, Sr.] got married, see my father was a dentist, and right after the Depression [Great Depression], nobody had any money. They couldn't pay a doctor or a dentist. Sometimes they would bring eggs and greens and yams, or whatever they could bring to pay. So, it was very hard for my father to pay the house bills, the expenses of the house, but my Uncle Walter would always come by. He came by every day, and I think he supported the family for many, many years until my father got on his feet, which was probably after the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. I think my father, the first car we had, I think, was in 1941; before then, we used to ride the bus, public transportation. We walked everywhere with my mother. When Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I were babies, I think I must have been around--well, when I was around, I can remember when I was around three or four, my mother taking, dressing Andrew and I alike. She liked to dress us like twins, because we were very close in age, and I can remember taking a walk down to Canal Street, to Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], where my mother went to college. However, Straight College had closed but the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] was still there and Central Congregational Church [Central Congregational United Church of Christ, New Orleans, Louisiana] was still there, so I can remember as a kid my mother holding us by the hand and taking--that was a Sunday afternoon stroll, to walk down Canal Street to Straight College to visit the YWCA, and then my mother loved to play bridge, so she always found a babysitter to watch Andrew and I, while she played bridge. The babysitter taught us how to play ping pong, how to play Chinese checkers, and chopsticks and a lot of other little games, but we had a lot of surrogate parents when we were growing up. Story_ID: 369810 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Daisy Fuller Young]--now she went to Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: She went to Straight College. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: S-T-R-A-I-G-H-T, straight. Speaker 1: Just like straight, okay. Speaker 2: And Straight College was founded by the American Missionary Association. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, if you know the history of the American Missionary Association, it was founded back in, I think around 1846 [sic.], to assist slaves who were coming out of the South, going north to educate slaves, and the AMA founded, this was a precursor, I think, to the Amistad [Amistad Research Center, New Orleans, Louisiana] group, so the AMA founded Howard University [Washington, D.C.], Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], Straight, Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], and several others. Speaker 1: Now Straight College, is that still in existence? Speaker 2: No. Straight College became Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana]-- Speaker 1: Yes, that's right. Speaker 2: --and Dillard University is still in existence. My mother was on the board of Dillard and very active with Dillard University, and when my parents died, they had a little property. Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I donated all of the family property to Dillard University and Dillard remodeled the property and uses it for its own purposes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Whatever needs they have. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your mother go to Catholic school? Speaker 2: Now, an interesting thing. When Hurricane Katrina came, the property that we donated to Dillard, our family home, didn't get any water, which is only a block and a half from Dillard, and Dillard got twenty feet of water, and our family home didn't get any. That's the amazing thing. Speaker 1: That is amazing. Speaker 2: Everything in the neighborhood was flooded except the property that we donated to Dillard, because I think what happened was on Annette Street, when you leave Dillard going to Annette Street, Annette Street went up to an incline, and I think back on the days when I was growing up when we were kids, they called it Sugar Hill [Gentilly, New Orleans, Louisiana], because it was a little more elevated than the rest of New Orleans [Louisiana], so that part of New Orleans didn't get flooded at all. Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother, did she attend Catholic schools in New Orleans? Speaker 2: Public schools. Speaker 1: Public schools? And what is she, was she pursuing a career when she went to Straight College? Speaker 2: She's a school, she was a schoolteacher and she taught school at Wicker Elementary School [Albert Wicker Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] on Bienville Avenue [sic. Bienville Street], until the time she married my dad [Andrew Young, Sr.], and back in those days, if you were, when you got married, you had to retire. Married teachers were not allowed to teach back in those days. Speaker 1: Is there any idea why that's true? I've heard that before. Speaker 2: I don't know. I never, I never tried to find out why. That didn't last long; I think, after a while teachers were allowed to get married and teach. Story_ID: 369811 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Andrew Jackson Young [Andrew Young, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Eighteen--he was born in Franklin, Louisiana, I don't know the date. This was back in the 1800s, somewhere. Speaker 1: Yeah, was he--how much older was he than your mother [Daisy Fuller Young]? Speaker 2: He was about seven years older than my mother. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that would put him around 1893? Does that sound-- Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere around that time. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: He went to Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] as well, and also Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. He finished Howard University dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] in 1921. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about his side of the family? How far back can you trace his people? Speaker 2: Well, as far back as my grandfather [Frank Young]. My grandfather was a secretary for the Knights of Pythias, which was a fraternal organization, and he controlled, he was considered a very prominent person in Franklin, Louisiana, and they had a large home on Louisiana Avenue, and I can remember as a kid visiting and driving to Franklin for weekend visits and playing ball. They had a lot of property for playing baseball. You know, my dad was a great baseball player. As a matter of fact, he played with Lou Gehrig in the Canadian League. Back in those days blacks couldn't play professionally, and my dad paid his college education, his dental school education, playing baseball in the summer leagues in Canada. Speaker 1: Hmm. You know, Lou Gehrig, one of the great New York Yankees, played in the days of segregated baseball. Did your father ever play in the Negro Leagues? Speaker 2: Oh, no. He only played professionally in Canada. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then he went to, he was trying to pay his way through Howard University. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories from your father's family that go back to the Civil War or anything like that? Speaker 2: No. I can't remember any. Story_ID: 369812 Speaker 1: When you look at your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after? Speaker 2: Probably a combination of my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] and father [Andrew Young, Sr.]. Um-hm. I'm a dentist like my father and maybe I have some of my mother's personality. She was a very strong and determined person. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father have a lot of support when he was a, I mean to go to dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.] and get an education, from his family? Speaker 2: No. He had to get part time jobs, I think he did. He was a railroad porter and he played baseball. Speaker 1: So it wasn't easy. He had to make his own way. Speaker 2: He had to make his own way. Speaker 1: I see. Did he ever talk about growing up? In Franklin [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Mostly he talked about playing baseball as a kid. Every day. That's all he talked about. Being a great baseball player. And all of his friends said that was true. His name was Boo Young, and everybody talked about, whenever I met his colleagues over the years and I mentioned who I was, they said, "Oh, you're Boo Young's son," so they all knew him as the great--Boo Young was a great shortstop-- Speaker 1: I was going to ask you that. That was the next question. So, he's a shortstop, okay. Speaker 2: Shortstop. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story that's passed down about how your parents met? Speaker 2: I don't know--I think my brother might remember that. I was a little younger, I guess. I think there's a story and I can't remember it right now. Hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, we can get--if you remember it, we can go back to it. Speaker 2: That's interesting. I need to--I'll talk to Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] about that. There's a story, but you know all of my relatives are dead now, and my mother's best friend was Thelma Desselle [Thelma Desselle Smith], who is the mother of [HistoryMaker] Dolly Adams, Bishop Adams' [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams] wife. Now, Dolly and I grew up like sister and brother. She's in Atlanta [Georgia] and her mother and my mother were like sisters and I think, and they taught school together, and when my mother got married, she had to retire from the school system, but Thelma was still single. She continued to teach. So, I think Dolly Adams would know something about that history, Dolly and my brother, they're older than I am, but there are stories about how they met and I just can't remember them right now. Speaker 1: Do you know about what time they got married--what year? Speaker 2: Probably nineteen--well, my brother was born in '31 [1931], and I think he was conceived about two years after they were married, one or two years, so it was probably about '29 [1929], 1929, something like that. Story_ID: 369813 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yes, I remember, as I mentioned before, taking walks with my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] down to Canal Street, to visit Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], and YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], and walking to visit neighborhood friends, like the Watts [ph.] family that lived on Bienville Avenue [sic. Bienville Street], the McCann [ph.] family, who lived on Bienville, and the pastor of our church, who lived on Bienville, because we took walks everywhere because we didn't have any automobile transportation. Sometimes she would take us on a ride on the street car on Canal, which was a beltway that went all the way around the city. So, that was a Sunday afternoon to ride on the Canal Street streetcar, and we'd stop at the riverfront. We'd visit the riverfront, and then we'd get back on the streetcar and go all the way around the beltway. That was a Sunday afternoon outing for us. Story_ID: 369814 Speaker 1: What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: The sights and sounds-- Speaker 1: And smells of growing up. What did they call your neighborhood? Speaker 2: We grew up in a mixed neighborhood. We had an Irish grocery store on one corner, an Italian bar on another corner, and the third corner right on Galvez [Street] and Cleveland [Avenue], that was a German beer garden, and before the Second World War [World War II, WWII], his kids are, we would just play around in the bushes and peek through the windows, trying to see what was going on because they were singing songs in German, and we would peek through the window. And they were actually flags in there with a swastika, and we can remember them saying, "Heil Hitler, Heil Hitler." That was before the Second World War. Of course, when the Second World War broke out, the place was closed down. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: And we only had about oh, two or three black families in the neighborhood, and then we had a lot of Cajun people in the neighborhood. It was mostly white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think that's where my brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] got his diplomatic skills growing up in the neighborhood, when he had to communicate and meet with diverse people, people of different cultural and ethnic backgrounds, trying to get along with different people. We both learned that very young. Story_ID: 369815 Speaker 1: So, you were talking about the need for diplomacy in this mixed neighborhood. Now some people might wonder, like how do you account for, you know, a mixed neighborhood in the American South in the 1930s or '40s [1940s]? Speaker 2: Well, New Orleans [Louisiana] and other cities in the area--their culture is completely different. It's a seaport and a lot of mixed people; Spanish, French, a lot of brown people of different origins came, moved into New Orleans, and they didn't know it was supposed to be segregated (laughter) so they just lived together even though sometimes there were differences as little boys. We had to grow up fighting and you had to protect yourself. New Orleans was a very rough city, being a seaport city, and we went to an all-black elementary school called Valena C. Jones School [Valena C. Jones Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], and it was so bad that the nickname was the bucket of blood. Speaker 1: That's the school's nickname? Speaker 2: The bucket of blood. And for instance at lunchtime, lunchtime recreation for us would be to divide the class, the boys would divide up into two groups and we'd have an army and we'd fight, and one group would take the stairs, another group would take the lower level, and we'd try to take over the stairs. Fighting was a game when I was in elementary school. Speaker 1: Would people get hurt? Speaker 2: Well, you know, yeah they got hurt (laughter). Quite naturally they got hurt. But we didn't use sticks and weapons, we used fists and we were just fist fighting. So, you ended up with black eyes and, you know, bruised, a bruised head sometimes when you went back into the classroom (laughter), and the teacher never said anything. Usually she just got a wet towel and wiped you off, and-- Speaker 1: So that was expected, the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. You had to fight your way. You had to fight your way home because I think even though the bus fare was seven cents to the school, it was, oh about an hour's walk from home, and we'd walk home a lot rather than ride the bus. The buses were usually full back in those days because the Galvez Street bus went all the way down into the Industrial Canal where the ships were being built. That was in the Second World War [World War II, WWII], so at the end of the day, shipyard workers, the buses were packed. Rather than, we didn't want to stand up and get on the crowded bus, we walked home and walking home, we'd have to, the school was in the 2nd Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana]. We had to go to the 6th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana] and we lived in the 5th [5th Ward, New Orleans, Louisiana] and you had ward fights, so we had to fight on the way home (laughter). Fight, sometimes run. If you were outnumbered, you ran (laughter). Speaker 1: I guess it was pretty rough coming up-- Speaker 2: Very rough. Yeah, we learned, we both learned to fight very well. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I think your brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] said that you all had boxing lessons. Speaker 2: We did. We had boxing lessons. Eddie--what was his name--Eddie Johnson [ph.] was lightweight champion of Louisiana at the time--a great lightweight fighter. You never heard about him because in New Orleans black people didn't get a chance to fight nationally or fight in other cities. It's very rare for a black fighter to get invited to fight in Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], so they--we had some good fighters in New Orleans. So, he was a patient of my dad's [Andrew Young, Sr.] and didn't have money to pay so he said, "Well, I can teach your boys how to box," so we had boxing lessons a couple times a week, so we both became sort of well-versed at prizefighting. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever fight formally as a kid, the youth--? Speaker 2: Oh, I did, yeah. The YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. Story_ID: 369816 Speaker 1: What else did you all do there? Was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: In New Orleans [Louisiana], it was. But we have never, ugh, my father [Andrew Young, Sr.] and mother [Daisy Fuller Young] were members of a group called the B Sharp Club [B Sharp Music Club, New Orleans, Louisiana]. They liked classical music. When my father was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], he took part in a group of men who were barbershop quartets and things like that, then when he came to New Orleans, he teamed up with some other people who were interested in music and singing, and they formed a group called Osceola Five, and they went around singing, but they were more into classical music (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Osceola was--a black Indian [Native American] chief, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, but there was a guy named Osceola Blanchet, who was a classical pianist. Speaker 1: Osceola Blanchet. Speaker 2: And they formed a club called the B Sharp, and they would invite classical--Marian Anderson came and sang at Booker T. Washington High School [New Orleans, Louisiana] when I was a kid, I can remember Mahalia Jackson, and we considered that spiritual was a classical form of music, but we had a lot of classical musicians who performed at Booker T. Washington High, back in the days when I was a kid. That would have been back in the '40s [1940s], during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] and right afterwards. Speaker 1: Okay. Is Osceola Blanchet related to [HistoryMaker] Terence Blanchard, the trumpet player now? I think he's from New Orleans. Speaker 2: I don't know. I think most of the Blanchards are related. Speaker 1: I think, I think Terence Blanchard plays with the trumpet player from New Orleans, I can't think of his name now, but I know it, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, yeah. How do you spell B Sharp Club? Speaker 2: B, with a sharp, a musical sharp (laughter). You know how to make a musical sharp. It was B and a musical sharp. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. B Sharp Club, okay. All right. So, did you all, was the Mardi Gras a big deal when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. It was, Mardi Gras was always a big deal to New Orleanians. What I can remember about the Mardi Gras was going to the parades, and the blacks were always carrying the flame. We called them flambeaux, and they marched alongside the parade with flames, and then I can remember the floats, and the white people on the floats were throwing trinkets, but they would very seldom throw trinkets to black kids on the side of the road so we had to get down underneath and catch the trinkets off the ground that the white people, the white kids, couldn't catch, so we would scramble to get trinkets 'cause they wouldn't throw trinkets directly at us. Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd get the ones on the rebound, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, on the rebound. I don't think they still--they still don't throw trinkets to black people in New Orleans in a crowd (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's interesting. Story_ID: 369817 Speaker 1: Did you know any of the black performers or any of the Indian [Native American] groups or any of that--was anybody in your family or neighborhood involved in-- Speaker 2: No, but my dad [Andrew Young, Sr.] was a dentist for Louis Armstrong and Fats Pichon. I can remember, you see my dad's office was in the house. Back in those days the doctors didn't have offices; they had a little room in the house where they saw patients. My living room was the waiting room and right on the side was a little room where my dad had a dental office. So, we saw all the patients coming in, and I can remember Louis Armstrong coming in, Fats Domino, and one day a white politician was in New Orleans [Louisiana] for a Mardi Gras and he was having a tooth problem. He was the speaker of the house of the United States, Rayburn, Sam Rayburn. Speaker 1: Sam Rayburn, okay. Speaker 2: He had a dental problem, and couldn't find any other dentist. My dad's office was not far from, down from Canal Street, so somehow one of the waiters in the hotel said, "Well, I know Dr. Young might see you," so he said, well, he was in pain. He came to my dad's office and my dad treated him, so I do remember a lot of celebrities coming through when I was a kid. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's interesting. Did your father have very many white-- Speaker 2: Yes, he had a lot of white customers because we were in a white neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he have, now I've heard that some black doctors that are dentists had to have a segregated waiting room. Speaker 2: Not in New Orleans. No, my dad's waiting room was integrated. Speaker 1: That's the kind of strange thing that I've heard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was strange, yeah. Speaker 1: I heard that before where a black doctor would have to have a segregated-- Speaker 2: No. In most cases, black doctors didn't get white patients, but my dad's office just happened to be in an all-white neighborhood, so when you're in pain, you're having a toothache, you went to the closest doctor that you could go to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he had a reputation for being a good doctor, anyway, so a lot of whites came to his office. Story_ID: 369818 Speaker 1: Did you like school when you were going to school? Speaker 2: You know, no kids like school (laughter) growing up. We wanted to play football, baseball. We wanted to play sports, you know. We just tolerated school growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite course of study at all? Speaker 2: Well, strangely enough I liked history. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I was good in math. You know, I was sort of good at anything I wanted to be good in, but I really liked history. I always did. Speaker 1: Why did you like-- Speaker 2: And I still like history. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: History is a sort of hobby, and one of the things that I enjoy doing now is looking at the History Channel [History] on TV, and when I see an article in a magazine on a book, I want to read everything I can about history. When I was a kid, and I don't know why, but I would get on the streetcar; when I was a kid, I mean seven, eight, nine years old, I'd ride down to the French Quarter [New Orleans, Louisiana] and walk to the museum, which was called the Cabildo [New Orleans, Louisiana], and I could spend a whole day just walking around looking at the artifacts in the Cabildo, and I don't know why I was that way but I was always fascinated with historical events and historical objects. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And to this day, I'm fascinated with anything related to history. Speaker 1: I noticed your father's name was Andrew Jackson Young [Andrew Young, Sr.]. So-- Speaker 2: Young (laughter). And my brother is Andrew Jackson Young, Jr. [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. So my brother is really a junior. He's not the first Andrew Jackson Young (laughter) and, of course, Bo is Andrew Jackson Young III. Speaker 1: Okay. Someone in the family idolized [President] Andrew Jackson, I suppose. Speaker 2: Yes. I don't know, it must have been my [paternal] grandfather [Frank Young]. Speaker 1: Andrew Jackson is famous for the Battle of New Orleans, and the War of 1812, but, okay, so--you went to high school at Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 2: No. I went to high school briefly at Gilbert Academy in New Orleans [Louisiana] on St. Charles Street [sic. St. Charles Avenue]. It was a Methodist private school, and unfortunately the Methodist church couldn't hold on to the property. The property today would be worth about a whole city block, probably about $50 million a day. Right on St. Charles Avenue, the most exclusive street in New Orleans, it was a Methodist prep school called Gilbert Academy, and the Methodist church sold it when I was, my first year in high school, and so my parents didn't know where to send me, so we had friends in Princeton, New Jersey, who had gone to school at Straight College [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] with my mother [Daisy Fuller Young] and father, and it was Howard Waxwood, Sr., we called him Uncle Howard. He was the principal of Witherspoon elementary [Witherspoon Street School for Colored Children, Princeton, New Jersey], and there was a school, Princeton High School, so I went to Princeton, New Jersey, and I finished high school there. In Princeton, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Was that--well, had you ever been to New Jersey before (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never. Story_ID: 369819 Speaker 1: So, was this your first time really outside of New Orleans [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: No, I'd taken trips with the family to New York [New York] and Washington, D.C. as children, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had some exposure. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I can remember as a kid we took a train ride to New York and stayed in the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa] on 125th Street, and Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I would get out and walk in the streets. Now, that's another thing I want to talk about. I can remember as a kid freely in New Orleans, New York, eight or nine years old, venturing out unaccompanied in the streets, and I never heard of children being molested. I mean, my parents [Daisy Fuller Young and Andrew Young, Sr.] didn't seem to be concerned. When in New Orleans, Andrew and I, we would get on a bicycle and go for the whole day riding all over New Orleans on a bicycle. You never heard of anything happening to kids in those days. I don't understand what's going on in the world today. I had never heard of child molestation when I was a kid. We were never on guard. Nobody talked about it. I don't know whether it happened or not, but nobody talked about it so, freely, we ventured out unaccompanied as children in New Orleans, New York, wherever we went. I can remember as a kid when we went to visit New York, staying in the Theresa Hotel, Andrew and I, we would go out and walk up 125th Street and go into the hotdog shops and things like that, and get in the subway alone. That's eight or nine years old, taking a subway ride. Nobody bothered us. Speaker 1: Do you think it's more dangerous now, or is it-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't have an answer and I wonder, I talk about it all the time. I say, "Was it going on then and we didn't know about it, or is it something new? If it's something new, what's caused it?" I don't know. I don't have answers. Speaker 1: Maybe just a heightened awareness of it that makes it-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't have an answer to that. But it does bother me. It's something I think about. Well, you know, I'm grown now. My grandchildren are almost grown, but it just bothers me anyway because it's just a cultural problem, social problem, and it's very degrading. I just can't figure it out. I don't guess anybody can. Speaker 1: People have been trying to ruminate on it, and there's like a, one thing, the fear factor is higher because we know more-- Speaker 2: Maybe so. Speaker 1: Or maybe it is what it is because there are more people. I don't know. Speaker 2: I don't have the answer. Speaker 1: Okay. But those were the days that you could just, you could leave and go out in the street and it wasn't-- Speaker 2: Well, I can remember my Aunt Teenie, who was like a sister to my mother, had her movie studio on Rampart Street right near Canal [Street] during the Second World War [World War II, WWII], which was one of the worst streets in New Orleans, and Andrew and I, we used to get on the streetcar and go to visit my Aunt Teenie, and walk up and down Rampart Street, and the barbershop was on Rampart and Conti [Street], and we went to the barbershop alone on the streetcar. We got off at Rampart Street and walked up two blocks and turned left, take us on Conti Street and Levi Barbershop [ph.], right down in the worst section of New Orleans in the Second World War. And-- Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: They were smoking marijuana on the streets and drugs were a big thing, but they didn't bother kids. I remember as a kid in elementary school seeing other kids smoking marijuana around the streets, you know, but we never thought about smoking anything. It's something that you just didn't do. Speaker 1: You said your aunt had a video, I mean a movie studio? Speaker 2: No, she was a photographer (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. So she had a photography studio. Speaker 2: Photography studio, that's what I meant, a photography studio. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. Speaker 2: Called Perrault's, and she became a very famous person and they've done some exhibitions of her pictures around the United States. There was an exhibit in Macon [Georgia], there was one in Memphis [Tennessee], there's a travelling exhibit of black artists, and she's one of the artists whose collection has been on exhibit around different parts of the country. Her name was Florestine Collins [Florestine Perrault Collins]. Speaker 1: Flores-- Speaker 2: Florestine Collins, but her maiden name was Perrault, P-E-R-R-A-U-L-T. Speaker 1: Okay. She was certainly a pioneer, I guess. Speaker 2: She was a pioneer, along with the other photographers, but my [maternal] grandmother [Louisa Czarnowski Fuller] raised her, so she was like an aunt to me, but not a blood aunt. Speaker 1: But okay, but like an aunt. Speaker 2: My grandmother took her in. I think she was having problems at home with her father and mother. Her father was--I think from what I understand, he was an alcoholic, and they had lots of children and so my grandmother just took her in, just like she took a lot of other children in and raised them as her own. Story_ID: 369820 Speaker 1: Tell us about Princeton, New Jersey. How did you like Princeton, New Jersey? Speaker 2: Well, it was a very interesting experience, coming from New Orleans [Louisiana]. Other students were way advanced, you know, and I had to, of course, my Uncle Howard [Howard Waxwood, Sr.] was a principal and he helped tutor me to bring me up to the level of most students. It was very difficult, but I caught up. It was challenging. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was it like a mixed high school? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And, in New Orleans, I wasn't used to a mixed school. I went to a school that was predominantly white. They had blacks but mostly whites, so that was another experience, to go to a mixed high school. You know, I can remember growing up in New Orleans, and the yellow school buses, and I was always fascinated with the yellow school bus because we couldn't ride the school bus, we had to walk to school, and I could remember white kids spitting on us out of the window when they passed by blacks. They'd spit out the window on black kids and I used to always wonder, if I could just ride a yellow school bus--when I was a kid that was the dream, to ride a yellow school bus, and then when I got out of dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], I had been a naval dental officer. I went to New Orleans, and I went down to register to vote, and I wasn't allowed to register, so we took a busload, on a yellow school busload of blacks to register, and we were all arrested (laughter). I said, "Well, I did get my ride on the yellow school bus," (laughter) trying to register to vote. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite subject in high school at Princeton [Princeton High School, Princeton, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Physics, math. Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that took a special interest in you or tried to mentor you or-- Speaker 2: My physics teacher, and I can't remember his name. Now, I had a physics teacher in college that, his name was Dr. Blocker [ph.], who took me under his wing and spent a lot of time with me in physics and chemistry. That was at college at Baldwin-Wallace College [Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you, when you were in high school, did you get involved in clubs and activities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I ran track, and then I was involved in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you tempted to play baseball? Speaker 2: No. Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I, my dad [Andrew Young, Sr.] wanted us to play baseball, but we played every sport except baseball. I guess he tried to push baseball on us as kids. Speaker 1: So that was like a rebellion, sort of. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. So you ran track and what events did you run? Speaker 2: The hundred [100 meter dash], the hurdles, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so primarily a sprinter, okay, all right. So, were you a good student in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a good student. Whenever I wanted to be (laughter). Whenever I could take my mind off sports and concentrate on my studies, I could do well. Speaker 1: Who were your heroes when you were a teenager? Speaker 2: Harrison Dillard. That's why I went to Baldwin-Wallace College. I read about him as an Olympian, and he was from Baldwin-Wallace College, and that's where I went to college. Speaker 1: He was a hurdler? Speaker 2: Hurdler. I was a hurdler at Baldwin-Wallace College as well. Speaker 1: So, that's why you wanted to go to Baldwin-Wallace. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: Did you get a scholarship there (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no I didn't. Speaker 1: No? Okay. When you graduated from Princeton High School-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you have an idea what you wanted to do professionally? I mean, yeah--you knew you were going to college right? But what did you think you would do? Speaker 2: I was interested in physics and chemistry and the sciences. When I was in college, I really wanted to be a chemical engineer. I wanted to do something related to science and engineering. However, I realized back in those days there were limited opportunities for blacks in Corporate America. So, I did grow up in a dental office and I knew something about dentistry, so I chose dentistry, but I really wanted to be an engineer of some type. Speaker 1: Okay. That's right up through high school? Speaker 2: That's all the way up through college. Speaker 1: Through college? Okay. Story_ID: 369821 Speaker 1: When you chose Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], you just knew that's where Harrison Dillard was and you, did you contact Baldwin-Wallace about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. I did, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you applied directly there? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So, Baldwin-Wallace is in, what, Berea, Ohio? Speaker 2: Berea, Ohio. That's Cleveland [Ohio], now. It's right next to the Cleveland airport [Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Small college? Speaker 2: Yeah, small college, um-hm. When I was there, it used to take an hour to get into Cleveland. Now you get into Cleveland in fifteen minutes. There's an expressway from the airport into Cleveland. It's not a town. It's a suburb of Cleveland now (laughter). This goes to show you how things can grow. Speaker 1: That sprawl creeping out of Cleveland. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, so, did you, so what was your major initially at Baldwin-Wallace? Speaker 2: Chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were there any teachers at Baldwin-Wallace--you said the physics teacher at Baldwin-Wallace was helpful, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, his name is Dr. Blocker [ph.]. He was a German guy. He couldn't speak good English, but he took me under his wing and tutored me and helped me through the most difficult parts of analytical chemistry and biochemistry, all the difficult subjects. He helped me through those. But I became an A student in chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there very many black students at Baldwin-Wallace when you were there? Speaker 2: No. Maybe about twenty-five-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Out of about two or three thousand. Speaker 1: So, we have, let me just go back a second. Now you graduated from high school [Princeton High School, Princeton, New Jersey] in what year? Speaker 2: In 1951. Speaker 1: Fifty-one [1951]. Okay. And you started at Baldwin-Wallace that same year, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 369822 Speaker 1: --Now we were just talking about those Ohio schools up there, all the kind of liberal Ohio institutions up in northern Ohio, middle Ohio (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]; what was, it was a Methodist school, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did they have a history of having a mission of, some sort of a liberal mission in terms of education? Speaker 2: No, they really didn't. They just had a good athletic program and Harrison Dillard sort of made Baldwin-Wallace famous. But it was not a liberal school at all. You know, Ohio was a rather, very segregated state back in the days when I was in school in the '50s [1950s], you know, and Baldwin-Wallace was rather segregated as well. Being just one of a few black students at Baldwin-Wallace, we had no social life because we were not allowed to join any of the fraternities, so all of the social life on a small college campus was surrounded by the fraternity life, and if you were excluded from fraternities, you had no social life. So, all we had was sports and academics, and I studied hard and-- Speaker 1: Were most of the black students males? Speaker 2: Yes. Most of the black students were like myself, came there for track or football. Speaker 1: Okay. So, were there any black people in the town of Berea [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Very few. There was a little section of town across the railroad tracks where a handful of black people lived, and those black people were the black people who worked in--maids and cooks, menial-type laborers. Speaker 1: Right. You hear the expression across the tracks and that sort of thing, and it really is a physical (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was really across the tracks. Speaker 1: Physical barrier. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: In a lot of communities. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The river, the tracks, et cetera. Okay. So, but you got along all right on the campus--so, did you have any social life at all? Did you-- Speaker 2: None. Well, I went into Cleveland [Ohio] on weekends, and I joined Alpha Phi [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], which was the fraternity, and met a lot of people through the fraternity, and my social life was in Cleveland. Speaker 1: Okay. That, as you say, was an hour ride away from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I could get a bus and get into Cleveland in an hour's time. A little rough going to Cleveland in the wintertime, and it was very cold, and getting off the bus, trying to get another bus (laughter) in the snow, and the bus ended up right there on Superior Avenue, which was about a quarter of a mile from the lake [Lake Erie] and that wind was really tough. Speaker 1: Yeah, Cleveland can be very cold around the lake, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, it was--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at Baldwin-Wallace for four years, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Until 1955? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 369823 Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from Baldwin-Wallace [Baldwin-Wallace College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio], what were your options? What did you think you would do when you--you were thinking of dental school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really wanted to be a chemical engineer. I wanted to be a physicist. I wanted something related to the sciences, having more serious thoughts, I thought in terms of something that I could do to be more self-sufficient, and in those days there weren't many opportunities for blacks in science or engineering, so I said I better think in terms of what I can do for the rest of my life, and I chose dentistry. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I applied to Howard University [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], Western Missouri [Kansas City-Western Dental College; University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Dentistry, Kansas City, Missouri], I applied to, I was accepted at every dental school I applied to right away, except Louisiana State University [Louisiana State University School of Dentistry, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was all white, and we thought about suing the state for the right to enter LSU, but my father [Andrew Young, Sr.] had gone to Howard and I said, "Well, I don't think I want to fight that battle," so I went on to Howard. Speaker 1: Was your father pleased that you decided to kind of follow his footsteps? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you like Howard as opposed to-- Speaker 2: I had a great time, great time. I caught up on everything I missed in college (laughter). Too much social activity, maybe I got too much. Too much college life at Howard (laughter). Speaker 1: I guess you had a good time at Howard? Speaker 2: I had a good time. Speaker 1: Okay. And was the dental program strong? Speaker 2: Very, one of the best in the country at the time, because they had just finished a new dental school, which was financed by the government, and had rated very highly, and it was very competitive, because it was very difficult to get into medical and dental school back--any professional school--you had all of these guys coming out of the Korean War, who were grown men who really were ready to study hard, and they were lucky that they hadn't lost their lives, and here I was, a little kid coming out of college, wanted to have a good time, so I had to compete against grown men and then men who had gone to school, had gotten master's [degree] and Ph.D.s, because there was a big waiting list to get into medical and dental school. You see, you only had Howard and Meharry [Meharry Medical College School of Dentistry, Nashville, Tennessee], and blacks in those days were not admitted to white schools, so Howard and Meharry got the cream of the crop. The best black students from all over the country were applying to two schools, so you really had to have a good academic record to get in, and then when you got in it was very competitive to stay in. Fifty percent of my class flunked out in the first year; however, they were replacements for a dentist, a European dentist who wanted to come into the U.S. who were already dentists, but they had to go back to dental school. They enrolled at Howard so they could become licensed to stay in the U.S. So, we had a lot of foreign dentists who graduated with me. That started a new trend. That was back in '56 [1956], '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Okay. You graduated in '57 [1957] was it? Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959]. Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], okay. Story_ID: 369824 Speaker 1: --We always hear about some of the great academic personalities who were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Well, you take Dr. Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb], who was one of the greatest anthropologists, who was director of the anatomy department. You've got LaSalle Leffall [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.], a great surgeon who still lives today, lots of course--Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew], a lot of great people came out of Howard University. Speaker 1: Jack White [Jack E. White]. Speaker 2: Jack White, that's right. Speaker 1: There are some others, too. Speaker 2: A lot of great doctors. Speaker 1: So you had--some of those doctors taught the dental students as well (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, they all did. I studied under all of 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I heard him, Montague Cobb, also-- Speaker 2: Montague Cobb taught me anatomy, and so did LaSalle Leffall, um-hm. Speaker 1: I think Montague Cobb was a musician, too, by the way. Speaker 2: He was a historian, anthropologist, very brilliant, he could do anything. He was a man of all talents, a man of all seasons. He was a very brilliant guy. Speaker 1: Who was the president then at Howard? Speaker 2: Mordecai Johnson was the president. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any stories about him? I've heard a few. Speaker 2: One of the greatest orators of all times. He could keep you spellbound; of course, you've heard of Benjamin Mays, Mordecai Johnson, all the great orators. Speaker 1: Also, Howard at that time, what was--Howard Thurman? Speaker 2: Howard Thurman, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you ever get a chance to hear him? Speaker 2: Yes. Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a good friend of my father's [Andrew Young, Sr.], so I knew him personally. Speaker 1: Okay. I just had to get some of these people named, here, that go through Howard. Any other people in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] that you encountered that you-- Speaker 2: Well, I remember Paul Reason [sic. Joseph Reason], who was the librarian, who was a good friend of my family, who sort of took me under his wing. His father--I mean, his son became a naval officer, who carried the papers for president, what president, you know the naval officer that travels with the president? His name was--he became an admiral. Admiral Reason [J. Paul Reason], R-E-A-S-O-N. He was a good friend of mine. His dad was a, sort of took me under his wing when I was at Howard. Paul Reason [sic.] had a kid, and he became an admiral in the United States Navy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: First black admiral, I think. First black admiral. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Anybody else? Speaker 2: I can't think of anybody else, but there are so many great Howard-ites, my goodness. All of your great black leaders were graduates of Howard, really-- Speaker 1: Yeah, quite a few. Speaker 2: Howard or Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], came out of the black institutions. Story_ID: 369825 Speaker 1: Were you, at that time, like paying attention closely to the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: When I was at Howard [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.]? No, it wasn't until I graduated and went back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and couldn't register to vote, and I became interested because I just finished dental school, I was a former naval officer, and they wouldn't let me. They said I passed the voting exam. I failed the voting exam, I'm sorry (laughter). Simple questions, these were real simple questions, they said I failed it. That was an excuse they gave you. They just didn't want blacks to register. So, I became involved with an All African Students Union [All African Students Union of the Americas] at Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana]. I had a little part time job as a dentist at Dillard, so I befriended a lot of the African students. That's another role in my life that I didn't mention. I have always been interested in Africa. Speaker 1: From what time? From the time when-- Speaker 2: When I was a teenager. In New Orleans, I was sort of involved in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], with Bill Mitchell [William Mitchell], who was the director of the Y, but also was the honorary consul of Liberia, so when I was fourteen and fifteen, all of the Liberian dignitaries who came to the United States came through New Orleans because of Bill Mitchell. I think he was the first honorary consul that Liberia appointed in the US. So, all of your Liberian politicians and all of the leaders who came to the United States came either through New Orleans, New York [New York], or Washington, D.C. So I became very much interested in Africa from him. Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by honorary consul? Speaker 2: It means that you are selected to represent a government and to assist Liberians who are coming into the United States for business, for school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It's the same thing as an ambassador, but you don't get paid (laughter). We do the same duties. It's hard work and it's a voluntary type of position. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so you met Liberians before, when you lived there, when you were a teenager. Speaker 2: Oh, yes. When I was a kid, I knew all about Africa and I became very much interested in Africa, so when I went back to New Orleans, to practice dentistry, I became involved with the African students, and I became director of the All African Students Union. So, when the Civil Rights Movement broke out, these Africans said, "Hey, we're not used to this segregated stuff. We want to demonstrate." So, I was involved in taking them downtown to sit in at the Woolworth [F.W. Woolworth Company] and the five and ten cent stores, and the movie theaters. My role was, when they went to jail, was to get them out. I was a support, more of a support person, organizer and supporter of these students. I started off with African students and then all of the students. Speaker 1: Did the other students join the organization as such, or did they-- Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it really wasn't all African students. Speaker 2: Most of the students that originated the movement in New Orleans were African students, then other blacks joined in. Speaker 1: Okay. That sounds like a powerful kind of a combination (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 369826 Speaker 1: This is something that hasn't, that--I can't recall having read about this kind of a unity anywhere else. Speaker 2: No, it happened in New Orleans [Louisiana]. That was because of the work that I did in organizing the African students [through the All African Students Union of the Americas]. I don't think anybody had ever done that before. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: They had a lot of African students at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], but I don't think anybody tried to organize them. Speaker 1: What was their stance using civil rights of African students at Howard at the time of-- Speaker 2: I don't know. I wasn't involved in the Civil Rights Movement at Howard at the time. I only became interested in the Civil Rights Movement when I went back to New Orleans; I think that must have been in '61 [1961] or '62 [1962], around that time. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the demonstrations that you were involved in advising students about occurred in early '60s [1960s] or '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: Yes. In '62 [1962] or '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: In '62 [1962] or '63 [1963]. Okay. How did, well, history shows that somebody was successful but were the efforts of the students successful in New Orleans right away, or did they, did it take a while. Speaker 2: No, it took a while because we had no support from the people in the city, the blacks in the city. It was very discouraging to me. New Orleans was a city that cared for God, and when I had kids in jail and I was trying to get kids out, I went to the Mardi Gras clubs and asked for support. They said, "Well you can come to the balls and put a plate there and collect money that way," and it was very discouraging to see people coming in with tuxedos and carrying liquor under their arms and women with thousand dollar dresses and dropping a quarter in the plate. It was very discouraging to me, and that's one of the reasons why I left New Orleans. I said, people just didn't, I just couldn't understand the mentality. It took them a long time in the pursuit of freedom, because New Orleans was very divided. You had uptown people, downtown people. You had blacks, you had the mulattoes, you had the Catholics, you had so many divisions, it was so hard to get 'em all to work on one front, and it was very discouraging, so when I met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and I started, he talked me into coming to Atlanta [Georgia] to work with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], and to help him develop a health program for poor people in Resurrection City. When he was assassinated, I came anyway. We talked about--he recognized there were so many problems facing black and poor people. One was healthcare, and he asked me if I could develop a committee and become a committee to try and find ways to solve some of the crises of health among black and poor people, and that's still a problem today that we haven't addressed-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now can I-- Speaker 2: --which I'm still interested in working with (simultaneous). Story_ID: 369827 Speaker 1: Can you tell me, like, how did you, about how you first met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 2: I met him with my brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], and we talked-- Speaker 1: About what year was this? Speaker 2: In '64 [1964], '65 [1965], and we talked and then I started coming to Atlanta [Georgia] and whenever I came here, we talked and we got to know each other pretty well. We talked to him on the phone when I called. We developed a good relationship before he was assassinated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I came here anyway, and when I came here I worked with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], I volunteered for a year. I didn't practice for a year. I traveled with Ralph Abernathy, and Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] and I became good friends. When I decided to open my office, Daddy King was a patient and he helped me get patients here in the office, so Daddy King and I became very close. Speaker 1: Now tell me, now, I ask this question of a lot of people and I get different stories, but can you remember what happened on the day that you heard Dr. King had been assassinated? Where were you and what were you doing? Speaker 2: I was getting ready to move to Atlanta. I was in New Orleans [Louisiana] and Baton Rouge, Louisiana. And I was just shocked and I caught up with the first plane I could get to come to Atlanta. Couldn't wait to come here to just--to be with the people whose lives were hurt just like mine. Speaker 1: What was the attitude of the staff of Dr. King? You probably had access to a lot of people-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was in turmoil, you know. It--nobody knew, everybody was lost. Unfortunately, a lot of people didn't find themselves. A lot of people remained drifting and some of his lieutenants died as drifters. They never could adjust to normal life after the movement died down. The leadership was gone. So many other people, one of my good friends committed suicide after-- Speaker 1: Who was it? Speaker 2: Well, I don't want to talk about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, several of them just, it was very sad. Most of the lieutenants, the street lieutenants, just never could adjust, and we called them the veterans of the Civil Rights Movement, the forgotten leaders that nobody talks about, and it's very sad because they are people that struggled so that you and me can have the privileges that we have today. They were forgotten. Nobody took care of them. Nobody--when they were down and out, nobody helped them. Nobody reached out to them. They were the forgotten heroes. Story_ID: 369828 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And these were the real heroes, because, I mean, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] went into a town that town was organized already. It was set up. All he had to do was come in and make a big speech. He was a leader but they did the work. These were the foot soldiers. They really laid that town out. They got all the people who would support him and who would protect him. They were organizers. The real foot soldiers were very important. There were a few books about the foot soldiers, but nobody has done a story about the fallen or forgotten heroes of the Civil Rights Movement. Somebody needs to do, write a book about it while there are still a few people alive who could probably help you write the book. Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: Like James Orange is still alive, J.T. Johnson, Willie Bolden, a few of 'em are still around, who managed to readjust and managed to make it. You know, people like Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian] were educated; but you see, a lot of these young people were teenagers in high school and dropped out of school to march with Dr. King, and became organizers, so they didn't get much of an education. They dropped out of school to work with the movement. So, after the movement was, after Dr. King was assassinated, the movement started falling apart and they had nowhere to turn. Nobody looked out for them. Speaker 2: So there was-- Speaker 1: And people began to shun them because they seemed to be lost, and they were not educated, didn't know how to take care of themselves. And, people actually shunned them. They didn't want to be bothered with them. Speaker 2: Did you go to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for the Poor People's Campaign? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. That's when, I think that was sort of a, it seemed to be to us watching it from afar, a power struggle in the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] between a rising force in Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Ralph Abernathy, and maybe some other forces too, we don't know. Do you have any thoughts about any of that at the time? Speaker 1: No. I didn't get into the politics of it. I didn't want to get into the politics of the Civil Rights Movement. I just wanted to cooperate and serve in any capacity that I could. I didn't have any ulterior motives at all. I still don't. I just want to do the best that I can do. I just want to help somebody, as Dr. King said. Speaker 2: Do you have any personal reflections of Dr. King that you'd like to share with us? Speaker 1: One of the greatest people that ever lived, and I can say that because I knew him. He was an all-around person, and he was just full of fun, just a great, great person to be with, beautiful personality, almost a perfect person. Of all the people I've ever met, I would say he's closest to being a person, perfect person; closest that I've ever met. Story_ID: 369829 Speaker 1: You continued to live here and be involved and things in Atlanta [Georgia] after Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination, am I correct? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, and you continued to be involved in Africa on some level, yeah? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, just kind of walk us through, how did you become more intensely involved in Africa, though? Speaker 2: Well, I began traveling to Africa. I did some consulting for American companies. I was in the oil business back in 19--early '80s [1980s] and I represented some American companies doing business in West Africa. I took an American engineering company [Hensley-Schmidt Engineering] and we did the first sewer system for Abuja, capital in Nigeria. We were the first American company to open an office and to successfully complete a project. We did the sewer, the gravity sewer system, which was quite a feat, and it's still working to this day. We designed that in 1979, I think. We implemented it around '81 [1981] or '82 [1982] and it's still successful. I did some consulting for a Nigerian insurance corporation. I happened to be the honorary consul general for the Republic of Liberia. Right now, I still serve--right now-- Speaker 1: It's the same position that the man [William Mitchell] in New Orleans [Louisiana] served years ago? Speaker 2: That's right. And you're sitting in the consulate office right now (laughter). We're using the Liberian consulate office for this interview. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's got to be--you know, it's a new president now, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf-- Speaker 2: A very fine person, a very able person, and I think she's gonna help that country to turn the corner, and I'm in 100 percent support of the work that she's doing. Speaker 1: How would, now were you involved with Liberia at all when they first had the coup, I guess it was in 1980, I guess it was. Speaker 2: I was appointed in '85 [1985] and I continued to serve because we have about ten thousand Liberians in Atlanta, who needed somebody, who needed a friend here. And-- Speaker 1: Was this the largest concentration of Liberians outside the country? Speaker 2: No, I think the largest would be in, maybe Washington [D.C.], Minneapolis [Minnesota], I think this was the third largest concentration. Speaker 1: That's a lot though, ten thousand. Story_ID: 369830 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer and this is a continuation of your interview. Will you please state your name and spell it for me, once again? Speaker 2: Walter Young [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], W-A-L-T-E-R, Y-O-U-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay. I understand that we have already talked about your childhood, but there were some things that you wanted to talk about, so let's go back and talk about your childhood and where you lived, I think that's what you wanted to speak about, okay. Speaker 2: Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I grew up right after the Great Depression. It was a time when most people in America were of meager means, barely able to find enough food to eat and to clothe themselves. It's maybe not much different from today with a lot of homeless people, but back in those days we called the people who were in the street hoboes. We grew up on Cleveland Avenue, which was not far from downtown New Orleans [Louisiana], and we grew up in an Irish, Italian and German neighborhood and, of course, right before, that was right before the Second World War [World War II, WWII], and I can remember there was a German beer garden down the street and Andrew and I used to sneak there with other kids and look in the window, nosy like most kids, and we would see the German guys, we saw the swastika flag and we saw them saying, "Heil Hitler," and that was back in the late '30s [1930s], before the Second World War. The interesting thing about the way we grew up, we had a backyard about maybe five hundred square feet, which we had to share with the chickens because my [maternal] grandmother [Louisa Czarnowski Fuller] raised chickens, and I had a little pet rooster that I used to play with called Blackie and one day we were having some soup, chicken noodle soup, and my brother started instigating and he says, "Oh, this is something beautiful. This is some delicious soup. There's some good soup. This is chicken noodle soup." And he kept saying that over and over again, and then he finally said, "Walter, where is Blackie?" (Laughter) And I jumped and ran outside and I couldn't find Blackie, so my mom [Daisy Fuller Young] said that Blackie had jumped into a pot of hot water. Back in those days we had a shed in the backyard, where we washed clothes and you would take a big tub of water and you'd turn the fire on and you'd heat the water. That's how you got hot water to wash clothes. And then, my grandmother used to scrub the clothes with a scrubbing board. That was our washing machine, so unfortunately the rooster was flying around our hen and fell in the hot water, so that's what happened to my rooster. But, I had lots of different types of pets. I used to raise pigeons, rabbits, and turtles; all kinds. I always did love animals and pets. And then, another hobby I had was building model airplanes, and that's how I became dexterous and became a good dentist, because I learned as a child, oh, when I was around six, seven, eight, how to work with my hands. Then when I was about eleven years old, I started working in my dad's [Andrew Young, Sr.] office. My dad's office was right in the house. In those days, a doctor had his office in the home, so I started off doing little menial chores, cleaning up, helping him develop x-rays and pouring bottles in the dental office, and I became interested in dentistry, and then in the summer time, he sent me to a lab, McDonald Dental Lab [New Orleans, Louisiana], where I learned to be more of a lab technician, so when I got to dental school [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], I was so far ahead of the other students, that it was, they called me the best dental student that they had ever seen, because I already, I had been doing it ever since I was eleven years old, so I got the first A that Dr. Fitzgerald [Percy A. Fitzgerald] had ever given. He was an old doctor, who didn't believe in giving A's, but I was so good he had to give me an A, but I was considered an exceptional dentist from dental school on, and dentistry has been a good profession to me. I enjoy it and I'm still practicing and I don't think I'm gonna ever retire. Story_ID: 369831 Speaker 1: Even though I'm not practicing full time now, I have other interests in life, for instance consulting, and I'm very much involved with the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], the Andrew and Walter Young YMCA [Andrew and Walter Young Family YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia], and also The First Tee golf program right down the street. I'm working with kids and trying to give back to the community in which I grew up in, because I can remember as a kid how important it was for Andrew [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and I to have a YMCA in New Orleans [Louisiana]. There were very few recreational act- there were hardly no recreational and leadership activities in New Orleans back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], so the only thing we had was the Dryades Street YMCA [New Orleans, Louisiana], and the interesting thing, when we went back to New Orleans after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], and everything in New Orleans had really been devastated and still is. It hasn't been restored yet, and the only thing that was running full swing was the Dryades Street YMCA. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Isn't that interesting? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Everything was just destroyed all around, but that YMCA was still standing, and they had a program to welcome us back to New Orleans, and they must have had about a thousand kids, and never saw so many kids in a gymnasium before, but that was the only thing that the kids of New Orleans had, and still had, was the Dryades Street YMCA, because New Orleans still hasn't started to rebuild yet. Story_ID: 369832 Speaker 1: When we left off the last time, you were at Howard University [Howard University College of Dentistry, Washington, D.C.], and tell us about your, how you came to be involved with the [U.S.] Navy. It was at that time, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes, back in, I think that must have been around 1956 or '57 [1957], somewhere around that time. The Navy wanted to recruit blacks into the Navy. They wanted to recruit black officers, so there was a special program, and they came to the medical and the dental school to recruit students, so we were commissioned. I think I was commissioned in my sophomore year in dental school as an ensign, which is an officer, and then I had to serve in the summertime, then after I graduated I was commissioned again, as a lieutenant junior grade, and then a year later lieutenant senior grade, so it was a special program to attract doctors into the Navy, and I served, in peacetime Navy of course; however, we did have a little fright. I was serving during the Cuban Missile Crisis, and back in those days, well, it was announced that the battleships and aircraft carriers were on alert. They were running 24/7, and I was so afraid I was gonna get sent out on one of those ships (laughter) but I didn't. Fortunately, I stayed in Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois], which was near Chicago [Illinois], and I worked in a hospital there. Speaker 1: Okay. So how long were you in the Navy? Speaker 2: Well, from '57 [1957], I think, to part of the time when I was in school and then after school, about a year and a half after I graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. And you graduated from Howard in what year? Speaker 2: In 1959. Story_ID: 369833 Speaker 1: After you graduated is when you came to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: No. I went back to New Orleans [Louisiana] and started practicing, and that was right in the--around '60 [1960] or '61 [1961], right in the early days of the Civil Rights Movement, and I got involved with the student movement in New Orleans, and I was the advisor to the All African Students Movement [sic. All African Students Union of the Americas] in New Orleans, and we were leading the demonstrations at lunch counters; Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company], Kress [S.H. Kress and Co.] and the movie theaters, and my role, of course, was to help and support the students in the rallies and the meetings, and to help them get out of jail when they got in jail, to raise money to get them out of jail. When I went home, of course, I went, I tried to register to vote and they said I failed the exam (laughter) so we took a busload back to register to vote, and, of course, we were all arrested (laughter) so we had demonstrated to get the right to vote and we demonstrated to sit at the counters in the lunch rooms, as they did all over the United States. So I was involved in the early Civil Rights Movement in New Orleans and in Plaquemine, Louisiana, and through my work in the Civil Rights Movement, I met Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] with my brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and Dr. King said, "Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], I need you to come to Atlanta. Why don't you move here and help me with the Poor People's Campaign?" One of the interests Dr. King had was, how can we find ways to get the government to provide healthcare for poor working people? And that was his early agenda back in the early '60s [1960s]. Of course, you know we still haven't solved that problem in America, but I'm still working on it. I'm trying to do everything I can to encourage the government to do something about providing maybe a national health insurance so that all Americans can have good healthcare and good dental care. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's '64 [1964], '65 [1965] when you come to Atlanta, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me your thoughts about the Vietnam War. Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't that much involved in the demonstrations in the Vietnam War; however, we all did support Dr. King in his effort to find a solution and an end to the war. I was more involved in the Civil Rights Movement and trying to get more equal rights for black people. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me about some of the people that you worked with in civil rights besides your brother. There were some other people that you worked alongside of. Speaker 2: Hosea Williams was one of the ones that took me under his wing when I first came to Atlanta; of course, in Louisiana I worked along with [HistoryMaker] James Forman and people from the Congress of Racial Equality [CORE] and, of course, Mary Hamilton [Mary Hamilton Wesley], the "Call me Miss" girl; the young lady who won the [U.S.] Supreme Court case [Hamilton v. Alabama, 1961] because she went to jail for refusing to respond to the judge when he called her Mary. She said, "Call me Miss Mary," and he wouldn't, so he put her in jail for about thirty or sixty days, and she took the case to the Supreme Court, so now you have to be called Miss. You have to have a title when you go before a judge now. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Okay. All right, so, are there any other things you want to talk about the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: No, other than the Civil Rights Movement continues, and we still haven't, it's a little different now in that you are looking for economic parity nowadays, and trying to get our young people to realize that education is still very important, and responsibility to the community is very important. Young people today maybe don't have the guidance and the leadership that we had growing up, because we had aunts and uncles and grandmothers and we grew up in a very strong disciplinary society, and discipline is lacking in today's society. I don't have the answer to that, and I'll guess none of us do. Story_ID: 369834 Speaker 1: Here in Atlanta [Georgia], in the '70s [1970s], the late '70s [1970s], in this community, the missing and murdered children [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases; Atlanta Child Murders] was a big issue going on. Can you give me some thoughts about, you lived in Atlanta at that time. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, can you give me some thoughts about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was very much concerned because I had, I had children around the ages of the kids that were disappearing so we were very concerned and very careful about our children and where they went and what they did, and we were sure to supervise all of their activity at all times, and all parents were very concerned, 'cause we didn't know, actually, how and why the children were missing and we didn't know what to look for or what to watch for, so we were extremely cautious about our children in those days. Speaker 1: So, what are your thoughts about Wayne Williams asking for a new trial? Do you-- Speaker 2: Well, I think if the DNA shows that there is some evidence that he should have a new trial, I think he should. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're all waiting for the findings of the DNA test. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any thoughts about whether it truly was a conspiracy or not? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 369835 Speaker 1: Okay, so now, you become honorary consul general for Liberia. Speaker 2: Yes, I've been serving since about 1985. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got involved in Africa, oh, as a young man. I've always had an interest in Africa. When I was around fourteen, I was sort of an errand boy for Bill Mitchell [William Mitchell], who was the director of the YMCA [Dryades Street YMCA] in New Orleans [Louisiana], and he was sort of a role model and he was appointed honorary consul of Liberia. That was probably back in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], and whenever Liberians or Africans came to New Orleans, of course I was right there with Bill Mitchell, helping him and running errands, so I got to know something about Africa as a young man of about, oh, fourteen or fifteen, I think, and I always admired Bill Mitchell for his interest in Africa. And when I went to college one of my very close friends, Ernest Eastman, became, was from Liberia, and we continued to stay in touch, and years later I ran into him and he had been appointed foreign minister for Liberia and, of course, he knew that my interest was in Africa over the years, and I was still working in West Africa doing some consulting for American companies, trying to export goods, technology and services in Africa. So he said, "Walter [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], why don't you think about in terms of serving in Liberia in the capacity of honorary consul general?" And I said, "Yes, I'd be happy to do so." So I went to Liberia and I was appointed and I served through some very difficult times; politically, of course, you know we've been involved in the civil--we just ended the civil war [Second Liberian Civil War]. We've had a coup and two civil wars, and now we've elected democratically a very dynamic woman who I have a lot of admiration for, Ellen Sirleaf [Ellen Johnson Sirleaf], and she is providing us the leadership that we have needed for a long time, and I trust that Liberian people will support her and give her a chance to turn the country around, and she is certainly capable. Speaker 1: Was this your first trip, in '85 [1985] when you were appointed, was this your first trip? Speaker 2: No. I have-- Speaker 1: When was your first trip to Africa? Speaker 2: I had been working in Africa since around '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I took the first American company to Abuja, Nigeria. It was Hensley-Schmidt Engineering, and we did the design of the sewer system. It was the first American company to do business in the new federal city capital. It was a gravity sewer system, and it's still operational today, but we were the first American company to do any business in the new federal city capital of Abuja, Nigeria. So that was one of the projects that I worked on, and then another project, I exported some earth stations, communication to earth stations from Scientific Atlanta [Scientific Atlanta, Inc.], and I did some consulting with Ashland Oil [Ashland Oil, Inc.; Ashland Inc.] in Cameroon, during a time when there was an oil crisis in America and America was looking for new sources of oil and then we encouraged them to look to Africa because Africa was producing oil and was exporting all of its oil to Europe. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: So, we started, we got American oil companies interested in West Africa, and that was back in early, early '80s [1980s]. Story_ID: 369836 Speaker 1: You talked about so many things that have happened in Liberia as you were working there. Some of the things you spoke about, let's elaborate on some of them. When Charles Taylor was there, you wanted to speak to some of the things that were going on that might have affected the business that you were doing. Speaker 2: Yes. Charles Taylor really spent a lot of time here in Georgia, in Macon, Georgia; so, I knew him as a young man. However, I served under his presidency, but I had very little contact with him. I didn't go to Liberia during those years, so, but I, my interest was supporting the Liberians living in Georgia, who needed their passport renewed--that needed support, immigration support, that needed someone to support their efforts to live in the Atlanta [Georgia] area. Most were here under the amnesty program [Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986] and they had some who had come here to go to college and stay. We have roughly over ten thousand Liberians here in the Atlanta area, so I was responsible for all of the Liberians during those days, and it was a very warm relationship. I got to make many good friends, whom I still have today. It's going back to, since 1985, so I do have some long-term friends who are still here. Now that we have a democratic government and we are trying to rebuild Liberia, my role is to try to assist and encourage American companies in investing in Liberia and trying to get Liberians who have been educated in America to somehow think in terms of going back home to rebuild the country. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I think that's important. I understand that when the new president [Ellen Johnson Sirleaf] took office there, she had to get rid of a lot of her government officials because they were uneducated, so-- Speaker 2: I know she's tried to retain as many as she could. She's, it's just a great challenge for her because Liberia was at war for so long, so young people were not schooled; in other words, all they knew how to do and still do, was to carry a gun and so many of them were not educated, so, now what do you do with ex-combatants, as we call them? Those young people who grew up fighting. What do we do with them now? We can try to create an educational system. Mostly, I would encourage vocational education, and I'm trying to encourage as much support, vocational support as I can, from America and that's my challenge now; doing whatever I can do to support Liberia and to help it to grow, and I'm following, of course, the lead of my president. Story_ID: 369837 Speaker 1: As far as supporting them, would it entail the United States helping to give this vocational training in Liberia or to educate them here and let them go back home. Speaker 2: Well, no. We have enough Liberians in the United States who are educated. We want to train and educate Liberians in Liberia. Hopefully some of the Liberians who have become educated here will go back home to assist in educating Liberians in Liberia. One of the challenges that we have, we have no infrastructure. Electricity, and water, the basic resources are needed. Hopefully we can get more support from the United States and other countries of goodwill that will come in and help us to rebuild Liberia. We are spending billions of dollars a day in Iraq, rebuilding Iraq, and a portion of that, if we had a fraction of that, we could rebuild Liberia very quickly. Speaker 1: That would give Liberians the incentive to want to go back. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If there were financial resources. You see, you have Liberians here who have become educated and who have good jobs and good training, who are quite capable of going back home, but it's, for them to give up their comforts of America and to go back home, it's a challenge, but a lot of Liberians are going back home and are doing well, and are very happy to be back home. We just need to encourage more Liberians to go back home and to try to find ways to make it conducive and interesting for them to go back home. We need more support from the U.S. and the United Nations [UN]. We need more, much more financial support than we're getting. Speaker 1: How do you feel about the homeland security and the immigration laws reform? Speaker 2: Well, I have, I have a lot of problems with what's going on in America today. "Give me your tired, your poor, your humble masses yearning to be free." The inscription on the Statue of Liberty [New York, New York] isn't applicable today. America was founded by people who came here seeking a better life from Europe and other countries and now we're trying to close our doors on those people. I think that we need to find ways to embrace the people coming from other countries, find ways to train them so that they can become productive American citizens, to become educated, to have jobs and to pay taxes. I think that's a challenge that we, I don't think we need to necessarily close the door, but we need to open our hearts so that we can embrace the people from other countries. This country is very vast and very rich, and we have lots to share, and I don't think that we can survive in a global economy by closing our doors. Look, the world is too small now. Speaker 1: So, as part of your function as consul general, do you work with illegal immigrants at all? Are there very many? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. Well, yes. A lot of Liberians came here under the amnesty program [Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986] and they're trying to terminate that program. A lot of Liberians and foreigners came here illegally, and stayed here without the proper documentation, and I have those problems all the time. There's always somebody being arrested and that's part of my job. I'm called on by the immigration department. I have to determine are they Liberians or are they from other African--we have a lot of fake passports nowadays. We've got a lot of immigration problems that I have to deal with, a lot of laws that Africans are not used to because the culture's different and, to give you an example, I have a few Liberians who are in jail and about to be deported today because of the way that they handle their children. They're strong disciplinarians. In this country you can't violently discipline your children. In Africa, it's sort of part of their culture. I've got two Africans who are in jail today because they broke American laws by using--disciplining their children too harshly. Story_ID: 369838 Speaker 1: So, you were talking about the Liberians that are in jail for violating U.S. laws. Do you work with other organizations that deal with Liberians, like the Friends of Liberia [Washington, D.C.] or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Liberian Association. There are many Liberian groups. I work with all of the groups. I support just the total Liberian community. Speaker 1: So, do they call you when there's a problem? Speaker 2: All the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I get calls from the department of immigration. Sometimes they call me first and then Liberians call me. I do what I can. Now American laws, immigration laws, are so strict nowadays that it's unfortunate that there's very little that I can do as honorary consul general. Most of the problems are legal. I try to find, give them advice insofar as helping them to find lawyers. Years ago, I could do more as an honorary consul general, but because of Homeland Security [U.S. Department of Homeland Security] and the immigration laws changing, most of the problems have to be solved legally. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, give me an example of what you could have done before that you can't do now because of the change in the laws. Speaker 2: Well, I could inter- years ago, I could intercede with the department of immigration. I could even go to court and intercede in court. I could talk to a judge and ask for leniency and understanding, and I could help--years ago I could do that, nowadays I can't. The department of immigration, they won't even speak to me anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They've become very closed, and you can't even talk to an immigration judge on the phone and you can't even--I have written letters and they respond from an office in Maryland. They don't even respond to me from Atlanta [Georgia]. If I write a letter to a judge in Atlanta, I get a response from an office in Maryland, and I'm not allowed to speak to a judge. I've tried to talk to judges, and, as they say, it's against the law for me to talk to a judge now, whereas years ago I could talk to a judge about immigration problems and try to get some understanding and some communication. I can't even communicate with an immigration judge anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The immigration laws have become so restrictive in America today. Story_ID: 369839 Speaker 1: Being that you have been in Atlanta [Georgia] for a very long time and your brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] was, you know, a very active politician here, did you have a lot of interaction with some of the mayors, say Maynard Jackson and Bill Campbell? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I supported all of the mayors. I've been very active in behind the scenes politics. When my brother ran for [U.S.] Congress, I was one of the first people to get out and campaign and to raise money for him. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about working with some of the mayors? I mean, your brother-- Speaker 2: I worked with all of the mayors in Atlanta and many of the state representatives and city council people. I've been very active politically behind the scenes. Speaker 1: Any interaction with the governors that have been in office since you've been here? Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked, I ran an office, a get out the vote office for Governor Barnes [Roy Barnes] right in this building where you're sitting. I had a vacant space in this building and I donated it to Roy Barnes. Maynard Jackson worked out of this office, my brother worked out of this office, and so many elected officials and people of good will who believed in Roy Barnes worked right out of this office. We had a get out the vote drive right out of this building. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: About fifteen years ago. I can't remember--let's see, no, not that many years ago; about eight years ago, maybe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Roy Barnes ran for governor. Speaker 1: Okay so that was about '98 [1998] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was behind, he was way behind in the polls and we got together in the black community and turned it around overnight. We got the black vote involved and that was done right out of this office, and I donated this office, you know, to the campaign. Speaker 1: So the get out the vote was a strategy to get black people out to vote for Roy Barnes? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had block parties, we had flatbed trucks with bands going out in the community, we campaigned door-to-door, on street corners, in front of shopping centers. We really had a massive get out the vote effort. Speaker 1: What about Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]? Any interaction with Jimmy Carter? Speaker 2: Yes. We did the same thing for Jimmy Carter. We got the vote out for him as well. Speaker 1: When the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] were here did you have a part in it in any way? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I did. Being honorary consul general, I was very much involved with the African athletes who came. We had athletes from Liberia, who had been studying and training in America, who participated, so I was very much supportive and involved with my Liberian athletes and athletes from other countries as well. That was my role, was to support, finding support for the athletes from other countries. Story_ID: 369840 Speaker 1: Dr. Young [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], you have been in this location for how many years? Speaker 2: Since 1970. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970], and that's a very long time to be a dentist, and I understand that you're saying that you are part time, you're working part time now, but tell me how did you keep up with all the newest things in dentistry, and what is your office doing now? Speaker 2: Well, I read and I go to dental clinics on a regular basis. I keep abreast of what's going on in my profession academically. Speaker 1: And you've been a force in this community, so your clients here, are basically--have you had the same patients for a number of years or do you see a change, do you see an increase in African Americans making sure that they have good dental care? Speaker 2: Well, there's a change in healthcare because of the new insurance programs. Patients nowadays go to a doctor who's recognized by the insurance company, who is on a particular list, whereas years ago when I started practicing people came to you because word of mouth, because they heard that you were a good doctor and had a good reputation in the community. Nowadays it doesn't matter to people at all. They want to consider, do you take my insurance, so they'll go anywhere where you will accept their insurance, so most doctors have become very insurance-conscious. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but your office tries to cater to the community in that aspect. Is that right? Speaker 2: I've always been very much involved in the community and will continue to do so. That's one thing that I spend most of time is working in the community, all of the different programs, 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.], the YMCA, The First Tee program, working with young people, and I'm president of Cascade Merchants Association [Cascade Business and Merchants Association, Atlanta, Georgia] right here in this neighborhood. So, I mean I'm always busy going to meetings, community meetings. Speaker 1: Well, what's the Cascade Merchants, what is that about? Speaker 2: Well, it's these merchants right here in this Cascade area [Cascade Heights, Atlanta, Georgia], just trying to organize ourselves to improve the community. We've had things like Christmas parades, Easter parades, just generally trying to work together and keep the community intact so that we can at least go to our city council people when we have problems as a community and as a group. Story_ID: 369841 Speaker 1: As far as merchants, I know your brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] recently made a statement that got blown out of proportion about the foreign merchants in the community [of Atlanta, Georgia]. What's your feeling about that? Speaker 2: Well, I've been working very and supporting the foreign merchants in this community right here on this corner. I tried to encourage them to become a part of more, a part of the community. There are cultural differences and I tried to reach out to them. There's an Indian group on this corner and across the street there are some Koreans, and I visit with them frequently to find out how they're doing and what problems that they have. I tried to encourage them to get involved in the community. I let them know what's going on with the YMCA and what's going on during Christmastime, and I try to get them to appreciate our culture and to become a part of it, and that takes an effort. I'm continually going to give them support, and I reach out to them. I think we have to reach out to the foreigners much more and try to understand them and try to bring them into our society without trying to strip them of their cultural values; try to assimilate them into our community, but we have to understand them as well. Speaker 1: So, is there much in the community, much being done so that the other merchants would understand? Speaker 2: No, there's not much being done in that respect, no. There's not enough, but we need to try to reach out to the foreign merchants because they are in the community and have come here and have made an investment, but we need to explain to them some of the values that we have and how they should support our values and how we should try to understand theirs. Speaker 1: So, how do you feel about foreign merchants coming into the black community and being able to establish a business, and is there much being done in the community to increase the numbers of black entrepreneurs? Speaker 2: Oh, I wish there were methods of providing financing for small businesses and that some small minority businesses would take an interest. One thing that foreigners will do, they will come in as a family and they will work day and night, whereas we won't. We want to work nine to five, and these small businesses, like the one right here on the corner, they're open 24/7, and it's hard to find people who are that committed, but the way they do it, they have family members take rotating shifts, so it's always a family effort. So, foreigners work as families, and we have lost that family togetherness that we used to have, maybe fifty years ago. Our families aren't as cohesive as they were when I was a kid, you know. I grew up, my [maternal] grandmother [Louisa Czarnowski Fuller] was there, my aunts and uncles were there. We had strong family unity and we don't have that anymore. Speaker 1: Do you believe that, well recently the Mexican immigrants have been rallying around the fact that they're really now taking the place of doing the work that blacks would have done. Do you believe that they actually will do work that we won't do? Speaker 2: Well, they're doing work a lot cheaper, but I think that they should be paid minimum wage and they should pay taxes. The reason why they're doing work a lot cheaper than we will do it is because they're not paying any taxes. They don't have the financial responsibility. I think they should compete on the same level that our people will compete. If they're brought into the system and they're paid a decent wage, and if they pay all their taxes, then I think it will level off, so there's a little disparity between the responsibilities of workers in the two different groups. They will work for below minimum wage, and I don't think they should. But, if they get minimum wage, then they should pay, they should assume the responsibilities of being, living in America. Speaker 1: So, what are your thoughts, about the guest workers proposal [Fair and Secure Immigration Reform] that the president [President George Walker Bush] has? Speaker 2: I'm not very supportive of this administration. Story_ID: 369842 Speaker 1: Dr. Young [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young], is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: No, I think--it's been very enjoyable to be, to reflect back and to express my feelings about America and about the global economy and where we're going. I'm, I have concerns about America and where America is going, and I have concerns about American people and the way we feel about ourselves and the way we feel about the rest of the world, and how we've isolated ourselves, and unfortunately, most Americans have no idea about how other people in other countries feel about us, but we have really developed a very poor image globally, and I mean one of the leading nations in the world, I think we need to do a lot to improve our image, and I don't think you can improve your image with military power. I think we need to be more statesmanlike and try to win friends by helping friends. So, we have a lot to be desired--now the unfortunate thing that bothers me is not what this administration [President George Walker Bush administration] is doing, it's that more than 50 percent of American people support what they're doing, so we have a lot of education. We need a lot of help ourselves, and that's the frightening thing, that it seems to be the American way, and I don't know what's become of America and the way we've always been the home of, the land of the free and the home of the brave. We've always been a leader in the world, a moral leader, and a country that believes in the principles of God and In God We Trust, and now it seems that we're not trusting too much in God. Speaker 1: Do you have a message that you would send to the future generations? Speaker 2: Yes. The message I would send to the future generation is that we're living in a very small world. We cannot isolate ourselves. We've got to learn to understand people in other countries. We've got to be more competitive, and we've got to be more understanding, and this world does not belong to us as Americans. It belongs to all human beings, and that we need to learn to live as human beings in the whole world and strive for peace and to reach out to people in other nations and to be concerned with people in other nations as Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was. He, his movement was not necessarily a Civil Rights Movement. It was a human rights movement, and I think we need to think in terms of a new human rights movement in the world today. Speaker 1: Tell me, how do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: Just as somebody who tried to help somebody (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 369843 Speaker 1: Okay, that's my [maternal] grandmother and that was taken perhaps before I was born. Speaker 2: What's her name? Speaker 1: Louisa Valentine Czarnowski Fuller [Louisa Czarnowski Fuller]. Speaker 2: Please for that caption, would you just give us the spelling of the more difficult names? Speaker 1: I can't spell it. I have to look it up. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Maybe my brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] can. It's written down somewhere. Speaker 2: Did we get your questionnaire, Dr. Young [HistoryMaker Dr. Walter Young]? Did you-- Speaker 1: I never got it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We'll leave it with you. Speaker 1: If you send it to me, I'll fill it out. Yeah, leave one with me, yeah. Speaker 2: All right, next photo. Speaker 1: That's my [paternal] grandfather, Frank Young. Speaker 2: Do you have any guess at about when this might have been taken? Speaker 1: He was a young man. That was before I was born. I remember him. He was, didn't have any hair when I remember him, so he had hair so that was before I was born (laughter). Speaker 2: That's my Aunt Nina, my mother's sister, whom I never knew. She died before I was born. Speaker 1: N-I-N-A, I'm sure. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, next. Speaker 2: Bring that a little closer. Oh, yeah. That's my grandfather, Frank Young. That's the way that I remember him and that looks like it was taken probably around in the-- Speaker 1: This is July, 1939. Speaker 2: Um-hm. That has a date on it. That's interesting, um-hm. That's how I remember him. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, got it. What's next? Speaker 1: You're gonna have to bring that closer too. Speaker 2: That's your mother [Daisy Fuller Young] and grandmother. Speaker 1: Oh, my mother and grandmother? Yeah, okay. They're both, good. Speaker 2: Any other comments about the setting or the date or-- Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh. That's a typical New Orleans [Louisiana] neighborhood. That was taken before I was born and that's what houses looked like, shotgun houses. You open the front door and the air can go out the back door because there was no air conditioning fans back in those days, so you had to depend on ventilation. That's my mother, and that would have been taken probably in the early '40s [1940s]. She was a young woman then. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me as a little boy. It looks like that was taken at Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. What year was this? Speaker 1: That must have been about when I wasn't even, maybe five years old then? Speaker 2: You were about two. Speaker 1: About two? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Okay, next? Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting picture. That's me and my rooster that I talked about, and that's the backyard where Andrew and I grew up, and that was our playground, and that's part of the backyard. The rest of it was, we had a, we raised chickens and the rest-- Speaker 2: It was 1948. Speaker 1: That's Andrew and myself, 1948, hm, I was still in high school. Speaker 2: Okay. Who is this? Speaker 1: That's Andrew, my dad [Andrew Young, Sr.], and me, and Ernest Cherrie and Anna Cherrie [Anna Cherrie Epps]. The lady on the right is dean of Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], Anna Cherrie. Well, she's Anna Epps, Dr. Epps is her name now. Speaker 2: Oh, a year for that one? Do we have an approximate sense of when that was-- Speaker 1: That would have been about '50 [1950], in the early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my dad in the middle and some of his running buddies, probably taken at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. They all went to Howard University together. On the far left is my Uncle Laddy [ph.], on the far right is my Uncle Orrie [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That's my dad and my brother, my mother, and on the far left is Marcus Neustader. He was a good family friend. Speaker 2: I actually got that one. You said Neustader? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Would you possibly be able to spell that for us? Speaker 1: N-E-U-S-T-A-D-E-R. Speaker 2: Right, German, okay. Speaker 1: That's Jewish, isn't it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. You're right. Speaker 1: That's my mother and dad. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my mother and father. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, that's me and my horse. I used to raise horses in Louisiana. I had a practice in Plaquemine [Louisiana], which was about eighty miles from New Orleans, and I used to go up there, a dental practice, and I was involved in the Plaquemine Civil Rights Movement, but I raised horses. That was Redman, my favorite horse. Speaker 2: And Plaquemine is spelled how-- Speaker 1: P-L-A-Q-U-E-M-I-N-E. Speaker 2: Okay, good. Speaker 1: That's my horse again. That's my other horse. Her name was Radiant Moor [ph.] and that's me and my wife [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young], and I think that's Tonya [Tonya Young] on the horse with one of her little play friends. Tonya's my daughter. Speaker 2: Very good. Next. Speaker 1: Now, that's me campaigning for my brother when he ran for office. I was involved in all of his political campaigns and you see how we used to get out on flatbed trucks and with microphones and bands and encourage people to get out to vote for our particular candidate. Nowadays, people politick on TV. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But I still like the old-fashioned way of campaigning. There I am again, campaigning for my brother. Speaker 2: Did you give us a year for this, or are you able to? Speaker 1: No, not offhand. I can't think of the year. What does that say, Young running for Georgia? What does that say on this? Speaker 2: I don't know-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, he ran for governor then, hm. Speaker 1: Yes, that's for governor. Speaker 2: I'll find out that year later. Story_ID: 369844 Speaker 1: Brief moment in my life when I left Louisiana. That would have been right after the Civil Rights Movement, and I went to Denver, Colorado and I worked there with the Denver public school system [Denver County School District No. 1] as a dentist, and I spent a little time in Nevada as a dental director of the Nevada State penitentiary [Nevada State Prison, Carson City, Nevada] and Nevada State Mental Hospital [Reno, Nevada]. So, I was trying to find myself, didn't know where I wanted to live and what I wanted to do. After the Civil Rights Movement, I just left for a while and then I came back. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I remember that was around the time when Barry Goldwater ran. That's how I can remember that because we were fighting whether or not Barry Goldwater would win the election because he said anything at the expense; what is the word he said, at the expense of liberty. Speaker 2: Yeah, extremism at the expense (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You remember, extremism at the expense of liberty, so we were all fighting about Barry Goldwater but, listen, we got a Barry Goldwater now. We got worse. Don't you think so (laughter)? Huh? Now, that was back in, what, '64 [1964]. You remember. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. You remember, look at that, you must be my age (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay, now that's an interesting picture. I was, I brought this artist over from Nigeria, Fred Ajanogha, a Benin artist, and you know, Benin artist reportedly, historically developed a technique of casting long before the Europeans did, and what history says is that the Europeans came to Africa and learned how to cast and bronze from the Benin artists in West Africa, so I brought this artist over and he did that sculpture, and I raised the money with Ambassador Hassan Adamu from Nigeria, and we gave that sculpture to Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Could you spell the ambassador's name? Speaker 2: A-D-A-M-U, Ambassador H-A-S-S-A-N, last name Adamu, A-D-A-M-U. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was involved in that. That's the opening of my first dental office in New Orleans [Louisiana]; that would be in 1960, I think. That was Dr. Braux, B-R-A-U-X, on the right, and Mr. Labat, L-A-B-A-T, who was a contractor who built the office. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's my college track team. I ran track in college; Baldwin-Wallace College [Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio]. I went there because Harrison Dillard was my idol. He was an Olympian. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Go ahead if there's anything else you want to add. Speaker 1: No, that's all. Speaker 2: The year, can we get that as well? Speaker 1: That would be about in '53 [1953], I think. Speaker 2: Now, that's an interesting picture. My brother [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], we were having a party at my home around the time that my brother decided that he wanted to run for [U.S.] Congress. We were just clowning. He said we needed to give him some money, so we all put in, that was the first money he got to run for Congress, right there. We were clowning and said, "Well, you need some money." He was talking about, thinking about running for it and we said, we were just drinking and having a good time, and we said, "Well, you need some money if you're gonna run for Congress," and so we all dug in our pockets and gave him his first money. Speaker 1: Are you the one right next to him? Speaker 2: No, I'm not in that. Speaker 1: You're not in that. Speaker 2: I'm not even in that picture. I don't know where I am; outside my home. All of those are my friends. Speaker 1: You must have taken the picture. Speaker 2: I was probably taking it. Those are my friends, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, next? Speaker 2: Those are all my buddies. Speaker 1: Okay. That's my Uncle Walter [Walter Fuller], who was very, very responsible in my upbringing for Andrew and I, when my father [Andrew Young, Sr.] wasn't making any money as a dentist. He started supporting my family. I think he gave us a down payment on our first home. He was the maitre d' at the Roosevelt Hotel [The Roosevelt New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], and that would have been in, right after the Depression [Great Depression], and rich people were making money, so he got big tips (laughter). That was the most exclusive hotel in New Orleans, and he was a maitre d' there, so he got a lot of tips. Speaker 2: That's Uncle Walter again, and his wife, my aunt (unclear). Speaker 1: That's my mother [Daisy Fuller Young], probably looks like it's around the early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's me right in front of my dental office. That was a Citroen Maserati car that I bought. It's a French body. It was an Italian engine. That would have been around '72 [1972] or '73 [1973], and that's the neighborhood right in front of this office. It's changed a lot now. You see that 76? Now that's a Shell [Shell Oil Company] station there. Speaker 1: Who's the woman in there? Speaker 2: Her name is--no, her name was Faye Adams [ph.], a good friend of mine, and that's me and my daughter, Nikki [Nikki Young], when she was baby. Nikki's thirty now. She would have been about, what, two years old there? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We were clowning in the backyard. Speaker 1: A wonderful shot. Speaker 2: A guy who was visiting took that picture and he won a prize in a photo contest on that picture. He was an amateur photographer. Speaker 1: Now, that's me in the governor's office talking about how we can improve trade between Africa and Georgia. Speaker 2: Great. Okay. A time frame for that, approximately? Speaker 1: In the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was a naval officer. That's me in the [U.S.] Navy. Speaker 2: That's me with the children at the YMCA. You know about all my involvement at the Y. They named the YMCA after Andrew and myself. It's called the Andrew and Walter Young YMCA [Andrew and Walter Young Family YMCA, Atlanta, Georgia]. I wish you all would come to the opening of it next month if you're around. If you're not, then we'll send you the information on it. Speaker 1: You know who really gave us a fair amount of information during the interview was, I think, it's your wife, Sonjia [HistoryMaker Sonjia W. Young]? Speaker 2: Sonjia. Okay. Speaker 1: She knows quite a bit about that, so-- Speaker 2: She's been very supportive of helping us raise money and-- Speaker 1: She really gave us a rundown on that. Speaker 2: Now, this was an interesting picture. You know Nigeria had a democratic election back in the early '80s [1980s] and the guy in the white suit is president, he just won the election, Shagari [Shehu Shagari], S-H-A-G-A-R-I. We were at his inauguration. Muhammad Ali was there, and that's me and the other guy is Izzat Aku Ibrahim [ph.]. Speaker 1: Spelled like it sounds? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, of course, history will tell you that that government was overthrown by a coup, a military coup a few years, well shortly after then. Speaker 1: Now, these small ones--let's circle back. Speaker 2: Okay. That's my wife and I and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey]. We were Oprah's guests. She had a party, a birthday party for [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, and we took a cruise throughout the Caribbean a boat where some of her personal friends, Maya's friends, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, was entertaining us, and Patty LaBelle, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones was on the cruise, and we had a lot of notables on that cruise (laughter). It was a fun cruise. So after a cruise like that, it was all gratis, I can't repeat that, so I don't want to take any more cruises or else that would spoil everything. Speaker 1: That's my wife and I in Paris [France]. Speaker 2: When? Estimated? Speaker 1: Hm. In the '80s [1980s], early '80s [1980s], around '83 [1983], '84 [1984]. Speaker 2: Good. Thank you. Speaker 1: That's my wife and I at the inauguration of President Obasanjo [Olusegun Obasanjo], who is the current president of Nigeria, so that would have been taken about seven years ago 'cause this is his last year, he's served two terms...