 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Today is Wednesday, February 3, 2010. My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn, along with Tanya Finchum, with the Oklahoma State University Library. We re in Arlington, Oklahoma interviewing Ola and Charlotte Fouquet. This interview is being conducted as part of the Oklahoma Centennial Farm Families Oral History project. We re here on the Deffenbaugh Homestead Ranch. Thank you for joining us today. You re welcome. Let s begin by learning a little more about how your family came to Oklahoma. I might have to refer you to my wife, but C.D. Deffenbaugh, his dad David Deffenbaugh homesteaded in Crescent, Oklahoma in 1889. In 91, Uncle John and C.D. came here and homesteaded this property. That was as a result of them harvesting bones here and knew what they wanted. They didn t want to ruin horses coming for the land in the Run, so they proceeded to look up the boys that had the stakes or whatever identification they used to come back to Guthrie with. They found them and purchased it and we don t know the exact amount of money that they paid. Well tell me about harvesting bones. I have no clue. (Laughter) What kind of bones are we talking about? Buffalo and deer. Buffalo bones. 5 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet And what would they do with the bones? Sell them. They were a marketable item. Interesting. And the original acreage of the land? Uncle John had 160 and Grandpa C.D. had 160, so it was 320 acres. And tell me about some of the original structures that you know of that were on the property. Well, C.D. had a one-room rock house on the north side of that would be the northwest fourth of 19-13-6. The Fouquets lived across north of that. Grandma Fouquet, when C.D. was courting my grandma, he would carry his shirts over for my grandma Fouquet to iron his shirts while he was courting my grandma. And then Uncle John lived in a dugout here in the northeast fourth of 20-13-6. The original house across the road was down on the south side. It was a two-story house and it burned down around 24, 25 Right after your grandpa died. That s right. He died in 26, so it was probably 27, along in there. Grandma and them was at a pie supper and the house caught on fire while they were at pie supper. She had quite a struggle. She lost her husband and then lost the house. That s quite a bit to go through. So they lived in the garage until they got the house done. Yeah, until he got this house over here built. What about barns? The granary in the old barn that s across the road in 19-13-6 is the original that Grandpa built. My step-grandpa, Waychoff constructed a barn around that and made a shed on it. The old granary is still the original that C.D. built years ago. As far as early crops, animals, any idea? They had shorthorn cattle, I know that. I m sure they grew a lot of cotton. Cotton was what kept the farmers alive around here until the land was ruined, basically. 6 O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Lincoln County was basically cotton country back in them days. What are some of your earliest memories of the farm? Where were you born? I was born on the 80 south of here. It was the north half, southeast fourth of 19-13-6. It was the old Sucha place and my mother and dad bought that from leasing royalty on this eighty here, which is the east half, northeast fourth of 19-13-6 . And your mother inherited this eighty when her father passed. Yes, when her father passed away. So they used the finances from the leasing of this to help purchase that eighty down there. So as a little boy, do you remember coming up to see grandpa? Oh, yeah, picking cotton. Four acre patch of cotton. Cully Duncan, he s always over there, driving his old horses. I won t say what he said. Tell them about when you and Joe Don were trying to drive the car over the hill. Oh. We had an old Model A and my brother, we d flip the seat down How old were you? and drive it. Oh, I don t know, we was probably eleven or twelve, and go up to see Grandma Fouquet. So we come over the hill here in front of the house here and my brother said, I m going to let it coast down the hill. Well he did, but it had too much slack in the steering wheel and he lost it and ended up in the plum thicket, high-centered on rocks and scared the living daylights out of me. I run up to Grandma Rosie s and said, We ve wrecked the Model A (Laughs) She harassed me about that from then on, about how I just thought we d destroyed old didn t even scratch the silly thing. She came down and pulled us off. We went on to Grandma Fouquet s house. (Laughs) Grandma Fouquet lived at the corner on the southwest fourth of 17-13- 6 and Grandma Rosie, his mother s mother, lived here and his mother and dad and he and Joe lived at the house right down the road. So family was really close by. Oh, yeah. And all of my kinfolks come to see Grandma, so we knew our cousins. Later on in life I found out a lot of cousins don t even know one 7 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet another. Everybody comes to Grandma s house, so we knew everybody as cousins. What were some of your early chores? Oh, my goodness. Slopping the hogs and feeding the chickens I guess would be part of it. Tell them about your skunk. We had a pet skunk one time and a runt pig that we fed together. They was pretty good buddies. We had a lot of fun with them. We had a cousin that didn t handle the skunk quite right and paid for that. (Laughs) And your billy goat. Oh yeah, we had a pet goat. We just put it in the hog pen with the hogs and had self feeders so that the little goat it was a runt that Mr. Earlabaugh had gave us. That goat got a lot of attention. We d run around the old hog house and the goat wouldn t keep up and we d run in the house and then the goat would bay and bay and bay and crawl up on top of the house and run back and forth quite a little sight. We had a lot of fun with her. So I have to know. What s the proper way to handle a skunk? (Laughter) Very gently. Very gently. I mean, that just seems like a lose-lose situation. (Laughter) That one incident was the only time I remember that skunk ever stinking anybody up. We had a lot of fun with that skunk and the pig, though. Probably had names, but I don t remember them. Where did you go to elementary school growing up? Arlington, Oklahoma. Did you have a one-room school? It was a two-room school. Mostly the way I remember it, it was used as a one-room school. We had an extra room. We walked a mile and a half to school. I spent nine years there, if that tells you anything. Mom didn t 8 C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet think I had learned enough the first year, so she said she d buy me a gift if I would take that over again. Well, it didn t make me any difference. I was ready to go. We was just going to school. So I took the first grade over again. And I still haven t learned anything. (Laughter) And then when you graduated eighth grade? Yeah, I was the only one in the eighth grade and then I got mumps and didn t get to go to my graduation. So, I don t know where I m at. (Laughs) Well you had to walk to Arlington though to catch the bus to Prague when you went to high school. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Still had to walk that mile and a half. Until about senior year, they started kind of sacrificing and bringing it part of the way. Most of the time we of course we could cut across the pasture and save a little bit. We had our little trail across the pasture. I remember one time an ice storm came up. It was slick as blazes but I was determined I was going to go to school, so I went. It had done been turned out and nobody let me know so I was the only one that showed up for school. (Laughs) What was the time you stayed with Lee? Oh, that was a snowstorm. A snowstorm came up and my brother and I started home. We had the old crank sort of telephone, just like the one here on the wall. So Lee Hillman called Mom and asked her if we could stay all night. Mom said yeah. Lee and Eddie didn t have any children at all and they just thought that was the greatest thing that they ever had, because me and my brother got to stay all night with them. Was she the teacher then? No, that was after she had quit teaching. So was your mother a housewife or did she have a profession? She was a housewife; a good one. What type of foods do you remember her cooking? All good. (Laughter) 9 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Well that s a good answer. What were some of your favorites? Oh, lands, blackberry cobbler. (Laughs) Anything sweet I had a little sweet tooth. Blackberries grow wild around here. I didn t like gravy for some reason when I was young, and grandma always said, You ll come to it. You ll come to it. And I did. (Laughs) Did you have a big garden? Oh, yeah. Most of what they ate was either canned or butchered on the place. We had the hog pen south of the house and I can t fathom that but we didn t think anything about it. We walked across the garden to the hog pen and that s where the goat was at, with the hogs. We had over a hundred head of hogs at one time. When he said there was something unusual about the hog pens south of the house is, back then, you didn t have air conditioning so you raised the windows to stay cool. The wind always blew out of the south. So you had quite a smell going on. We didn t notice it; didn t think anything about it. That s probably why they couldn t smell a skunk (Laughter) That s true. It was normal. (Laughs) Yeah, it s part of growing up on the farm. That s right. And your father was a farmer? He started out trying to farm and bought a 1940 Farmall and it didn t take him about two years to decide he wasn t going to raise a family farming, so he started carpentering. I ve still got the 40 model Farmall over across the road. 10 C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Of course he still farmed. He just was carpentering, too. Yeah, he farmed and then when Joe and I got a little older, we puttered around farming a little bit. Tell her how you used to raise the mowing machine. The old mower was a rear mounted mower on an A Farmall and the old lever to raise and lower it was over the wheel. I don t know how Mom ever consented for us doing that but we had to put our little old rear on that handle to push it down. We was so small we couldn t do it with the strength of our arms. I look back and think, My lands, I wouldn t let one of my kids do that. (Laughs) So was Grandpa Fouquet always a farmer or did he also have another profession? I never seen either one of my grandfathers because they passed away before I was born. Grandpa Fouquet, George, and his brother Frank come into Kansas and mined. They was teenagers when they came from France. They was mining in Kansas and Missouri, so their sister came down and homesteaded the place that Dad grew up on. Virginia do you remember her last name? No, I can t remember her last name. Virginia was Grandpa Fouquet s sister and she was the one that started out homesteading and then she moved to Sand Springs. I started to tell you about George and Frank. George was my grandpa, and Uncle Frank, they d take turns coming down and farming. That was before they was married. Once they got married, their wives didn t agree on the same house so they had to do something different. Grandpa George bought Virginia, his sister, out and moved down there. Then Frank stayed on the northwest fourth of 17-13- 6 and Grandpa took Virginia s place, which is the southwest fourth of 17-13-6. They had a vineyard and made their own wine. They had the biggest barn in the community. They had Red Cross dances in the barn. They came over from France They was teenagers when they came over. I never did see either one of my grandfathers. I had step-grandfathers. I was going to say, poor Grandma Fouquet, she s out here all by herself (Laughter) She s tending to the land herself or does she have help? Oh, my dad, the boys, they had four boys 11 C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet They had four sons The boys more or less took care of the farm. How was the house heated where you grew up? Where I grew up? Oh, there was an old kerosene heater. I imagine a wood stove when I was very small, but the one I remember was the old kerosene heater. And did the heat make it to your room in the winter time? Oh, no. We shut that off. The bedrooms wasn t heated, you covered up with quilts. (Laughs) You didn t have to worry about the water freezing because you didn t have plumbing. Had a water bucket. It was a little cool going to the bathroom in the middle of the night, because you went to the outhouse. (Laughs) Our cousins from Kansas always made fun of our outhouse because it was so far out. They d say bye, and all that stuff, you know, make a big deal out of going to the outhouse. What catalogues did you have out there? Sears and Montgomery Wards. (Laughs) I had to ask. And the Yellow Pages was your favorite. They didn t last long. (Laughter) I can see why; it doesn t have the slick pages. (Laughs) Well tell me a little bit about the water source here on this property. On this property? Well we ve got a well with a submergible pump on it right now. And back in the day? Oh, had the windmill. Then the well went bad and so Dad had to dig another well and he put a post in the middle and made a pump jack. The 12 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn windmill would pump the water on a pump jack type deal. After that, he put a regular pump jack on there and just had a small pipe for the air compaction on the pressure system. It wasn t like having a big tank or anything like that. Then we got electricity in 1950, I guess. They got plumbing and all that then. When you got electricity, what were some of the first things done? Lights, appliances, or was it just a slow process? Slow process. I can remember, southwest of us, John Bouda, they got electricity about two years before we did. They had electric lights in the chicken house that they left on all night and we thought that was terrible because we didn t have electricity and they had lights for the chickens. That was kind of a humorous thing. Tell them how you studied without electric lights. Oh, a kerosene lamp. You had that little kerosene lamp. You just had to get used to life without electricity. I mean, it must have been like Well we didn t even know about electricity. What do you compare it to? That s the thing that fascinated me the most. We got electricity when I was, I don t know, probably about seven or eight. First thing you noticed is you never knew that your kerosene lamps were that dim until you got an electric light bulb and then boy, you wondered how you ever studied with a kerosene lamp. Had a kerosene heater and when you took a bath, the old wash tub was back in the corner and everybody took a bath. If you was the last one, it was a little raunchy. (Laughs) Do you remember the tub number, what number tub it was? Number two tub. Number two. Might have been number three but I think it was a number two tub that we took a bath in. Some people was modern, they had that long tub. We never did have one of those. So in the pecking order with your brothers, are you the oldest, youngest? 13 O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet I was the youngest. You were the youngest? So did you get to go first when it came time for a bath? I don t remember that much in detail. (Laughter) Or did they say, Uh-uh. You get to go last. (Laughter) I m afraid I don t remember that much about it. I can remember it happening, but I don t remember that much. I do remember it got a little scummy if you were last in line. When the farm came into your family s possession, what were some of the first things you started doing after Grandma passed away? Let s see. Grandma Fouquet, let s start there. I was on a bus east of Prague, which is about seven miles from here, when I seen smoke going up from her two-story house burning. She thought she had insurance to build back just like it was. Come to find out, she had a thousand dollars worth of insurance. So she ended up living the rest of her life out in a two-room house. They had money enough to build two rooms and that s what she lived the rest of her life in. Grandma Rosie was a different deal. That was my mother s C.D. was how old when he passed away? I m not sure about that, hon. Grandma Rosie, she lived to be about ninety-seven and we purchased the farm from her in about, what, 64? We married in 63, so it was about 64 when we purchased the farm from her. She lived in the house and we moved the trailer house in and lived in that eleven years. Then the house got too much for her so she lived with my mother and brother until we could get the house re-did here that she lived in. We added a room and did quite a bit of work to it. When we got that completed, we moved into that and we moved the trailer down to my mom s place for Grandma to live in for the rest of her life. And that whole time, were farm operations still going on, running cattle ? Oh, we was running cattle then. Yeah, my brother and I both worked at Tinker. Had to have something to finance the cattle deal. Now when his dad passed away, you were how old? Sixteen? 14 O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet I was a freshman in high school when Dad passed away. Let s see, I have to think on that a little bit. It was rough. Tell them about the dairy. After Dad died, Walter Starks kind of was promoting dairies back then and so Mom built a dairy barn and my brother and I borrowed money and bought cows. We dairied up to the time I went into the service, which was about 57. Joe and Mom still ran the dairy after I went to the service, but Joe was working out, at that time, over at Shawnee Jonco, I think it was. After, I don t know, probably close to a year in the service, he wrote and asked me what I thought about selling the cows and all that, because it was just too much for him. They actually sold the cows and when I came back, well he hadn t started in the beef business but I promoted it a little bit. We got into the Hereford business and that s where we started into the cattle business, was with Herefords. Then we drifted off to Angus, Limousin, Simmental. And right now before I get too old, I want to go back to the Herefords. I think we ve got about twenty-five registered Hereford s with a black bull on them right now. So how many head total, right now, do you have? Oh, I don t know. There s calves out there. There s probably thirty-five, forty head, something like that. But you did your real farming when you were in the dairy, so tell them about the land you leased Oh yeah, when we was dairying, my brother and I was farming about six farms. We was growing small grains and that kept us out of the beer joint so Mom didn t have any trouble with us running around or anything. We had our hands full. That was a full-time job. Had to get up and do the milking before you went to school? Joe was out of school then, wasn t he? Yeah, Joe was out of school but we d get up at four, four-thirty and do the milking before we d go to school. Mom cleaned the dairy up after I got off to school, and him too, when he was in school. Let s see, he had graduated, I guess. No, he hadn t graduated when we went in the dairy business, I don t think. I m a little hazy right in there. Well dairying takes a lot of work. I mean, this is before automation, I m guessing. We had electric milkers and when the electricity was off, you could use 15 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn the vacuum off the tractor engine to run the milkers. If the electricity was off, we d park the tractor by the dairy barn and run a line into the vacuum line and keep the milkers going that way. So did you have to worry about pasteurization or federal regulations? We was a Grade A dairy. Townley s Dairy in Oklahoma City is who we sold to. But you put them in cans, you didn t Oh yeah, it was in ten gallon cans. We didn t have bulk while we was in the dairy business was when bulk tanks came in and they started hauling out bulk. But we never did go that modern. We stayed with cans when we was in the dairy business. Now how would you get the cans to There was a truck driver that came by and picked them up. And then the farming you were doing in addition; were you producing crops to sell? Yes. Wheat, oats, rye, vetch, basically. And how would you get those items to the market? With a 50 model Chevrolet pick-up. And you took them to... Took them to Prague, to the mill. Walter Starks, who was my old ag agriculture teacher, became a farm advisor at the bank. Then he built the mill in Prague. He ended up going back to OSU and teaching economics and became adjutant general of the state and did all right. Walter was a good old boy, a very good man. So you were farming six farms? Yeah. That s a lot of work Tell me about it. (Laughter) When did you sleep? 16 O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet Well you got a little sleep in. I was young back then. Tell me a little bit about your family. I want to put you on the spot. Are you ready? Yeah. How did you meet your wife? My father-in-law. (Laughter) We both worked at Tinker and she had finished OSU and you pick up here. You can tell that. Well, he and my dad were riding together. My dad lived just south of Wellston and he lived here and they were looking for someone to ride with, so he started riding with my dad. When I got out of school, I was looking for an apartment in Oklahoma City, so I asked my dad if I could borrow the car to go find an apartment in Oklahoma City. He said, Yeah, when we drive to Tinker to work then you can take the car and then you can pick us up. What I didn t know was that each one of them had a certain spot they sat you had what, a full load? Five? Yeah, there was five of us, I think. Five of you there. So when I got in the car they had done some shuffling around so that I wind up sitting beside him on the way to Tinker. (Laughs) That s how we met. Did you have a farm background? Yes. She was a cotton chopper. They started using automatic cotton picking machines when my sister and I left home. (Laughs) Of course (Laughs) She s from north of Verden. Yeah, I was raised at Pocasset/Verden area. Well cotton picking is back breaking. Did you not think anything of it? You just had work to do and you did it. Well, actually, it paid. (Laughter) Actually, the most work we did, my 17 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet sister our dad told us that if we would get his cotton hoed and when you hoed cotton, you had to not only take the weeds out, but you had to thin the cotton. So he said when we got his cotton hoed, we could hire out to the neighbors. So as soon as we got Dad s cotton hoed, we hired out to the neighbors. We took the old flat-bed truck and headed to the neighbors. We hoed cotton through the summer. Very rarely did we pick all of the cotton on our home because it was school time, you know. My dad did pull us out one time for two weeks to pull cotton because he couldn t find any pickers. So that s my experience in cotton. So when you got married, did you help out on the farms? We had a milk cow. I was never much of an outside farmer other than milking the cows. I always milked cows when I was at home. We always had a Guernsey cow. We taught all three of our daughters to milk a cow before they got to high school. But as far as tractor driving and all that, I never even got into that very much with my dad. I had an older sister who was a year older than me. She was the one my dad yelled at. (Laughter) So I didn t have to drive the tractor. He had his brother to work with, who was much more proficient in driving tractors than I was. So until his brother passed away, well he and his brother farmed together all the time after we were married. I kind of got out of that part, and I just was mostly the homemaker and the gardener. So tell me about your garden. A big garden? What do you grow? Well it was pretty big. It wasn t as big as some people s, I guess. We give vegetables away. And canned. Mostly what I can is green beans and tomatoes. The girls didn t like tomatoes so usually I just made tomato juice. I canned about sixty quarts of tomato juice. Relish you made a lot of relish; green tomato relish. About twenty, twenty-five quarts of green beans every year. I didn t can as much as his mother did. (Laughs) Although she taught me a lot about canning my mother canned some, but when I married, of course his mother was right down the road from us. We canned together a lot. We made sauerkraut and canned tomatoes. The corn, we froze. We d harvest 18 Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet the corn and cut it off the cob and put it in the freezer, because we had freezers by then. So where would you store all the canned goods, Mom and yourself? We had cellars. Still have a cellar in the garage. Same one? No, not hardly. I imagine that one down home is full of water. (Laughs) I haven t looked in lately. His mother put in a new cellar not too long before she passed away. Of course, the cellar across the road is not being used by our kids right now. Our kids live across the road. It s kind of gone to pot, but since we ve got a cellar here that s enclosed in the garage they come over early and sit in the living room just in case there s a tornado. They were sitting over here when that big one came through Midwest City and such is that, watching it on the television so we could dash. There was a time when we were over there that we rushed home and we rushed home because some people said a tornado was coming. By the time we got home, the wind was blowing so hard, we couldn t get to the cellar. That s why we appreciate the one that s in the garage, because two different times we were in a mobile home and the wind was blowing so hard that we couldn t get to the cellar. The one time we got to the milk house, which was a rock building. The other time we just rode it out and came to find out the neighbors a mile west of us blew away. Their house did they d run to another house and survived. Yeah, the cellar across the road is an original that, I guess, Grandma probably had that built after Uncle Ollie kept saying that he hauled the rock for it. It s got a drain in the bottom down the hill. It sits up on top of the hill, so it s got a drain in it. It s a real good cellar. Probably a better cellar than what we ve got here in the garage. You just have to take care of those things if you re going to use them, because spiders and everything else gets in them. So how long did you work at Tinker before you went to farming full-time? Tell me what happened. After I came back from the service, I guess I was flunking around at one 19 C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet thing or another for about a year. I put in my application at Tinker and I just wrote out in farm language what needed to be done. They didn t like that, so I didn t qualify. I said, Well, I had an official title in the military. I ll go over to Shawnee and look it up. I had the lawyer s secretary type it out officially and they hired me on the spot. I worked about twenty-six and a half years there and retired plus my military time was twenty-nine years and something. I retired in 88 and I ve been retired since that time, which is about twenty-two years. Which was what? Let s see, it would have been six years after his brother passed away and so now he was farming by himself and taking care of his mother. It got to be a little more difficult than it was with his brother helping him. So did you have outside help at all, at any time? Yeah, I hired Roy Ladd, a neighbor that worked for a couple of years for me. Brother passed away in 84 and I retired in 88. In that time, Roy worked for two or three years for me and then he went to work for Stanley Kolar, the vet, and worked there. He just worked part-time though, building fence and such. Yeah, Roy was pretty much full-time. He was part-time part of the time, but he was from Pennsylvania. You could turn him loose. Mom said when he come over to build fence, it was just like the old days. He d just take the tractor and went out and he worked sun up to sun down. When he got through, he went to the house. You could trust him with anything. He was just like one of the family. Tell me about some of the current structures on the property. Well, the barn you see over there, the wind got a hold of it and took two sides out of it. The kids haven t got around to get that fixed they re not quite as enthusiastic about it as we are. Tell them about the chicken houses you inherited when you were My step-grandpa, Waychoff, he had chickens. He raised capons and he had hatching eggs for the Park n Hatchery at Shawnee. He also raised minnows. He had minnow beds down here in this pond that s behind us. We seined minnows and he sold minnows and crawdads and all that kind of stuff at Shawnee sold minnows by the gallon. We helped him seine that. That was fun. Helped him clean chicken houses, too, it seems like I remember. 20 O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn Oh, lands, yeah we cleaned chicken houses. (Laughter) That old ammonia about killed you. He was a mason, a bricklayer. He built all of his own chicken houses out of local rock. He d haul the rock in and some of those are still standing. Some was tile and some was portable buildings. I don t know how many chickens he had, but one time there was a lot of chickens across the road. So what other current structures are still around or in use today? In use the old barn is still in use. We built a, I don t know, it s about thirty by twenty shed over there and it s still used. We built that about Oh, in the eighties, I m sure. Down at the home place where I was born, the old mule barn and all that stuff still stands down there, the sheds Dairy barn s still there. The old dairy barn is still down there. It s just solid as it can be. My step-grandpa built that old dairy barn and I remember he bought some nails somewhere that a lumberyard had burnt. All the nails was mixed. We separated those nails and straightened them to build that old dairy barn. We was conservative. You had to be, if you survived. Mom was building the dairy barn and Grandpa was building it for her just as economically as he could. Joe and I, we had to go in debt to buy the dairy cows, so it was a struggle. But that s what makes you tough and resilient for today. Oh yeah. Before you went into the dairy, you still milked. You d sell the cream. Oh, yeah. We d had cows that we milked when I was little. You d separate the cream and take it to John Wright s store a mile and a half north of here sold cream and eggs. That was part of the struggles of life back then. And we d buy a nickel s worth of candy every week. And lands, that would be a big old sack of candy a big old sack like that. That was peanut brittle and all that stuff. You d have mixed candy. For a nickel you got a lot. So you had to share with your brother? 21 O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Oh yeah. I imagine Mom and Dad even ate a little of it. That was part of it. So there were just two of you. Yes. Joe Don was two years older than me and unfortunately he got cancer, melanoma. I think my mom had that situation figured out. He was born in the Fouquet home, because Mom and Dad lived with the Fouquets until he was about two years well, shortly before I was born, at least. There was about two years difference in us. They had an old Delco system and the batteries, the acid from the battery in the basement, Mom said the acid stunk the old house up all the time. The whole family died of cancer, so we was quite sure that the old Delco system is what resulted in their deaths. And you mentioned a mule barn? Oh yeah, we had a milk barn and a mule barn. It was just two old barns. You didn t have any mules, though, when you Oh yeah, Joe and Beck, sure. We had old Joe and Beck. I remember them. What did you use them for? Dad farmed with them before he got the A Farmall. See, that was 40, so I was just three, I guess, when he got the Farmall. But I remember old Joe and Beck. That s going pretty good. I didn t know my memory was that good. (Laughter) So how old were you when you got to ride the tractor for the first time? Oh Lord, I don t know. I remember falling off the Bundle wagon one time and the tractor rolled back on my head, like to have scared me to death. Scared your family to death, too. And Mom too. But it didn t hurt me, just scared the living daylights out of me. Fortunately, it didn t hurt me. So in the thirties, did they do anything in particular to make it through the Depression? They was resilient just like all the rest of the people. They was tough. 22 C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet I don t think they hurt as much as people who rented they didn t lose their ability to Well they owned the farm. That made a great difference. Renters, you know, was in a different position. When the end of the year come they had to go somewhere or come up with rent. That made quite a struggle for them. I don t think they was hurting all that bad. They raised most of their food and everything, so they survived pretty good. Did they take advantage of any of the WPA Works Progress Administration programs? I remember Dad talking about working on Highway 99, when they constructed Highway 99, but I don t think he got in on WPA or CCC Civilian Conservation Corps either one. They also had an occasional cash crop of pecans. There were enough wild pecans Yeah, they re natives native pecans in their lower pastures that they his mother even, I guess until she was ninety, she would go down and pick pecans in the Fall. Talk a little bit about the ponds on the property. Oh the old big pond down here that Grandpa cut up into minnow beds was built with horse and slip and the pond above that pond, I imagine the original was built by slips, but we had it cleaned out Carl Smith came over and cleaned it out. We got married in 63, it was probably in the late sixties when we did that. Then I had a soil conservation pond built on the back side of the place. Then my brother that was on section twenty. In section nineteen here, my brother had a pond built on the north end of this eighty and when the flood control lakes was built, the Duncans down below us had a flood control lake, so we got a silt pond built above that, which is a pretty good sized lake. Joe had another pond built on that place, so there s three pretty good size ponds down there. Let s see, that s on the farm here in section nineteen. On section twenty is where the it s got about three ponds and then a small pond on the north side over there. Would you swim in any of those when you were younger? Oh Lord, yeah. Over on Deer Creek, that s between here and Highway 99, is where our swimming hole was. The Ray family and us, at one 23 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet time, the two families was all that kept a little Methodist Church together over here. If they wasn t at our house, we was at their house on Sunday. We had a swimming hole down on Deer Creek and one day, we was down there swimming and Maude Southerland come Maude and Blant come across the bridge and caught us in the nude down there swimming. (Laughs) So we got the results of that. Mom said, Now there s not going to be any more of that. (Laughs) Shoot. Growing up, what were holidays like? Did you all come to Grandma s? Yeah. Grandma Rosie s house was in fact, the kids have still got the bench over there that we sat on when it We sold the house and twenty acres to our daughter and they still have the old bench that I sat on when I was a kid. All the cousins and everybody come to Grandma s house, and of course Grandma Fouquet s was the same way. Occasionally, we d go to her house, but most of the time it was Grandma Rosie s house. Your mother still talked about when you would have Fourth of July celebrations and mix up lemonade in tubs. People come along with their That was at Prague, I think, Fourth of July. They d mix up a tank full of A tub full. No, this was a horse tank. I m not talking about a tub, this was a horse tank. They had dippers around there and you d just come up and get you a drink. Everybody drank out of it. Everybody drank out of the dipper. What about Christmas? Christmas, oh, we d always go out and get a cedar tree. That s about all I can say about Christmas. We always went and got our Christmas tree and of course all the cousins came in and all that. It was typical Christmastime. And you still had to do chores, even if it was a holiday? Tell the cow it was a holiday? 24 O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet It didn t matter, the chores had to be done three times a it was just something that had to be did. It was part of life. Do you ever remember county agents coming by? You brought up a real subject there county agent. Let s see, my daughter told me not to get on these stories. That s what we want to hear. Anyhow, they had the spring show, I guess it was. They had a pecan show along with the spring livestock show. I had livestock there and so one morning I went over to the building, the American Legion building where they had the pecans and everything. Old Don Vincent and several of the boys was sitting there eating pecans. I begged on them, I said, I want some pecans. They said, Go in there and get your own if you want some pecans. So old dumb me, I went in there and got a few off of each plate. The county extension agent walks in and says, Who are you? I told him the truth, I didn t lie to him. He never did punish me or anything. Taking pecans off of the show plate. Stealing pecans off the show plates. (Laughter) I came out smelling like a rose. But you know what Don Vincent became the boy I was telling you about, that was eating the pecans? He became head of security at Tinker. I mean, the top. Then he went past that into other security out of Washington, D.C. Did the county agent ever give you advice about farming or what you should or shouldn t be doing? Or did you just not even care or listen to him? Was it just Ag teachers Ag teachers did most of that. The extension agent was the guy we didn t even know. That was always in Chandler. That was twenty-five miles from here. We didn t know the extension agent that well until I got involved in Cattleman s Board and Fair Board and all that stuff, then I got well acquainted with the extension agent. Do you remember your mom or your grandma being involved with home demonstration agents? Yeah, they had a club, best I remember, in the community. 25 C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Home extension club Home extension club of some type. I don t think they ever entered anything, did they? No, I don t think they ever got that involved. My mother got involved in that somewhat but I don t think yours did. You mentioned the one pond that was a soil conservation pond. Did you do any other conservation efforts on the land? Terracing or Terracing was did before I came along. Grandpa terraced, I guess, when they first started terracing. That was pretty much but we ve sprigged Bermuda grass. Most of our land is Bermuda grass now. I serve on the Soil Conservation Board now so And you used a sprigger from the county for Well we did part of it and part of it we just spread with a pitchfork and disked it in. Part of it we hired sprigged, so it was different circumstances. So how has farming changed since when you were a young tyke growing up to today? Well, you don t see much farming around here now. It s just all grass. The farm is a struggle. I look back; my grandfathers had to support the farm with some other occupation. I had to support the farm with some other occupation. Unless you ve got a lot of bottom land, there s no way to make a living on a farm, in reality. It s a struggle. It s tough. And you have three daughters? Three daughters. And only one still lives on the land? The middle daughter lives across the road. He works for DHS Department of Human Services in Tulsa, works on computers for DHS, and she home schools the kids. They ve got two that are still home and two of them are in high school. They got out of home schooling. Our oldest daughter married Scott Miller and they live at Blanchard. He s the only son-in-law that I ve got that is interested in cattle and farming and everything and he s way off down at Blanchard, so that 26 C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet doesn t work out too well. He works for John Deere Industrial Credit, so he s on the road quite a bit. He s still outside the farm but he likes playing with the cattle and so he s sticking with the farm life. The youngest daughter is a first-grade teacher at Prague and has been for how many years? I don t know. Sixteen, I think she told me. Her husband works for the State Highway Department in Oklahoma City. So all in-state and pretty close? Do they come back to the farm quite often? Oh yeah, we re very fortunate to have our grandkids. We re very blessed. We talk to so many people, their kids are all out of state or something. Up until the kids got to be teenagers and they really got too busy, well they d always be back here. We built this home in, what, 97, 98? Somewhere in there. So the kids all come here because we ve got the biggest house and they all used to come in for birthdays and Christmas and Thanksgiving here. They ve gotten so busy now they don t make it quite as often as they did. But they usually make it It gets more difficult the older you get. four or five times a year, anyway. They usually have to check with the girl in Blanchard because the others are close enough they can come just about any time. We ve got eight grandchildren four boys living across the road. Have they been on the tractor? Not too much. Can they milk a cow? No. We keep telling their mother, she ought to get a cow to feed those four boys. She knows how to milk a cow. That s probably why she hasn t gotten one. (Laughter) 27 Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn O. Fouquet So where do you see the farm and the land going in the next one-hundred years? Oh my, that s too far out. Time changes so fast. Technology doesn t turn me under. I ve got a GPS for my tractor but other than that, cell phones and all this stuff just drives me nuts. I enjoy getting on the computer and playing a little bit but I can t keep up with technology and I have not a clue where all this nanotechnology I can t even fathom that. They say the cell phone is going to be shrunk, shrunk, shrunk and I can t fathom that. Because we can t find our cell phone now. (Laughs) Do you think the farm is going to remain in your family; is that what you hope? Well, you would hope that they would keep part of it but, I don t want them to feel obligated to. Other than the son-in-law at Blanchard, none of them take an interest in it. I don t know what will happen. We set up in a trust and it will go to them but now that s their decision where it goes from there. But he s considering already selling his cows and leasing the property because we do get older. (Laughs) So today, what s a typical day on the farm for you? There s not a typical day. Every day is a different thing. I enjoy what I m doing now. I do what I want to do. Feed the cows and then go to the coffee shop. (Laughs) Yeah, I go to the coffee shop. Well that s not too bad. I attended the National Cattlemen s Association meeting in San Anton io last weekend. I flew out of Oklahoma City on the last flight after the snowstorm and spent three days down at San Anton io and got back on Sunday for a fundraising basketball game at Prague and had a real good time down at San Anton io . I put twelve big bales of hay out and they still had hay when I got back. So it s pretty low maintenance now. Yes. If it s very heavy, I just can t do it. When I was up at Stillwater, a 28 Finchum O. Fouquet Finchum O. Fouquet C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Finchum C. Fouquet Finchum C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet C. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet year or so ago, I stopped at the railroad yard and got me some railroad ties, because I always put railroad ties in for corner posts. I got them home and spread them where I wanted. Then I had to start digging the holes and I decided, This ain t no good. I can t even handle the railroad ties. So I picked them all up and hauled them back to the house and went and got some five inch treated posts dug the holes and set the rascals. I can t take that railroad tie setting anymore; I can t handle it. So how early do you get up most days? Seven o clock is a good time. Sun is coming up Sometimes two or three o clock in the morning. (Laughs) When he can t sleep. When I can t sleep I get up and get on the computer or something. I get nervous; I have to do something. Charlotte, you mentioned you graduated from OSU? Yes. In what department was your degree? Microbiology. What year did you graduate? I graduated in 62. Then I trained for a year in medical technology at OU Medical Center. Then I got married and had kids. (Laughter) Well you worked a year at St. Anthony. Yeah, I worked a year at St. Anthony. And I worked a little while at OU Medical Center. If I had to choose, I d probably want to hang out on the farm. (Laughs) When we moved out on the farm it was a little more difficult to go to work. Tell them about when we had the party in the City. 29 C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet Nykolaiszyn C. Fouquet O. Fouquet I told all my work mates that I was going to move. I told them how much we were going to pay for the farm that we were buying and that we were going to move to the farm. They said, Oh, my goodness. You re going to spend money like that; you could buy a house here in town and have a swimming pool (Laughter) And we have a swimming pool Several ponds, just jump in (Laughter) Well is there anything that you d like to make mention of that we haven t asked you today? We ve kind of jumped a little bit around. You all have covered it pretty good. Yeah, you ve covered everything, pretty much, I think. Well we appreciate you taking time to meet with us and helping us with this project. Thank you. Thank you for your time. Thank you. Glad to have you here. ------- -------..