 Milligan. I m with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State University library. I m here today with Sandra Bradley in Maud, Oklahoma, and the date is June 15, 2015. We re going to talk today about Sandra s experience at Oklahoma State University and her life after graduation and everything in between. With Sandra Bradley for the Cowboy in Every County Oral History Project, which we are starting this year in conjunction with OSU s 125th anniversary. Taryn, our intern, is here with us, in case Taryn s voice pops in anywhere and you want to know. Speaking of, we get to identify your friend Bradley Yes. (Laughs) Milligan your buddy here, okay? Sanderson Aw Bradley This is Maximus dog . Milligan Hi, Maximus. (Laughter) We get an interview companion. He looks like a pretty good companion. All right, we talked a little bit about what this interview process is about and what we re trying to do. Just to get started, I just wanted, if you would tell me a little bit about your life in general, just where are you from, a little bit about your family, just some background information. Bradley Okay. Born and raised in Shawnee-Tecumseh area, graduated from Tecumseh High School in 1991. I have one sister and a cousin, and we re all considered sisters, basically. Milligan You grew up in the Shawnee-Tecumseh area. Was there a specific community that you attached yourself to? Bradley Tecumseh. 5 Milligan To Tecumseh. Bradley Yes, Tecumseh. We moved to Shawnee when I was about nine and a half, but we were allowed to stay in Tecumseh schools because Mom worked at COJC Central Oklahoma Juvenile Center . Milligan Got it. Bradley This was good to be able to stay with our friends and finish where we started. That s home. Tecumseh s home. Milligan If you don t mind me asking, when were you born? Bradley In 1973. Milligan Maybe a little bit about what your parents did and more about your cousins and Bradley I was raised in a single-parent family. They divorced when I was one. My mother, she began working out at COJC, which is the Central Oklahoma Juvenile Treatment Center. It was an all-girls facility at that time. She started out as the gatekeeper and then worked her way up as a supervisor. She passed away in 1991. So then my grandparents played a big role into our lives, her parents, my maternal grandparents. They were there to support us, to help us, to guide us in a lot of things throughout our lives and were Mom s biggest support, also. Yeah. My cousin, Meredith , was raised by my grandparents, so we all grew up together. When we went to OSU, her and I decided that that s where we re going to go and live together. That was just such a blessing to have that time and not to be with total strangers. (Laughs) Milligan When did you go to OSU, and what made you decide OSU? Bradley Well, I had went to Seminole Junior College and got my associate s. She (Meredith) was also going, so we decided, both at the same time, Well, let s just go to OSU. We loved the Cowboys, so why not go to the school that you love anyways? In August of 1994 is when I started at OSU, and then graduated in December 1996 with a bachelor s in Special Education. Milligan Tell me a little bit about your time. Did you live on campus? What was your sort of normal schedule like? Bradley Crazy. (Laughter) We lived off campus. We had an apartment, then we had a house, then we went back to an apartment, but it was all in close proximity to the campus. Usually it was either walking to campus or a short drive to campus. Classes, at that point of my education, were all mostly in the 6 education building because of my degree. I was involved in the BSU there on campus (BSM, BCM, whatever they call it now) and had some involvement there. Milligan The BSU? Go ahead and spell it out. Bradley Yes. Baptist Student Union, Baptist Collegiate Ministry, whatever they call it these days, was involved in that, also. Then worked there in the community at different jobs. Milligan Like a lot of students. Bradley Yes, worked your way through college. Milligan Tell me a little bit about your classes then. Bradley I loved them because they were so small. The professors got to know you, you got to know your classmates, and you begin to really develop and grow into who you were going to be, I guess this is a good way to put that. Really enjoyed the hands-on because when you re in the education field, you did a lot of practicum and observations. Then they would pull kids in to do various reading programs and tutoring programs. That was a very eye-opening experience for me, just to be able to go and see what it was like to be in the classroom or what it was like to tutor a student. I had done things with children at church or in different settings like that but never in the classroom setting, so at that point in my life, that was a big Oh, this is what I m going to do? Okay, eye-opening experience for me. Yeah, I loved the classes. They were very, very good. Milligan Are there any professors or people that you worked with that you remember? Bradley I remember faces. I m horrible with names. (Laughs) Milligan Well, I m obviously awful with names. (Laughter) Bradley I know that we had an assessment professor who it was testing, on how to do testing. You would think that would be the most boring class, but she made it fun. She made it interesting. She made it exciting. I do not remember her name, but she was an outstanding teacher just to be able to bring what she knew from her experience into the classroom and made that assessments class something you wanted to go to. (Laughs) So yes. Milligan Yeah, I can imagine it would be hard to make assessment Bradley Yes. (Laughs) 7 Milligan entertaining. Oh my gosh. Did you do a lot off campus? Bradley What I did was I worked a lot, mostly off campus. I enjoyed being at home, doing home stuff, doing homework, or going to work. Coming from a single-parent family, I needed to work my way through college. A lot of my time was spend on a second job or the first job to try to make sure that the bills were paid and making sure that you got your studies done so that you made the grade you needed to have. Milligan That makes me think, I think a lot of students come into a four-year college, and they come with the same struggles, but that s not always the story that you hear. I mean, a lot of times you hear about college being this time where you just get to explore and find yourself and don t often get Bradley Right. Milligan so I don t know. Is there things that helped you make that decision that that s where you wanted to put your priority, or is there anything that helped you? Bradley My mom was she taught us how to have a good work ethic. Growing up in a single-parent family, you saw her work all the time, so that just was in my sister and I s blood. Like if you want it, you had to work for it. That was just how we were raised and what we knew had to be done to make it anywhere in life. I think that was one thing that just continued to be, has continued to be a part of our lives, too, is that if we want something, we have to work for it. It s not going to be handed to us. (Laughs) Just going to be honest. That was one thing that she instilled in us at a young age was that work, work ethics, being women of integrity, yes. Of course, faith played a lot into our lives, our faith, being believers and knowing that God was going to take care of us, but we have to do our part, also, and being able to take care of what He has given us, being good stewards. Milligan Talk to me a little bit about that. If you were involved in the Baptist Student Union, did you grow up in the Baptist church? Bradley I did. When we were three, I think it was I say three because we re all within the same age range , my sister and I are eleven months apart, and then my cousin is in between us. We were all three raised very tightly together. I ve mentioned that. At that time, we were all around about three years old when we started going to church. It was all because my cousin had said, Grandpa, we need to go to church. That made a changing point in our lives. He was raised in a church. My grandmother was raised Catholic, and he was raised more evangelical. 8 When he said, Well, let s go to this Baptist church that my cousin had pointed out, my grandpa was like, Okay. We all started going, and my mother started going. She accepted Jesus in 1983, and that just began to change our whole family. Because of her decision to believe, she was able to lead my grandparents to believe and share the gospel with them. They accepted Jesus, also. Then it just had that ripple effect to the rest of us in our lives when we made our decisions, also, to follow Him. Milligan Well, it sounds like you had a support network when you went to OSU, as well. Bradley Very much so, very much so. By that time we were at OSU, my mother had passed away, so my grandparents were very much our cheerleaders, our fans, the ones that we could say, I don t get this. I don t understand it They would, Yes, you do. You can do this. They would just push us forward, each other being there for each other. I think living with a relative when you re in college is a benefit because they know your past, they know what you struggle with, but they also know what you re really good at. They help you become who you need to be. I think that has been a benefit of being at OSU, also, is how much I grew as a person with having that living experience and then being involved in BSU and in the classes. You just find yourself. You re no longer who your parents said you were going to be, but you re who you are supposed to be. Milligan That s very well-articulated. I do think that that really was an articulate explanation, sort of how that fits in. I m wondering, too, how that worked out with it sounds like some of your only campus activities, and correct me if I m wrong, were with the BSU? Bradley Yes. Milligan Maybe talk a little bit about what their activities were and how you socialized. Bradley Okay. They had Bible studies. They had weekly Bible studies that we could be involved in and I was involved in. Also, they would have social activities where they would either go play volleyball or they would go have a cookout. Different things like that throughout the year was something that I was involved in with the BSU. Building those friendships and relationships there were essential into shaping more of who you were, also. Milligan Do you still have friends that you met while you were on campus? Bradley Yes, I do, actually. She is here in Oklahoma now. Her and her family, they just moved back from Hawaii. Her husband s in the military. I know (Laughs) 9 Milligan Hawaii? Bradley Yes, and she is the only one that I have kept in contact with. I think it s because it s been a two-way, you know, instead of just the one way. Being able to visit with her this summer, I m looking forward they just moved back in the fall. With the busy schedules and everything, we haven t gotten to, but we re looking forward to seeing each other in the summer to catch up. That ll be good. Milligan Well, that s great. Are they close? Bradley Yeah, they re in Lawton Oklahoma . Nah, it s not bad. (Laughter) Milligan Okay. Let s talk a little bit about what you have done since graduation. You graduated in 1996 with a degree in education focusing on special ed. Is that correct? Bradley Yes, ma am. Milligan So what happened? Bradley Then I moved to Kansas City, Missouri, and worked on my Master s of Religious Education and finished that in 1999, May of 1999, from Midwestern Baptist Theological Seminary. As I was preparing, within that particular educational degree, you focus on college, children, whichever range that you re going to be teaching. Looking back, I know I had the opportunity to do college classes where you learned how to meet the college needs and to relate to college students. Then you also had classes on children and how to relate to them and work with them. Looking back, I go, Oh, that s why you had me do that. (Laughs) I went from Midwestern to Johannesburg, South Africa. Yes, drastic, to Maud, America . (Laughs) In Johannesburg, South Africa, I did children s ministry among the colored people out in Eldorado Park, a fantastic two years where I probably learned more about who I am than any other part of my life because you re living by yourself in a totally different country. You have a support system with the International Mission Board, but they were not always right there physically. They may be forty-five minutes away or an hour away. Learning how to deal with situations, and how to communicate, and how to share the gospel the best way with the people that you re assigned to, I think that was very much a challenging time in my life but also the most beautiful growing time in my life also, yes. Milligan Help me understand how you ended up there. What was the process, and how did you feel when you found out? 10 Bradley Okay. When I was at Midwestern working on my master s, I really felt like I was called into missions. The Lord really gave me a heart for international students, and that began in college. I went to First Baptist Church in Stillwater and helped with the international Sunday school class and would be involved in that, and learned a lot about just different cultures also when I was at OSU. That cultivated that spirit and a desire to go. In college, back up a little bit, I had the opportunity to go to Mexico and do a mission trip there. Of course, in the community that we were at, you may have learned Spanish in high school, maybe a little in college, but to be thrown into, fully immersed into the culture, you re like, I don t have the knowledge I need. It was so neat to be able to learn how to communicate using body language and just hand gestures to communicate with the people that you worked with. Milligan Who did you go to Mexico with, what group? Bradley It was just a group that was going to Mexico. It was southern Oklahoma, like Lawton and some other small churches that had gotten together to go to do a VBS Vacation Bible School down there. That was part of my college years that I had the opportunity to do that. That s when that desire to be involved in missions grew. When I was at Midwestern, I was like, I need to be involved more. Had the opportunity to go to South Africa for a two-week mission trip when I was in Midwestern and fell in love with the people. One of the pastors there, Pastor George, he said, Sandra, you are coming back. I was like, Whatever. If I m going anywhere, it s going to be South America. This is too far from home. (Laughs) He said, No, you will be back. You will be back. When you come back, you just let me know. We will take care of you. I was like, Okay. You know, in the back of your head you re like, Whatever. Then in 2000, I had the opportunity to go back as a journeyman through the International Mission Board. That requires the process of paperwork, applying, going to interviews, and going to candidacy conference, and being selected to go. It s a lengthy process to be able to go, but I wouldn t have changed any of it. When I did go back, Pastor George was there, and his church became my base church that I worked from. They did take care of me. They did help me get into places that I could get into to minister with their help. That was just an amazing experience. Milligan Do you remember when you, like the first day or the first week that you were there? Bradley Yes, because you have to drive on the other side of the road, first. Milligan Were you driving? 11 Bradley Uh, yes. (Laughs) Yes, because the board said, You cannot go unless you learn how to drive. A standard, first off, and which I d always driven automatic, so I had to learn how to drive a standard. Of course, you learn on the side that we know, and then when I get there everything changed. I was like, Oh my (Laughs) The other foot , other hand, and I remember distinctly having a little wreck but didn t damage the car. They just said, Okay, you just need to relax when you re out on the road and make sure you re on the right side. It was just that I had hit a curb that I shouldn t have hit. That was the beginning of my adventure there. Milligan That was your first week? Bradley Yes. (Laughter) Yes. Milligan Gosh. Bradley Yes. (Laughs) Milligan What else was a little unexpected? Bradley I think living in a gated community because everything they have guards in your house. If you live in a house, you have a guard. If you live in an apartment, you have a guard. In the community that I lived in, (community being the apartment complex, they were all what they consider flats) there was a gate that you had to have permission to come in, so if you were my guest, you would have to know my name and what apartment I lived in to be able to get in. I think that was just a shock because there are these walls, and there s either barbwire or broken glass on the top of that so nobody can get in. Then on your doors and windows, there s bars. We live in Oklahoma. We don t have bars. I think that was just probably a real shock to this Oklahoma girl that I m going to a culture that security has to be this way, and you have to be careful about what you do, and just be aware of what s going on in your surroundings. Milligan Did you feel prepared for that when you left? Did you know that was coming? Bradley A little bit, but I think that if you hear about it and you see pictures, it s nothing like until you re there and you experience it. I think that was the biggest, one of the biggest shocks there was to have that experience, yeah. (Laughs) Milligan What were your goals while you were there? What were some of the specifics that you were doing? 12 Bradley I was in charge of doing children s ministry, which was basically teaching churches how to do Sunday school, how to use God s word as their curriculum, and then also did what you would call maybe child abuse clinics. What we would think as child abuse is not child abuse there, meaning neglect. If they have water and milk, or water and bread, and maybe some meat, that was a feast in the communities that I worked in, where here, that would be neglect. Teaching the workers in these churches to know what is important to look for and what is not important, I had to learn their system of how that played out as child welfare goes in South Africa, than what it was here in America. That was eye-opening to see because there would be communities where you would have houses. Then you would have communities that were just shacks put up. There was just tin, literally tin, put together, four walls and tin roof, and everybody lived in that one room. One water spigot to the whole area instead of a spigot to a house. Those were challenging, heartbreaking times to know that these are conditions that people live in. When I was there, having the opportunity to not only spiritually feed the kids and the families but to also physically feed. When I worked with the church, Pastor George s church, they had what they called a feeding scheme. Every week after school, we would fix something, and it was something that the kids could eat, usually, with their hands and be able to have some nourishment before we would have class. They knew every week they would get a meal from that particular church. Being a part of that and helping them grow that was essential. Being a part of an orphanage, going and working there with them and seeing you re going to make me cry. (Laughs) Milligan It s a tough topic. Bradley Yes, so many of these kids who d lost their parents. Then also seeing the joy of them being adopted out was also a wonderful experience, also. Milligan I m trying to visualize this, and you brought this up. Having someone tell you about it or seeing a picture is never the same as experiencing it firsthand. I wonder that with all these places that you went into, what were some of the things that maybe caught you off guard or that surprised you, either way, the things that maybe you thought that you knew what you were going into but was different when you actually got there? Bradley I think the shacks, the shack community. They would call them squatter camps. I think that was probably the one thing that just really hit my heart the hardest because you may see pictures, and they may talk about it, and you even see it on TV sometimes, but not until you re there and you see the conditions, and you meet the people that you put a face and a name with the environment, and then what s happening. I will tell you from that whole experience about living in Johannesburg, the people, when they have a 13 relationship with Jesus, it is their hope. They may have nothing else, but that is their hope. Where in America, we will have a relationship with Jesus, and it can be like, Oh, well, that s my Sunday, or It s my Wednesday. It is not their (Americans) everything, and in Africa, it s their (Africans) everything. I think that was the most beautiful thing to see was that relationship they had with their creator. Milligan Were they already invested in that relationship, that Christianity relationship, before you came in, or was that something nurtured or fostered or began? Bradley It depended on what situation I was in. Sometimes it was I had the opportunity to share and to grow and to disciple, and sometimes it was just walking alongside and encouraging in fellowshipping, yes. Everybody needs to go. (Laughs) Milligan How far away were these communities from where you were in Johannesburg? Bradley They were about thirty minutes to an hour away. Where I lived on the West Rand, I would have to commute thirty minutes or an hour out to a community to do the ministry. Milligan Were there other people with your organization who were in different areas that you could communicate with that you saw? Bradley Yes. A majority in Johannesburg at that time when I was over there, they had the mission, what they called the mission compound, which was on the East Rand, which was about forty-five minutes on the other side of Johannesburg. You had the medical missions. You had the administrator. You had the accounting team. They were all on that side of the city. There was three mission families on my side of the city that were doing, working in the seminary or working with the schools in different settings. Milligan When you said, I m from Oklahoma, did anyone have any concept of what that was? Bradley Cowboy and Indians. (Laughs) Teepees Every time. Do you still live in a teepee? No I live in a house. You still riding a horse? No That concept. The movies, they had that movie image in their head. (Laughs) Milligan I m just impressed they knew where it was, actually. Bradley I know (Laughs) Milligan That s interesting. You were there for 14 Bradley Two years. Milligan two years the first time, right? Bradley Yes. Well, two weeks the first time that I visited Milligan Two weeks the first time, and then you went Bradley and then went back for two years. Milligan two years as a journeyman? Bradley Yes, and went back in as journeyman. Milligan Journeyperson? What s the PC? (Laughs) Bradley They say journeyman. Milligan Whatever you call it, it was your job. You can name it whatever you want. Bradley That s right. Milligan That s a lot of time. Where else have you been? I know you ve been a couple of other places. What are some of the other Bradley When I was in South Africa, I had the opportunity to visit Lesotho, which is a kingdom inside of South Africa. I got to visit the family there and thought I was going back, coming back to the States, doing a six-month turnaround and going back as a career missionary. That was my intention, was to go back as a career missionary to Lesotho. The Lord said, No, you re not. Upon coming back and having three months, (it literally was three months of grieving because you left the people that you fell in love with) the Lord began to open the door for a ministry in Shawnee. There is a company that was there on Saint Gregory s campus who taught English as a second language. International students would come and learn English, and then go to universities. They were college students mostly. That door opened for me to be involved in teaching English to those kids. I thought, Wow If I don t get to go back, you re bringing the nations here. Having that opportunity to build relationships with not only people from Shawnee but also from Ecuador and Brazil and Saudi Arabia, Mexico, Honduras, just having that experience to learn and to grow with them as they figure out where they re going in life. Once again, I had the children s opportunity in Johannesburg, and I come back. Now it s college students. 15 Going back to Midwestern and how those classes and those opportunities that I had there, He used them once again. Milligan What year did you come back? Bradley I came back in 2002, the end of 2002. Did odd jobs here and there, and then got involved in the private company teaching English as a second language. Then moved away, and then moved back. (Laughs) It was kind of a crazy time because I didn t know where I was supposed to be. Upon coming back, I went back to the private company that taught English as a second language and became their admissions director, and did all the immigration and accounting for them. Then moved into the director position and was able to help run that particular site for a couple of years until they moved it to Ada. Then a door opened for me to go to the private university in Shawnee and teach and be the director over their English program until this past January. Milligan Wow. Just for details, what was the private company teaching English as a second language? Bradley The Language Company. Milligan The Language Company. That was when they were based in Shawnee? Bradley Yes, as the Shawnee English Institute. Milligan The private college in Shawnee is Bradley Oklahoma Baptist University. Milligan You were in charge of their English department? Bradley No, in charge of their intensive English program. Milligan Intensive English. Bradley Yes, their ESL program. Milligan You did that from 2000 wait, I don t think we got a start date. Bradley No, no, we didn t. (Laughs) The Language Company, I started with them in 2004, then left, and then came back in 2005. It was like a six-month jaunt period. In 2005 until 2013, I was with them doing the admissions director and then director position with them. Then moved to OBU in May of 2013 until January of 2015. Milligan How do you get from OBU to Maud? 16 Bradley I know Milligan It s not that far Don t get me wrong. Bradley Well, within my story, coming back in 2002, I became involved in the church that I had been involved during college , Temple Baptist Church there in Shawnee. I became back involved with them, and that s where I met my husband. We ve been married eight years this month, and I know that s what the Lord had in store. Here I wanted to go back overseas, and He said, No, you re staying. My husband was called into full-time ministry. He quit his full-time job and became a full-time minister. The church down here, Trinity Baptist Church in Maud called him to be their pastor a year and a half ago. That s how we ended up in Maud. Milligan That definitely happens. Pastor family goes where you re needed. Bradley That s right. Milligan That s right. I m visualizing this, and I m trying to kind of wrap my head around all the things you ve been doing, but also when you became involved with who s now your husband, (right?) Bradley Yes, yes. Milligan how did you feel when you realized that you weren t going to be going back abroad to do more missionary work? Bradley Right. I think there was that grieving time, that three month of grieving time that I shared with you guys. That was just dealing with the loss of not being able to go back overseas, that was three months of just going, Okay, and feeling kind of lost in a sense because you d placed your identity in this career that you thought you were going to have, then realizing you re not. Then God opens the door for you to be involved with the Language Company and be involved with internationals here in Oklahoma. My husband, Butch, he was doing college ministry at Temple Baptist Church before he was full-time pastor. I was able to join him within that college ministry as we dated and got married. It has been a blessing, also, because we have the opportunity, and still do even though we re in the church now. Some of those college students are still very closely connected to us as family. Having the opportunity to pray with them and to encourage them and disciple them over the years has been a blessing because a lot of them have went overseas, also. It s just kind of like a little piece of you goes with them. (Laughs) 17 Milligan Talk to me about Maud. Give me the little profile of Maud and its population and what s happening here. Bradley It s a small town of a thousand people. It used to be very much a booming town with the oil, but as that phased out, the town basically, I wouldn t say died, but became very, not really dead, dwindled is a good word to put. You have seen this community thrive in pictures, and you hear people talk about the community where there were businesses downtown and things were happening. All these wonderful things were going on in this community, and then as the oil bust happened, this community basically dwindled. The businesses downtown are no longer there, only a few. They have become a community that supports each other is what I ve noticed in the past year and a half, where if there is anything that goes on within a family in this community, they are there for each other . The community is there, not just the people who know them, but it s a community effort. Coming from, you know, Shawnee to Kansas City to Johannesburg, and then back to Shawnee and then here, it has been eye-opening for me because I ve never had the experience of living in a small town. My husband, Butch, he has. He grew up in Stratford, so he is used to that small-town feel and what it s like to be a part of that. This past year and a half has been an eye-opening experience for me to see the love, the support, the encouragement that comes along when there s kids that are going through things or when they re graduating or when there s a sporting event or when there s a death. There has just been this beautiful display of family in this community. Milligan How many people are in the congregation? Bradley On a good Sunday, we have about seventy, so that s good. For a small town like that, that s very good. There s another Baptist church. First Baptist is here, also. To be this close to Seminole and then to Saint Louis, which also has Baptist churches, that s a very good number to have. This last week, we had Vacation Bible School, and we had fifty-some-odd kids every night. Yes, exactly. (Laughs) That was huge to see. To see the church come together, but also when the parents would drop off the kids, sometimes they would stay, and they would be involved. That was neat to see, also. Milligan What do you do on a day-to-day basis while you re here? What does a normal day look like for you? Do you have a normal day? You may not. Bradley I don t know what a normal day is (Laughs) Well, in the fall, I ve accepted a position at Shawnee Public Schools to be their ELL teacher. I get to go back to little kids and internationals, so I m so excited to see what that holds. It s going to be teaching pre-K to fifth grade, and I m very excited of that opportunity, of God s opened that door. This summer, I m just kind of enjoying last bits of freedom, I guess you could say, without being tied 18 down to getting things prepared but looking forward to what that next job holds, yes. Milligan That s interesting. I love how it came full circle, too. Bradley I know It s beautiful, isn t it? (Laughs) Milligan It s pretty tidy. Bradley I know Milligan Talk to me a little about sort of because the interview sort of started with OSU, you know. Maybe do you feel that there was some sort of impact with your time there and how it relates? Bradley Yes. I think going back to being in college also helps you find out who you are. I think that if I wouldn t have found out who I was, not based on my parents, what they thought, or my grandparents thought I was, but finding out who I was and what I believed and where I wanted to go, that has filtered through everything else that s happened in life thus far. When you find out that you can be independent and you can take care of yourself, you feel equipped to go and do what is set before you, I guess that is a good way to put that. Being at OSU, having the opportunity to meet internationals not only at the church but the BCU, (BSU, BCC, I ve got it all confused now) BSU, then also in my classes I think had a big part, I know had a big part in just that international heart being developed in me. Milligan Had you had much contact with international students or people before coming to OSU? Bradley I was able to go on a mission trip to Mexico in 1992. Then just learning, learning about them when people would come and share about them at church. We had Acteens at church, so you would learn about global missions. You would learn about local missions, so reading and learning, but then is different than actually going and being there. Yeah, that had a part in it. Milligan What made you choose OSU? I don t think I asked that. Bradley You did, and I said it s because we loved the Cowboys (Laughs) It all filters back to the sports Milligan That s right. I was just thinking, Gosh, it s close to home, but that s not it. Bradley Nope. (Laughs) 19 Milligan You love the Cowboys. I know that you talked about this, too, a little bit, but I m also hearing more sort of getting fleshed out. I m just going to ask a little bit more about it. When you decided on that path for missionary work, what were some of the struggles? You re leaving home. You were away from home already in Kansas City, Missouri , but that s big. You mentioned that it was a jump from here to there. Bradley Exactly. Milligan At what point did you actually start to think, Mission s going to be my life. Like, I need to get out of here and do some stuff ? Bradley I can t really pinpoint when that was except that missions had been taught, and I was exposed to growing up with Acteens in the church. It was all something that interests me and kind of pulled. I was pulled in that direction of wanting to go and see what else was out there. I think one of the challenging parts was having to say goodbye to your family because you don t know what s going to happen when you are thousands of miles away. I think that s with anybody who moves from home. You just have to be prepared. I remember distinctly because my grandfather, (I called him Pa-paw) he was the one that I always sought approval from. I remember distinctly when it was time for me to apply, and they were accepting me through the process that, I don t know if he s okay with this. I sent him a card, and I said, I just need to know that you know that I ve got to do this. This is what I m supposed to do with my life. I would love for you to approve it, to put your stamp of that s great on there, but if not, I m still going to go. I just really felt that strongly in my heart, and he made a trip to Kansas City and took me out one night. He said, You do what you need to do, but I want you to know that your grandma and I, we support you in whatever you choose. We are right there with you. That was just a release of going, Okay, the world is mine, that I can do whatever is set before me, yeah. Milligan Did they ever come visit you while you were out there in the world? Bradley No, unfortunately, they did not. (Laughs) My grandmother was diagnosed with breast cancer, and she was unable. She had to go through treatments and things. They were unable to travel, but there wasn t a week that didn t go by that I didn t get a letter from her. They communicated either by a phone call or a letter. Milligan It s true. Technology has made it easier, even with phones with the ability to call internationally. Bradley Yes. 20 Milligan It s easier to be far away, but still . Bradley True, true. It s much easier now than it was in 1999, 2000, yes. Milligan That s true, too. Well, do you have any inklings on whether you ll be traveling more in the future? Does your husband have any interest to pick up and reach out? Bradley I don t think that we will go overseas to live, but I m not opposed to overseas mission trips. I did have the opportunity in 2010, I think it was, that the pastor s wife at Temple and myself went to Malawi. I was able to do some work alongside one of the ladies who was in college when we were both there. We got to work alongside her. Having those opportunities like that as they arise, I m all for it. Milligan I don t blame you. Bradley My husband has the mindset that he can do more work here . I get tickled because I m like, Well, the Lord said this is what we need to do, or, I ve been really praying about this, and this is what direction. Anytime that I come back and say, Well, I ve been really praying about going to Malawi, for example at that time, he said, Well, I can t argue with God, can I? (Laughter) No, you can t Milligan Yeah, you got a winner there. Do you still keep up with the people that you knew while you were in Johannesburg? Bradley A little bit through Facebook. I know, exactly Some of them are on Facebook, so I m able to keep up with them. Milligan Interesting. Do you keep up with the adults or the children or both or a combination? Bradley The adults, yeah. Milligan I mean, the children aren t children anymore, but most of them probably Bradley Probably are adults now, yes. (Laughs) Milligan You know, you make special relationships, obviously, with people when you re, especially when you re away from your family and you re deposited, you find family. Bradley Yes, you do, exactly. That s exactly right. 21 Milligan Anything interesting going on on that end of the world? Do they continue to grow what you were working on? Bradley Yeah, they re continuing to just grow. They ve moved the ministry more into the Soweto area, which is among the black people. The missionaries that are there working are working there, and of course the restructure of the IMB, that s kind of reorganized where people are serving at right now. It changed a lot since I ve left as far as who s there. Milligan Was there ever an issue while you were there? I mean, you ve mentioned that a couple of times, the mission to sort of the black communities, the black populations. Was there ever an issue with you being there and doing that outreach and not being black? Bradley No, no. They loved my accent. They loved my laugh, so they accepted me. (Laughs) No, they were very much an accepting people. If you come to work alongside them, they re going to just take you in as their family. More than once that happened. It s just a beautiful, beautiful country, but the people are more beautiful. Milligan That sounds like you had a really nice time. Bradley You need to go Milligan Well, I hope that you get to go back someday, too. It sounds like it. Let s see. You re moving out to, moving to school in the fall? You re going to start working in school in the fall, getting settled into Maud? Bradley Yes. Milligan You re here as long as you need to be, as long as you re called to be. Bradley That s right. That s exactly right, yes. Milligan Had you ever been to Maud before you moved here or before you found out you were coming here? Bradley Driven through. Milligan We were talking about that this morning. A lot of people knew where Maud was because they d driven through. Bradley That s right. Milligan What s your favorite thing to do here? Do you have anything? 22 Bradley In Maud? (Laughter) I think our favorite thing to do is have people over here in our home. Our home is a safe haven but also our place where friends can come and just fellowship. We play games and hang out and have meals. I think that is one of the things that we really enjoy about being here is building those relationships with the people. Milligan That s important. Bradley Yes. Milligan Taryn, any other observations or thoughts? Sanderson I have one quick question. It seems like your missionary work really taught you a lot over there. Bradley Yes. Sanderson Has that helped you at all with the church here? Bradley Yes. Sanderson Have you been able to reach people on a more spiritual level than you have before, or what is that kind of like? Bradley I think that being able to do the mission work that I did has equipped me in being able to be flexible, has given me the opportunity to say, Well, if that didn t work, let s use something else to meet the needs of the people or to minister to them. I think for me, personally, I think the Lord s given me a spirit of discernment. Being able to see the needs of the people and praying for them even if I don t know them has been beneficial in what God is doing here in Maud, yeah. That answer your question? Sanderson Yes. Bradley Okay. Sanderson We were also driving through here, and we saw Wanda Jackson. We actually saw it on a wall. It was like Wanda Jackson Day. Do you know who Wanda Jackson is? Bradley She is a famous country singer. Sanderson Oh Okay, and is she from here? Bradley She is from Maud, Oklahoma, yes. They no longer have the Wanda Jackson Day, but that used to be a very prominent day here in Maud where they 23 would have a festival. I do believe, if I remember correctly (correct me if I m wrong if you find out differently), that she used to come back and sing every now and then. Yes, she s from Maud, Oklahoma, a famous country singer. Milligan Mystery solved. Bradley There you go Sanderson We saw WJ. I was like, That has to be Wanda Jackson. Bradley Yes. Sanderson I was like, Who is Wanda Jackson? Bradley See, now you ll have to go look her up. Milligan We really appreciate your time. Bradley You re welcome Thank you Milligan Is there anything else that we didn t ask about that you want to talk about? Bradley No, I think you ve covered everything. Milligan You had some really great adventures. You re still going on lots of great adventures. Bradley Still, exactly Life s not over yet, and there s more to come. Having the opportunity of whatever comes this way, I think, is going to be exciting to see what s next. Milligan Fantastic. ------- -------..