 Milligan with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State University Library. I am here in Yukon, Oklahoma , today, interviewing Wendy McConnell, Dr. Wendy McConnell, for the Cowboy in Every County Oral History Project, which is a part of the O-State Stories collection. Today s date is April 15, 2016. We are going to be talking about, sort of, Dr. McConnell s choice to attend OSU, what led up to that, and what she s been doing since. How broad is that? McConnell That ll work. Milligan Let s just start. Just give me a little bit of background. Like, tell me a little bit about yourself: where you re from, and who are your parents, do you have siblings, any of that sort of stuff. McConnell I grew up in Mustang, Oklahoma, and graduated from there. Milligan Not far from here. McConnell No, so I got to come back home, which was nice. I actually have three siblings. I have two brothers and a sister. My sister is also an OSU alum. Went to Northern Oklahoma College, actually, immediately after high school. Had a pretty nice scholarship setup up there that I couldn t turn down. That was a nice little starting point. I think that was even before OSU and NOC kind of even had their affiliation. Then I transferred over to OSU and finished out there. Milligan Tell me a little bit about growing up in Mustang. McConnell It looks nothing like it does now. (Laughter) Milligan It s changed a lot, I think. 5 McConnell It s quite different. You know, it still was a bigger school system, even when the town was more rural. Still had quite a graduated with a little over five hundred, even back then. Milligan Oh, that is bigger than I would think, yeah. McConnell It was nice. It was quaint. We were still close enough to the city that we could go to the mall and do what we wanted to do, but kind of far enough away that you had a little bit of space. Milligan What year did you graduate high school? McConnell Two thousand. Milligan You said that you got a scholarship to go to the NOC first. How did that come about? Was it something that you were actively seeking, or was it an opportunistic thing or McConnell A little bit of both, to be honest. I was kind of applying everywhere to see what kind of scholarship money I could get. My parents had always there s four of us, and, you know, we were a very middle class family. They had always told us in the beginning that they wouldn t be able to pay for our education. I was kind of trying to find where I could go and get the best student loan debt, and things of that nature, and consideration, where I could get a good start and get my feet wet. That just seemed to work out the best for me. Milligan What did your parents do for a living? McConnell My dad is a CPA. My mom didn t work when we were younger. Once we got more middle-school-age, kind of did some clerical and accounting type stuff. Milligan I can understand having four children being a full-time job on its own. (Laughs) McConnell Yes. (Laughs) Wouldn t have had it any other way, though. I mean, it was a lot of fun. Milligan Yeah. So out of curiosity, like, what area of Mustang? It really is a more rural community. Did you live towards more town part, or more out in the country? McConnell More towards town part. Kind of lived on the junction where Mustang and Yukon separate. We even had a Yukon mailing address, but I was part of 6 Mustang Public Schools. Then we had Oklahoma City utilities even, so it was right on the cusp of everything. Milligan Yeah, that makes sense. Well, so let s talk a little bit about you spent two years at NOC. Tell me a little bit about what your classes were like and what it was like moving to that college from here. McConnell It was probably the same size as my high school. The transition was good, but the town was much, much smaller than what I was used to. It s a good hour drive to get to any bigger city. I had the time of my life up there. Had made some of the best friends that I still stay in touch with to this point. Classes were good. It was smaller class sizes, and so I really felt like I could get a lot of one-on-one teacher help and things moving forward. Most of my basic sciences and things of that nature, I was able to get taken care of there. Just had some really good teachers that made a big, big impact. I was able to do an internship while I was there. I used to want to be a physical therapist, and thought that s where I was going to go with my life. I did an internship for a year, Blackwell, Oklahoma, with physical therapy. Decided that it wasn t quite what I wanted to do but led me to some other opportunities. Milligan Well, I think that s actually a really good point about the class size was a transition. I wonder, not at NOC, but at any point did you ever attend any of those classes that were, like, a hundred and fifty or two hundred students? McConnell At OSU, I did. Milligan Did you? McConnell Yes. Milligan How did that, for you, compare I wonder, coming from a . Well, coming from Mustang, how did that compare for you for those big and those small? McConnell Some of my science classes were smaller, but my organic chemistries and things of that nature definitely were a hundred, hundred and fifty kids. You don t get a lot of the one-on-one attention, unless you really go out and seek it, that you re having trouble or you re struggling. It was a big change. Those classes were definitely harder, to a degree, too, so it s hard to say if you were struggling because the material s harder or the environment was different or . Organic chemistry is never fun, class size of ten or a hundred. Milligan You don t hear many people saying that it s easy . McConnell Yes. 7 Milligan Well, so you were there for two years at NOC, and you said that you thought for a while that you might do physical therapy. I wonder if you had in mind the area of study, like, when you started attending there that you thought you were interested in it. McConnell I knew I wanted to do something medical, whether physical therapy, PA physician assistant school, something. I like people, and I wanted to do something around helping people. Just went in for basic science type stuff so I could get courses because most of the prerequisites for all of those degrees and graduate degrees all have the same ninety-hour prereq courses. Went in with that notion, at least, that wasn t sure exactly which direction I would head but would have most of those requirements taken care of regardless of where we went. Milligan What made you choose to come down to OSU when you finished those two years? McConnell My sister was there and loved it. Believe it or not, my dad is an OU alum and OU season ticket holder. Again, it came down a lot to scholarships and where I felt comfortable. I got a pretty nice transfer scholarship, a transfer leadership council scholarship, into OSU which helped in that. I liked the feel of Stillwater. It s very laid-back. People are always very welcoming. It just felt right. Milligan Had you been down to visit your sister quite a bit then? McConnell I had. Milligan At least you knew what you were getting yourself into. McConnell Yes (Laughs) Milligan Was it an easy transition for you then? McConnell I think so. I actually lived with her the first year that I moved to Stillwater, and actually ended up working quite a bit to help make up for the cost and the difference in tuition from NOC. Worked for the Vice President of Research and Academic Affairs there at Stillwater, over in Whitehurst. I spent two years hanging out in that department. That kind of helped, too, you know because I met people there, had a little bit of a network. They could get me set up with things and moving forward, and . Milligan Yeah, that seems like a good place to land. 8 McConnell Yeah. I was on the transfer leadership council, so that kind of helped me meet other people that were in similar situations that I was in. It definitely was a lot harder to make friends and get settled there. Milligan Was that because you were coming in as a junior, I guess? McConnell Yeah. I worked, and so I wasn t in a sorority and stuff. I didn t have a built-in network. I spent most of my times working or going to class, and so . Milligan Yeah. I wonder, tell me a little bit about the transfer leadership council. I don t I ve never actually heard of that. McConnell Really? Milligan No, so tell me about it. McConnell It was basically a group of students that had obviously transferred into OSU, and it was a networking thing to help welcome in other transfer students. They would put on events and different things and little mixers to welcome them in, show them around the campus. We would sometimes give tours when transfer students would come, just share our experiences. Milligan That s a great idea. I m glad it s going on. Well, I m curious at what point you decided you were not going to go into physical therapy. McConnell Kind of after that internship. At least, in the clinic I was in, the physical therapy aides definitely had a little more patient contact. I wanted to do something where it was a little more hands-on all the time, so I decided that one probably wasn t it. There was a kid that had cerebral palsy that came in every week. Definitely had a lot of fun working with him and building that relationship, and I was like, Maybe I want to do pediatrics. That was one of my next big pipe dreams was maybe something on the pediatric side of things, whether it s PA school or medical school. I wasn t sure what I wanted to do at that point but leaning towards that spectrum of things. Milligan When you came into OSU, did you have in mind what you were working towards as your ultimate goal by that point? McConnell No. Milligan Still no? Which is totally, obviously fine. (Laughter) So what did you transfer with your did you have to declare a major at that point? McConnell Microbiology is what I decided. Milligan Which is what you ended up majoring in. 9 McConnell Yes. I figured, again, I had most of the prerequisites for any kind of medical background that I ended up going into. I liked microbiology. I don t know what I would have done with the degree had medicine or something not worked out. I didn t want to work in a lab because that was the complete opposite of what I was going for. I just really found the stuff interesting and the classes really interesting, and so . Milligan So tell me a little bit about your classes then, other than that some were big and some were small. McConnell Trying to remember. Milligan If you don t remember, it s all right McConnell Biochem definitely was another one of those that s probably two hundred plus. We d have our little study groups and always meet over in the library. Trying to remember. The microbiology and immunology and those were definitely much, much smaller. I don t know if that s why I kind of enjoyed those a little more. In the labs, usually there s only twenty people or so in the lab portion of those. OSU always had really good TAs and stuff for their labs, and that helped to make things interesting, moving forward with things. Milligan Well, tell me. You talked a little bit about being a transfer student and how that affects the social part of it. McConnell Yes. Milligan What about as far as your major work? Was that hard to break in, to feel like you were fitting in there well as a transfer student? McConnell Other than organic chemistry, I think everything else transferred in okay. Actually, I had a couple people from my high school that I knew that were at Stillwater, so sometimes could network in with at least some familiar faces. Surprisingly, we weren t friends in high school, but when you move to Stillwater and those were the only familiar faces I knew, we definitely became a lot closer and were able to build some of those relationships. Milligan I m curious, too, about as you were sort of delving into that. Did you have any I know you worked for the VP-Research office, but did you have any sort of lab duties or anything like that within your major that you McConnell Just the classes that we had to go to. Duty-wise or after-hours stuff, not particularly, just our designated lab times, which always made trying to work in the office hard because those were always middle of the afternoon for two or three hours, so you d go to work for a little bit. They were very 10 flexible. They obviously knew that we were students and stuff. We could go to class for a couple hours, then come back for a couple hours, and then go back to class for a couple hours and try to get as much done at work as we could while we were there. Milligan I wonder, working at the VP of Research s office, you mentioned that it was a good place to meet and network with people. McConnell Yeah. Milligan Maybe talk a little bit about that. Is there people that you met that helped maybe direct you or helped mentor you or maybe influenced decisions at some point. I m just kind of curious about how . That is such a, it s a leadership place, obviously. They McConnell Yes. Milligan like to see students who are interested in developing outside of . McConnell Yeah. Milligan Obviously you already mentioned you re a people person, which is fantastic that you knew that was a skill you needed to go in the medical profession. I m just curious about, maybe a little bit about how you ended up there, and what were some of the things that actually happened while you were there. McConnell I actually worked for the Vice President of Academic Affairs when I was at NOC, also. I think he made some phone calls, and they all knew each other at that time. Made getting that position a little easier, and started that shortly after I got to Stillwater. I am horrible with names. Milligan That s okay. McConnell There was a retired general that worked for the university. I want to say Goodyear or something of that nature. Milligan That s where the transcript comes in handy. You can always note that later on. Don t worry, really. Don t even worry. McConnell He was we d have to do projects and take papers and deliver to them and stuff. They would be there for meetings, and we d be in there handing out packets and making coffee and doing those things, and could just get to chat and meet the guys. I worked for about thirty hours a week, so you re definitely around them a lot. They were always good sounding boards. If you had some kind of question or concern or, What do you think about this field, they were definitely very positive influences and encouraging do 11 what you want to do things. Him specifically, I remember sitting and talking a couple times. He was just very polite, very cordial, very respected man. Getting to sit and even talk to him and hear any of his thoughts or stories was always exciting. You d take stuff down to the president s office, and you d always feel like, I shouldn t be in here kind of thing, but again, was always super nice. Would come out and shake your hand and stuff when they d see you in their waiting room. It was a really cool experience, where you got to network with a lot of people that you otherwise probably never would have met in your life. Milligan Not normally as an undergrad. McConnell Yeah. Milligan Well, and I also think that this is interesting. Do you feel that there was an advantage to the way that you went about it, that you sort of went to NOC for two years then ended up at OSU? I know the transfer aspect of that can be kind of tough, but I wonder if there was an advantage to that structure for you. McConnell Both. I can definitely see advantages and disadvantages to both. Like I said, I loved the time I had at NOC. I was student senate president when I was there and was definitely very involved. Again, got to meet some really interesting people there that helped shape and change my life. Getting those first two years taken care of and not being in debt when I left there was a very nice feeling. Even with scholarships and loans and stuff, I was still working quite a bit when I went to Stillwater. I think having that first two years taken care of and knowing they were taken care of did really make a difference. My sister definitely was there all four years, was in a sorority. She had this whole different life and different experience at OSU than what mine was, not that that s a bad thing. It was different. You always think, Had I not transferred in and done that, how would things have been, and how would it have been different? I wouldn t have changed mine. I m very happy with how things turned out. Can t have any complaints, you know. Milligan Speaking of that, speaking of, sort of, your sister s experience in that reflective aspect, what did you do for the free time, which, of course, you didn t have much of because you worked thirty hours a week and were into microbiology. I m just curious. What did you do for social time? McConnell OSU sporting events were always so much fun. They were finally starting the football renovations and stuff when I was there. That was kind of back during the Les Miles era, and the football program was turning around. It was exciting, and it was a lot of fun to go to the games. Started dating a guy back then and hung out with him and a lot of his fraternity brothers. Still had some social fun when I was there. 12 Milligan Are there places that you all hung out pretty regularly? McConnell Eskimo Joe s was always fun. Thinking. I m bad with names. Trying to think of all the bars that we . Milligan Main Street, the Strip . McConnell Pretty much everything on the Strip we definitely frequented. We used to go to the Tumbleweed, you know. Milligan Which is not on the Strip. Did you go to events like the Calf Fry? McConnell I did. I went to several concerts out there if they d bring in some pretty decent country music bands and stuff back when they had the Calf Fry. Orange Peel was always a lot of fun. Got to see Goo Goo Dolls when I was there. One of those moments I ll never forget, also. Milligan Yeah McConnell It was a great concert. Milligan I forgot about that. Did they I guess they still had comedians with Orange Peel. It was comedians and then a musical, right? McConnell Yeah. Milligan That s interesting. That s a big name for Stillwater McConnell Yeah Milligan Was it packed? McConnell Oh, yeah. Milligan Really? McConnell Yeah. Milligan Cool. So mainly a lot of the campus things and social stuff. McConnell Yes. Milligan Well, and you mentioned that you were on student senate at McConnell NOC. 13 Milligan NOC, thank you. I was like, That s not right. I m going mix up my letters. That you were in student council there, and president is what you said, right, or student senate president. I m curious if that interest in student council transferred when you went to OSU. McConnell It did, and that s why I got involved with the transfer leadership council. I definitely at NOC was kind of involved in everything and really flourished in that aspect at that time of my life when I was there. When I transferred, I definitely was working a lot more, so I couldn t be quite as involved. The transfer leadership council, and there was some kind of academic society group, too, that I was a member of that had events and things that we would volunteer and do some stuff around the campus for. Milligan Is that something new for you when you went to college, or did you have those sort of leadership interests when you were in high school? McConnell I had some in high school. More athletic involved, too, when I was in high school. Still did some of the leadership stuff, but I think it really flourished and became a much bigger part of my life when I went to college. Milligan I m always curious how young adults really step into that. I mean, some people, they are just really into it, and you can tell. Some people, one door opens up, and they kind of slide through. That s why I was asking that. I was just it s obvious that that was something that you blossomed in. McConnell Yes. Milligan That s the point that you found it. Anyway, we ll come back to that in a minute, (we ve got other things) but that s why I was asking that. Okay. So you were in microbiology; you were working on campus. You did have a social life, which I m happy to hear McConnell Yes. Milligan and just finishing, you went two years, so it sounds like you graduated in 2004? McConnell I did. Milligan What happened when you graduated? McConnell At that point, I was still kind of late figuring out what I really wanted to do, whether I wanted to go to PA school or go to medical school. It wasn t really until my senior year that the guy that I was dating at the time was applying for medical school. I had never thought that I . You have 14 aspirations, but I m like, Oh, I could never be doctor, and I could never get in to medical school. Just had all those self-doubts and stuff at that time. He really encouraged me to apply and to try. I was like, Why not? What s the worst? They can say no. I was like, If that doesn t work out, then I can explore PA school or something else going down the road. Ended up applying, and lo and behold, here we are, fifteen years later, whatever it is. I didn t get in until the 2005 class, so I had a year off between OSU and starting OSU med school. Milligan Was there a reason you applied for the OSU med school? McConnell I applied to several. I applied at OU, toured down there, and then also applied at OSU. At that point in my life, I never wanted to leave the state of Oklahoma, and I really wanted to just stay here and be here. When I went, toured the OSU med school, I don t know if you ve ever been on the campus, but just loved it. At that time our class sizes, I think were, like, eighty-five. The little lady at the front desk, Lee, (I ll still never forget her) knew every medical student s name. When they walked in the door, she d greet them, she d hug them. It just felt like home the minute I walked in, and I was like, I want to be here. Milligan Did you go tour other campuses? McConnell I did. Milligan I m guessing you didn t have that experience? McConnell Not at all. (Laughs) I went to a couple in Missouri and was just mortified, and some others, in-state and stuff. It wasn t the same. There s just something about the campus in Tulsa. It s very, very welcoming, and you felt like they wanted you to be there. Milligan So the application process for med school, (because I want you to talk a little bit about that) you mentioned it was one of those things that you never thought that you could actually do that. I think that s important for students, no matter at what point they are McConnell Yes. Milligan to really think about. I understand what got you to apply, but maybe talk about the application process and some of the feelings that went with that and the process that you went through. McConnell It s a very nerve-racking time. MCATs are never, never fun. You get used to being the big fish or the top of everything. Then you get in with a bunch of people that are equally as smart, if not a lot smarter than you, and it s a big, 15 big change, just trying to get letters and things for med school and shadowing experiences. I even believe that the general I mentioned earlier had even wrote one of my letters for me to get into medical school. We had that relationship. Interviews are always nerve-racking. You re not quite sure what you re getting yourself into the whole time you re applying. You re even anxious from the unknowns of what medical school is even like, and then yet you re excited because it s this new opportunity. It was . Milligan That s a really complex process. I mean, not only, it s not just your normal application process. You also have to go through there s an in-person component. There s all this stuff. McConnell Yes. Milligan I m curious about that. You graduated in 2004, and you didn t start until the fall of 2005. You mentioned you had a year off. At what point did you actually start your application process, and what point did you find that you were accepted? McConnell I think I had even started it before I left OSU. I think I had missed the class cycle deadline for the 2014 start. Milligan Two thousand four start? McConnell Sorry, yes. I m jumping ahead on you there; 2004 start. I ended up taking a job at Deaconess Hospital here in Oklahoma City. I worked as an orderly in their operating room. I literally mopped the floors, and cleaned the ORs, and stocked the ORs, anything I could get that had some kind of medical experience behind it because that s always something they wanted on your applications. It was either shadowing or medical-type work. I stumbled into that job. Again, met some great people when I was there, a couple physicians there that even wrote my letters for medical school that I even still talk to, now that I ve come back full circle. Again, also, opened doors, and some pretty cool relationships there, even. Milligan You have to be pretty committed to this is what you wanted to do. McConnell Yes. I always laugh. I got my bachelor s degree, and then I went and mopped floors for a year. It s sad to say, but that still is a dream of mine, and was going to see it until the end. If it didn t work out, then I would revaluate my life and revaluate things, and figured where I wanted to go from there. At that point, I had it in my head that that s what I wanted to do. Milligan Talk to me about starting classes and really the coursework and the process for medical school. 16 McConnell Probably one of the most overwhelming experiences of your life. I always try to describe it to people, but I m like, Until you re there in the thick of it, you can t really begin to fathom. Like I said, we had smaller class sizes. There was about eighty-something of us, and so you really get to know everybody. That whole, everybody was the top of their class before, and you put all those type A people in a room and put them against each other, it s full of heartache involved. That first semester was hard. Am I smart enough to be here? Should I be here? After that first cycle of tests, I even remember a friend of mine called my mom, was like, She s upset; she s homesick. She even drove all the way to Tulsa, snuck into my apartment, did, like, seven loads of laundry, stocked my fridge, and had a roast cooking. I came home from class, and there s my mom. It s probably one of the most epic, memorable moments of my life. After that, she gave me a big go get em speech. Things turned around, and everything worked out. That first round of test blocks was definitely a eye-opening experience. Those are some of the people that, again, that I ll be friends with for life, that I still keep in contact with moving forward. I always describe it as, like, it s I don t want to compare it to this, but almost like people that went through some kind of life tragedy, a bombing or something. There was something that you were all part of, and only the people that were there really, truly know what it was like. It s just . Milligan So a little bit of trauma to go with it. McConnell Yes It really was. They describe it as trying to drink water from a fire hydrant. That s kind of how it is. It s just that much information, flying at you. Milligan What changed after your first test cycle? McConnell I think maybe believing that I could do it, or believing that I should be there. Then you figure out how to study, and what study techniques work for you, and what study techniques don t work for you, because in college you could half-study for some things and be okay. You definitely could not do that in medical school. Really learned where I could study. There was a Borders caf in Tulsa that I took over one of their little corners every weekend. The whole wait staff knew me. They d bring me food, bring me drinks all the time, and I just sat there in the corner all day. I couldn t study with other people. I found that usually didn t work for me. It only rose my anxiety levels. Put me alone by myself with some ear plugs in, and I was good to go. Milligan Was there a level of competitiveness, then? McConnell There was on some levels. There were definitely a couple of people in my class that definitely wanted to be the top of our class, and that was always a 17 struggle amongst them. I wanted to do well for myself. You d really sit and think about stuff in medical school. You re like, Well, if I don t know this, am I going to hurt somebody later because I don t know this information? You get a guilt factor going on, and that makes you study more. Milligan Did you have anybody in your, professor-levels, in your program that helped address that sort of thing? McConnell We definitely had stress management classes, even, that the second-year medical students would put on for the first-years, about how to adjust and how to deal with things. I even got to be a stress management leader, when I was a second-year, to the first-years. They definitely try to play into that, into the well-being of medical students. Sadly, the suicide rate for medical students is on the rise, and they definitely stepped in and tried to put in some programs and some things to try to help with a lot of that because it s just an overwhelming time. Like I said, it s a lot of the type A people that are used to excelling at everything they do, and when you get to that point and you don t, it s hard. Milligan That s what contributed to higher levels of suicide risk, I guess McConnell Yes. Milligan is really what it came down to. It s interesting. As I was driving down here, I was listening to an NPR interview (I think it was probably Fresh Air) where she was interviewing somebody who is a neurologist. Part of this said that medical school has changed, (this is why I m thinking about this) medical school has changed in the last, I don t know if it was ten or twenty years or whatever. The way that they are trying to teach information is less about you have to memorize everything and be your own encyclopedia, and more you have to know where to look. You have to know where the research is. You have to know how to evaluate good information from bad information. McConnell Yeah. Milligan It s not bad if you have to stop and look something up before you give your patient the answer. Which got me thinking, I wonder if that s part of it. Which angle did you learn? Was it both, or do you feel like you had to internalize every single thing, like you said, or I could mess somebody up ? McConnell At that point in my life, I felt like I had to internalize everything. You know, if you didn t know the answer, then you were failing, failing your patient, or failing yourself, or failing something. My stress levels definitely during medical school were a lot higher. I didn t know what kind of residency I 18 wanted to be in at that point, even, in my life. You definitely wanted good grades and good board scores and good everything so you would have options moving forward. You were always scared if you messed up on a test. Is this going to affect all these life decisions later in my life moving forward? Milligan That s stressing me out just listening to it. (Laughter) Well, you said at that point, you felt that way. Is that reflect that you don t feel that way anymore? McConnell No. I can usually be very honest with patients, and if I don t know, I don t have a problem telling them that I don t know. I feel like they even appreciate that even more, instead of trying to fluff or lie your way or dance around an issue, just being like, I don t know what s going on, and I don t know why you feel the way you do, but here s what we are going to try and do in the meantime. Or, I would like to send you to this person because they know, or they re really an expert in this specific field. I want to get their opinion. I feel like most people tend to appreciate that a little more. I ve, like I said, learned to do that, and I feel like it takes a lot of the pressure off. Milligan Yeah, I would guess so. Well, so at what point did you decide what you were going to specialize in? How does that decision even come about? McConnell When I applied to medical school, I wanted to be a pediatric oncologist. Milligan Oh, you were still pediatric. McConnell I was still pediatric. Cerebral palsy kid from the physical therapy clinic, Maybe I do I want to do pedes. I used to love to watch those Saint Jude s infomercials, and I thought those kids were so inspiring. Milligan I don t know many people that love to watch those. McConnell Well, they re just, they re special people. A lot of them really, truly live their lives in the moment and try to appreciate everything that s around them. There s just a different quality that s inspiring about a lot of that. That was my initial goal in life and got into some of my pediatric rotations. I just didn t enjoy it as much as I thought I would. Milligan What was the difference between in your mind what you thought it was going to be like, and what it was really like that made you change your mind? McConnell A lot of it was to do pediatric oncology, you would have to do a pediatric residency first, so got into inner-city pediatric clinics, well-child checks, and pediatric neglect, and things of that nature. It just wasn t quite what I 19 thought I could see myself doing long-term. Didn t think that in the end that it would ultimately make me happy. Milligan Were you in Tulsa doing that? McConnell Yeah. Then I was back to the drawing board. I knew that I liked some of the surgical stuff. I found a lot of that pretty fascinating or pretty interesting. There was a ENT ear, nose, and throat resident when I was a third-year medical student that kind of took me under his wing. ENT, we have some pretty cool equipment, and we have a camera that can actually go down and look at people s vocal cords. When I was a medical student, he let me play with it, and I thought it was the coolest thing ever. I don t even know that he realizes the impact he had on my life, moving forward. It wasn t a specialty that s usually on a lot of people s radars because it s one of the smaller type specialties. I was like, I kind of like this. I need to look into this a little more. Lo and behold, here we are. Milligan So, what point in your education were you when you made that decision, then? McConnell Probably mid- to late third-year medical student. Milligan Oh, that was okay. I thought you were saying that a third-year medical student took you under their wing. McConnell Sorry. When I was a third-year, a resident took me under his wing. Milligan Got it. Wow, that was good timing. McConnell Yes, because by fourth year, you have to start setting up those rotations and your interviews and . Milligan Did you feel like you were leaving anything behind by leaving pediatrics completely? McConnell Not entirely because ENT has quite a bit of pediatrics involved in it. That was one of the things that I loved about it is you still got pedes, then you had a lot of middle-age adults, all the way up to the elderly. You see everything across the spectrum. I felt it filled that void but then also gave me enough of a mix of patient ages and disease processes that it would ultimately make me happy at the end of the day. Milligan Has it? McConnell Yes. (Laughter) 20 Milligan Glad to hear because that s a lot of time spent McConnell Yes. Milligan What happened once you made that decision? What was your next step? McConnell For the way it works for medical school, you have to set up out rotations. For osteopathic ENT programs, there s not a ton of them. There s very few select places that I could apply and to do those. I tried to set up as many of those as I could to try to get face time with the program directors, and then you go on this whole interview trail. My fourth year of medical school, I actually put all of my belongings in storage and lived out of my car my fourth year because I did all of my rotations pretty much out of state or out of the city of Tulsa. Had one type of scrubs, one type of shoes and I just drove around the country for a year. Milligan Where d you stay while you were all those places? McConnell Most of them have housing set up for rotating students. Occasionally, you d have to try to find a resident or somebody that would let you rent a room. One of them, I ended up actually trying to rent a hotel, I think, for two weeks while I was there and stayed in one of those extended-stay places, but . Milligan So going from not wanting to leave the state to, by the time you re in your fourth year, to basically not living in state not living anywhere, how was that shift for you? How did that happen? Was it comfortable? McConnell It was kind of an adventure, to be honest. It was all these places I d never been. Spent a lot of time in Michigan, Detroit and northern Michigan, certain parts of Missouri, and it was kind of fun. You were so busy when you were there because you were trying to be on point and make a good impression. You always wanted to be well-read and prepared. You didn t really have time to sit and think that, This is kind of awkward that I haven t slept in the same bed for more than two, three weeks in couldn t tell you how long. I wouldn t when I look back on it, it s a fond, fond memory in my life, and I wouldn t have changed it. Milligan So how did you decide where you were going to go next, then? McConnell When it came time to interview, I interviewed at several different places across the country. The way it works for medical students is you make a rank list of where your top choices would be. Then the programs also do such of, This is our top candidates of who we would pick, and it goes into a computer system. Then it spits out a match. You really don t know going in, one, if you are going to get picked anywhere, and then two, where you re 21 going to end up. It could be your first choice; it could be your tenth choice; it could be none at all. It was a very nerve-racking process. Like I said, ENT is very small. There s not a lot of spots. I had been discouraged by a lot of people to not even bother trying because it was so competitive and that I should just do something else and not even get involved. Milligan Who was discouraging? McConnell Other classmates, couple of advisors at the time, just that it was a pipe dream. It was something I believed I wanted to do, and if it didn t work out, then it wasn t meant to be. I felt like it at least deserved my full attention and a chance. Milligan Was that discouragement from ENT in general or from trying to do this ranked residency? McConnell ENT in general. Milligan Yeah, I thought you had to do one to do the other. That s interesting. Well, good for you for not giving up before you started. McConnell The sad thing is, every interview I went on, they literally asked, What is your backup plan if this doesn t, if you don t match, because it happens so often and stuff. Just got asked that repeatedly, and it d always be so disheartening. I d just sit there with a smile and try to have a good answer. Milligan What d you tell them? McConnell That I didn t have a backup plan. It was ENT or bust at that time. If I didn t match, then I would sit down and reevaluate and figure out how to reapply the next year. That really was my plan at the time. I didn t have a backup plan, so I was horrified if that situation did come. It would be a little shocking. Milligan That s sort of a yeah, that s an eye-opener to have that as a part of your interview process. So tell me about what it was like when you found out you matched. McConnell It was super, super exciting. It was just a great, great day knowing that all that hard work and stuff, living out of my car and all that had paid off and that those dreams were finally, finally coming true. I would kind of look back. For a girl who wasn t sure she even could go to medical school or was good enough for medical school, and then to get one of those residency spots, it was a pretty nice feeling. 22 Milligan Do you remember having that discussion, sort of, once you decided you were going to go for it, from your professors or your advisors at the medical school? Did you talk with them about the process, or once you were gone, you were just gone? McConnell I talked with some of them about the process and had tried to . There s usually only, maybe, one a class that even tries to apply for it. I was even trying to talk to some of the upper classmen that had done it before me. Again, not a lot of positive feedback, and especially females wanting to do it, there s not a ton at the time. There were certain programs that they just said, Don t even bother going to because you re a girl. There was just a lot of Milligan That s really interesting. McConnell a lot of negativity surrounding the whole process going in. Milligan I wonder what the sticking point is for gender with something like that. McConnell Yeah. Milligan Was there a reason why that was a point that came up? McConnell I think there had been a few programs that had taken female residents that had gotten pregnant during residency. Most ENT programs are generally pretty small. They have maybe one resident a year, maybe one every two years, so when there s one pulled out of the mix, it really changes the dynamics of things. Some of the pediatric residencies and family medicine residencies, they can have five, ten residents a year, so if you have one down, it s not a huge deal. It definitely makes a difference in their schedules, but it doesn t, kind of, cripple the whole system. I think that was a lot of the negativity towards taking a female resident for a surgical sub-specialty. Milligan That was just pretty common knowledge? McConnell Yeah. They can t say it, you know. It would be more people that applied at the programs before me. It wasn t even people at the current programs, but it was just a general opinion that that s what they felt. Milligan Oh, I don t think they re the only ones that McConnell No. Milligan that s a struggle for. That s interesting that that was a big part. You also said at the time. Has that changed? 23 McConnell Yes and no. I feel like most medical classes are now at least 50 percent female, for the most part. I think mine was really close to those numbers. I feel like there s more and more females coming into health care and even doing the sub-specialties. I don t know that it s 100 percent changed, but there s still some stigmata there, too, I feel like. Milligan Well, so where did you get in? McConnell Ended up at Saint Louis. I was at Des Peres Hospital in Saint Louis, Missouri. It was back when the OSU hospital was going through some leadership changes. There was some funding issues, and the stability of Tulsa was not the best at the time. I had ranked some of the out-of-state ones even a little higher at that time. Again, for a girl that came in, I m never leaving, I m never leaving, I m never leaving, when I went to do my rank list and I actually put some of the out-of-state ones first, it was very, very shocking to me to even think about moving away. Milligan Is Saint Louis where did it fall on your rank list? McConnell At the time, it actually was my first choice. Milligan Congratulations. McConnell Thank you. Milligan Belated, but yeah. I m, like, listening to you, and I m excited for you (Laughter) in, like, retrospect. So how was that? You were leaving Oklahoma as a, like, moving out of state for the first time and into this big thing. How was that? Tell me about the transition. McConnell It was different. Moved up there about a month before residency started. I knew one person, now that I think about it, that was there. He was a former OSU medical student, and he was doing an anesthesia residency at the same hospital. I had one familiar face. We weren t close friends but at least knew somebody. Other than that, I really had never lived out of state, living on my own. Again, this whole new chapter of, What s this going to be like? How much is my life about to change? It s so exciting. You re getting ready to start all this training for what you ve worked so hard and wanted to do, but then again, now you re suddenly responsible for things. As an intern, it s like, Oh, my goodness This is real. People expect me to know things, and people are depending on me to know things. Again, those stress levels keep going through the roof. That s probably why I had a little more wrinkles than I should at the time, but . (Laughs) Milligan Did you feel prepared? 24 McConnell Yes and no. I don t think you can ever 100 percent feel prepared for any of that. The first code that you arrive at in the hospital, and you re the one running the show, there s just no real preparation, I don t feel like. No matter how well you trained and how hard, how good you were, until that s you being the one there calling the shots, it s different. I ll always remember those first couple of experiences and stuff, moving forward. You know it; you ve been trained to do it. It s just when you re there and actually in the moment, it s different. Milligan How was it the first time you had a code that you were in charge? McConnell Terrifying. (Laughs) You just keep looking around. Is somebody else going to come? Is there another ER physician or somebody coming? The nurses are usually always pretty good. Especially a lot of the ICU nurses have definitely been there and done that. Ours were usually pretty good and knew things. They kind of, Why don t you think about this, or think about , help cue you along, or help you remember certain things, or do certain things. Milligan You feel like they knew it was your first, sort of, step. McConnell They all knew. They always know when there s a fresh crop of interns coming in. It wasn t a super large hospital. I think it was about a hundred and forty beds or so. There s maybe twelve of us in the intern class. We were pretty easy to pick out if we hadn t been around before. Milligan Do you remember what the emergency was? McConnell It was kind of a complex thing. I think he d been transferred from an outside hospital. He d already had a breathing tube down, been having seizures and things, and ended up going into cardiac arrest and having a seizure. Like I said, thankfully, he was already somewhat stabilized from the breathing tube stand point, so we didn t have to worry about the airway part. I can tell you exactly what room of the hospital he was in, like, where he was, what time of day it was. It s just those little things that kind of stay with you forever. Milligan Well, so what was your, once you, sort of, got through some of those firsts, you said (I can t remember exactly) it was a three-year rotation. Is that right? McConnell Five-year. Milligan Five-year rotation. So how did that, once you got through some of those firsts, how did that time, sort of, progress for you? 25 McConnell You get through certain firsts of things, but then there was always something kind of bigger on the horizon, or bigger looming, especially in ENT. You start with ear tubes and tonsils. You start getting good at those, or getting comfortable. Then you re like, Oh, this is nothing Then you go into sinus surgery or thyroids. There was always something more complex or more complicated that was on the horizon for next. You never could get too comfortable with anything because there was always something that you hadn t seen before, that you hadn t done before. Unfortunately, no two patients are ever the same. You d always run into certain issues or complications with one for something you ve already done a thousand times, and it changes things. It s always challenging, even still today. Milligan What were some of the major things that you learned during your time with the residency? Was it what you were just talking about? McConnell A lot of the surgical stuff and how to manage a lot of it. ENT is kind of a nice balance between clinic and surgical. We spent a lot of times doing both. There s all kinds of very complicated head and neck cancer cases. Some of those would be sixteen hours long, doing big cancer resections and trying to fill in the defects. I knew it was nothing that I wanted to do later in life, but still getting so see those and experience those. From a science level, some of the stuff that they could do was just unbelievable, and it was always really cool to be part of that. I knew long-term that that s not ultimately what I wanted to do. Milligan Why was it not ultimately what you wanted to do? McConnell One, they re long cases. It s exhausting. Head and neck cancer patients are usually never the healthiest bunch of people. A lot of them are still smoking, and so their wounds break down, and they fail. It s a process where a lot of times you never could get them better. Milligan That makes me think, too, because when you re not in the medical field, all you know is what you experience secondhand. You know, you hear of those things like sixteen-hour surgeries, sixteen-hour procedures, and my brain cannot process how that s possible. Is that something, was that a learning period for you to, sort of, be able to figure out, like, how does someone work for sixteen hours on a surgery? McConnell Believe it or not, if you re the one in the operating room actually doing stuff, time stands still in the OR, I feel like. You have no concept of how long it s been, what s going on because you re so focused on what you re doing. There were definitely times as a medical student when I was in on those cases where you re holding a retractor and you can t even see what s going on, where they re working. You re standing here, like this. You re very aware of every minute of those kind of cases, and you re just like, Are they 26 done yet, kind of type things. One thing I ve realized is definitely when you are the one up there doing it, time is not even, not even real when you re in there. You look up, and it s been five hours later. You re like, Oh, wow. You just duck your head right back down, and you re right back at it. Milligan That s interesting. Well, so what happened? You spent your time in Saint Louis. You spent five years there. McConnell Yes. Milligan Then where d you go? What did you do? McConnell Again, just had dreams. I always liked the cycles and things for myself. Well, you know, what if I wanted to do a fellowship again? Can I do one? Could I get one? Well, let s apply. The worst they can say is no. I ended up getting a rhinology, or sinus, fellowship in Boston, which was an even bigger, scarier move. Ended up at Saint Elizabeth s Hospital in Boston, which is affiliated with Tufts University up there, for a fellowship. Milligan Why would you choose to do a fellowship versus something else? McConnell I m Oklahoma born, so I suffer from allergies horribly. I m a product of the Oklahoma Allergy Clinic. I ve always had a sympathetic ear to patients with sinus and nasal problems because it s always been a lifelong struggle for me. I always found that part interesting. I really liked the surgeries for those. ENTs can do, fellowship-wise I mean, there s fellowships for ear. There s fellowships for head and neck cancer. There s fellowships for voice. There s fellowships for pediatrics, for thyroids, specifically, for sleep, for sinuses. Everything has its own sub-sub-specialty. I feel like even with health care, that s even a lot of ways that things are trending, is for people to be sub-sub-specialized. I figured more training s never going to hurt me. Nobody s ever going to fault you for doing extra training. It just happened to work out. I ended up in Boston. Milligan So Boston s bigger than Saint Louis and bigger than Mustang and bigger than Tulsa. McConnell Yes Milligan How was your transition to Boston and into this fellowship? McConnell Boston was even a little more difficult because I absolutely knew no one. At least in Saint Louis, when I got there I had one guy that I vaguely knew, and then I had my intern class where you had a little group of people to bond with, moving forward. Got up there, and it was just big city, kind of overwhelming. Trying to find somewhere to live was probably one of the 27 hardest parts. I actually rented an apartment that I had never seen before and never stepped foot in. I got very, very, very lucky moving forward with it. It couldn t have been more perfect. It was super nice, and it worked out great. It was just one of those experiences. Boston apartments are very different. Things like central heat and air, washers and dryers, and elevators aren t common in a lot of their buildings. Trying to look for those kind of things and modern amenities that I took for granted . Thankfully, the fellowship that I was in had three fellows a year. There was an international fellow that came from Turkey. There was a girl that came, she s from Texas, but she had trained in Mississippi. She s now actually one of my best friends. We definitely were both kind of in that situation of, Oh, my gosh, we re in Boston. She s from Texas and, like I said, trained in Mississippi, and had a lot of similar life experiences and that whole overwhelming move. She was married at the time and had a two-month-old, I believe, when she moved up there to start. She had a little home system, at least, and I just was there. Her and her husband definitely took me under their wings and had Thanksgiving dinner there and things, Easter. We would always hang out on the holidays and do things together. Boston was absolutely beautiful. There s so much you can do within a forty-five-minute drive of Boston. It s all these places you ve never seen before and seen in pictures and read about in books. Getting to be able to do a lot of that on the weekends and stuff was just, again, one of those experiences that I wouldn t ever change. I m so glad that it worked out. Milligan Did you have a lot of time to do stuff like that? McConnell We were on call, I think, every third weekend, so we had two weekends in a row that we usually had time to go do what we wanted. During the week, we were usually pretty busy and couldn t get to much, but had at least two weekends out of the month that we could go play and do what we wanted to do. Milligan What was your experience in the hospital there versus the other hospitals you had spent time in? McConnell It was a much bigger hospital system than where I initially had trained, and so it was a lot busier, a lot more beds, a lot more going on. As fellows, we took our own attending call. When I was on call, I was on call by myself and didn t have backup. That was even a little bit of a transition, knowing that you were there on your own medical license and these were your patients. We even had our own clinics on Fridays and stuff. There was that transition, which I feel like made my life now a little more easy. I had that year where I was in that in-between stage, where you re kind of on your own but you re not really on your own. It was nice to have that to work out some of the 28 kinks and get you used to seeing things on your own and managing things without somebody standing behind you, telling you what to do. Milligan What year did you do this fellowship? McConnell Two thousand fourteen to 2015. Milligan Okay. I thought it was recently, just based on the math and how much all the other things took. Was there differences in sort of like the stress level or the cases that you had to deal with in a place like Boston versus Saint Louis, or even, you know . McConnell It was definitely a it was a rhinology fellowship. Hugh, the guy that I trained under, was definitely well known for sinus surgery. People would drive from across the country. We had people come from Africa to be patients of his. It was always kind of a crazy experience. These people come from all over the world because they heard of him to have cases done. We would do tons and tons and tons of sinus surgery every week, getting that amount of cases, and that exposure to different cases, and different people from all kinds of walks of life. Boston is very much a melting pot of different people. Just getting to meet all these different nationalities, different education levels, it was quite an experience. They definitely have the Boston accents. It s just as bad as it is in the movies. It s real. I ll never forget the first time I walked in a patient s room. They always make jokes about them saying wicked. They really do say it. The first time somebody used it in a sentence and wasn t mocking somebody with it, it was like, Doc, my nose is wicked bad, just wicked bad. I was trying to keep a straight face. I was like, He said wicked It was just all the different every time I walked in a room, You re not from here. The minute I opened my mouth, You are not from here Milligan Were there any problems with that? McConnell No. I think they all like hearing your back stories and where you re from. If they ve been going to the guy that I trained under for any length of time, then they were used to having fellows. Every fellow has a different story and different background, and I think they like getting to meet all the different ones. Milligan If you were training under somebody with that large of a reputation in that specialty field for a year, what do you think you walked away with from that time, other than the independence? I know; I understand that. McConnell I m a much better surgeon walking out than I was walking in, the amount of cases that we did. He definitely operated in a different manner than I did when I was in residency, so everybody does things a little differently. 29 There s little tricks and little pearls that everybody has. I ve been able to blend some of the original training that I had with the training I had there to have my own mix on how I like to do things. He definitely had some tricks, that I think will definitely make me popular in the community, for things that he could do that really made a big difference for people. They got great responses, and that s why he was so popular. Milligan Great, because you re right. That allergy thing . McConnell It s very real here. (Laughter) Milligan Well, so what happened after you finished with your fellowship, then? McConnell Started looking for jobs. My fianc is from Kansas City, and we actually met during residency training. He definitely wanted to go more the Kansas City side. I wanted to come more to Oklahoma, and so we were looking at everywhere there and in between. Actually, we kind of stumbled into this one. It was a weird situation. My mom s family practice doctor works for Yukon. Course, my mom loves to brag about me, as you re very well aware. Was telling her family physician about me, and she was trying to get me to come back to Oklahoma. She actually was the one that found out about this job and contacted me and got me set up for my interview. Lo and behold, here we are. Milligan Go, Mom. When did you start practice here? McConnell August. Milligan Yeah, August, I was like, I know it s fairly recently, but . How did you feel about coming back here? McConnell I was excited. I have some nieces and nephews that are here that I ve never made it to a single one of their birthday parties. I missed holidays. I get to Skype with them. My siblings have been really good to try to make me feel included in their lives still and get to see them grow up. I really wanted to come back and be part of it. I was super excited to move. I don t know if my fianc was quite as excited, but he willingly came. Milligan Sometimes spouses or spouses-to-be just have to do that McConnell Yes. Milligan Did he go with you to Boston, then? 30 McConnell He did not. He still had another year left in Saint Louis. We actually lived apart for a year, which is always trying on any relationship, but we made it through. Milligan It seems like if you start a relationship in the, what sounds like, super stressful period doing a residency, you probably can survive a lot of things. McConnell He s definitely seen me at my worst, so . (Laughter) Milligan Well, that s one of those things. That is really, really quick to come back here. A lot of people, when you have to go out and do these specialties, it s not very often that you can quickly be so close to home. McConnell Yeah, I got really, really lucky that they were hiring and looking for out here. A lot of them, Enid, Elk City, definitely had talked and interviewed at a couple of those places, but it still wasn t quite home. Still a good hour drive from the City or something. After living in Boston, I definitely wanted to be closer to the City because I had gotten spoiled with having certain amenities and things available. I knew I didn t want to live in rural parts of Oklahoma. Yukon is still considered the outskirts, but it s ten minutes from anywhere I need to be. It was perfect. Milligan Yeah, you can be in the prairie, and you can be in the city, either way pretty quickly. McConnell Exactly. Milligan Well, I m curious. I know that you ve done a good amount of mission work and lots of traveling with this. Maybe let s talk a little bit about that. McConnell First mission trip I went on was when I was a third-year medical student. We went to Nicaragua. Went with a handful of my classmates and two of my professors. Milligan Was that set up by the school? McConnell No. It was actually one of the professors that was an internal medicine doc. Came in and mentioned it when he was lecturing one day. A couple of my friends and I were like, This sounds pretty cool. We should look into this. Invited ourselves along on the trip, and he let us. Ended up getting to go down there. It was my first time out of the country. It was quite the experience. We ended up going up into northwestern, rural Nicaragua and took over a school there. I could tell you stories for hours if you really want to listen. Ended up staying up there and had a medical clinic that we ran there. The villagers would walk from all over to come in for the medical clinic. 31 They actually, even, the organization we went with, they had the medical clinic, they had a dental clinic, and they had a veterinarian that would go around and even check people s animals in the community. They had a little eyeglass store for them. They had a whole clothing donation thing where they could get sacks of clothes and other necessities. Was really kind of a nice little one-stop, one-shop deal for them. Craziest part of it was that Hurricane Felix hit when we were down there. There s nothing like being in a third-world country when a hurricane hits. We ended up having to be evacuated, and it was flooding. There was all kinds of craziness from that, but we made it safely out of the village. Flew back two days early, but . Milligan How did you how did that happen? How did the evacuation go, and how did . (Laughter) McConnell Surprisingly, we heard rumors that there was some rain coming, and they were all just blowing it off. One of the girls dad that we were on the trip with had called the national headquarters for the organization we were with and was like, There s a hurricane coming to Nicaragua. Are you guys aware of this? Do they know? Nobody was aware. We somehow get radioed news in that somebody s dad had called, and it was one of the medical students that I went with. They were like, Oh, it s going to hit the East Coast. We re going to be fine. We may just see a little bit of extra rainfall from it. We re not going to evacuate. Don t worry about it. It was one of those eerie, quiet nights. They had a church service and things. Things just didn t feel right. You almost felt like you were in a bad movie. We all went to bed, and it started raining. It kept raining and kept raining. Then two o clock in the morning they come around, and they re like, Pack up stuff, everybody Pack up right now We re leaving. We re trying to pack up all our cots and everything. We get all packed up and just sit there for two hours, waiting for the buses to come. Four o clock in the morning in the pouring rain, we re trying to load all of our stuff onto these buses. They re trying to get the buses out, and we get stuck. Then they have to go wake up all the villagers to come and dig us out to even get out. We were way up in the mountains when it happened. They all graciously come and dig us out. At this point, we re driving down the hills. The churches have flooded. There s mattresses floating in the churches that we could see. Get to the bottom of the hill, and things are very, very flooded when we got to the bottom. There s probably six feet of standing water on all sides of the bus and the roads. It s rushing in through the door of the school bus, and all I could think about is, It s pitch black. It s four o clock in rural Nicaragua. Who s going to come get us? This may be the end. (Laughs) Thankfully, the buses didn t stall; we kept going. Once we got off of that lowland and back on paved roads, everything was fine after that part, but it was a little hairy there for a while. (Laughter) 32 Milligan So do you know why the decision was made to evacuate at that last hour instead of trying to ride it out? McConnell I think they decided we were going to get a lot more rainfall than what they had expected. We didn t even take the direct hit. It was all the surrounding, wrapping rains. The part of Nicaragua that we were in was definitely prone to flooding and was going to flood. I think they felt if we didn t get out then, that it may be days before they could get us out otherwise. I don t know that we had enough supplies and things because we definitely were making our own meals, and all our stuff was done off of a generator. It was a horrible feeling that here we are fleeing for safety, and we just left everybody else there, which, I mean, I m sure they re used to some of that. It just was an experience, to say the least. Milligan Yeah, holy cow. I m curious, too. That leads to the idea that when you re there, you re there for a certain period of time, right? McConnell Yeah. Milligan You re there to treat people for some period of time. They re probably somewhat used to these groups coming in, and there being clinic hours for a period, then nothing, then coming in again. For you, as a third-year student, like, because you hadn t started residency, you probably, if, at all, you had just decided what you wanted to do. So how did that decision to go down there, how did that affect or not affect, sort of, where you were going with your career? McConnell It was definitely things that I had never seen before. Most Americans have some access to health care. Going down there, I don t even think I had decided ENT at that point. I think I may have even still been on the pediatrics track when we were down there, and these little kids, no ear drums left, these weeping ears, and these infections that had never been treated, and they all have worms and things of that nature. They get a lot of parasites down there. It was heartbreaking to see a lot of that. I definitely knew mission work was something I would like to be involved in, as much as I can on whatever level I can. It s a whole different world. How grateful people are for any kind of care or anything like that was just very, very shocking, and very surprising how appreciative the villagers really were that we were there and . Milligan Did you feel prepared to deal with that level of need? McConnell I was surprised, to be honest. It was worse than what I had expected in my head when we got down there. When I went to Africa, it took it even to a whole, whole different level because I thought Nicaragua was bad. At least 33 most of the kids when we were in Nicaragua had shoes, had some kind of clothing or covering. That amount of poverty, I don t know that you can ever prepare yourself for that. Milligan So talk about, yeah, you ve been other places. McConnell My fourth year of medical school, it was my last rotation. Decided to go to Malawi, Africa, and spent almost five weeks over there. That one was set up through the school. It was through one of the osteopathic missionary organizations. We went over there. The nice thing was, we slept in the capitol every night, so at least where we slept, we had power for the most part. We would go on day trips out into these rural areas and spend the day out there and then drive back. Seeing a lot of that was just unbelievable, the amount of malnutrition and, again, parasites, no shoes, no anything. I think one of the saddest things was we d buy bottled water because we couldn t ever drink the water that was there. We always had tons and tons of bottled water. They would literally fight in the roads over an empty twenty ounce bottle of water. We d try to throw them off the back of the truck we were driving in so people could have them. You never could throw them out when there was a crowd of people because they literally would fight each other to the ground over an empty bottle. I feel like that s when things in my head really were like, Wow, this is real. Milligan Did you experience that? McConnell Yeah. There s one of my that may be one of my favorite pictures. That one s from Malawi. Then there was these two little boys that probably ran along the side of our bus for a good mile, just smiling and waving, just so excited to see people coming to visit. Neither of them have shoes on. All their clothes are completely ratted and torn, but they were just happy as could be. They chased us as long as they physically could, running and smiling and . Milligan Did they know what you were coming to do? McConnell I don t even think they did. I think we still drove another hour or so after we had ran into them on the side of the road. Not a care in the world. It was just I don t know. Milligan That s a great picture. McConnell Things that make me look back, look back and smile and remember some of the things. Milligan How do you even tackle things like that? You re there for five weeks; you re in a lot of different places. 34 McConnell A lot of different places, and it s diseases that we re not exposed to a lot. Malaria over there is just rampant. You d see all these little kids, and the issue is, they don t even have Tylenol to give them. They re all having seizures from these high fevers. They have malaria, and they re anemic and super, super sick. There s no way to get them to any kind of medical centers and stuff out there. One of the things is when people line up for those clinics, all they want is even just Tylenol and Advil. They re so thankful to even have medicine like that. It was heartbreaking. There was one day that we d even drove out, and they were just having some of the people I went with were OB-GYNs. They were doing some studies on cervical cancer rates while they were there. They were doing their own thing. We had a women s clinic, but people just knew we were there. They started bringing their children over, and we hadn t stocked the van and didn t really have supplies to do a lot of that. I think we probably saw fifty kids, and every single one of them was running high fevers and sick. Not having supplies and not being able to do anything for them was one of the most awful feelings in the world. You know how to make them better, but you didn t have anything to help them. It s a very helpless feeling. Milligan Yeah, what do you do about that? McConnell There s nothing you can. Tell them to try to go to a medical center, but most of them can t get any kind of transportation to get anywhere. Nobody owns cars. They re lucky if they own a bike. It s a big deal to have a bike. Milligan So that was your second trip? McConnell The second one. Milligan Did you keep going? McConnell I did. One of my mentors from Tulsa is very, very involved in missionary work. He s every week somewhere in a different country, and he got set up with Pros for Africa, which is based out of Oklahoma. They were taking a group of medical students and physicians over. Milligan What s it called? McConnell Pros for Africa. Milligan P-R-O? McConnell Yes. Milligan Okay, like professionals ? 35 McConnell Yes. Milligan Okay. (Laughs) McConnell It was actually set up by a couple of OU football players. They had teamed up with a lady by the name of Sister Rosemary Nyirumbe . She s done a lot of talks here in Oklahoma and has a book. She was even named one of Time s Fifty Most Influential People. I believe it was last year. She has a school over in Uganda. She takes on women that have been displaced by the Lord s Resistance Army, or the LRAs, that came through Uganda, terrorized a lot of the villages. A lot of the women got raped and had children out of wedlock. It s very frowned upon over there, and so most of them couldn t go home to their families. She took all these women in, took on their babies and their children, and taught them all a trade so that they could support themselves. She would teach them to sew or to do things, clerical things, and gave them a new life. When Pros for Africa got teamed up with her, they decided to make this big trip. Feed the Children went, and the Starkey Hearing Aid Foundation went. That s why my mentor called me is because the hearing foundation was going to be there. He was like, Hey, do you want to come? I m like, Yeah What do I have to do to make this happen? I ended up going to Uganda for ten days. The fun part with that one was ten NFL players also went with us because of the Pros for Africa connections. Adrian Peterson was one of the guys that helped set it up in the beginning. He may be one of the few ones that s still playing that went on the trip. So we had these back then at least, they were all, most of them were still playing. Getting to go to Africa with those guys was a whole different experience, a much different kind of trip than the first time we went to Africa. We definitely had Wi-Fi in our hotels; we had swimming pools; we had power. We had Uganda CIA that escorted us to everywhere we went because they weren t going to let these famous athletes have problems or be attacked in their country. We definitely had very, very high security everywhere we went. Milligan Were they recognized as celebrities even in Uganda? McConnell Yeah, a lot of them knew they were coming, so they had researched a lot of them. They d be like, Which one s Superman, or Which one s this? They d come up and ask you because they didn t know who was who. Definitely their builds and their size, they definitely stood out over there. You definitely knew they were something because they didn t really fit in with the typical African stature over there. Milligan Were they, all these football players, were they all African American? 36 McConnell Yeah. There was one lineman guy that went with us that was probably three hundred pounds and six ten, I mean, just towered over everybody that was there, a force to be reckoned with. He was one of the linemen with Adrian Peterson, and he was a Minnesota Viking. Since Adrian was coming, he came with him. It was a really cool experience, and then . Milligan Did you get to know them at all? McConnell We got to hang out with quite a few of them. Roy Williams (used to play for the Dallas Cowboys) was there, very, very personable, very, super nice guy. We were Facebook friends afterwards. Contacted him when I came back to Oklahoma. He even signed some pictures that I have framed in some of my exam rooms and stuff for me. He was like, Yeah, sure Come pick them up when you want to, and I d be more than happy to. They were a good group of guys to hang out with and have fun with. The Starkey Hearing Aid Foundation part of it was really, really cool. I don t know if you ve ever seen any of their videos on Facebook or anything, but putting hearing aids on somebody that hasn t really ever heard before, hasn t heard in years is a really cool thing to be part of and to get to witness. I saw some really cool videos of Adrian putting hearing aids on kids and stuff, and getting them set up with them, and dancing with them and stuff afterwards. They always like to play music for them after so they can hear some kind of sound. Didn t always speak the same languages, but music s kind of universal. It was just . Milligan That s pretty amazing. Those are, the videos you re talking about, are usually, like, where it s a child has a device put in their ear where they get to hear their parents voice or something for the first time McConnell Yes Milligan and there s always tears at the end McConnell There is There s tears They don t know language because they haven t ever been able to hear, so they can t always tell what you re saying. They usually just sit over there, and once they have it on, they ll just sit over there and be like, Ba, ba, ba, any kind of noise they can make that they can hear. They ll sit over there forever and just be mumbling to themselves because they can hear it. They re over there, smiling away. It s pretty life-changing. Milligan That was your job while you were there for ten days, is you were basically. McConnell I treated the ear infections. When they would be trying to fit people for hearing aids and they either had wax or really bad infections, they d send 37 them over and let me get them cleaned out or get them on some drops and stuff. I would definitely snake back over and try to be as much a part of that as I could because it was just so, so cool to watch. Milligan That s cool. How many people went on that? It sounds like a big entourage. McConnell It was a big entourage for that one. We had attorneys; we had physicians; we had medical students. There were the athletes, and they brought their own entourages. There was probably fifty of us or so, I would think. Milligan When was this, maybe while you were at Saint Louis? McConnell It was, either 2011 or 2012. I d have to clarify dates for you. Milligan Oh, no, that s fine. That s what I was kind of asking. It was . McConnell Yeah, I was a second-year resident, I believe, when I went. Milligan Good enough. Wow, that s a huge deal. McConnell Yeah. Milligan That s a big production. So ten days your travel just kept getting longer and longer. McConnell Yeah. Milligan Is that the last, sort of, mission trip you got McConnell That s the last one I ve been able to go on. Trying to take off during residency was never easy. I got invited to go the next year, but I couldn t. Again, when you re in those smaller residency programs, you can t really jump ship, so I wasn t able to go. Milligan How did you make it happen the first time? McConnell I actually took my own vacation for it. That s what it ended up counting as. I got it cleared that I could be on vacation during those days, and they let me go. Milligan I m sure, worth it. McConnell Yes Milligan Well, so I hear you see the value in that, obviously. I mean, it s life changing to be in any of those experiences. Also, before we got started recording, you 38 also talked about some of the experiences you had opportunities to do some of those more rural clinic areas in Oklahoma, as well, it sounds like. McConnell Yeah. Milligan Maybe talk a little bit about some of that outreach within state. McConnell Yeah. The rural cities were definitely a whole different, different experience, again, just seeing people from different poverty levels and different things. How people respond to certain medical conditions and diagnoses, also, is very, very different. There was a lot of chronic pain patients and things of that nature that we saw a lot. I feel like we saw more of it when we were out in the rural parts of the state. Spent two months, even, in the Indian health care system in Tahlequah. I got to even see some of the things from that side of the health care system. We even did, definitely did outreach when we were in Tulsa, even. There s a John 3:16 mission bus mobile clinic that would go around town. Definitely spent a couple Saturdays on those. They even have a Bedlam clinic. I don t know if it s still running in Tulsa or not, but it would be the OU and OSU residents would get together and have a free clinic in the evenings, treating. Even the big cities, there s plenty of underprivileged or under-covered people in America that can t get access to health care. It is everywhere, unfortunately. Milligan Is that a built-in thing for medical school, or is that something you do as an elective? McConnell You do them as an elective. It s on your own time. If you want to spend some time on the weekends or after hours of things, there s plenty of opportunities and needs that those clinics have. It s definitely a volunteer situation. Milligan Is it something that is, that a lot of students take advantage of? McConnell I think there s a certain number that do. There s always a handful that don t. I always feel like I got more out of it, probably, than the patients did. It was always something that I tried to do. Definitely keeps things in perspective and make you look at your own life and revaluate things in your own life. I tried to every chance I could. Milligan Well, we re getting close to the end of your time. There are a million other things I know I could ask you about, especially some of these travel points, and I know there s a million other things you can say. I think we ll rein it in. Anything you want to part with, specifically whether it s about, sort of, restarting this next stage of your career back in Oklahoma, or where you see, where you, kind of, hope to be in the future? 39 McConnell I was super excited that I had the opportunity to come back. I get to even being in Yukon, it s a big enough city, but everywhere I still go, people know me. People recognize me. It s fun to see a lot of people that I went to high school with and take care of their kids and their family members. I ultimately would like to be able to raise a family in Oklahoma and have my parents get to be part of that, moving forward. I feel like it s a great state. I feel like things are definitely moving and changing. The whole downtown area and everything is becoming revitalized. I think the state s done a lot to try to recruit younger positions and things. Company-wise, it s a growing market. Oklahoma is not quite what you used to think of it. The Thunder and things have done some wonderful things for the city and the state. I just can t imagine being anywhere else. This is home. It will forever be home, and it s good to be back. Milligan Well, we re glad to have you back. I wish you lived closer to me. McConnell Yeah. (Laughter) Milligan All right, well, we re going to go ahead and turn it off, but if there s anything else that . McConnell Not particularly. Like I said, I could tell stories all day. ------- -------..