 Baeza The following interview is being conducted with Ms. Angela Vivar Romero for the Latino Americans: 500 Years of History grant project at Oklahoma State University. The interview will become part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Edmon Low Library on the Stillwater campus of Oklahoma State University. The interview is taking place on Friday, June 17, 2016, in the Edmon Low Library in Stillwater, Oklahoma. The interviewer is Victor Dominguez Baeza, Director of Library Graduate Services. Thank you for agreeing to participate in this oral history project, Ms. Vivar Romero. I want to remind you that this may be published as part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University in Stillwater, Oklahoma, and that you have granted us permission to publish the transcript and video in part or in its entirety. Vivar Romero Yes, that s fine. Baeza Well, hello. Vivar Romero Hi Hi, Victor. Baeza To start, can you tell me a little bit about yourself? Vivar Romero My name is Angela Vivar Romero, and I work here at Oklahoma State University. I coordinate a program for students who are the first in their family to go to college. It s called the RISE Program. I also manage diversity academic support, which is one of the departments here at OSU. I am a daughter of Mexican immigrants from Veracruz, Mexico, and I was born here in the United States. As a matter of fact, I was born in Stillwater, in this town. Baeza Thanks. You were born in Stillwater? Vivar Romero I was born in Stillwater. 5 Baeza Have you lived any place else? Vivar Romero I have lived in Tulsa. I lived in Tulsa for a couple of years and worked with inner-city youth, helping them get to college. It was mainly Hispanic youth. It was a program called Conexiones. Besides that, I had an internship in Houston for a summer, and I lived in Chihuahua, Mexico, for a summer also. Baeza Tell me something about your parents. Vivar Romero My parents? Like I said, my parents are from Mexico. My dad came here when he was younger, before he became a teenager to help his family in Wisconsin. They came to work up in, I believe, it was around Fond du Lac or Cedar, Wisconsin. My mom came afterwards. She came in her early twenties to join my dad. They met in Mexico, when he had gone down there to live there for a while, and he brought her back essentially. They re from southern Mexico. Baeza Do you know exactly how they met? Vivar Romero My dad lived in Wisconsin, like I was saying, and I believe that he decided to go back to Mexico for a couple of years. While he was back in Mexico, he met my mom. They happened to be from the same hometown. I believe that my mom knew of his family growing up. They knew who the Vivar family was, but they never met each other. Then I think they met on a bus. (Laughs) My dad was actually driving a bus because that s the transportation system that they use a lot in Orizaba Mexico . My mom would go into the bus, take her bus home every day, and he was the driver. I think he started liking her, and he would set out a jacket behind his seat and save her seat for her. From there, I think he asked her out, and they had tacos or something. They just decided to get married. They got married in Mexico, and my dad came here to the US. My mom wasn t able to join him for about a year or something like that. Baeza Do you have any siblings? Vivar Romero I have a brother, he s a year older than me. His name is Ryan, and he works in Oklahoma City. He has his own physical fitness studio that he runs. Baeza What was it like growing up in Stillwater? Vivar Romero Okay, so I was born in Stillwater. I lived in town on Fourteenth and Chester for about until I was about four years old. I remember my mom not knowing how to drive yet, so we walked everywhere. Every day, she would take us to this little daycare center around town, and we learned how to 6 make little crafts, and butterflies, and little random objects that I remember, but she would walk us everywhere. We d go to downtown. We d got to this store called Catz that used to be open here, and a grocery store called King s. We played a lot in the house, but when I was four, I guess my dad found a house north of town, close to Morrison, but not quite in Morrison. We moved there when I was four, my brother was five, and he started kindergarten at Morrison. We re about a block into Noble County. I grew up in a rural school system, so I didn t actually go to any Stillwater public schools. I went to Morrison public schools. My upbringing there I think it would ve been very different had I gone to Stillwater High School, but because I grew up in a rural town, I saw cows and farm animals. All the students were in FFA. I think I was really confused because I was living, very much, a bicultural lifestyle. At home, it was like you were walking into Mexico in your house, but then you stepped out of your house, and it s white Anglo-America. That s who my friends were, but I couldn t quite adjust to them. I didn t know what cottage cheese was because we wouldn t eat that. We didn t eat orange cheese. I didn t know what a fruit roll-up was, a corndog, so I slowly had to learn what they were doing. What a sleepover was, my parents had never heard of a sleepover. There s a lot of things about college or playing sports in school that it just doesn t happen that way in Mexico, the way that they grew up. They were learning with me, and it was tough sometimes, trying to explain to them what the heck is cheerleading, and why do you have to wear a skirt to cheerleading. Why would you stay afterschool and spend your money on a uniform, and we have to save gas money . (Laughs) It was school for both of us, I think. Growing up in Stillwater and Morrison, it was living two different lives. I don t think anyone realized that from my school. They just thought, well . I kept it to myself, though I was like, What is that? What is a breakfast burrito? I ve never had a burrito. We don t eat burritos where my family s from. (Laughs) It was different, and my mom actually has worked at Oklahoma State University, so I would go to the cafeteria and meet her there after work. We d go pick her up because she wasn t able to drive yet. I would see a lot of international students sometimes, and I would eat different foods. Sometimes in the evening, they d invite us, and I just saw a lot of the world at OSU. I m fortunate to have had that experience growing up. Baeza In Morrison, were there any other Hispanic students there? Vivar Romero No. (Laughs) It was my brother and myself. I don t remember there maybe I think maybe another couple a brother and a sister came in later, when I was about to graduate, I believe, but I never really saw them. We were about 7 the only minorities. There was a Native American student younger than me, and once we had an African American student. In terms of Hispanics, it was just us, so it was a lonely world. Baeza What do you mean by it was a lonely world? Vivar Romero You re literally bringing the traditions and the culture of a whole other country, a whole other lifestyle, a system, economically, socially. In terms of education, it s like you re living in this world, and you have to explain to the rest of the world why it s so different for you to be around them. I was very quiet, so I kept it to myself. I was living in this internal confusion a lot of times. (Laughs) I did have my small group of friends growing up, but never did I realize that I needed that support. I just knew I needed support, but I didn t know I needed it from people who look like me, who came from similar backgrounds, until I came to Oklahoma State University, and I joined the Hispanic Student Association. That s where I really found out like what it means to finally exhale, and not have to explain myself, like, Oh, you don t know how to use a dishwasher either, or like, Oh, your mom packs your lunch every single week, and she s worried that you re not going to eat. She packs your taco meat, and xico mole, and your mole, and your guisados, and her biggest concern is that you re not going to eat. You have a curfew too. It s this strict upbringing that a lot of, especially Mexican parents, have with their children that I never had to explain that anymore around these people because it was like, You get it. We get it, we just got each other. I found something I never knew that I needed so badly. Baeza Do you remember there being a Hispanic community in Stillwater, or in the area, when you were growing up? Vivar Romero I ve actually been a part of St. John s and St. Francis, our Catholic communities here in Stillwater, since I was a baby. It didn t start until I was in early elementary school. They would have a monthly Spanish Mass at St. John s Catholic Parish, the student parish over here. We would have Mass every month, and that was our community, and so we started meeting a lot of students. My mom would connect with a lot of students, who were actually about her age because they were grad students and doctoral students. I met their kids, and so I d become friend with them. That was our community, and then I think the population started getting bigger. That s when we started having weekly masses at St. Francis, so we had a weekly Spanish Mass. I think that s where the bulk of the Hispanic community in Stillwater is, we ve met through the church. Then through there, people have their own groups, which is actually cool to say because before we didn t have the luxury of having different groups. It 8 was just the few families that were here. I can easily say that we were one of the very first few families that were here, probably in the 80s and the 90s. Then there was an influx of more immigrants that came in about that time later on. That s what our community is based around. I think the church and now there s other churches, but also different countries. Definitely like the Venezuelan community, and Puerto Rican people hang out with the Venezuelans and Columbians. We all get along, it s just different, and we relate to each other. Yes, that s how our communities function. They started off in the church, I think, more here in Stillwater. Baeza From the kids that you were hanging out with back then, are any of those still around? Vivar Romero No, because it s funny when you live in a college town, and you actually grew up here. It s like there s this revolving door going around you, everybody leaves. Everybody comes for a purpose, they come to get their education, but they end up somewhere else. You, as a resident of Stillwater, Oklahoma, you stay here, and you see people come and go. That even happens now that I work in education. I receive my students every year, my cohort. They keep getting older and older, and eventually they graduate. That revolving door pushes them out, and more come in. I feel like my at least my mom and I, because we ve been so connected to the university and working here. We ve been like the pillar, or a stable body for them, because they know a lot of Hispanic people here do know that we re from here. I remember one of the first Hispanic Student Association cookouts happened at my house, and it really helped. My mom would help with those events, and even before I was in college, she would help. I think they know that we re people here that are familiar with the territory, and that can assist, and be that pillar with the revolving door, constantly spinning students out. That s who we ve been here. That s our identity, I guess, here is helping. Baeza Have you always thought, when you were younger, did you always think you were going to college? Vivar Romero Yes, I remember telling my mom I wanted to be a veterinarian. It was because I liked animals, right, because most of my students say, I like animals I want to be a veterinarian, and I m like, There s so much more to it. Then I saw my dad. My dad had back surgery, and he got stitches. I remember seeing all the stitches up his back, and being like, I do not want to be a veterinarian, because you have to stitch little animals up. (Laughs) I decided against that. I remember when I would tell my mom that I wanted to do this, or live this big dream, she d be like, Yes. mija. Adelante. This is what you re going to do. She never stopped me from dreaming about having an education, and neither did my dad. 9 They always pushed for that. The funny thing is years later, my mom told me, she said when I would tell her that I wanted to go to college, it would scare her to death because she was like, How am I supposed to pay for this? I don t have any money. Being first-generation, you don t know that there s financial aid out there, you don t know . You might work on a college campus, but what does all of this mean, educationally, that s happening around me. I know that I really would freak her out a lot whenever I d talk about college, but she never stopped me from dreaming and talking about it. Baeza When did you at what point did you decide you were going to come to OSU? Vivar Romero I actually because of that experience I had in high school, where I just couldn t find my place, and I secretly couldn t relate to anybody, I wanted to leave. I really wanted to go. I actually convinced my mom to go to San Antonio on a to go visit the UTSA University of Texas at San Antonio campus because I started looking into colleges, and I wanted to go there. Then I realized how expensive it was to go out-of-state, (Laughs) and I already had Oklahoma s Promise. I still tried to avoid OSU, so I was like, I am not going there. I remember an admissions counselor going to Morrison High School, and talking to us about college. I was the nicest kid, but I grabbed that application, and out the door, I threw it away in the trashcan. Before I stepped outside, I was like, I will never go there. I applied to UCO, University of Central Oklahoma in Edmond, and I got in. I was ready to go there with two of my friends. One friend, we were already looking for housing, and we went to tour the campus, and we missed our tour. Anyway, one friend calls me, and he s like, I fell in love with a girl in in Tonkawa, and I m going to go to NOC instead, and some other school in northern Oklahoma. I can t go to UCO with you. I was like, What? Are you kidding me, and I was like, Well, at least I still have my friend Emelia, so I ll go with Emelia, and we ll live together. Emelia, all of the sudden, decides she doesn t want to go to college. (Laughs) I was like, I really don t . First of all, I don t even know what it means to be in college, and I didn t want to feel isolated again. At that point, I decided that day, I m going OSU. (Laughs) I think the next day or even the same day, I m not sure when it happened, I walked up over to admissions, and I spoke to this really nice gentleman. I think he s still there. I see him sometimes, but I never quite ask him what his name is, blond hair and glasses. He asked me to step into his office. He looked at my grades, looked at my ACT scores, and he said, You re in. Do you need aid? I was like, Yes, and it was past the deadline. The deadline is in February. I missed it, it was already like July or August, and he gave me a 10 scholarship to go to OSU, and it started there. It was probably the best decision I could have ever made. Baeza If I may ask, how did you pay for college? Vivar Romero Maria Diaz I think that my mom met Maria Diaz (she s a financial aid counselor here at OSU) through the cafeteria, or through somehow the Latinos on OSU s campus that knew my mom. She helped us fill out the FAFSA. I remember the first FAFSA I did was my mom and her, and I was involved somehow, but she helped us. I received the full Pell Grant, thank god, because I don t know how I could ve done it without the federal aid that I received. I received OLAP, which paid for my tuition, Oklahoma s Promise, OTAG Oklahoma Tuition Aid Grant Program , and SEOG Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant because we were a family in need. A part from that, I had scholarships that I had applied for. One of them was a Horatio Alger Scholarship for students who have overcome a lot of challenges and barriers. I had a couple of others, and throughout college, I would earn other scholarships through the Multicultural Student Center. I don t think that I ever had to pay for anything because I was fortunate enough to do that, and I worked a lot. It took care of all that. Baeza You worked a lot? Vivar Romero I worked a lot. (Laughs) I started working when I was thirteen. I would work at the snow cone stand and plant nursery. I remember watering plants, but mostly being in the snow cone stand, and taking care of that. I believe I was fifteen and a half when I started working at Stillwater Food Outlet, which is now where Hobby Lobby is, but it was our grocery like a Food Pyramid, but cheaper prices. Sorry, Food Pyramid (Laughs) I was a cashier there, and the next year, I was promoted to be a clerk, so I would count all the tills and cash checks. I remember the college girls being upset because I was in high school, telling them what to do, but I worked hard. My mom taught me how to work hard, and I think that stood out. Then I started working at El Vaquero Mexican restaurant. It s owned by a family here in town, and I worked there for a little over a year. Then I transitioned to Golden Dragon Caf under Jennie Hong, and she owned that at the time. I worked there for about four years total. I worked at the BSR, which I would do surveys over the phone here on campus. I worked for institutional diversity. I usually had multiple jobs going on at the same time. I always knew what it was like to have some cash on me because I waited a lot of tables in college, and cleaned a lot of messes in restaurants, and just a lot of work. Baeza You said you started working when you were thirteen, and have you ever stopped working? 11 Vivar Romero I ve never stopped working. I don t know that I was necessarily under...paying taxes when I was thirteen. I know when I was fifteen and a half, I counted the other, a couple of years ago, how long I ve been in the social security system. I was like, Wow, and now I m thirty, so when you count it, I ve been in social security system about fifteen years. Hopefully, I get to retire a little bit earlier, (Laughs) so I ve been doing my taxes for a long time. Baeza When you first started, what was the process once you got admitted to OSU? When did you register, and all that sort of things that your family didn t have a history with, how did you get through all of that process? Vivar Romero Somebody had to have held my hand through that. I m not exactly positive. It s a blur because I remember showing up to Alpha Week, which is what is now Welcome Week with the orientation office here. I was alone, and I was lost, just like a lot of other students. They experience that time were, Is this the place for me? My roommate s never here. She s always with her boyfriend. I was very alone. In terms of registering and getting ready for school, I don t remember much. I remember having to ask I remember maybe my advisor answering some questions for me, but there was not a program for first-generation students the way there is now, which I coordinate. Thankfully, there is something now, but at the time, I think I was just asking whoever I could to just try to get by. Honestly, there was a lot that I didn t find out before I came. I didn t even know how to use a computer really efficiently. I didn t know how to use Microsoft Word very well. We didn t have a computer until later, when I was about seventeen or eighteen years old. Even then, you re not there to use Microsoft Word. I had a lot of trouble writing papers, but one gentleman that I remember through the Hispanic Student Association, John Guyette. He was a Cuban-American student, and he was studying political science. During Welcome Week, something that would catch my attention were the multicultural events. There was one multicultural event at the time, and so it said, Meet all the multicultural organizations I was like, I think I m multicultural I remember going to a fair, where they re giving out information, and John Guyette was there. He looks at me, and he said, You are our next Miss Hispanic OSU. I was like, Okay? I don t know who you are, but sounds good. I was really excited, so he started pulling me. Now that I think of it, I think John helped me through a lot because he helped me join the Hispanic Student Association. I never missed a meeting. In four years, I think I missed one due to a test, but that s what helped me. I think he s someone that, now that I think of it, stands out as a person who helped me. Even one night, I had to write a paper, and I didn t know where to find a computer on 12 campus or a computer lab. I didn t step foot in the Library the first two years at school because I didn t know what it was for. I didn t know what to do. I think I did for a comp class actually. John let me use his laptop at his house, and a year later, I found out there was a twenty-four-hour computer lab at Math Sciences. I think the Hispanic Student Association, him, and a young woman named Lilia helped me a lot, and I m still connected to them. Lilia is one of my best friends. Baeza What year did you start at OSU? Vivar Romero Two thousand four and I graduated in 2008. Baeza Was the Hispanic Student Association, HSA, first group you got involved with on campus? Vivar Romero Absolutely. I remember just seeing the word Hispanic, and I was like, Yes I finally get to see people who look like me In my mind, I remember walking there. I had a blue shirt on, and these blue shorts, and flip-flops, and I was like, This is going to be the best day ever I finally get to meet Hispanic people my age. I pictured walking into this room that would be a hundred and something Hispanic people. I m skipping along all happy, walking by PIO, and I cross Monroe, I go to the Student Union, I go look for the room, and there s a room with seven people in there. (Laughs) I was like, What? (Laughs) They were really nice to me, and I kept going back, and it s not what I expected, but that s what we had at the time. We had a very small Hispanic student population. With time, I eventually became a leader in that organization, and we grew. Baeza When you were a freshman and you were involved in HSA, you remember faculty and staff participating along with HSA? Vivar Romero Yes, people that stand out are (maybe not my freshman year, but he came later) Dr. Figueroa, Maria Diaz, Victor Baeza, you. (Laughs) I don t want to discount anybody. There was a man that would help us, and he had black hair. (Laughs) I think his name was Carri, or . I forget. He was from New Mexico also, but I don t remember his name, but I know he cared about us. Somebody who was leaving at the time was I think her name was Eliza, but she was an advisor. Then when I was leaving OSU, Brenda Morales came in, and she became the advisor as I was transitioning out. Baeza With the Hispanic Student Association, you mentioned actually becoming a leader. What positions did you take? Vivar Romero My freshman year, I was historian, and my sophomore year, I became vice president. Then my junior and senior years, I was president, and I was also Miss Hispanic OSU, and so it was my life. Promoting the Hispanic 13 community and getting word out about who we actually are, and that we do care about our community, and we have positive contributions to make was very important to me. At the cost of my grades, I think, and different opportunities I did miss because of that, I really dedicated myself to that organization and considered it to be very much a part in my heart. I don t regret it at all because I learned a lot about leadership, what to do, what not to do, how to put on events, how to organize things, how to work with people. It really is what held me down when I was in college. Baeza You mentioned that when you went as a freshman, there were seven people in the room when you were expecting a hundred. How did that change throughout the years? Vivar Romero It s changed tremendously. At that time, I think there was about 250 Hispanic students, about. I think the number was like 242, and that was in 2004. Now, it s 2015, and there s about twelve hundred Hispanic students. That s an extra thousand students walking around here, who do look like you, and have a similar background and culture. What was your question? Baeza For HAS, you had seven people in the group when you first walked into the room. How did that change, say your sophomore year, junior year, senior year? What did the numbers look like? Vivar Romero My freshman year, the Hispanic population was about 222, but I 222, not forty-two. I think that they still counted like OSU-OKC and Tulsa students. Actually on campus, I don t think that there were two-hundred-and-something of us because we would find them. I remember getting on Facebook, and looking up every single Hispanic last name I could find, and they would tell you what school they went to. I d look up Garcia, Ruiz, Guansales, Escovelo, anything I could, and I would invite them to HSA. That s how more people would start coming. I would pester them, I would text them, Hey, let s hang out That s why I think I m really good at retention is because it s just constantly building relationships with people, and knowing that that s what they need to stay and to be in an organization. I think that helped to grow us, along with everybody else that was working with Hispanic Student Association and our advisors. Two hundred and twenty-two, and then it slowly started growing. What I do know is that by the time I graduated my senior year, there was about 440 or 420 Hispanic students. It doubled and the Hispanic Student Association, I remember our last meeting there was about thirty-five to forty people present. The very last meeting my senior year, so it had grown. To us, that was huge because first of all, not everybody wants to join an organization or a Hispanic organization. We built a family, and that s what HSA has been since before I came, and what it is now. It s a huge family. Now that I work here, and I co-advise the organization, that part of it hasn t changed. It s 14 really beautiful to see because you truly find people who have a similar upbringing, and who have those life experiences that you do, and that s very important, very necessary. A lot of people will say, Well, you don t . What does it matter? We re all the same, but we re not the same. We need support, and that s what the Hispanic Student Association has been here at OSU. Baeza You also mentioned first being told when you were a freshman that you were going to be the next Miss Hispanic at OSU. When did that actually occur? Vivar Romero My freshman year. (Laughs) I competed against a few other girls, and I was just that quiet little bullet in the background, and I just came out that night. Apparently, they liked me, and I became Miss Hispanic OSU and served for a year. Baeza Did your mother go to the pageant? Vivar Romero Oh, yes. I think she passed out. I m pretty sure she passed out when I won, and so she took all the attention off of me. (Laughs) All of the sudden, I see this crowd, and everybody s like, Oh, and they look over, and I was like, What? What just happened? I didn t know that my poor mother had passed out out of excitement for me and for the win. Baeza What was that like? Vivar Romero Winning? (Laughs) Baeza Sure, the pageant and then winning. Vivar Romero The pageant first of all, I m not the type that . Now I wear high heels, but at the time, I was like, What am I doing? I can t even walk. I remember Dr. Figueroa being our advisor, and he lived in Parker Hall, which is where I lived part of my freshman year. I would go down to his room, and I d pester him at night, and be like, Can you help me learn how to walk? Can you just watch me walk, and he d help me. The whole process was I learned how important it is to be able to communicate with people, and to really show that you re passionate about a certain subject, and mine was education, Latino students becoming leaders and becoming educated. It s funny how that still rings true in my life. Some things never change, and that s what I m working on. The whole process has been interesting, and now the process led to me helping train the girls for the Miss Hispanic OSU Pageant, which is now called the Miss Hispanic-Latina OSU Pageant to be more inclusive. Though honestly, we can stick with Hispanic or we can stick with Latina, but I think either one of them would be fine, so now I help train those girls. My goal is 15 never for them to learn how to walk, or how to have great posture, take good pictures. The goal is for them to become good public speakers, to learn how to communicate their ideas, and to be confident, and value themselves and their culture. I think that that s the number one goal, and it s great to see that they actually do that. That lead to another title, the (Laughs) Baeza Which is? Vivar Romero which is Miss Oklahoma Latina 2014. Baeza We ll get back to that. What kind of programming did HSA put on during the course of the years? Vivar Romero The Hispanic Student Association, we hosted Hispanic Heritage Month and Hispanic Awareness Week. Throughout Hispanic Heritage Month, what we established during my time there is that every week, we would have a different even that covered one facet of Latino culture or Latino living. We would cover education one week, and we might have a public speaker come in. We would cover the culture or the fun part, and we would have Latin Dance and Cultural Club come in. Through that, every week we would build partnerships with different organizations, and so it wasn t just us. The goal was never for it to just be Hispanic students. We would try to incorporate as many other organizations and affiliates as possible. I remember another goal that I had, and that we did really well on, was bringing the community in. It was very important that we let our community, the people who did not have the opportunity to go to a university, to know that there is a group of students here that cares about them, and that hopes that their kids will go to a university, or even them. It was great because I had that tie. The good thing here is that I have the tie to Stillwater, and so I would invite people from my church and the community to our events. We established a lot of cool a lot of really great events that you still see students doing today. We started, what is it, the HSA Welcome Back Cookout. I remember having that, and it was little turnout, and it was fun, and we had all our friends there. Now the Hispanic Student Association still does that. We would have Hispanic Heritage Month, and I remember making a list. Everybody was like, Why are you making a list and just posting it? Nobody does that. You need to make it look different. I said, No, we just need to have a list with, This is what Hispanic heritage month is. On this date we do this, this, this, and this. Now, a lot of the other organizations have their own heritage month, even though it s not official. It looks very similar to what we started with our heritage month, and they cover different topics. Then with our awareness week also, we would do something different every single day, whether it was a social, a game night, bringing in a speaker, having a panel, watching a movie that talks about our community, Voces 16 Inocentes, which covers the Central American War that was happening at the time, or Freedom Writers. Now, you see the same thing. They have this poster that looks very similar to the one that we created, and it s really cool because you see a legacy. The cookouts also, end of the year cookout, this used to not happen. We had that cookout at my house, and from there, we started having it at Boomer Lake. You never saw other organizations having cookouts at the end of the year like that. Then you see other organizations start to do that. Now, you see the Office of Multicultural Affairs, and they have all their student groups: Asian-American, Native American, Vietnamese-American. They have very similar events to what we started at the time. I keep quiet, and I m like, That came from somewhere, and that secretly makes me happy that it meant that much to keep it around. Baeza What were you the most proud of during those four years? Vivar Romero I hope that with HAS, we gave people a sense of belonging because growing up in a community, where you don t look like everybody, they re like, Oh, it s not a big deal, just blend in. It s not that easy, (Laughs) when your whole world is different, and you re bringing it into someone else s world. What I hope, and what I think that we did, was that we gave a home to a lot of students, who may have gone back to their own homes, or may have had a very lonely experience here at OSU. I love that because I still consider those people to be a part of my family. Apart from events, I think what really matters is that we all had that connection to each other. Baeza That was the positive side. Was there a negative memory that you have from your years at OSU? Vivar Romero Trying to think . There s a couple. I remember when HB, House Bill 1804, was being introduced, in about 2006, 2007. That is a bill that made it a lot easier to deport Hispanic people, who had come here to work hard and to contribute, and so we became a target. I remember at one point, there was a newspaper article, and I was interviewed, and the reporter, unfortunately, chose to use certain words and turn the article a certain direction. The O Colly posts things online, and they post the article online, and I got a lot of backlash for that. There was a lot of negative talk about Hispanic people, and whenever they talked about the House bill, there d be newspaper articles in the O Colly, and in the Stillwater NewsPress, and the Daily Oklahoman. HSA had a cubicle, and I remember going to that cubicle, and just crying and crying. I couldn t get out of that funk for a while because my community was being targeted. There s a lot that can be said on both sides, but when you re the face of the Hispanic community, and you re getting interviewed for these things, and people are changing your words around, or 17 you get hateful emails and comments, that was really hard on me. I think that that s what it was going to take to develop some thick skin for the things that I would end up doing in the future in our community. That was very difficult on me because everyone looks at you, and they want you to have an answer. That was one thing. Then another thing that happened was having an experience with members who came to the Hispanic Student Association. They wanted to change everything around that we had built. They were new to campus and really not learning about us first or trying to understand us. Also bringing in some not-so-positive comments and remarks, and it went beyond that. It did turn ugly, and that also built some thick skin, and that not everyone s going to like you, and not everyone s going to like what you do. People might talk about you, but I ended up winning the election again. I became president, (Laughs) and we took care of that. Thankfully, we had built enough relationships. I had built enough relationships to get into office again, and become president again, and not have to worry as much about that, but that was very difficult. I was about to give up. I was about to throw it in the ring, and say, This is it. I m done with Hispanic Student Association, but I couldn t because I had my community. I learned a lot through that too. I learned more about being a leader and about delegating. Now, I m a delegator, (Laughs) and that s been the most beautiful thing. Life lessons learned in tough situations, but it s all right. It s good now. Baeza As you were preparing to graduate from OSU, what plans, what thoughts were running through your head? Vivar Romero As I was graduating from OSU, all . Nobody could tell me what to major in. I switched my major eleven times. I started with journalism and English no, started with literature. I didn t know any of the books they were talking about the first day, so I snuck away from that class. Then I went to literature, I didn t know how to use a Mac computer and kept switching. In my head, I decided, I want to help people. Something that would reoccur in my mind was I want to help Hispanic kids, who grew up like I did. That one in the system that nobody ever thought, Hey, let s go find her, and help her, and give her opportunities that maybe other Hispanic students have in an area where it s more populated with Hispanic kids. I said, I want to go to those little rural schools, and pick out those kids, and help them, and let them know it s going to be okay. There are people like you, and you will be able to find people to relate to. Just hang in there. I ended up majoring in liberal studies because I d taken so many history classes, and so many philosophy classes, and Spanish literature that it just combined into my thesis. It was the Cesar Chavez movement, the United 18 Farm Workers Movement, that I did my thesis on and focused on in my undergrad. That was great, but I still didn t know who to be or what to do. I had that vision in my head of helping kids. Another strange thing that was in my head was every time somebody asked me, What do you want to do? I envisioned a school with blue walls and blue lockers or white walls and blue lockers, these two double doors. A couple of months after I graduated, a person named Sara Mata connected me to a social worker in Tulsa, and said, Hey, do want to be , because I hadn t found a job. It d been a couple of months, and I was like, Where should I work? I just keep working at this restaurant, and making my cash every day, but I need a real I need a job that has to do with what I studied. I had the interview with a lady that Sara connected me to, Tyreene, and she lives in Tulsa. She said, Yes, you d be good for this behavioral case management, but I think you d be better for a different position we have. She goes and she finds out about that position through Talia Shawl in Tulsa, and she was with the Community Service Council of Greater Tulsa at the time. It was a program called Conexiones, and that was a program that existed to serve Hispanic students from pre-K through twelfth grade, all through the pipeline into college. They had a position open for somebody to work in the high schools, and in particular, Will Rogers High School in Tulsa. That s where I ended up working. They hired me, and they said, This is an inner-city school. It houses students who are very, very high-risk. Unfortunately, not a lot of their kids graduated or went to college. My job was to create programming for them, and I did. I used my resources here on campus, and I would bring them to OSU. All these Tulsa kids, I d bus them over here, and I d show them what it meant to come to college and to be here. I taught them a lot of things. What s funny is that picture I was talking out, that white walls, blue lockers, and the double doors was exactly where my office was located. That vision became a reality in working at Rogers High School. That has been the best, most rewarding job I think I ve ever had. Baeza How long were you there? Vivar Romero I was there for a couple of years, a little under two years. Baeza What was the most satisfying part of that? Vivar Romero I worked with kids, who lived in central and north Tulsa. I feel like I discovered my culture even more because they re completely immersed in their culture over there. The school was about 36 percent Hispanic, about 35 percent African American, the rest were white (I think there was one Asian student) and Native American. I learned so much about myself, and I learned about . I had had my experience in human suffering, but the 19 amount of human suffering that exists in the school systems, in every student sexual abuse, physical abuse, bad relationships happening at home, a lot of really heavy, heavy stuff. I was twenty-three years old, and I was hearing stories every single day. My students would come to me. One student came to me in handcuffs. The police were right behind him, and he said, Ms. Angela, will you help me? I m like, Yes, of course. My kids I love them very much. When they would get into trouble, they would say, Where s Ms. Angela? It s not that I bailed them out, it s that I heard them out. I think that s where I learned to really listen to people, and not give them a solution to their own life, but just listen. I think that that s carried me through into what I m doing now, is hearing peoples stories, and really knowing that there s a lot of work to be done. My eyes were opened to the work that needs to be done. Baeza Before we go much further into that, so what year was this or which two years were these? Vivar Romero Two thousand nine and 2010. Baeza When were you the pageant winner? Vivar Romero For Miss Oklahoma Latina? Two thousand fourteen. Baeza Okay, so we re getting there. (Laughter) After those two years in Tulsa, what did you do next? Vivar Romero After those two years in Tulsa, by the end of all that had happened there, I decided that . We were switching leadership and management. My leadership style matched more with the person who was there before, and so with the new leadership style, I couldn t do it anymore. I decided to leave and pursue graduate school. What I ended up actually doing was becoming a teacher at Morrison High School and teaching Spanish for a while, and helping at a restaurant. I still wanted to keep working and making money on the side, so while I was teaching, I was doing that. That s when, a couple years later, I found an opportunity through OSU, and that was the RISE program, which I was actually a part of in undergrad, but it was different. I was repeating the cycle. Baeza Graduate school, where was that? Vivar Romero I went to UCO, University of Central Oklahoma in Edmond. I believe this was from like 2012 to 2014, so it took me two and a half years. I was working fulltime. Baeza What was the program? 20 Vivar Romero I got a master s in education and school counseling. Baeza You were going to school fulltime as a graduate student, you re working fulltime as a Spanish teacher? Vivar Romero I was a Spanish teacher, and then I started working for the LASSO Center, and I became a success facilitator. Then after that, I became the RISE coordinator. After a few months, I was ready for fulltime, and I wanted to work fulltime, so I worked for Institutional Diversity. Baeza When was that that you came here? Vivar Romero I started working my full-time position here so LASSO started in March of 2012, and then I started working at Institutional Diversity with the Retention Initiative for Student Excellence in June of 2012. Baeza That was also part-time? Vivar Romero No, that was full-time. Baeza That was the first full-time? Vivar Romero Yes, so that was my full-time after this well, teaching was full-time. Then I took some time where I was tired of kids. I was exhausted from hearing all these stories, and I realized that when you work in a place, where people are telling you about how abused they are, how neglected they are, how many cases that you see where it s a school. I m supposed to help you get to college, but we can t get you to college until we take care of these things. You actually need counseling yourself, and so I needed time away. When I got that bug again to work with youth, I was like, Okay, it s time. The position came open with the RISE program, and I knew that was the position that I needed to go into. Baeza Describe the RISE program at OSU for me. Vivar Romero It s the Retention Initiative for Student Excellence, so it s in the name. My job is to retain students. I work with about fifty-five to sixty students every year. They re freshmen or transfers, mainly freshmen, who are the first in their family to go to college, or among the first generation, low-income, and that have overcome challenges. They tend to be students with very diverse backgrounds because that s who we ve had in the past, and they refer the younger kids to be in the program. It s probably about 45 percent Hispanic, 45 percent African American, and then that middle 10 percent is white, Asian, and Native American students that we serve. These students undergo a really vigorous set of requirements, so I ask a lot of them . I want 21 them they must come to the leadership workshops that we have every three weeks. They have to complete ten hours of homework every week in our center, so it can t be randomly somewhere else. They have to do it with us. They have to come meet with me about every three weeks to talk about their plans, and discuss what they want to do. They have to join leadership organizations, volunteer in their community, and attend cultural events, do mock interviews, and meet with career advisors very regularly, and meet with their professors. I do all this, and then at the end of each semester, I give them five hundred dollars, from Phillips 66, that they award us to give to the students. It s not much, but for some reason, they buy in. We create a it s that whole relationship, building a family that keeps them in because other than that, that s a lot of requirements. Baeza You re also providing help. Vivar Romero Oh, yes. We provide help. I think that after the first few weeks, where they re like, Oh my god, I have to be here so much doing my homework, they realize the benefits of it because it s a retention program. That s exactly what we do is that we retain students at very high volumes, and we graduate students at a lot higher rates than average here. Our students become student leaders, they become the convocation speaker, they become the Top Ten Freshmen Men and Women , Seniors of Significance. They do a lot of cool things, and it is for a reason. We put them through some rigorous training. Baeza What was your job title when you first started there? Vivar Romero When I first started here at OSU? Baeza With the RISE Program. Vivar Romero Retention Initiative for Student Excellence Coordinator. Baeza What s your title now? Vivar Romero Manager of Diversity Academic Support, which is the department that RISE is under. I m also still the RISE Coordinator, so I m tired, (Laughs) very tired. Baeza What has that been like, doing those two positions? Vivar Romero It s been tough, but I have learned a lot because part of helping with Diversity Academic Support, I got put on more committees. I was put on the committee for Seniors of Significance, and I really learned what it is that our students don t know how to do. Where we have a population of students 22 here at OSU, who know how to fill out the application, who have family members, who have been awarded these big awards to be recognized for their work at OSU. They have members in their organizations that have been awarded. We don t. The Hispanic-Latino community, African American community, we don t have as many people that have done that because we tend to be more first-generation. Who s going to tell you how to fill out the application? Who s going to tell you that every bit of community service that you do, you have to log? I ve learned that our students, nobody ever told them to report community service, nobody ever told me to report that. I would ve gotten like two orange cords by the time I graduated. Our kids do these things out of the goodness of their heart because they know it s the right thing to do, We re going to go help our community. I m not going to log this. Now, I ve really pushed my students and said, You have to. They say, But why does it matter in the end, and I ll say, Trust me, it s going to matter by the time you re a senior because you will have done just as much work as anybody else here on campus that s considered a leader, but you re not getting any recognition for it. You want that for your own future, and to be able to talk about it during interviews. Just to say as much as everybody else has contributed in places where they have legacy, helping them, Just because you all don t have legacy helping you, or anybody who s done this before, doesn t mean you can t get it. You see more and more students doing it now. I ve learned that because of serving on different communities and also serve on the External Review Committee for Admissions. We see the students who are barely being accepted, who maybe didn t receive the highest ACT score, or who don t qualify that first time to get into OSU. I realize I really need to push, when I go talk to high school students in inner-city or different places that don t have as much access to resources, I really need to push for certain things. That s a really good essay, take rigorous courses all throughout high school, and know how to fill out a really good application, so I ve learned a lot through the extra responsibilities that I ve been given. Baeza It was during this time then that you won the pageant, so what was the pageant again? Vivar Romero Miss Oklahoma Latina. Baeza And this was in . Vivar Romero Twenty fourteen. Baeza So tell us about that. 23 Vivar Romero Miss Oklahoma Latina, it s a pageant system that s existed here for a few years in Oklahoma. It was my last year to qualify. I always secretly wanted to do it, I just never said it. I hear of other people being interested, and it was literally the last year that I could qualify. You can qualify until you re twenty-seven years old. I almost didn t because they were going to have the pageant on April 15 or so of 2014, which meant I was going to be about three weeks too late. Then this is me, I prayed a lot about it. I was like, God, if you want me to do this, please, please, please make a way for me to still be able to compete. I ll use this to honor you. I m going to go talk to kids. I want to do this. The pageant director said, No, you can t do it. It s in late April, so you re not going to qualify by age. He s like, You can compete, but you can t win anything. Okay, why would I do that? He called me back, and he was like, Actually, we can t have the pageant that day because that date was booked. I m going to have to do the pageant March 22, 2014. My birthday s March 24, so by two days, I was able to qualify to do this pageant. It was really interesting because I didn t win that night. The girl, who won I don t know why she ended up quitting, but she left the title. Then something else really strange happened, where the next girl in line she went to nationals, and she won nationals I thought, Okay, so now I m in third place, because I got fourth place that night. I thought, Okay, that means you won nationals. That means you can t have your title anymore, that means it goes to the next girl. I was like, Wait, this means I m runner-up all of the sudden, so the girl, who was in third place from the beginning, she forfeited her title, or she didn t respond to the director. Something happened. I celebrate my half birthday. My half birthday is September 24, so I was like, What am I going to get for myself? What s my gift? On September 24, my gift was I got a call from the director of the pageant, and he said, Do you want to be Miss Oklahoma Latina? I was like, Wait, what happened? I d been following on social media, (Laughs) and he told me. I was like, Yes, and I ended up doing it. I was like, I m not giving up this. All these other girls gave up their title. I am not giving up my title. I won it, and I ended up going to probably twenty-five to thirty different schools throughout the year, maybe more, and presenting to kids from K-12, and teaching them what does college mean, what is self-esteem, what is domestic violence? What is what are all these things that a lot of kids experience, and how can I make my life better through those experiences? That was a platform that I stood on was education through adversity. Baeza With all of these experiences, having gone through you went to a school system as a teenager that you were basically the minority representative for the school. Coming to Oklahoma State University, graduating, all of these experiences, how have you used those recently or in your current position? 24 Vivar Romero It s everything, everything I do circles around my life. I tend to use my life experiences to help other people with them because I don t want them to experience the same thing that I did. The end goal in everything that I do is that you use education as a tool to break out of these cycles of poverty and violence that a lot of people experience inside of their homes and inside of their community. Our goal, my goal is to get kids educated. I think it was Jimmy Smits that said, Education is the greatest equalizer, and I like to tell my students, Higher education is the greatest equalizer. You need to be able to have that title to fall back on, and that, No matter what, if somebody tears that paper apart, or it burns down in someone s house, you will always be able to have that diploma. Go back to Oklahoma State University, and have the registrar print it out for you, but nobody can take away your education from you. That s something that I instill in all of my students, and that s what RISE is. That s the program that I do. More recently, I m doing public speaking and facilitating in different parts of the state and across the nation. Everything that I do ties back to the fact that no one can take away the things that you ve earned through your education, but you have to be prepared. You have to do the things that maybe at the time, they re boring or they hurt, but you can come out of that. You should come out of that because a lot of the kids that I work with experience a lot of challenges, and painful upbringings, and situations. We have to use education as a tool for them to get out of that and live healthier lives. Through that, they ll be able to create healthier children, healthier families, and things will get better in our community. Baeza Over the years, have you noticed especially with your involvement when you were in Tulsa as well. Have you noticed a change in the state, as far as opportunities for Hispanics? Vivar Romero As far as opportunities, I think that my generation and the older generation were creating those opportunities. We re the people who are exposing the younger generations to opportunities that we had or that are being developed. In terms of funding for Latinos or Latino-based programming, no. There needs to be more support for that, especially with the sleeping giant that we have. I mean, you look at Oklahoma City Public Schools, Tulsa Public Schools, Guymon, a lot of communities in Oklahoma, and who is your young population? Latinos. You have to be able to do something with that. If you re talking about, Well, we need a state that s more educated. We need to be, instead of number forty-nine or number fifty in everything, we need to try to be at least in the top ten or top half. You re not going to get there if you re not educating your youngest people, your youngest population, and providing more resources for them. I get it, there s community organizations that do help our populations, but with budget cuts that are happening, with education funds being cut, there s not 25 the type of support that we do need to invest in the young Latino population that is up and coming. Those are your future leaders of the state. It s not what it looked like before. It s going to come to a lot of people by surprise, but that s exactly who we need to be taking care of right now because what are we going to do in the future when there s brown people I mean, we re the ones who are going to be leading this state, so it s a sleeping giant. What I do see is despite all that, our students are resilient, and they re rising above that. What we do see is an increase in population here at Oklahoma State University, and universities all across the state, of Hispanic students. Attending college and finishing because we do tend to have a higher rate, here in Oklahoma now, of retention that first year. Our kids here, in particular I know PEW had a different statistic a few years ago about white students graduating at faster rates than Latinos. Here at OSU, it s about the same. It s actually a really good stat, so our kids are exceeding expectations because their upbringing, most of them, it involves being taught to work hard and being taught to overcome hardships. I think that they themselves are creating those really cool opportunities through their education, and they re giving back in return. Baeza In a lot of literature, or just about immigrants in general, they talk about how each generation loses part of its cultural identity. A lot of it is because that cultural identity is so far away. It might be somewhere in Asia, or somewhere in Europe. Do you see that as being the case with the Hispanic community in Oklahoma? Vivar Romero You see a little bit of both. What worries me is that I will be one of those parents, who you do get your education, and all of a sudden, your kids are no longer first-generation to receive their education. You start to try to fit a mold that belongs to the people, who are in power, so why wouldn t you do that? I mean, you re going to get more opportunities that way. You re not going to be as different any more. I think I m alluding to maybe something that (you catch my drift) is that I don t want us to lose our identity. Is it happening slowly? Very slowly because I think it s more my generation, that we are the ones who are now becoming homeowners. We re the ones living in suburban areas, and we have more income because of our college education, thanks to our parents and thanks to the people whose shoulders we stand on. We had that opportunity, so my fear is that our kids will lose part of their culture, but that s our job. Our job is to enforce Spanish in the home, and to make sure that they know that their grandparents, the people who immigrated here, or their parents, the more recent immigrants, had to work really hard. I think that s just parenting, in general, for that awareness to be instilled in them. We have to remember who we are, because as much as we try to blend in with mainstream and with the dominant culture here, it s okay 26 to be different. It s actually beautiful to be different. It s fine that you don t look like them. We re not all the same. A lot of people say, I don t look at color. I m like, You can look at my color, because part of that tells you that I m part indigenous, and I m part European. There s different facets. I have no idea where I m from because of our history, but it s definitely something that I see affecting us. The beautiful thing is when I see my students, and they still want to make tacos, and use salsa Valentina on their popcorn, and they speak to each other in Spanglish, so Spanglish is coming in more. I like that, and I promote that, and I don t want them lose that. I wish I could make a public service announcement to everybody, and say, Enforce Spanish in the home. They ll get English, they re going to learn English. It s okay. They will learn it in school. Their brains are sponges, but enforce that. Teach them to be proud of who they are. Take them back to Mexico, take them back to Central America where they re from, and let them live a little bit of the life that their family had to live. It s hard. It s very difficult, but they learn a lot through it. Baeza Your mother was from Mexico. Have you gone back there to see the family that s still there? Vivar Romero Absolutely, I love Mexico. We don t really have family here. My mom, most of her siblings are in Mexico, except one uncle I have in Riverside, California, and his family. Because everyone is down in Orizaba and Veracruz, I feel at home when I go there. I feel loved, and I feel valued, and so we go, and I go pretty often. I wouldn t say pretty often, every couple of years, every two, three years. We stay for a while. It s so different, I love it. It s definitely more poverty. It s not the commodity, not the things I have here, but I wouldn t have it any other way because it gives me an understanding of where I came from, and how hard my family has had to work for me to be here, and what a blessing it is for me to be here. That s my way of giving back, that s my fuel to give back to all the other kids whose families had to endure the same thing. Baeza We talked about opportunities in Oklahoma for Hispanics. Have there been times that you felt that being Hispanic was an advantage or something that helped you out? Vivar Romero It s helped me to understand the Hispanic population and to be able to better serve them. A lot of people talk about scholarships, and, Oh, you guys get scholarships. We don t have as many opportunities as you do for the very fact that we look different. We are different. We are considered a minority, and when you re considered a minority, there s stigmas that go with that. It s putting us on a level playing field. In terms of that, no, I don t think that that s some extra opportunity. I think that that s putting us on a level ground, at least trying to, but not necessarily. My advantage is I get to relate 27 to Hispanic youth, who I love. That s my vocation. That s my calling is working with youth, and to be able to co-advise Hispanic Student Association, or a multicultural sorority that s here, or different things that I m a part of. I don t just work with students, and from a distance, and say, Okay, well, that s your lifestyle. That s what you do. I m more like, No, I know what you re on to. I know what you re doing, and I know what your family is experiencing. I know that you have to go home every weekend and take care of your siblings. I know that you have to go home and take care of things. You re not going to be able to get homework done. That s why I m going to work with you, so that you get your things done here, during the week. I know their experiences already, and I can relate to them. We do have increased success in retention because somebody here, and not just myself, but other staff members, who are Hispanic-Latino or who sympathize with the culture. They know what these students are experiencing, the barriers that they experience in going to college and trying to be successful. We work with it. We don t try to change it or tell them, Don t go home and help. We find a way to make it better, and they become successful because of that understanding. Baeza You mentioned that back in your day, when you first became a student, there was only just over two hundred students. Some of those might have been down at Oklahoma City campus. Now there s over twelve hundred? Vivar Romero I think so. It s about twelve hundred. Baeza There s a lot more students here. Do you think there s more of that close community on campus for Hispanics? Vivar Romero Yes. There s a gentleman named Andrew here on campus. He s a student, and apparently, he s over a lot of the student organizations with what he does through SGA. I m not really sure, but he came to the Hispanic Student Association meeting, and I believe there was seventy students there that night. It s a beautiful thing, and he came in, and he said, This is the largest student group that I ve ever seen. Compared to all the student organizations, for you to meet consistently every week, and still have this many people here of course it dwindles towards the end of the semester because people get busy, but, To pretty consistently have that many members show up says something about your community. It s really cool what s happened with Hispanic Student Association. It s big, and it stays big. We treat each other like familia. You don t just walk in and walk out, and nobody talk to you. It s pretty cool. It s pretty cool when someone finally relates to the food that you eat, to the mannerisms that we have, to the little sayings, and to the little sounds, and to the little facial gestures that come with a different culture. It s great, and they find a home. 28 Baeza Something I ve run into, that I ve been asked about and I m going to ask you, I ve had some people mention that it s a culture of hugging and touching. Have you found that to be the case on campus with the Hispanic students? Vivar Romero Yes, they definitely touch and hug a lot. (Laughs) I grew up, and I don t know if most Mexican people did or not, but we didn t always hug or touch each other in public. I grew up with a lot of hugging, and cuddling, and stuff, but it was never el beso, the side kiss. I had to get into that in college because it s probably my family, that we just didn t do that. I mean, yes, and there s a lot more open-mindedness about different genders, and how we interact with each other. I see a lot of our guys, as a joke, they will hold onto each other, or they will cradle each other. I mean, it s something that I m like, Oh, wow They do that now, and it s not a big deal. They are very touchy-feely with each other. More I think, Central Americans and South Americans, they always give their little besito, the little side kiss more than anything. Hugs, more I think with the Mexican population, but we still kiss, but I do more of a hug. Baeza How do you think that is have you noticed how that s being viewed by non-Hispanics? Vivar Romero Oh, yes. I accidently did that with one of my African American students, and he was like, What? I said, Oh my god, I m so sorry. Because he came a little too close, and I directly you don t directly kiss someone, it s a side . It s like your cheek, and you make that kissing sound. I was like, I m so sorry, no. I did not mean to do that. I think that it can get us into trouble. That s where I think if the university, or if anybody has a problem with it, they need to understand that not everybody is like them. We don t all do the handshake. Asian people don t always . They have different mannerisms also. If it ever does get me in trouble, I m just going to say, This is my culture. You really can t do anything to change that. If you do, I ll probably cause a ruckus. Baeza As far as you mentioned, when you were growing up in the Stillwater area, that the Hispanic people that you met were people that were rotating in and out, because they were coming here for college or their parents were coming for college, and then they would leave. Do you find that there are more people who are here and are staying here? Vivar Romero Actually, yes. Yes, I think Stillwater is growing. When I was here, I think Red Lobster was on the corner. We had what was before Wal-Mart, was a JC Penney s something. It has grown, and I think that that attracts more families, and the fact that it is a safe town, and we re friendly. It s not until I go to different coasts or different places that I realize my town is very nice. We open doors for each other. We say hello. We ask how your day is going, 29 and so I think people are attracted to that. Now, they have more things to see, and to go to, to be able to stay. Baeza Is there something that you think of whenever you re down that you consider the happiest moment of your life Vivar Romero The happiest moment of my life? Oh my gosh Baeza or happiest memory? Vivar Romero I think what comes to mind is growing up, when we moved north of town, towards Morrison but still in Stillwater. My mom still couldn t drive, so she had to find a way to entertain us inside of the house. We would play. There would be . It d be dark, but she d turn on a light, and she d make little hand puppet, like a little conejo, like the little bunny, or an alligator, and a goose, and things like that. We had these little we would just make up . They weren t actual bowling pins, but we d put them on one side of the kitchen, and she had her aros. Her aros was what she sewed with. Those little round things that people cross stitch, and we would just play ring toss inside of the house. Things like that, I just have memories of those times, where my mom would have to just make stuff up for us to do because there was no iPad. There was no cable TV. We didn t have internet, and so we would use our socks and skate around the kitchen, like Oksana Baiul, (Laughs) and pretend we were on the Olympics. It s the simple things that I think are the best times of my life. Baeza Do you have a plan or a vision for yourself in the near future and in the far future? Vivar Romero It s very interesting, because when I ask youth, they re like, Doctor, veterinarian, lawyer, teacher. The line came around to me, where I had to answer. This was just last week. I was in Guymon, doing a public speaking engagement with students, and it came to me. I just said, I just want to have peace in my life. I want to be well. I want my family to be in peace. I want us to find joy and to live in joy. That s what I want, and professionally, I have found a place in speaking, and I ve found mentorship in public speaking. You know how I told you about the lockers, and I saw lockers and double doors? Now, when people ask me, this vision comes in of I m speaking, and there s a crowd, and I m wearing blue. Who knows when that s going to manifest itself, but it s to a lot of people, and I don t mean to say that I m speaking to people. It s more like somehow, I m helping, something to do with education and creating equal opportunity for all students to be able to attend college, regardless of where they re from or what background their from. 30 Baeza We talked about a lot of stuff, obviously. Is there something that you d like to say to current or future Hispanic students that might either be thinking about coming to OSU or are at OSU? Vivar Romero Especially to future Hispanic students who want to attend OSU, challenge yourself now. High school, it s not the time to be a teacher s aide your junior and senior year. It s the time to take calculus. If you want to be an engineer, if you want to be a doctor, if you want to be in STEM, this is not the time to take a couple of classes and take it easy. You have to challenge yourself before you come into school. Things are different when you come to college. You have to be willing to ask questions, you can t isolate yourself. A lot of students, they get intimidated, or they get scared. They know they re different. I just had a student tell me the other day, his name is Oogal, and he s a current student. I met him at orientation last year. He said, I was about to walk out of that orientation, until you came up to me, because I didn t see any Hispanic people here. I was going to go back home I don t know. His hometown is two or three hours away. That s very important that you connect to somebody when you come to campus. Don t try to go at it alone. Visit your multicultural office or your diversity office, but do not try to do things alone because that doesn t usually end well. Connect and challenge yourself. Baeza Is there anything that I haven t asked you about? Something that you want to mention as part of this interview? Vivar Romero Not necessarily, I think I talked a lot. (Laughs) That whole public speaking thing, it s a breeze. No, I m just happy to have the opportunity to share whatever I can with you. Baeza All right. Well, thank you very much. Vivar Romero Thank you. ------- -------..