 Baeza The following interview is being conducted with Ms. Maria Malav for the Latino Americans: 500 Years of History grant project at Oklahoma State University. The interview will become part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Edmond Low Library on the Stillwater campus of Oklahoma State University. The interview is taking place on Sunday, June 19, 2016, in the home of Ms. Malav in Stillwater, Oklahoma. The interviewer is Victor Dominguez Baeza, director of Library Graduate Service. Ms. Malav , thank you for agreeing to participate in this oral history project. I want to remind you that this may be published as part of the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University in Stillwater, and that you have granted us permission to publish the transcript and video in part or in its entirety. So if you would for me first, can you say your full name? Malav My full name: Maria Antonia Malav . Baeza Let s see, and where could you actually spell your name for me, the last name? Malav The last name, M-a-l-a-v-e. Baeza Okay, and where were you born? Malav I born in Puerto Rico in the city called San Sebastian del Pepino. Baeza And how long did you live there? Malav San Sebastian del Pepino, I lived there about let me think about let me think about it. In where I born? Baeza Or just in Puerto Rico. 5 Malav Oh, in Puerto Rico I live from Puerto Rico like forty or forty-five years, I don t remember exactly. Baeza Can you tell me something about the town where you were born? Malav San Sebastian? Oh, they call San Sebastian del Pepino because San Sebastian is a saint, pero el pepino, the name el pepino is because there was a pepino how they call in English, cucumber. Cucumber in English, and pepino in Spanish. There was a farm, los pepinos, and they funded the city there, and that is why they call San Sebastian del Pepino. Baeza What was it like growing up there? Malav Oh well, we talking about years and years back. That was everything was practically old fashioned, not many roads in the street, and the city was a small city. It s still a small city, and there is another city. The neighbor, they call Lares, that is where my father born, and he moved to San Sebastian. There he meet my mother and married there in San Sebastian, but was a very good place to live. Very quiet, no crimes, nothing. That was very neat. Now I don t know because I don t live there for ages and ages. Baeza Was it close to the beach, or was it more Malav No, not very close to no beaches. Lake, yes, and they have they call it La Central Plata Central because they have sugarcane, and they have factory for all kind of sugar, brown sugar, white sugar. That was the main things there in the city. Baeza What do you remember being a child in that town? Malav (Laughs) I only remember I get too much spanking (Laughs) when I was a child. My mother have fourteen childrens. We was a big family, and I was the number seven, I think, Freud is fourteen, and my mother have nine boys, and the rest was girls. Not too much, we no have toys on Christmas. Only I get a doll, and the one time but that s it, and the oldest, we put grass to the Three Kings. You put grass for them to come and put the toy, and eat the grass, was a gratification for the toys, but sometime in the morning, the grass was there. (Laughs) The parents throw away the grass, you know what I mean, and put the toy, and that was the Three Kings present, but was the parents most the time, no grass, no toys. (Laughs) Baeza Was that a tradition in Puerto Rico? Malav Yes, that s not too much now. They still visit some areas. They do the Villas, they say the kids put grass to the Three King for the camel because they are tired delivering present. The parents don t even take the grass and 6 the water, and throw away, and put the present there. Yeah, that was before Santa Clause. Now, it s a lot of Santa Clause, but still that, yes. It s a tradition. Baeza You have, so with you, there are fourteen children. Malav Yes. Baeza Can you tell me who was the oldest? Malav The oldest brother, his name was Pedro. The second, Victor, and the second, Carmelo. The other one was Manuel. The other one was Cristobal. The other one was Saulo. The other one was Paulo. The other one was Tonyo, and my sister Monserrate Carmen, but she died when she was seven. Monserrate, Maria Antonia, me, Carmen, Gloria, and Maria Mercedes. That was a factory. Big factory, I tell you that. Baeza What did your father do? Malav He has a farm, and he had a store. He sell rice, and beans, and all this kind of food, and the farm, we have a coffee farm. We, I know how to plant coffee from the beginning until the bean in the kitchen. Bananas, orange, so it was a big farm, yeah. He produced that and make the money to take care of us. Baeza You owned the farm? Malav There s still the farm there, yes. The farm, nobody, we no sell the farm. Everybody is be in different places, like my brother, one is in California. My sister lives in Utah, some of them lives in Puerto Rico, but the farm is still there, yes. Nobody did anything with that. Baeza You grew up on the farm with thirteen brothers and sisters. Malav Yes, thirteen brothers and sisters, a lot. Baeza What was like, especially since you were in the middle. Malav It was okay. We get along very good, and nobody mistreat anybody. That was great, I can t complain growing up like that with this bunch of brothers and sisters. My sister and I would never ever have an argument, we never fight, we never disagree, was like a two-in-one. Baeza Did everybody agree and not fight? 7 Malav Yeah, we no have no problem. We was very, very good friendship, let me put it like that, like brothers and sisters, yes. Well, if we no do that, you know what. (slaps hands to symbolize spanking) (Laughs) Baeza Would that be your mother who would do the spanking? Malav Maybe both. We have to be nice, one with the other, because if not we get the spanking, believe me. Baeza What was your father s name? Malav Manuel. Baeza And your mother? Malav Aurelia. Baeza And what did she do? Malav Producing babies, and be housekeeping, making a factory babies. Baeza What was the, what s your happiest memory from growing up on the farm? Malav Let me think about because I have to go back and remember what was my happiness then. Happiness, I was so many happiness, who knows? (Laughs) We see bunch of people, but yeah. I sew, at least I do sew in all the ages, and I make my own money, and I help my brothers and my sister to buy clothes, shoes and everything. That was happy for me, to help them and help my brothers. That was happy time. I never put the money first, I always put the people first, and I still do. Baeza What was the school system like? Malav Well, like every school by now, you have to go to first grade, second, keeping going, and know how to write your name. I went to the school and learned a lot, I never forget that, what I have learned there, and teachers was good. I have males and female teachers, my sister too. Baeza How big was the school? Malav Oh, I think it was like a twenty-five or thirty students. Baeza From first grade to . Malav To nine to ten, yeah. 8 Baeza There was only thirty students total? Malav In the school where I went was like thirty student at this time, yeah Baeza They were all ages from . Malav Yeah, all ages. Yeah, from seven, to nine, to ten, keeping going. Baeza And what was that like? Malav Excellent, very good. I never forget that. I have that here in my mind. I see my teachers, my professors, and I can see the other girl. There was girls very good with me, always very nice. There was a girl that she, every day, her mother bring her coffee and snack for break, and she called me and shared with me. Baeza Oh, nice Malav Yeah, and there was, her name was Amelia. Amelia Mercado. Never forget that because when somebody do good something for you, you never forget. If they do bad something for you, you never forget both. Baeza Being in Puerto Rico, what was the view of the United States, of the main part of the States? Malav The view? Baeza Like what did people think about the politics in the United States or the government? Malav Okay, I don t know if you know that Puerto Rico was discovered by the Spain, and Spain . The England invade Puerto Rico, belong to Spain, they come, and the Engl- Ingleses. I say that in English. You see what I did? I mixed one with the other for you. You want me to say that in Spanish or English? Baeza You do it. Malav Los ingleses invadieron a Puerto Rico y querian cojer la isla para ellos. Tu entiendes? The English invaded Puerto Rico and they wanted to take over the island for themselves. Do you understand? Baeza Yes. 9 Malav Okay, entonces cuando eso paso, los Estados Unidos mandaros tropas de Guerra a Puerto Rico a defender la isla y a protegerla y no dejaron que los ingleses se acojieron la isla para de los Espanoles. Se apoderan de ella. Entonces, en el 1999, 1999 Espana dijo que esta, esta isla no lo pertenece a nosotros. Este isla le pertenece a los Estados Unidos porque ellos fueron lo que la defendieron de los Ingleses y nosotros se lo vamos a dar a ellos. Entonces, y le paso lo-lo espanoles le dieron el territorio de Puerto Rico a los Americanos. Se lo transledieron y desde 1999, todo el que nace en Puerto Rico, nace siendo ciudadano Americano porque es la-pertenece a los Estados Unidos. Por eso es que somos Americanos cuando nacemos. Okay, so when that happened, the United States send war troops to Puerto Rico to defend the island and protect it and they did not let the English take the island from the Spaniards. They would possess it (the island). So in 1999, Spain said that This, this island doesn t belong to us. This island belongs to the United States because they were the ones that defended it against the English and we are going to give it to them. So and they passed the Spaniards gave the territory of Puerto Rico to the Americans. They moved to them (they moved possession) and since 1999, everyone that is born in Puerto Rico, is born being an American citizen because it is belongs to the United States. For that reason, is why we are Americans when we are born. Baeza And I know now there still, there are people who are for staying Malav people never be happy. We, we are good in the way we are. You know? Estados Unidos le ha dado toda la ayuda necesaria a Puerto Rico. Tu naces siendo Americano no tienes que estar pensando en pasaporte ni en visa ni en nada. Vienes aqui trabaja como Americano, ni te digen nada, ni te molestan. Tu entiende? United States has given all the necessary help to Puerto Rico. You are born being American you don t have to be thinking about a passport, neither a visa, neither in anything. You come here, work like an American, they don t tell you anything and neither do they bother you. Do you understand? Baeza Yes. Malav Que, que mas quiere, puede pedir la gente? Tu entiende de eso? What, what more do they want, can the people ask for? You understand of that? Baeza And so when was the first time that you left Puerto Rico? 10 Malav Ah nine in 1981 I come here. I I come from Puerto Rico straight here porque mi hija estaba estudiando aqui. Es la que estaba hablando conmigo. Ella estaba era estudiante aqui ella se modio en ochenta y dos y yo vine en la ochenta y uno a visitarla. Entonces, ella tenia un cordinador de personal era amigo de ellos porque iban a la misma iglesia y entonces el le dijo a mi hija que si yo queria trabajar el me daba trabajo. Pero yo en Puerto Rico tu tienes que cojer ingles por obligacion cuando van en la escuela pero el espa ol es la lengua que tiene. Pero mi ingles no era muy Bueno entonces por eso fue que coji en housekeeping porque no habia, no mi la lengua no me ayudaba. Podria cojer trabajos si pero la-el ingles no me ayudaba. Entonces dijo Alli no tengo que romperme mucho la cabeza dejame cojer eso . Y eso fue en el 1981, veinticinco a os wow inaudible . Y yo dije yo voy a cojer por un a o o dos. Un a o o dos. Y mira lo extra que dio inaudible . Pero no me arrepiento porque la gente es Buena. Me ha hido bien. Mira, mira, mira lo que tienes que mirar con estos dos brazos. Lo he hecho todo, tu entiende? He tenido mucha suerte he podido comprar casa, he podido comprar carro, he podido hacerlo todo. Y segui viviendo because my daughter was studying here. She was the one that was talking with me. She was was a student here. She moved in eighty-two and I came in eighty-one to visit her. So she had a coordinator of personnel (supervisor) was friends of theirs because they went to the same church and so he told my daughter that if I wanted to work, he would give me work. But I in Puerto Rico, you have to learn English by obligation when you go to school but Spanish is the language that is has. But my English was not very good. So for that reason I worked in housekeeping because there wasn t, no my tongue didn t help me. (her English language barrier). I could work other jobs yes but the English didn t help me. So I said There I don t have to pound my head very much, let me work that . (With this job-housekeeping-I don t have to think too hard, let me work that.) And that was in 1981, twenty-five years inaudible And I said I am going to work for a year or two . And look now inaudible . But I don t regret anything because the people are good. It has turned out well for me. Look, look, look what you have to see with these two arms. (Look at what I have with these two arms-providing for herself). I have done it all, you understand? I have had lots of luck, I have been able to buy a house, I have been able to buy a car, I have been able to do it all. And I continue living. Baeza So you don t regret the decision? Malav No No No, no, no yo pienso que Yo, yo podia trabajar en Puerto Rico, y tenia el trabajo me ofrecian ni trabajaba y todo. No sufri de nada, mi papa siempre tenia dinero, no nacimos pobre ni que nos digamos pobre. Tu entiende? Hasta el que cuando vine para aca, y trabajaba antes de venir trabajaba con una compa a Americana dando training en el costura porque yo coso. En una factor a y ellos me pagaban el apartamento, y me 11 pagaban yo no me acuerdo cuanto a la hora tu en-oh no me pagaban 150 a la semana. Que estaba bien en aquel, en aquel, en aquel tiempo tu entiendes inaudible para aca. Pero cuando vine a visitar mi mija y me ofrecieron trabajo pues, me quede. Y por, por un a o o dos y mira lo que llevo inaudible . Mi hija es Doctora en Psichologia, es Psicologa. Ella cojio el doctora. Ella tenia master y bachelor y master from de Puerto Rico. Entonces vino aqui a cojer el doctorado. I think that, I, I could work in Puerto Rico, and I had the job, they offered me jobs neither working and everything . They offered me work even if I didn t do the work. I didn t suffer from anything. I didn t lack anything. My dad always had money. We weren t born poor, neither did we call ourselves poor. You understand? When I came over here, and I worked previously before coming I worked with an American company giving training in seamstress because I sew. In a factory and they paid my apartment, and they paid me I don t remember how much at the hour, you under-oh no they paid me 150 a week. That was good at that, at that, at that time do you understand? But inaudible over here. But when I came to visit my daughter and they offered me work, well I stayed. For, for a year or two and look at what I have. My daughter is a Doctor in Psychology, she is a psychologist. She chose doctor. She had master and bachelor and master from Puerto Rico. And so she came here to achieve her Doctorate. Baeza And what is her name? Malav Nilsa, Nilsa. Baeza Could you spell that for us? Malav N-i-l-s-a. Nilsa. Baeza And so she, what school in Puerto Rico did she get her degrees? Malav Well first go she went to the college they call Colegio de Mayaguez. Mayaguez es la segunda ciudad Ma-ma- no la la ciudad segunda o la tercera ciudad mas grande de-de P-de la capital. Inaudible la capital, es como decir Oklahoma City, Tulsa, algo asi. Ella cojio el bachelor en Mayaguez y ella se gradu con alto honores Magna Cum Laude ella todo lo que tuvo en la escuela siempre fue a. Entonces, despues fue a-a la terce- a la segunda ciudad-a la tercera ciudad mas grande a una Universidad catolica. Se llama la Universidad Catolica Santa Maria. Y alli ella coji el master. Mayaguez is the second city no the, the second city or third biggest city of the capital. inaudible the capital, is like to say Oklahoma City, Tulsa, something like that. She worked on her bachelor in Mayaguez and she 12 graduated with high honors Magna Cum Laude, she everything that she had in school always was an A. (grades were all A s.) Then, afterwards she went to the thir-to the second city- to the third biggest city to a Catholic University. It s called the Catholic University Santa Maria. And she worked on her master. Baeza En que? In what? Malav Bueno ella siempre se fij en psicologia porque eso era lo que le gustaba. Entonces cuando ella fue a cojer ella inaudible me pregunt a mi Mami, que tu quiere? A mi me gusta-le gustaba el Jonah me dice inaudible . O psic loga? Y yo le dije hija este es tu degree no el mio. Tu eres la que tienes que decidir tu sabes cual de los dos quiere cual de los dos te gusta. Entonces me di-se dice pues se quedo en psicolog a. Porque ella le gusta ayudar a los ni os, a ayudar a la gente y eso. Y entonces, este coji el master en la Universidad Catolica Santa Maria en psicolog a y despues, cuando ella se cas , el esposo de ella es bautista. Es ministro bautista. Tonces, cuando ella se cas ellos se vinieron, el conoc a a Tulsa y a Jenks porque el era piloto. No, no pilotea ahora porque es ba-ba eh, ministro pero el-el ya habia estudiado sacar la licensia, vino a sacar la licensia de piloto a Jenks, Oklahoma y entonces, cuando ella se cas con el ella le dijo a el que ella se casaba pero que ella queria terminar su doctorado. No queria quedarse con el bachillerato y el master y ella dijo que estaba bien. Cuando termino el, cuando termino el- en la clase de aviaci n dice el que el le pidio direccion a Dios, al se or y le dijo Se or ya termine, dime. Adonde voy? Que hago? Entonces cojio la biblia, y la abrio y le salio en el Salmo Veintitres que dice Stillwater Y tu quizas saber que era eso? Entonces dijo pues alli es que el se or lo quiere. Y ella aplic para mucha universidad y toda la universidad la acepteron pero a ellos aceptaron a OSU. Y vinieron a parar aqui y entonces y yo vine atras de ellos inaudible y aqui estoy. Ellos se fueron inaudible Espa a y yo estoy aqui todav a. (Laughs) Well she always focused on psychology because that was what she liked. So when she went to work she asked me Mami, what do you want? To me I like-she liked Jonah she tells me inaudible . Or psychology? And I told her Daughter, this is your degree not mine. You are the one that has to decide, you know which of the two wants, which of the two you like. So she tell-it says well she stayed in psychology. Because she like to help kinds, to help the people and that. And so, she chose the master in the Catholic University Santa Maria in psychology and then, when she got married, her husband is Baptist. Is Baptist minister. So when she got married, the came, he knew Tulsa and Jenks because he was a pilot. He doesn t pilot anymore because he s a minister. But he had already studied to earn the license, he 13 came to get his pilot license at Jenks, Oklahoma and so, when she married him, she told him that she would get married but she wanted to finish her doctorates. She didn t want to stay with the bachelor and the master and she said that that was ok. When he finished, when he finished in the aviation class, he says that he asked for direction from God, from the Lord and he said Lord I m finished. Tell me. Where do I go? What do I do? So he picked up the bible and he opened it and he turned out on the Psalm Twenty-Three that says Still water and would you like to know what that was? So he said well there is where the Lord wants him. And she applied to many university and all the university accepted her but to them they accepted OSU. They accepted OSU. And they came to stop here and I came behind them and here I am. They went to inaudible Spain and I am still here. Baeza So all of this happened in 1981, when she started Malav You see Baeza school here? Malav Yeah, cuando ella, cuando ella vino, no ella se yo. Ella se graduo en 1982, y cuando yo vine aqui, ya ella estaba tu sabes ella ya era estudiante de OSU. Ya estaban aqui ellos. Yeah when she, when she came, no she-I. She graduated in 1982, and when I came here she was already you know she was already a student of OSU. Already were they here (they were already here). Baeza So she graduated in 82. Malav Ella se gradu en 1982, si. Muy bonito. Cojio su doctorado inaudible . Tu no le puede dar un hijo no? Desde Bachillerato, master, y doctorado. Puede cojer diez Doctorado pero es doctorado. Pero mande a el? No hay inaudible . Gracias a Dios salio inteligente, ella es bien inteligente nunca tuvo una b. Todas sus inaudible . Mi papa era igual y mis hermanos igual tambien y yo tambien. Nunca tuvimos b, siempre sacamos a. Mi papa era bien inteligente. Eso como que se deda (hereda) inaudible pienso yo. She graduated in 1982, yes. Very pretty. She earned her doctorate s, inaudible . You can t give her a son no? From bachelor, master, and doctorate. She can earn ten doctorates but is doctorates. But sent him? There is none. Thanks be to God she turned out intelligent, she is very intelligent, never had a B. All her inaudible my dad was the same and my brother equal too and myself also. We never had a B, we always got A s. My dad was very intelligent. It s like its (inherited-passed down) I think. Baeza What did she do after graduating? 14 Malav Who? My . Baeza Your daughter. Malav When she before she come here, she in Puerto Rico, she was a teaching university, she was teacher there. When she come here, when she graduate in 1982, they moved to Texas. They no live here, they no stay here. Her husband when to the Baptist seminary to take a master degree in religion something. Y ella and she worked in school psychologist in Fort Worth, Texas, because as bilingual, you speak more language, you can is easy to find a job. Yeah, she was a school psychologist in Fort Worth, and work in Fort Worth until they went back to Puerto Rico. When they went back to Puerto Rico when he finish, she was school psychologist for the military base. She work in the U.S. military base for twenty-four years as school psychology, and until they moved back to Connecticut. Well, the reason why they moved to Connecticut, my son-in-law, he was raised in Connecticut. His parents bring him when he was seven years old, he has eight sisters, big family too, eight sisters. Baeza Not as big as yours. Malav No, no, that s nothing compared with me. When he moved to Connecticut again, she started to work in school psy my daughter work and still now work in school psychology. The reason why they moved to Connecticut was because my granddaughter wanted to go to Cornell. They have two childrens, one boy, one girl. Jonah and Joy, and Joy applied for Cornell, and she was accepted. This is the picture you see there, and they decide to leave the house in Puerto Rico and move to Connecticut because it s more close to Cornell. Until Joy finished, Joy already finished and she graduate. Now it s up to them, I don t know when they go back to Puerto Rico, but they have the house and everything there. The reason why they live in Connecticut now was for to be close. We are a close family, attached, one to the others. Baeza When she finished school and they moved, why did you stay here at OSU? Malav Well my daughter said, Mom, you can go with us, when they moved to Texas, but I said, Let me try on myself. I think it was nothing wrong if I have a job. I only need to look for an apartment, she helped me to finded an apartment, and I rent my own apartment. I have a job, and I stay here, and I am here, and I go to visit them, they visit me. Sometime, we going to Puerto Rico together and whatever, but we keep very good family friend. See, but they are there, I think it s good that mothers be between couples. I think it s . My son-in-law is a wonder, he s like my son, I love him and everything, but you never know when they going to say something, and you disagree and you open the mouth, and there you going to be in trouble. No, 15 not for me. The best way to keep everything good is like that. That s what I think. Baeza When you moved here in 91, did you find a Hispanic or Spanish-speaking community in Stillwater? Malav Not really, not many Spanish people. I ve seen here in this inaudible , never so many like in another areas. You probably know that too, that some areas have more Hispanic population. There was a couple from Puerto Rico, and he was a student, and she worked for OSU. They graduate and they left, and try to remember who was here. Very little population. Baeza And now? Malav Not too much too. Baeza Better? Malav A little bit more, but not too much population. More Mexican people, but not many because some like Texas or some places is full of Mexican people, but here, little bit people. Not many I think, I don t know. Maria Dias from Salvador, you know her. Maria and this lady, Brenda Morales, you know Brenda. A little bit people, but not many compared with some places, I think. Baeza Where did you work on campus? Malav In the Student Union. Baeza Over the years, you ve seen a lot of the students coming and going. Malav Oh my God. I think, I probably in thirty-five years, probably see a million (Laughs) because from around the world. That s interesting, I like that, I like my job for that reason because I meet people from around the world. From Rusia Russia , China, Bangladesh, Nepal, Libano Lebanon , all these countries, and I can say they are very good people. I never meet anybody that I can say, Bad people. People from Iraq, they are very, very nice, very friendly, I can t say nothing negative about people from Iraq. I cannot from Libano, these guys or these girls, they come here Africa, they are wonderful. They have to be because they have to pass a record before come here, but they re keeping doing very, very nice, very good. I like them, like I said, all around the world. People from German, very little, I only meet, I think, two people from German. Libano, no many, my girl is from Libano, but not many people is from Libano, but Iraq people: very, very nice people, very 16 good student, very friendly, very polite. I can say nothing negative about them. Everybody nice, but if you are nice, people is nice with you. If you are good to your mama, mama is good with you, so I think you make the people, not the people don t make you. Baeza Has there been I know we talked about the population of Hispanic people in Stillwater, but what about the Hispanic students on campus? When you started in 81 . Malav Not many, not many, never saw many students. Some students, when I said like, for in the beginning, people from, how do you say this country not Libano, like an Arab country, we have like six hundred people when I come here. Mostly people was from this country, but Hispanics people, never see this boom population, to me, at OSU. Spanish people from Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia Venezuela, in the beginning, when I come here, Venezuela send a lot of students. Yes, but they stop. Now, we have a little bit people from Venezuela. I don t know how many because you can see here, or talking to Hispanics there or there, and when I hear somebody speaking Spanish, I ask them, Where are you from, to know. Not many from Venezuela now, but before, yes, it was the most thing was Venezuela. I don t know what happened, and Colombians, not many. I meet a lot of people from Colombia, but not many people, students. We have an advisor, one time, for Hispanics from Colombia, and she moved, and they gave the position to somebody else. They let me see, people in the school Colombia, Venezuela, Puerto Rico, no many people. I never see many people from Puerto Rico, but we have good university there. They no have to come far away to Sometimes, yes, but no too many, and I don t think I meet fifteen people from Puerto Rico in the thirty-five years I have here. I hear that there is three students from Puerto Rico but I don t know them. I no see them. Mexico, some, but for the Mexico is there, and Oklahoma is here, I not thinking so many people from Mexico. What do you think, little bit people, but not a bunch, like a boom. Baeza What about for employees? Do you see many employees that speak Spanish? Malav No, there might some and in my department, we raise students. We take students. I don t think we have, in department have there, not five or ten students who work for I not see number one Hispanic student, like it work in housekeeping. I think it s not a job for them. I feel sorry for them when they come to work, and to do this kind of job. They come from Libano, from a different country. I think it s different because they want the dollar, you know what I mean, but no, not many employees. There was one doctor. He s Spanish from Puerto Rico, Col n, you never meet Col n? He left, and I don t think he did very good in his position. He start to change, and they don t like the change he did, and he went to New Mexico. Ivan Figueroa, 17 you meet Ivan? Ivan work for was so good, he have a PhD and everything, but he was from Puerto Rico too, and he left to Texas, and I don t know nothing about him after that. you know? Brenda, and there was a girl before Brenda. There was a girl, and maybe you meet her. She was from Cuba, and I don t know if she married a Mexican guy and was not you? Baeza No. Malav No? He look like you, because I remember him. I remember seeing . Ah ha You re laughing, maybe Baeza Any others that you remember? Malav Did you marry with the girl from Cuba? (Laughter) No? Yeah, well, this girl that she left. They went to married in Mexico, and they didn t married. Something like that happened, the people comment because something happened to them. After that, they put Brenda for her, and that s it. Brenda still there, and Maria. Stuck there forever and ever People say, When you going to retire? Never, I am going to die working for the Union. Is that not sick? You see, is nothing here to talk. You come to talk to me, but if you not come today, you not have nobody to talk, only Fifi. I have to be working in order to communicate and being with people, because if not, I get Alzheimer s disease I no want to get Alzheimer. Baeza Do you so you don t have many Spanish-speaking friends in Stillwater? Malav No, the only have friend speaking Span I have a friend before, and I don t know, maybe you know her too, but she moved to from she retire and move to California, Marta. She work in financial aid for long time, Marta Oat, and she retire and move to California. She call me, and we keep in touch, but the only friend who I speak Spanish is Maria Diaz. After Maria Diaz, I not have anybody because Maria Diaz have a sister, but I no have too much communication with her sister. I communicate with Maria. There is a lady from Puerto Rico, she work in the Jamba Juice, but she is like a half friend. I talk to her sometime, try and invite her. One time, I give her a ride because she needed the car had problem, and I help her, but I am not stupid. I know when people and we yeah, it look like that she not like to have friends, Wait, you not like to have friends? You don t like have friends, so you re not going to push the people to be your friend, if they no want to. I don t know why because but hardly know her. Yeah, she live and work in Jamba Juice in the Union, there in the Union. Baeza Yeah, I ll have to look for her. Malav Yeah, she s there. 18 Baeza What is your favorite memory from working at OSU? Malav Everything. Everything is I was employee of the month twice. One, I saw for the you not remember how long you work in OSU? Baeza Ten years. Malav Oh no, probably not. You not remember the one program the Student Union had, they called Madrigal? Let me show you this picture, you see that, how beautiful? The Student Union. Oh, compared the ballroom, you know what is the ballroom. We make the ballroom like a castle, that is why they look like that, like a queen and king. We have a king, we have a queen, and I sew for them, for thirty years, the costumes. Every kingdom, they rent costumes in Nueva York, in New York, but they send they need alterations, or we measure, says the size, but never fit. Sometimes was too big, sometimes was too small, or sometime was too short, and I have to do all the alteration, but in the end, look like that. This was 2005 Madrigal, and I sew for them for thirty years. All these costumes, everything you see. Hats, shoes, I had to make shoes for them because sometime they one time, the jester need the shoes because she had to do trampoline. She cannot do trampoline without of tennis shoes, from the way she do trampoline, and I have to cover the tennis shoes in order that no tennis shoes is now, that was like in 1700 time. In 1700, there was no tennis shoes. No people cannot see these tennis shoes I had to cover that, and I did I did one in one color, one in the other, and they I get surprised myself that I did, because that was not easy, to cover the shoes, the tennis shoes for that. I have to do mil hats, a mil a thousand . You have no idea. That s just something exceptional. They pay me for my work and everything, but I did with love, you what I mean? I was employee of the month twice. One day, I was walking in the basement where is now Cowboy Underground. That was different before. They remodel, and they change. I come for my break, and I see so many people there. Boy, I said to me. Somebody said I finded a guy in the elevator, he said We have been looking for you, I said For what? We have a meeting. I don t know we have a meeting. Nobody told me, and I walk there. There was a lot of people, there was the president was there. When I walk, the president grabbing my hands, and I said to me, What s going on? It was something unexpected, and he said, I want you know that I declare you a celebrity. I have my plaque there, he give me a plaque. I was a celebrity for the work I did for that. Baeza Now you say you worked for them for thirty years? 19 Malav The guy who was in charge there, he died. He retired, and was sick, and he died. Another guy tried to do for maybe two years, two more years, but he didn t keeping in doing, and they cancel, they never but that was the most beautiful thing you can imagine. They walk now is different, but before, they have the counseling room, they changed clothes, they put all these clothes there, and they walk straight to the front of the ballroom. They perform on there, outside, until the seven o clock. Seven o clock, they open the doors for the ballroom, and the jester announce that they going to walk in. They walk in, and the jester introduce them, that was beautiful. They have a stage prepared for them like that, and they sing, and they have a dinner. There was like sometime three hundred, four hundred, five hundred people for dinner there, and they paid for the dinner. The last time was thirty dollar a ticket, but like I said, that he died, and he get sick, and he retired, and nobody take. This was the most beautiful thing you can imagine. If they keeping doing, people giving, the people come from Kansas, Edmond, Dallas. All people from different part of the around come to see this program. That was nice. We enjoy that, one of the best memories is the Madrigal. Baeza Every year, did the people who participated in it, did they keep the costumes? Malav No, this costume, most of them were sent, rented in New York. Some of them, I make because sometime, they say they no fit. Like one time, they said for the queen, the dress for the queen no fit. I had to make a dress for the queen, or the hat for the king. We measure, and send the size, and everything, but sometime was big. Had to attach here, and there, and there. For most of them, yeah, I had to make, too, pants. Pants for the jester. One time, I had to make the pants because once he had with elastic wool feet, and they not find that in the market. Had to be make, you know what I mean, but yeah, I happy My wonderful time was Madrigal, believe me. Baeza Since this took place in the Student Union, do you remember seeing, or do you remember any programs for the Hispanic students, or anything that was in Spanish? Malav Oh yeah, they had programs for the Hispanic people too. Spanish Cultural Night, what is the other one, Miss Spanish OSU, all in Spanish. I think it was Miss Spanish OSU. Cultural Night, where the Spanish people present their dance or their wedding, how they make a wedding, how they make...they not do that now, but they did before. They dance, guys play music, Mexican music. Most Mexican music because here, they reflect more the Mexican, and yeah, they loved it before. I don t know now, I don t know why they no do that now. They can, who is the leaders. 20 Baeza Can you think of when, in your thirty-five years, it was the most active? Malav What time? Baeza Which years was the most active that they had more programs in Spanish, or mariachi, or . Malav Oh, yes I not remember the year, but years back, oh yes, they bring mariachis here from Oklahoma City. There was a father and his son. They play music, and they come, and there was a guy, what was the name. They used to bring him, most the time, every year. Try to remember his name. He play guitar for Oklahoma City. I go I don t remember now, if remember, I tell you the name because he come every year, they bring him to the theater. Everybody buy their ticket, and the theater full for him to play. He come to perform, and his father play, and he play guitar. Baeza Edgar Cruz? Malav Edgar. You got it before me. I went to see Edgar, most the time, every year, but when he come here. I don t know what happened to him. Baeza He s still around. Malav Still? Stop playing music? That was a long time ago. Yeah, Edgar and his father, but this was the most time. When Edgar come to play was the most time that we had more Spanish people around, who go to enjoy that too. I d liked seeing that again. They try to do something to bring these people back. I think it s good idea. Baeza So, is there something that you would like to say to Hispanic students? Malav Well, I think, keeping going. It s beautiful, it s nice to be Spanish people, and speak different language. I think they need to try to make more programs to let the people know that we still alive. I think they need to do more for the Hispanic community, and let the people know that they can enjoy, and have different activities, and yeah. My advice is they need to do more for the Hispanics. The programs, and whatever they need to be doing, they can count on me too, if they need me, if they need make a dress. I make a dress sometime for girls, for multicultural night. Sometimes they need a dress, and this, and that. I make for them. I was a judge for Miss Hispanic OSU, I don t remember what year, and after that night, they come and give me this picture. That is all the candidates for the pageant in the picture, and the one who win, the contestant, is still there. 21 Baeza Have you, yourself, gotten involved with Hispanic students on campus, either through multicultural affairs, or diversity, or just from seeing them in the Student Union? Malav Well, out of sewing for them before, when Patricia Diaz, you know Patricia, was very involved in the Spanish people and the multicultural. Yes, I was more involved with them, but after for a period of time, yes, but by now, not too much. Let me putting it this way, which is they need me, I be there for them because sometime I can do something for them that nobody else, like sew, do this, or that for these kind of activity, or something. If they need my service, and they need, I be there, hundred percent. Baeza In the time that you ve when you worked at OSU, was there any time that maybe a bad memory because someone didn t like the fact that you were speaking Spanish or anything like that? Malav Yeah, I have that too, sometime. Sometime people discriminate for the language, or for the accent, and laugh about my English, and my accent. Yeah, that happen too, but I have to be Maria, nobody else. If you listen to the people, you never survivor. No, you have to be yourself, and that s what I do. Be Maria, and I don t care. Yeah, oh my God, I can tell you yes, muy a lot of discrimination, too. Yes, I did. Baeza From students or from employees? Malav No, from the co-workers, yeah. Baeza Are they still around? Malav No No, that s what I said. You succumb if you listen to them, but if you be yourself, you get ahead, and they go one day . One time, there was a lady, a new person come to work, and we have a special lunch. We have a special lunch for the celebration of the fifty anniversary of the Student Union. We have free lunch, we go into the ballroom, make a line to get free lunch. There was all the co-workers was there, and I was there, and there come this lady. She was new person working, not old like I was. She said, Today, I m going to kill someone. I m going to kill Maria. I said, I m here, ready Go ahead, do it I no said a word, I no said nothing. The other people that was in the line, everybody make they move, and this and that, but nobody said anything. One of those ladies went straight and tell Manny, you know who is Manny? They went and tell Manny, and Manny, he called me. He said, I hear that that happen, I said, Yes, that happen. Why she said that? Well, she was maybe you remember, maybe not, that we have trays, before, in the cafeteria have trays. She was pile, every day, she pile the trays in the floor, 22 in the carpet, and they caught it, but I don t know who would do that. I never know, I finded them, I put it in the table, or bring to the cafeteria, but this day, I see her doing. I tell her, I said, We cannot put that in the floor. We have to put it in the table, or bring to the cafeteria, because it s the truth, the reality She said, Go to your area, this is not your area Go to your area, you no have nothing to do with that. That s really what she said? I said to me. Well, she left, and I take the trays, and putting in the table, and take some, and bring to the cafeteria, what I supposed to do. After that happen, she want kill me. Manny said, You want me call the police? He want call the police I said, No, Manny I no want trouble. If he call the police, that was going to be big issue, maybe in the papers, in the news, and everybody going to know now. No need to know that, it s between her tongue, and I said no. He talked to her, and she finded me in the hall, and she hug me, and start to cry, Forgive me. I don t know , I left. That was one. Baeza Do you remember what year that was? Malav No, no. Another time, there was a lady. This one that I talking about, her name was Christy. This one I m talking about now, her name was Linda, Linda Doss. She said that there was a table at centennial lunch that needs clean. One student, we have a student, and I, we did both clean this table, and she said, Need clean. I said, Okay. The girl and I, we went back, and clean again, but what happen, the table have, somebody put a cigarette before, the people can smoke in the Union, not now. The top was like leather, and somebody put a cigarette and melt it. The more you scratch, the more you try to take it out, that not go because was the leather melted, but we went back and check, and clean again, the student and I. We were sent a break, she said that I didn t clean the table. I said, Yes, we did, because was true, I not lie. You cannot go over if you said lies and you get. What ridiculous is I never lied, never, because if I lie to you one time, you never trust me. If you lie to me one time, I never trust you. Only one time, I no trust the person who lie. That s what I never try to lie, if I kill one, and somebody ask, You did? I said, Yes, I did, I not going to say no if I did. I never do think like that, I decent person. Anyway, that lady said that we didn t clean the Did you clean the table? Yes, I did. She was on the other side of the table, she stand and try to slap me in my face. Do you imagine, in the workplace, somebody do something like that, but I move my head and she didn t catch me. I make a report, I write the report. I make it, but there was another girl that was there and also witness, I not tell her to do. She went and write the report exactly what happened, and report her too. Eventually, they called me again. 23 What you want we to do with that situation? I said, Nothing Forget it I forgiven her. You cannot live in the work place, Tiki-tiki-tiki . You know what I mean? I said, No, I m, forget about that, but besides, go for different direction. Maybe think I m being more trouble. I m the one I want work in peace and be happy, I go work every day happy, and I come home happy. I no want have a single problem because that take my sleep away. I come here to sleep, not to be in my bed spinning, and thinking, and worrying. I want be happy. This is my way to live. It s true. You have a problem that bother you in the bed. You go to sleep, don t matter you try not to remember. I no want that. I go home happy, I do all the best I can for Maria. It s for Maria, not for anybody else. (Laughs) Baeza Is that your advice for people? Malav Be yourself. Forgiving and forget. Everything cannot be .Get to the my mother said that you have to be yourself, and go ahead, and have a good life. If you do whatever the people want people laugh at me because I eat rice every day. Who care? This is my joy. (Laughs) They bullied me because I eat rice every day, somebody in my area. So what if I like rice? I growing up eating rice. In Puerto Rico, we eat rice at least once a day. Well, I cook rice, I have ready cook rice. You want some rice? I have ready rice there, good rice. I going to give you some before you go. I like it. Easy to care. I buy lunch, and I no eat the lunch I buy in the cafeteria. Sometime I buy and no eat. I give it to somebody else, or throw it away. Waste my money, but I bring my lunch, but they laugh about me. My daughter come to visit me one time, did you believe they tell her that I eat only rice? This is none what they business. Why they have to tell my daughter that? My daughter know, maybe, (Laughs) that that s what I eat, but let me alone. Let me alone, but what can I do? Be Maria, eat rice, and forget about. Baeza Did you have trouble when you first moved here finding food that you liked? Malav No because I always cook my own food. Yeah, I cook. Baeza You could find all the ingredients here that you needed? Malav Oh Oh, absolutely yes. Oh yes. It s only onion, garlics and pepper, and cilantro. Oil and chop it. Put in there, put chicken, meats there. Cook the chicken, take the chicken out. Put the rice, cook the rice, boom, easy. It s easy and good. I bring sometime to people there. Oh, they love it. They love it because they said, and when we have party or something, that s what they ask for, Maria fried chicken. I said okay, it s easy for me. Maybe not easy for somebody else, but me, it s easy. 24 Baeza Is there anything that I have not asked you about that you wanted to tell, some story? Malav (Laughs) Let me laugh first. (Laughs) I don t think so. (Laughs) Well, if I like to tell the people s is that be yourself. Be proud for who you are, no listen to what the people said. Listen to you because you never make the people happy. People never be happy. You do the best for yourself, and that s it, and that s what I do, and I keeping going. I no care what the people said. How old you are, nobody care. I m healthy, I cannot work, so what? If I cannot work, it s something different. If I cannot mop and do my job, so what? I be happy, I am happy person in the world, believe me. I never cry. Cry is not for me. I said, when somebody cry, you know why they cry? Do you cry? Baeza Sometimes, but why don t you? Malav Because people feel compassion for themself, they ll feel sorry for themself, and they start to cry. When somebody die, people cry. They no cry for the person who die, they cry for themself because they not going to see the person no more, so why am I going to cry? Sorry for me, no, remember that. When somebody die, you no cry because you cry for yourself. It s true, and I not going to see my mother again, (crying sounds). I lost that (crying sounds). No, I don t feel sorry for myself ever. Never cry, it s true. I not think is why, sorry for me? No, (Laughs) but yeah, my advice for the people is be yourself, and do the best you can for you and for the others. Because we both expect that we help people and be nice. Be nice is for free, you no pay to be nice, so let s got to be nice, and keeping going, and have a good life. Baeza Okay. Well, thank you very much. Malav You re welcome. ------- -------..