 Little Thunder My name is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is Wednesday, April 12, 2016. I m interviewing Marilee Nunnallee in Nowata, Oklahoma, for the Cowboys in Every County Series sponsored by the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University. Marilee, you obtained your bachelor s degree in home economics and early childhood development at OSU. You spent a number of years teaching, earned an MS degree, went to work for the county Extension office, and went back to teaching part time. Now that you re retired you are pretty busy volunteering, I understand, and I look forward to hearing more about your life, your OSU experiences, and your current work. Nunnallee Okay Little Thunder Where were you born, and where did you grow up? Nunnallee I was born at home in a little community called Lone Oak, which is about three miles north of Hartshorne, Oklahoma. I went to elementary school at . When I enrolled, it was a two-room school, but by the time I finished the eighth grade, it was down to a one-room school system. I ve had kind of a varied background and laugh about how many times I actually graduated. Little Thunder What did your parents do for a living? Nunnallee My dad was a coal miner. Most people who grew up in the southeastern part of the state, Krebs, McAlester, were involved in coal mining. My mother was a stay-at-home mom. Whatever needed to be done, she could handle it, a great role model for me. Little Thunder Brothers or sisters? Nunnallee I am the youngest of three children. My brother is six years older. My sister is eighteen months older, and she and I have a fabulous relationship, have a lot of fun together. We like to travel, and we do weekends in Tulsa together and just generally enjoy each other. 5 Little Thunder That s great. What was your favorite subject in school? Nunnallee Probably home economics. My teacher was very knowledgeable. Again, it was a whole new world for me in that my family didn t have a whole lot of money. When I saw my first set of matching pots and pans, I was really surprised I didn t realize people had that. I really enjoyed home economics. It was a real eye-opener for me, and I really loved it. That was it. Little Thunder Was the emphasis on sewing as well as cooking? Was it a Nunnallee No, most home economic programs, which are vocational, have to teach six or eight weeks of a gamut of different subject matters, so no, it wasn t concentrated in one area. Little Thunder What kinds of things did you do for fun growing up? Nunnallee Oh, gee, we were country kids. We had horses we rode. We even had a cow or two that we would ride. All of our city cousins would come and spend the summer with us. There was usually anywhere from three, six, maybe even nine extra kids during the summer. The boys could sleep outside, and the girls got the beds inside. We had a pond, and, of course, we swam two or three times a day. My mother was a fun-loving person. She would ride with us; she would do anything we wanted to do. There was a mountain which was called Round Top, and I think it s, like, two or three foot too short to be a mountain. That was one of our favorite places to track up to and have a lunch, and come back down. We were always on the go. Favorite memories, there was always gardens; there was always sheep; there was always cows, newborn calves, chickens. Anything we wanted animal-wise, we had it, dogs, cats. A fun thing we did was to dress up our animals. Our cats would have bonnets on them. Our dogs would have on a t-shirt, long before I ever saw that. As I say, we had a fun time growing up. Some of our cousins who lived in a big city, lived in Saint Louis, would spend the entire summer with us. They laughed and joked and said that was the reason they didn t go to reform school was because they were busy in southeastern Oklahoma. Little Thunder You had a great family summer camp, sort of? Nunnallee Yes, yes. Little Thunder Did you help make the bonnets and the t-shirts? Nunnallee I had always sewed. My mother sewed, and probably that was the reason why I was interested in sewing. She was one of the ladies who could cut something out without a pattern. I kind of followed that, and I was intrigued by the sewing machines and so on at high school. I was involved in 4-H 6 from the time I was nine. We showed animals. We would take a few animals to the Oklahoma City fair, which was really a eye-opener for country kids to get out. Also while I was in 4-H, I did judging for canning, which is something that went by the wayside. Of course, the sewing, the baking was always a lot of fun. Public speaking was fun. One of the fun memories from childhood was that most country schools had an elaborate Christmas program. The younger kids would put on a play. The intermediate kids and the older kids would put on different plays, complete with costumes and the singing, so that was a fun time, too. Those were good memories. Little Thunder Was there anything that kind of foreshadowed your getting into teaching? Nunnallee I really never thought about anything else. Keep in mind that those were the days when you didn t have high-school counselors. There was a junior college that was, like, twelve miles from the house. I had had varied experiences going there, and being the youngest of three, I kind of followed with what my brothers and sisters did. That was one reason. Of course, money was tight during that time. I don t know how my family handled things, other than my mother was one of those people that if she wanted to do something, she did it. The three of us went to college. Part of that time, Dad was unemployed because the coal mines had shut down. He did various odd jobs or worked on construction. We laughed we really didn t realize we were poor kids because everybody in town was in the same boat. Little Thunder Neither one of your parents had a college education? Nunnallee No, no. Little Thunder How did you land at OSU? Nunnallee First of all, I went to the junior college for two years. Both my brother and sister had gone there. It was just kind of the thing to do. I did have a job on campus for the president, Dr. J.N. Baker , of the college, and I inherited my sister s job that she had worked for him. Of course, she was a business major in college. My typing skills are next to none. I can talk on the telephone, and was really scary that I managed the office every other Saturday. He was real unique, real kind to us, and a big help to get us where we needed to be at OSU. Little Thunder Now, this is the president of the business college? Nunnallee The president of Eastern Oklahoma State College , which was a junior college, yeah. Little Thunder Got you. 7 Nunnallee Yes. Little Thunder How neat. You knew when you arrived at OSU you were going to be an education and home ec major. Nunnallee Right. Little Thunder What about some of your favorite classes? What were they? Nunnallee Well, I must tell you that my high school home ec teacher was a very strong teacher. I was kind of surprised. I did take tailoring at OSU and loved it. I hate to tell you this, but I still have the coat that I made. Of course, it wouldn t even begin to fit. I loved the coat, wore it for years and years. I know I should get rid of it someday because I know what will happen to it. I also took quantitative cookery. I learned a lot from the people who were in the class because many of them were men who came to Hotel and Restaurant Management. Here they were, they had worked summers or had jobs in restaurants, but none of them could make gravy. There was a few other things that these guys couldn t do. That was fun, and it was a real learning experience to be in the class with older students. They were really on a mission because they had, as I say, worked on cruise lines or from eastern part of the United States. I really enjoyed that class, too. I will say that was the day of the home management house. Have you heard about it? Little Thunder No Nunnallee Oh, my Your last semester on campus, you student taught for six weeks, which really doesn t prepare you for the real world. Six weeks you lived in the home management house. That was simply six girls in a household setting with a supervisor, and you worked with three budgets: a low, a high, and a medium. You did everything from having to when it was your turn to manage the kitchen, you had to go in and evaluate how much sugar you had left and what the cost was. You spent hours doing that sort of thing. You had to use cloth napkins at every meal. There was a person who had to do the laundry. There was a laundry person, a housekeeper, the cook, and there could have been some other duties. It was very, very stressful, very stressful. Then the last week or two, you had to find a place to live. You were out of the home management house. You were out of student teaching. You still had three weeks or more of school, and you had to find someplace else to live. They have since gotten rid of it. It was not a good situation. Little Thunder Not a good setup. Nunnallee No. Little Thunder Now, this is just for the home ec majors, right 8 Nunnallee Yes. Little Thunder this particular house? Nunnallee Yes. Little Thunder What building was it housed in? Do you remember? Nunnallee It was not in a particular house. It was on Monroe Street. It then turned into something for developmentally-challenged people. It may have just been offices. My grandson told me it was recently torn down because I had taken him by and shown it to him. It was a disaster, total disaster. The house is still being utilized. Little Thunder How did you cope with having to did you work while you were going to school? Nunnallee Yes. When I was at OSU, I was a RA. I was in, what, Murray Hall, which is now office spaces. I think I had about eighty-six girls, eighty-six freshmen. I tell my granddaughter that the girls had to be in their rooms at nine o clock, take their showers. They could study, and then at ten o clock, they could take, I think maybe, showers. Lights out at . It was really rigorous. The only great thing about being RA was that you had a room to yourself and a bathroom. The girls used to bribe me to come in and use the tubs because no tubs available in the dorms. (Laughter) The other thing I remember about living in Murray is that Theta Pond would overflow, and basically you just . Little Thunder When it rained? Nunnallee Yes, you would take your shoes off and wade everywhere. People are always astonished when I told them that we could not wear slacks or jeans to any class nor to the library. Those were the rules of the day. My, have things changed. Little Thunder That s been a good change. Nunnallee Yes. Little Thunder What are your memories of the library? Nunnallee Well, I just remember being overwhelmed. You spent a lot of time studying or looking for resource books. That was a learning in itself. Coming in as a junior, I don t think we had orientation to explain that, all those things to you, so a lot of that you had to learn. Everything was on the third floor for 9 home economics . Once you got there and got involved, you didn t have any problem, no problems. Little Thunder How about some other buildings on campus that you were at frequently? Nunnallee Well, there was home ec east and home ec west. Home ec west had the food service, or nutrition classes, and the early childhood. I spent quite a bit of time over there. I remember enjoying the student union. It had a lot of things that I wasn t familiar with, and really enjoyed it. I always went to the football games. I ve always enjoyed football. Back then, you ordered your tickets when you paid your tuition, so there wasn t a big expense in getting a ticket to go to the football games. Little Thunder You went to all the football games. Did you go to dances at the student union? Nunnallee Ironically, just a couple because I worked every other Saturday night in the dorm. As the girls came into the dorm, seniors could stay out an hour later, but then you had to go up and do room check. We made sure everyone was accounted for, so I didn t have a lot of free time. Little Thunder That must have cut into your dating life, too? Nunnallee Well, probably, probably. Living in a freshman dorm was different, too. Very few upperclassman lived there, so you didn t make a lot of friends with people your own age or in your major. A lot of that has changed, and that is for better. Little Thunder You did that for four years, or for two years Nunnallee For two years, yes. Little Thunder the duration of your student career. What faculty member or two had the largest impact on you? Nunnallee I really enjoyed (I m not going to come up with her name) who taught tailoring. She had been in some sort of accident. Even though her hands I think maybe she had a finger or two missing. Tailoring was just my thing. I really enjoyed her. She was not married and probably forty-five. Really enjoyed her. Then she had it was a small class. She had us over one Saturday for kind of a brunch. It was really nice and something that was new to me. I really enjoyed her. I also had a teacher who, she was one of our education teachers, McCaffrey. She had graduated from McAlester High School, a very tall, slender lady, and had been teaching overseas somewhere. She needed to come back to finish up, I think, part of her doctorate. She was very fun-loving, had a different view of education 10 because she had been teaching someplace else. I remember her. Edna, no it wasn t Edna. McCaffrey I think was her last name. Very fun teacher. Little Thunder Did you have time to get involved in any other campus activities? Nunnallee I really did not. Little Thunder How often did you go home while you were at school? Nunnallee Not very often because I had to work every other weekend. I did not own a car. You had to make arrangements with a friend if you were going to get home, so that really didn t work out. Little Thunder There weren t many people from the area that you knew on campus that had come from around Hartshorne or Lone Oak? Nunnallee Not really. Not really. Little Thunder Were your parents able to visit you once or twice at school? Nunnallee No, they did not come up. They came up for graduation, and I think that was it. Little Thunder What do you remember about graduation day? Nunnallee Oh, gosh, it was overwhelming because of the number of people. I was also impressed with the man who called out our names. My name is Italian and he was able to pronounce that without a flaw. I was impressed with that. Little Thunder Did you share any Italian cooking secrets when you were doing your cooking classes? (Laughs) Nunnallee Oh, probably not. I do a lot of ethnic cooking in that my mother s side of the family, we really don t know much of anything other than they were from some Slovak countries that were overran by Russia. We ve been trying, and I ve learned a lot but haven t been able to break through as to what port of entry they used and so on. Then my father s mother and dad, my grandfather came over by himself when he was twelve years old. Then my grandmother came over with her mother and dad and two other siblings. Her parents returned to Italy; they did not adapt to the changes. She and her sister stayed as, kind of, indentured servants or housekeepers until they got married. I do the cooking. We make tortellinis at Christmas, and I m the leader of the pack on that. I told my sister she needed to learn. Fix that, fix cabbage rolls, polenta. Been trying to find some recipes. I can remember the names of them, but they re not listed like that in cookbooks. (Laughter) 11 Little Thunder You mentioned Theta Pond overflowing. Do you have any memories of Old Central or Gallagher-Iba, those buildings? Nunnallee Other than knowing the location of Old Central, I think it was closed when I was there. Gallagher, I remember immensely from 4-H Roundup. Little Thunder They held that? Nunnallee Yes, all of our general sessions were held in Gallagher. Of course, we weren t allowed on the floor, but all the group sing-alongs and everything was held in Gallagher. Little Thunder How about events like Homecoming? Were the dorms involved in that in any way? Did you decorate Nunnallee I did not. I was trying to think. I don t think the dorms did, that I can remember. We did have a Christmas dance. That was an activity. Otherwise, no, I couldn t tell you. Little Thunder What was involved with the Christmas dance? Nunnallee Every one of those, or our building, had a huge living room, and all of the furniture was moved back. Truthfully, that was about the only time the living room was ever used. It was a just kind of a wasted space. I do have my pictures from that activity. See, no men lived in our dorm, which is different from today. The young men who were vet science majors ate their meals there. Little Thunder Oh, they did? Okay, they ate with the women Nunnallee Basically everybody in Murray was a freshman. Little Thunder because they were so close, because their building was so close. Nunnallee Yes. Little Thunder Interesting. What are your memories of the town of Stillwater? Nunnallee I walked to Stillwater, downtown, because I had no car. It was a good way to kill a wonderful Saturday. Murphy s was there and is still there, and is a place I still frequent. Katz was a fun place to go into. As far as eateries, the Hideaway was the big place to go on Campus Corner. Little Thunder Was that relatively new? Nunnallee I couldn t tell you, but it was one of the big hangouts for all the kids. 12 Little Thunder Okay, after graduation, how did you use your degree? Nunnallee I came to this area, and I taught general home economics for one year. There was a small school about six miles from here. I can honestly say that I learned much more than the students ever learned. They see a first-year teacher coming. I was cheerleader sponsor. I did the paperwork for the cafeteria. I planned the menus for the cafeteria. Gosh, junior class sponsor. They see you coming, and I would just agree and did all that. I did take the cheerleaders to a clinic, a one-day cheer clinic at OU. I don t know where we got our money or whatever, but one of the men teachers offered to drive us. He accidentally put the wrong kind of gas in the bus, and we got stuck, luckily, at midway. We made it back and sat there for hours until they sent another bus to pick us up. He just shared with me (he s a friend of my husband s) just recently shared that the reason why we had bus problems was because he put the wrong gas in the bus, and had never shared that before. Anyway, it was a good experience for me. Then I went back and got a second teaching certificate in special education. Little Thunder Where did you get that? Nunnallee At OSU. Our school here in Nowata had the policy that husband and wife could not work in the same building. Also, women could not wear slacks to school. You had to wear hose everyday. Quite a change. The home ec job would come open year after year. The superintendent said, I can always find a home ec teacher, but I can t find a special ed teacher. After several years, I told him, I said, I m not trying to hold this over your head, but I m ready for a change. Special ed back in those days, there was no curriculum. You would have children of all different levels. Each child, it was like an individual lesson plan that you had to do with them. I did that during the summer. I went and got another certification during the summer, and I d take a high-school girl with me to take care of my daughter. Little Thunder So you actually lived on campus that summer? Nunnallee I think it took me two summers. Basically, later on, UCAT University Center at Tulsa opened in Tulsa, which later became the branch that OSU has now. It was at the building where the social services DHS were. When I was working on my master s degree, I took a few classes there, but otherwise you had to be on campus. It was really a family decision when I decided to go back and get my master s. It was something I always wanted to do. Extension allowed release time. Otherwise, I couldn t have survived that. It s a whole lot easier now to get a master s degree and not have to drive two hours to get on to class. Little Thunder How did you meet your husband? 13 Nunnallee Basically, my husband is from Nowata. He had gone to Tahlequah to get his degree. My brother-in-law, he and my sister got married in August, and neither one of them had a job. That was during the Vietnam era. If he didn t get a job, then he was drafted. About the only job in the state was at Nowata. He was an ag major, had a master s degree, and he came to Nowata to teach science. They lived in Vinita. My sister taught business classes and taught at Big Cabin, which is now a consolidated school. They would go two different directions to teach and work, and Bill would have to work at the ball games and other kinds of things. Bob would invite him home to his mother s house to eat a meal before the games and so on. They were friends before I met him. Oh, I guess we met probably eight months to a year after he and Bill were friends. Little Thunder How about the county Extension office? How did you get involved with that? Nunnallee I had always been a volunteer with my children when they were in 4-H. I had taught high school for fifteen years, and I was ready for a change for a variety of reasons. They then allowed husband and wife to teach in the same building. My husband taught in an annex, and I never saw him unless he came to get his lunch or something of that sort. I knew I didn t want to watch my kids walk up and down the halls. I didn t want twenty-four-hour-a-day family. I thought we all deserved better than that. I was fortunate enough to be able to get on with the Extension office and not have to drive somewhere for a job. Enjoyed that. A lot of fun; a lot of hard work. Little Thunder What were some of your duties? Nunnallee I did most of the 4-H work. Then you had, we called it Extension homemakers. They now have another name, and I m not going to come up with it. Lots of responsibility. A lot of paper work. During that time, I think I worked with maybe four different agents, men. After a while, I thought, I m just going to file for county director. I can do that job because I do it if they ll leave it open for six months, eight months. I decided to file for county director. Very difficult working with budgets. At that time, most of your budget didn t come from the county. Nowata County was one of the first counties, probably the second or third, that passed the one-cent sales tax that helped to fund Extension. That was a plus. Through the years, as many things, the sales tax has dwindled from the Extension office and goes for other kinds of things. Anyway, probably the most difficult thing is working with the county commissioners and budget. The work, the people, again, it s an opportunity to learn so much. I know as much about gardening probably as many of the men did who came into take the job because I ve been raised in a garden. Canning and those things were just second nature to me. A job I thoroughly enjoyed, thoroughly enjoyed. 14 Little Thunder What motivated you to get back into teaching part time when you finally retired from the directorship? Nunnallee I d always been involved with the school in various, different ways. A lot of times I would be a speaker or serve on a panel. The superintendent at that time was a woman. The person who was in charge of special programs, she was a 4-H volunteer from the Tulsa area and drove to Nowata. I had known her for quite some time. She was really the one who approached me and said, We have the opportunity to write some grants, but we need someone to manage them. Would you do that? After the first year, I took over writing the grants. I did Parents as Teachers. Our school systems, a lot of them don t buy into it, and I wish they did because it is basically for young mothers. At the hospital, the babies are rated on the Apgar test from one to ten. Anything, I think it was over five was a red flag. Those were the people that we were trying to reach. My philosophy was, anytime you are working with a teenager, in Parents as Teachers you are going to have them in a school setting in four to five years with their child. Many times, the teenage girl was not having a good school experience. If we couldn t get in there and make that change, make her see how important it is to talk to her baby, to play with it, that they are their child s first teacher . What they learn from their mom stays with them. Also, when the state began the State of Oklahoma will throw out programs like that. They will fund it for, like, three years, and then they want the school to pick it up. A lot of the schools do not, especially the smaller schools. I had the philosophy with my community ed (and I did an activity with arts in ed) that I could raise money. The money that I charged for the classes, the instructor would get a certain amount, but I would keep a certain amount. I was able to fund Parents as Teachers for two years without the help of the school. Just could not get the superintendent to come across. We had Parents as Teachers for eight years. Little Thunder That s fantastic Nunnallee Yes, yes. I still see some of my little clients who are now working at the grocery store, and they re, like, twenty-one, twenty-two. I don t let them know that I know who they are. The same thing when I did community ed, it was Nowata s hundredth anniversary as a town. I hired a man from Bartlesville. His last name is McCorvey. You have to hire someone who is approved by the state arts council . Morris came over, and he wrote a play concerning there used to be a pyramid, a rock pyramid, in Nowata that sat about six miles north of town. It would give you the directions from that point to New York, California, just anywhere. Lo and behold, when they put a new road in, they pushed the thing over and buried it, so when he asked me something significant about Nowata that might fall into the era of the hundredth anniversary, that came to mind. I had worked on the project with 15 the county commissioners trying to locate it. We ran articles. I wrote articles for the paper. They had people with different kinds of machinery to come out in the area they thought it was. It s still buried out there somewhere. Maybe in my lifetime, someone will uncover it, or we ll have flood, and the water will wash somewhere, and we ll find it. I ve seen pictures of it. Anyway, that s what our play was about, and we ran it a night and an afternoon. I was able to make money, and that s how I funded Parents as Teachers for two more years. Little Thunder That s wonderful. It s not easy to raise money on a play Nunnallee No (Laughter) You have to have a lot of kids in it that they bring Grandma and Mother and Dad to see, yeah. Little Thunder It s kind of interesting because you can tell you had this big impact, and yet, as you say, you were writing grants, you were working behind the scenes. People don t know you as the person who implemented the program. Nunnallee Right. Little Thunder Neat, what neat accomplishments. Tell us about some of your volunteer activities now. Nunnallee Okay, probably during the past year with the state Retired Educators Association, I have served two two-year terms on committees. Basically, that s how you find out how the mechanics work up here, and that s what I wanted to do. I wanted to make a difference. I didn t join the Nowata retired teachers association because I was still working. I knew I couldn t participate, so I didn t join it for ten years later. I know how things work at the state level. I m involved there. We do such things such as post card writing when budget cuts were coming, and some other things. I truly made a difference, truly made a difference. Things that I do with retired teachers in the county is that there is a one-room school which has been renovated and was a thesis project of a lady by the name of Ann Dugger. Every spring it s coming up. Next week we have a workshop. The fourth graders in the county are invited to come out for a day to see what it was like to be in a one-room school. The lady who handles it taught in her early days as a one-room school teacher. We do fun things. They have to write with a pen and quill. They have to memorize. Oh, she has a hectograph. Remember that gel stuff? They make their own picture. Then, of course, the old fashioned slide is still there, the merry-go-round, the outhouses. The kids love the outhouses. (Laughter) They don t have to use them. They can go see what the outhouse is. Then we play some of the games like Annie Over, and we have a softball game. These are things that kids don t get to do at recess. They bring their sack 16 lunches, and we eat. It s a neat experience. Then we ve had a couple of senior citizen groups. One out of Grove come over, and I don t recall where the other one is from. People get married out there. They have class reunions. They used to have church out there. The kids can see what a real blackboard looks like. What are some other things? Well, there s a stage. There s a bible in the classroom. There is the picture of George Washington and whoever was president at that time. I don t remember who that was. Also, I ve been in every office for retired teachers at the local level . We do things at Christmastime for the elderly and for the teenage children who are not on the angel tree. The angel tree works. If you ve been on it one year, you can t be on it the next year. There is a place where people can go and get gifts, and we do it for teenagers because it s no fun to buy for teenagers. (Laughter) Nobody buys for teenagers. You pick up dolls or balls. I m active in my church. I m a member of the Catholic church here, a Eucharistic minister, and just recently quit being a lector. I got where I didn t feel comfortable doing that, so I quit doing that. The schools are not contacting us anymore to come and be test monitors. They re requiring the teacher who they take those kids out of their class to do it. That s a hard day because you just sit. You cannot read; you cannot fidget. I really don t miss that. Little Thunder You volunteered as an association for that? Nunnallee Yes. Other things I do for school, when they have their library fundraisers, they have the book fairs that come in that the smaller children can t write down titles and prices. That s what we do for that. Trying to think what else. I am an avid knitter and belong to a group in Bartlesville. We do all sorts of charity knitting, the chemo hats, the baby hats. The blankets we make now are to go over car seats, so that doesn t take much time. Thoroughly enjoy that. I was trying to think what else do I do with my time. Little Thunder Do you ever make it back to OSU for sports or other events? Nunnallee Our grandson is somewhere between his junior and senior year of engineering, and he invited us down to the spring football game this Saturday. I don t know if we re going to go or not. We just got in from Austin on Sunday and have played catch-up. We were there two weeks ago. My husband belongs to the Senior Golf Association. He s on a committee, and they meet in Stillwater because it s central. We were there just two weeks ago and ate at the is it the Red Dirt Bakery? Little Thunder Yes. Nunnallee Red Rock Little Thunder Red Rock Bakery. 17 Nunnallee Marvelous place. We re probably on campus four times a year, and we ll just go down to take our grandson out to eat, too. Little Thunder Is he the only grandchild that s attended OSU? Nunnallee Yes, our granddaughter I will brag on them. John was valedictorian of his class, and Meredith is a senior and is valedictorian of her class. Very proud of both of them. She, too, will be going to OSU and already has her room. I make blackout shades for their dorm rooms. She just got her room assignment last week and sent me the size of her window so I could fix the blackout shades. Little Thunder What a great idea. Your daughter, am I right, went to OSU? Nunnallee Yes. She and her husband both bleed orange something terrible. My husband and I had season tickets for a large number of years, and then we turned them over to Angela and Steve. They ve always gone. I have to tell this on Meredith. There s a boyfriend involved, so she wasn t sure that she . She thought she might go to Wesleyan University or she might go to Rogers State. Everybody just kept out. Nobody said anything one way or the other. Then it came first football game, and she said, I made up my mind. It s not like she hadn t been at every game since she s been three. Well, I ve made up my mind. I m going to OSU. She s excited about that. Little Thunder Are there many OSU graduates here in Nowata that you re aware of, other OSU alums? Nunnallee A lady who works at the library, Dorothy Gibson, is an OSU grad. I know there s people younger than I, but I m not going to come up with names right now. If you really want to know, I could make a list. (Laughter) Little Thunder What advice would you give to OSU students today? Nunnallee College is all about endurance, endurance and getting to know your professor. If you re having a problem, attack it immediately. Don t wait until tomorrow. Little Thunder How about faculty or administrators? Would you have any advice for them? Nunnallee I think they need to be very receptive. I am disturbed when I hear that a college professor has to curve his tests. Should not be happening. I m also disturbed I know a lot of schools do this, even where my little niece goes to private school. As a seventh grader, the assignments come over your internet. If they say, Ten o clock is our cutoff, it ought to be the cutoff. It shouldn t be ten after, ten fifteen, if you truly want your system to work. I 18 don t understand that concept. Course, I still struggle with my computer. I can do a newsletter, I can send an email to our newspaper, so on, but it s uncomfortable for me. I still try, and I still don t give it up. Kids are born with computers in their hands, and that s today s society. I just think it needs to be a level playing field. If you are an adult, you say you re going to do something, that s the way it is. Little Thunder What can you tell us about the town of Nowata or Nowata County? Nunnallee It has a strong history. As I say, it s over a hundred years old. Many of our buildings downtown have been restored. That speaks a lot. I did serve on the Main Street Committee when they had one. Some of the tile that they have now put boards up over are imported Italian tiles, and you can see the sconces and some of the decorations. The names are still on the buildings. I m very proud that we do have a downtown. For a number of years, I worked with the chamber of commerce, and I worked with the industrial board. Matter of fact, we had two men who came in. They had been in another town and were trying to sell an idea of putting together an airplane kit. They just ran out of time and money, but they were located here for a while. It was very interesting, especially when you work with people from big cities. When you live in a small town, your next door neighbor is a farmer. There s a huge difference. It s a fairly progressive kind of town. I m grateful we had a Love s station move in. We re going to get a Casey s station. We need industry. People are willing to drive sixty miles or an hour to go to work. We are a bedroom community. People drive to Bartlesville, Vinita, Tulsa, Coffeyville to work. A lot of our professionals do not live in town. Gone is the day when I started teaching, if you taught here you had to live in the community. It s a big difference when Johnny sees his teacher in the grocery store, and Mom says, Oh, how are things going? We ve lost that. We ve lost that, but Nowata is a nice community. Little Thunder Well, how do you think your degree has impacted your career and your life? Nunnallee Oh, gee, it s impacted my life greatly. Just going back to my class reunions, and I see people who said, Oh, I could never go to college. I was in the same boat they were. I just had a mother who knew how important it was, and she made things happen for us as far as getting to college. I d hate to even imagine what my life would be like. I ve had many, many experiences. When I was with Extension, I served on national committees, and I did it selfishly because if you were on a national committee, you got half of your expenses paid. I won t say I committee hopped, but I learned a lot about our organization, about cultures, about big cities. I would ve never traveled like that. That s one thing 4-H did for me. I was on different campuses, and I felt 19 comfortable when I went. No, I would hate to imagine what my life would ve been without a college degree. Little Thunder What do you think it is about Oklahoma State University that inspires loyalty? Nunnallee Oh, it s all about a feeling of community. I ran into a girl who had lived on my floor. Couldn t come up with her name, but I recognized her face. She had come back to her hometown of Dewey and opened a tea room. I walked in there and thought, Gosh, I should know this person. She looked at me, and she went like this. (Gestures) I said, Yes, we know each other. Let s just decide how. It s a strong feeling that you go someplace and you know when you run into a friend. I just truly enjoyed my time there, and I enjoyed my graduate work. I enjoy learning. I can t imagine not having the opportunity to learn and see what your potential really is. Little Thunder I need to ask you one fun question: Do you ever go to Krebs for supplies? Nunnallee Well, yes, I know where Krebs is well. I know where Lovera s is. I know Pete s Place. I still have a nephew who lives in that area, and a sister-in-law. I go back there two or three times a year. No, I wouldn t pass through Krebs without buying sausage. Matter of fact, I think I used the last of it up from Christmas. We have traveled that way by means of going to Antlers to my sister s for Christmas. They also serve it at a service station, or have it for sale there. Also we have a store in Oologah, the Apple Supermarket. They carry Lovera s products. You know, you re not that far from home if you re dying for good sausage. Course, Petty s went out of business, and you could always get it there. Again, I ve got raviolis in my deep freeze right now that I ve made. Little Thunder Sounds delicious. Is there anything you would like to add that we didn t cover today? Nunnallee Oh, gee, I wish I had been, more what do I want to say? When you come from a small town, you have small-town ways. Then to have the time to expand and to grow, yeah, OSU gave me that opportunity to find out who I really was and what I could be. Little Thunder Thank you for your time today, Marilee. Nunnallee Well, it s been fun. ------- -------..