 Finchum Today is November 20, 2015. My name is Tanya Finchum. I m with Oklahoma State University. Today we are in Stillwater to interview Marian Chitwood. This is part of our O-STATE Stories project, so thank you for being here today. Chitwood Thank you. Finchum I should say this is because Marian is retiring after thirty-one years with the OSU Library. She started November 19, 1984. Chitwood Thirty-one years ago. Finchum Thirty-one years. We ll get to that in minute, but let s start at the beginning and work our way forward, beginning with when and where you were born. Chitwood I was born on November the 23rd, 1940, in Perry, Oklahoma, in my Grandma Koch s house. That s my dad s mother. I was early. (Laughs) Finchum Born at home, early happy birthday then. It s coming up. Chitwood That s right. Finchum So you started here about the time you were celebrating your birthday too. Interesting, okay. You were born at home in a home? Chitwood I was born at my grandma s house. Finchum Brothers and sisters? Chitwood I had three brothers and a sister, but one of my brothers, the middle brother, died a few years ago. He was a preacher. 5 Finchum Where are you in the order? Chitwood I m in the middle. Have a younger brother, and a younger sister, and two older brothers. Finchum What did your parents do for a living? Chitwood My dad was to start off, just so you ll know what he was like. He was in the Army, but he was an Army cook so he was a good cook and we ate well. My mother, I m glad she can t hear this or see this, but she couldn t boil water. (Laughs) I mean she tried, but it just wasn t her thing. My mother was one of these very quiet introverts. She was one of ten kids. She was the with of all them, because she had five brothers too. I know when she was born, but I don t know her placement in the other girls. I never put their worried about their ages or nothing. She was a very sickly child. I think she even missed a year of school because she was sick. Now I hope that s right, because I have a brother who s a genealogist and I m sure he ll correct me. (Laughs) My mom was just a nice, pleasant person. She smiled a lot, and you never knew what she was thinking, but she took care of us. Finchum What was her name? Chitwood Alice Elizabeth Kirtley Koch. K-O-C-H, that s my maiden name. My mother was Kirtley, my dad was the Koch. Finchum I should say what was his name then? Chitwood I m sorry, Clarence Melvin. Finchum Were they from Oklahoma? Chitwood Yes they were. Now their parents were in the land runs that Oklahoma had. Now, I know a little bit about the history, but I don t want to put this down where someone could say, Hey, that isn t right (Laughs) I used to remember a lot of the details, but not anymore. Finchum Do you know where they came from, to get here? Chitwood One family came from Kansas and I believe that was my dad s folks. I think they lived in Hayward for a while. As far as what they did, I d say both families were primarily farmers. My mom s folks were originally, they re, I don t know why, but I know a little bit about them more than others. Probably because I just saw them more. Even though they both lived in town eventually. 6 My Grandma Kirtley, her maiden name was Sokol, S-O-K-O-L. I think that s how you spelled it. Her family was from the Old Czechoslovakia, so I always tell everybody, I m a bohunk and a gypsy. They even said that I reminded them of somebody in their family, that I was one of these happy people that laughed a lot, and liked music. I was a gypsy. (Laughs) Evidently that s the traits that I got. I don t know the years and stuff of when they came to the United States, but I just know they came from up north somewhere. It might ve been like Idaho or Iowa, but I wouldn t guarantee it, but they were in the land run too. Now I don t know if it was the same one because you know there was a couple there, but 1893 is what I think what I know for sure my grandma was in. Finchum And they landed in Perry? Chitwood That s right. They had a farm north of Perry. They d got some acreage there. I was telling somebody the other day that I used to live out of town, so when we d come home we d do a lot of roaming around. We would go to my Grandma Kirtley s farm north of Perry. They had big hills, and on the top of one of these little hills you could still see the imprints of where the buffalos were. I always thought that was odd because that had to be so many years, you could still see them. They weren t real deep or nothing, but it was interesting. Finchum For a little kid, too, that d be really cool. Buffalo wallows. Chitwood My family liked I guess because there were so many of us. It was interesting to hear the histories. When I was in high school I can remember my grandparents talking. At least my grandmother, my Grandfather Kirtley was a character. I need to I m going to get out of order, because I think of things as I m talking. Finchum That s okay. Chitwood My dad s dad died when he was in high school, so I never knew him, but my Grandma Koch, lived to be about ninety-two I think, but there was a reason why she didn t live longer. I remember her. She had a bad fall, I think it was in the 50s, so she went around the rest of her life with a crutch. She never got rid of it. I don t know if she actually needed it, but you never saw her without it. Just before her nine when she was close to being ninety-two, she had another fall. She lived by herself, she never had anybody with her after her husband had died. She had another bad fall and she was on some step coming out of a door and broke her hip. When you fall at that age you are so fragile. She only lived like six more months. I can picture her. She was very independent. The older she got the more careful you were eating 7 her pies, especially pecan pies because they had lots of shells in them. We all knew it, but we always made the effort. (Laughs) We had lots of napkins, wiped our faces a lot. (Laughs) I picture my grandma sitting in her chair at her house because now I m going to do this a lot. Every time I say something I think of something else. That s why when I write, and I like to write, there s a lot of it and it s not in any kind of order. Anyway, I picture my grandma sitting with a lamp beside her and reading her bible. That was the kind of person she was. She was faithful about going to church. As far as family gatherings, we didn t always go to each Thanksgiving and Christmas were the biggest ones, and maybe Easter. We might have even traded off a few times, but I remember mostly Christmas was at my Grandma Koch s. We spend Christmas Eve at my Grandma Kirtley s. We had big meals, we were all good cooks, wonderful cooks. My Momma s from such a big family, it was always a happy time. We had lots to talk about and lots to do, and we all got along. My dad s side he had two sisters and I think he was I don t know if he was the oldest. I don t know the order of their births. Finchum I m curious as to who taught him how to cook? Your dad? Chitwood The Army. Finchum The Army did? Chitwood Yes, the Army. Now oh shoot. Where do you want me to get? Finchum At the holidays, like at Christmas, what would be on the table to eat? What would have been your favorite thing that they cooked, if you had one? Chitwood Because my dad was a good cook, I don t remember exactly everything that he fixed, but they were always good meals. Like I said, everybody in my family was a good cook, so I just picture lots and lots of food on the tables piled up because you would all scatter around. Very few people could eat at a table, you were scattered all over the house, or on the floor, wherever they could fit you. There was every size range in the world because there were so many. My mom s family had married, and had kids, and those kids had kids. It was a houseful, but the food was always good. I don t picture a turkey for Thanksgiving, but you know it was there. Like I said, that food was something that was good, but I just ate what was there and didn t pay that much attention particularly. Anyway, like I said my dad was an Army cook and that s how he learned to cook. Now he did other things other than that, but that was the main thing 8 that I knew about my dad. Like I said, my mother couldn t boil water. She d try occasionally to make a cake, but it was always split down the middle (laughs), but she did try She made us share, us kids. She was real particular about telling us what to wear to school. We never liked what she suggested. (Laughs) Finchum Where did you go to school? Like elementary school on up? Chitwood I went to elementary school all the way through high school in Perry, Oklahoma. The grade school was in a different part of town. Finchum What was the name of it? Chitwood Just Perry it was just Perry Grade School. Yeah, Perry Elementary grade school. I never thought about what it was called. Perry Elementary School probably. Then Perry the high school, was just Perry High School. We were the Maroons. (Laughs) The cheer squad was the shoot, I m going to remember this forget this. Why did they call me this? I ll to have to think. It just left me. We were called the Red Hots. Finchum What year did you graduate from high school? Chitwood Nineteen fifty-nine. Finchum Did you have a favorite subject? Chitwood I liked school. I can tell you what I didn t like. (Laughs) I liked school. Back then things didn t have names like they do now, but I think I might have had a learning disability in math because up until say the sixth grade, I was one of those people that liked school. I did my homework and all that kind of stuff, and I made good grades. And I made a few B s, but mostly A s. Then I got to about the seventh grade in the algebra and that kind of stuff, the geometry. It was like if I couldn t see it, I couldn t do it. In other words, when you do all that other stuff you do you have figures written down where you actually see them and you can I didn t have any trouble with that. I mean I could have a whole bunch of numbers, but I could do them and can still do them really well like that. Algebra, I was a lost cause. Geometry wasn t horrible, but it wasn t good. It was like drawing pictures. Forget algebra. In those two classes I always tell everybody I was in the class where all the football players were. I don t remember too many girls around me. Maybe they stuck me in that class because they thought we all needed the most help. (Laughs) It was a lost cause. 9 I honestly believe, because I had made such good grades, that my teacher who happened to be the same man for each of those last two years I was in school as far as I don t know what I took in eleventh and twelfth grade. I remember the algebra and all, but it seemed like it was a little earlier than being a junior or senior. I don t know if you had to take math every year or not. I just don t remember. I put that out of my mind. And I m going to get distracted and forget what I was telling you. I think I passed those classes because the teacher felt sorry for me and I got a D plus. (Laughs) Oh well, that s just life Finchum A D? Chitwood D The bad stuff, dumb plus (Laughs) I accepted it. I was just glad I got through. An A was the top grade, with D being a passing grade before an F which meant you failed. The letter E wasn t used. Finchum You had talents in other areas. Chitwood Yeah, I don t mean to sound I get asked that a lot just because of things I ve done the later part of my life, but when I was you have to understand that I wasn t one of these people who mixed well with other people. I always felt like I was in a lower class than my classmates. Honest, I did. I think I need to tell you about where I lived and how we lived before I tell you about my school days. My dad was one of these people that it was tough times when he got out of the Army in trying to feed his family and find a job that he could do. He s had so many jobs, I couldn t even tell you all of them. When I was growing up, this was from about six years up because up until I was five years old I remember where I lived. I lived by my mom s I think our house was right next to my mom s mother s house. It was on Cedar Street in Perry. There was a lot families back then and matter of fact, I had another aunt that lived in that area too. So we were close to each other and we could help each other out. I think that s where we were living when my dad was in the Army. Then when he got back home, he got a job somewhere in there after the Army, working for the City of Perry. He took care of the parks. We had a football stadium that was in an area where it was on one end and on the other end was the baseball field. Then on the other side, one side was the highway. I think it s 177 and the other one was just a dirt road and there s a huge hole in the ground where the City of Perry got rock and dirt. I was out in the middle of a lot of dangerous territory. (Laughs) Where I was living was the unusual part. My dad was the person who took care of the stadium, which had the football and the baseball field. There was what used to be a dressing room for the athletes. There were two dressing 10 rooms. One of them still existed and they used it, but the other one they made into a house. It was made of sandstone and it wasn t that big. The rooms weren t that big. I think it was two-bedroom because my brothers and I all had more like twin beds, and we all slept in the same room. My mom and dad had their room. The windows were those windows that were up real high, but they were only the narrow rectangles, so you didn t see anything. In the summers it was cool and in the winters it was cold. We had our own playground because of all the activities that would be there. They would have their let s see, what do you call it when they have track and field. Those kind of days. They would leave things laying out until they were done using them. In other words, they might last a week or so, whatever events were taken on. A lot of this stuff, we would use it and play with it. I remember learning to pole vault. It s a wonder we didn t kill ourselves. Anything my brothers did, I did. Since there was three boys, and I was the only girl, because my sister didn t come along until I was ten years old, I didn t know how to be a girl. I didn t learn anything from my mother and because she did have sisters, I had one aunt in particular who would take I don t know if she took them all. We never went anywhere at the same time, not very often. She would keep us for a couple of weeks and make us feel special and buy clothes for us, and make clothes for us. It was really nice because we got a lot of special attention. Because my mom s family she was raised in a Christian family. They all had good lifestyles. I don t know how to explain it when I say my mom was she was just very quiet and kept to herself. She didn t talk a whole lot, so we learned a lot from her sisters, the ones who took care of us. I m really glad. I think I m the person I am because of one of my aunts. I tell everybody one aunt more or less raised me. She was the one that taught me about keeping good manners, and trying to be clean and neat, and friendly. So I did have one special aunt that I liked, we liked them all. Then on my dad s side they were just I don t know how to explain it. They kept more to themselves. I never saw them as much as I did my mom s family and I m not sure why. Wouldn t know how to explain it, but they were all friendly. Like I said, we had a good time when we were together. Mainly probably because we were spending we spent our holidays together. Because of where I lived in that stadium, it was a football and baseball stadium. It had a sandstone wall all the way around it. I mean all the way around it until you got to one side. The side that had the hole and stuff. It was just like it was only part way. So I never saw anything except those walls and those giant field lights. One of those field lights were a little bit 11 farther than that wall. (Gestures) In other words, if I opened that back door it just more or less almost hit you in the face. It was really scary when there was a bad electrical storm because lightning likes to hit that stuff that s up there high. I can tell you one occasion. The floors in this building we lived in were concrete. I can t remember any carpeting, I think it was all linoleum or something like that. I know this one room, we called it the storeroom, was at the back end of the house. It was next to where the football stadium is. The backdoor opened up and like I said, the first thing I saw was those light poles or at least one of them, and they were huge. I happened to be standing at that door with the door open and a lightning bolt hit the pole. You can understand if I m here and that pole s right here it literally knocked me onto the floor and my family, my brothers and sisters, we were all there. I don t remember where my dad was. They said I was unconscious, but it couldn t have been more than a minute or two. I remember seeing blue lights and my brothers told me that they saw blue lights too because I guess all the lightbulbs in the all my lamps, the lamps in the house, they did something weird. I don t know if it blew a fuse or what it did, but it was evidently pretty scary. I had no obvious damage from it other than it knocked me on the floor , but I ll never forget it. I remember those blue lights. (Laughs) Anyway, that was just a little side story. Finchum Must have had on rubber sole shoes. Chitwood We didn t wear shoes much, (laughs) so I don t know, don t remember. This room I was in, we called it the storeroom because that s probably what it was or part of it might ve been because that s where our bathroom was. We didn t have what you would call a bathroom, with a basin and the big mirror and faucets, all that stuff. I remember the commode and there must ve been like a shower head like the athletes would use to take a shower because there was nothing on the floor. It was just concrete, and there was a drain in the floor. That s where my mom did her washing. She had a washing machine and two washtubs. One for the bluing and the rinse, and the other one that was for washing she had two. I m not sure why they had two, but then I m getting off. We didn t have a bathtub, so anything you did, you did it with a shower. It was just a lot of room in there for you to be in there all by yourself. (Laughs) Of course we only had one bathroom for all of us together, too. I don t remember the locking system or nothing, but it was private. You had to make sure you never had that door open because it opened right up into the field. (Laughs) 12 On the backside of our house we had a small area where my dad had some kind of a workshop area where he other than just whatever he was working on. I think he had a little table in there. There were chickens in there, too. You had to be careful where you walked. We did have a garden, but it was on the other side of the road and it was a great, big, garden. Back then I was young enough we didn t have to worry about helping with any of the tilling and putting stuff in the ground, but we did have to help get what was in the garden out. I can remember going out there barefooted and stepping on those stickers that were like horny toads I can t remember what we called them things. Finchum Cockleburs? Chitwood They weren t cockleburs, but boy they hurt if you got them. Like I said, we didn t wear shoes much. There was a lot of dirt around there, a lot of rocks. I don t remember a whole lot of toys. I tell my kids when I grew up we played in the dirt with the rocks, and sticks, and used our imagination. My brothers had bicycles. I didn t have one of my own. To give you another little story I don t know how long I m supposed to talk because I can talk all day long I ve been alive a long time Seventy-five years. (Laughs) But anyway, like I said we were out in the middle of nowhere and we more or less did what we wanted. I guess you d say we were very unsupervised. We were more or less on our own. I know my dad slept in the day a lot, so he might have had more than one job for all I know. Finchum Did your classmates know that that s where you lived? Chitwood It was probably a while before they did. I had to ride we had to ride a school bus to school and they knew where I got off. We didn t go towards the houses, we went towards the stadium. There was an entryway and it was a nice looking stadium. It was kept neat well, my dad kept it clean and neat. I just know that they knew that we were poor. Most of my clothes were hand-me-downs. The only nice things I had would be things that my mom s family would give to us. That s one reason why I liked this one aunt in particular, she d buy me pretty clothes to wear. What I remember growing up and wearing all the time was gathered skirts because they were easy to make. You just gathered the waist, put a band on it, and hemmed it. As far as tops, I don t remember much about the tops. It was just classic blouse. Like I said, when we went to school we wore shoes, but when we were at home they were gone. That s probably why I m flat-footed. (Laughs) Course boys it was not so much you didn t wear jeans back then, or girls didn t. If you did you had to wear a skirt over them or wear them under your dress or skirt. I don t know what they thought we were going to do in them. Just because I m a girl don t mean I m going I 13 did grow up with boys, but I didn t act like a boy when I was going to school. I was just a girl. Because of our isolation in the stadium, I really believe this is why I didn t know how to interact with other people. I didn t have any friends. Everybody I saw was usually a boy or a man. There weren t any girls coming to the stadium except for maybe the field day track meets. I didn t have any contact with them. The only girls I knew , other than two female cousins, were the older ones and then they very rarely came to our place for any events simply because it would ve been so crowded and there wasn t room for anybody. Because we had so many we always met at my Grandma Kirtley s house or at my Grandma Koch s house. We never met at my house. We weren t people did come family did come to see us, but usually it was the older ones. It wasn t the kids. The kids weren t with them. They came more or less to see my mother, not necessarily us kids. Like I said, it sounds awful, but it was kind of like being in a prison. I didn t see anybody. Then when I got to school I didn t know how to intermix in I never had any friends who were girls. I had enough brothers, I sure didn t want to mess with any of the others. Maybe that s why I liked school so much. I had somebody who was telling me what to do and teaching me something. I always liked school and tried to do my best. I pretty much did all of it at school. I don t remember doing a whole lot at home. I know that every year at Christmas we got a new binder. You know, one of them things you zip up, put your papers and stuff in, and pencils, and maybe a new box of crayons. That was our Christmas. I really don t remember any toys. I think I did get a few dolls through the years, but my brothers weren t too kindly to them. They didn t last long, they had a lot of crushed heads. I did learn to ride a bicycle on my brothers bicycles. One of the events where I was trying to be just like them, I just about killed myself. I mentioned there was this big hole in the ground. To get into this place where they got the dirt and the rocks, there was a very steep incline entryway where the big trucks would go down. That s where my brothers liked to ride their bikes, go roaring down that gravel road gravel And it wasn t that little stuff, it was the big stuff. I decided if they could do it, I could do it. I convinced them that it was my turn, they should let me have a ride going down that hill. I got on that bike, I probably had to have some help getting on it because it was too big for me. I got down the hill alright, but I didn t know when to stop. I crashed, flipped off of that bicycle head first into that gravel. I don t know what it did to me. I kind of remember running down the got back up the hill and ran to the house. 14 It s like I ve hit my head a lot of times doing things I wasn t supposed to that and it was several times I did stuff like this when we lived there. This one occasion I remember running to the house and I didn t even realize it, but somebody from my mom s family was visiting, so there was somebody there. There was a wire across the road, boy you talk about adding insult to injury. I gave myself a neck job running into wire. The people would drive down this little side road. It was for us and for the big old trucks. There would be people who would want to come to the stadium and mess around in the stands and fields, but to keep them out they put up a clothesline wire across the road. I ran right into it. By the time I got to the house I don t think I was even conscious. I guess you d call it semiconscious. When I got to the house, I remember getting there, and then all of a sudden it dawned on me. I was sitting there talking to these people who were visiting my mom, but I didn t remember I don t know when they got there. They were probably already there when I walked into the house. I had enough trauma to my poor head that I wasn t quite with it, but I really think that the reason I am so tough now is because I survived so much. I guess it just makes you tougher. I don t know, either that or I have a really thick skull. (Laughs) Oh, golly. This makes me think of all the things that s happened to me. When I was five years old, this was when we were living on Cedar Street, and there are all these relatives. My mom, this is when my dad was still gone and my mom would go visit with her sisters. One time she left, it was in I don t know why, I don t remember what time of year it was. I just remember it because of what happened. My mom said we couldn t follow her. My brothers were in the house. My older brother, he was the man of the house. I decided I was going to go anyway, so he grabbed me by the arm and pulled me back into the room. Well, he pulled me hard enough I fell into this wrought iron black stove that was in our living room. I split my eyebrow right here and I just remember lots of blood. Don t know whose car we were in, because my mom did not drive, but they got me to our family doctor. I don t remember how many stitches I had, but I had a nice big scar there. Would you believe that same year, probably in the summer, my brothers were playing ball, with a bat and a ball to each other, in the backyard. They wouldn t let me play with them so I was just dragging a rope along in the dirt and I thought, I ll show them. I ll get in their way. I walked right in front of them, got hit in the same place with a ball bat. Exactly the same place. You can just barely see the separation of where the scar was and it was in this eyebrow. (Laughs) I probably don t even have all my eyebrow hair in there anyway. 15 To have that happen to me twice, I said I got hit in the head or something in the head all the time. (Laughs) I guess it was because I was acting like a boy all the time, should ve been acting like a girl. Anyway, I survived that too, but like I said, it didn t seem to harm my brain any. (Laughs) Okay, stop it right there, I ve got to get back on track Finchum When you say your dad was gone, was he in World War II? Chitwood Yeah, I mean yes. Finchum You would ve been four or five? Five, six, somewhere in there? Chitwood When I was five and all that stuff was happening to me on Cedar Street, all my mom s sister s husbands were in some kind of service. I was used to seeing lots of uniforms around. I really don t remember a whole lot in that stage of my life. I just remember where we lived and a couple funny little things that happened they were memorable to me is why I remember them, but that s about it. I can remember my mom braiding my hair, and I went somewhere. I don t know if I got on a bus or what I did, but I know I was going to school somewhere. So I know I was five and six when this stuff happened with my eyebrow. I don t know when exactly. I think I was probably around, maybe close to nine or maybe in that area when we moved to the stadium. Like I said, we had a lot of things happen to us there. Finchum Were you still there when you graduated from high school? Chitwood Oh no, my dad changed jobs many times. When I was maybe eleven or twelve, somewhere in there we never owned our own home. Every place we were living was either provided or we rented. I know this is hard to picture, but you know when a town grows it just things kind of pop up and get surrounded? There was this great, big two-story house with at least there was a porch that wrapped around the front and side. It was a neat place and I think somebody rented the upstairs. Either that or it was just there and for some reason we couldn t use it. We used the bottom part. It didn t have much of a backyard, but on one side of it was this big sandstone building that belonged to Schlumberger. Here we go, they would bring these old tar trucks. I grew up hating the smell of tar because those same trucks were out there where I lived at the stadium, too. My brothers and I learned how to we used tar for chewing gum. (Laughs) You could do that, if it s clean That s what we did. It was kind of waxy, but it was like chewing bubblegum. I don t remember how long we chewed it and it didn t turn our teeth black as far as I know. It never stuck together. See how easy I get sidetracked. Everything I do or remember tells me another story that I think, Oh shoot, I can t leave that out either. I could be here all day long. (Laughs) 16 You see I got sidetracked, forgot what I was going to tell you oh Where we lived. Anyway, here s this house, here s this big old Schlumbergers and it s not far from the town square. It probably wouldn t amount to be maybe only two, maybe three, blocks from the town square of Perry. On the other side of me was a car lot. It was some kind of business that was next to it. I remember just the glass fronts. We lived next door to these it wasn t a big lot, but it might ve been it was probably they had used cars there and the new cars were in the building I think. Across the street from us there was one of these little white-frame houses that you picture remember Little House on the Prairie? It looked like a one-room schoolhouse. The little house was about that size, it was little. This older German man and woman lived there. They spoke English, but they pronounced all that was what is it? Is it V s that they pronounce like a W? (Laughs) I remember that, but they shared their cellar with us and let us come over to watch their TV .. Beyond Schlumbergers there was a place that sold chickens, little baby chickens. I don t remember what else was on the other end. In other words, if it wasn t for that little house across the street, it was like we were living in the middle of town, but it was a big old house. As a matter of fact, on the other end, at the end of the block across the street, there was a lumberyard. The reason it made me think of that was because that lumberyard caught fire one time and we stood on our porch and watched it burn. It was kind of scary because it wasn t that far away, especially if it had spread. I can tell you, every story I tell you I can think of a whole bunch more that just because of the time and the place it makes me remember other things that happened too. Finchum If you lived that close to town, the Carnegie Library wasn t far? Chitwood The Carnegie Library was the square was really a square and the library was on the far side of the square. In other words, I was on this side, and you d have the whole square and the courthouse, and the Carnegie Library was on the corner. I did go to that library a lot, I did. I d come home from school, sometimes I d go straight to the library. Everything I did I walked because when I was in high school it was only I don t know how many blocks it was, but it wasn t far. It was close enough that I could walk it. It might ve been let s see, Eighth Street. What s even better is my Grandma Kirtley lived across the street from the area where the high school was. I think of things when I m picturing it in my mind. It was just a typical high school that you see pictures of. The brick buildings and the double pane double windows next to each other and all. I can t remember if it was two it must ve been just two-story, but that s where I went to high school. There was a junior high, which was close to 17 there, but a little farther on down. That s in since I was, I think the sixth grade was the last grade I was in before we moved. When I was in grade school I had my dad s sister and her husband and family lived across the street from the school grounds. It s funny, but I was around a lot of family a lot of times because they were just spread out in in just the right places. If I had to I can remember going to my aunt s house and waiting for somebody to pick me up. For some reason while I was in school I rode the school bus until I got in high school. Then I just started walking because where I was living. That was when I lived in the big house between the businesses. Finchum You graduated in 1959. Chitwood Yes. Finchum Then what did you do? Chitwood Oh gosh . Finchum Before, while you were in high school, did you think about coming to Oklahoma A M? Chitwood Oh, let s put it this way. I made really good grades, like I said, and then in that little time period where the math I couldn t handle brought my grade average down enough where I could ve gotten a small scholarship, but then my dad would have had to pay for the rest. Back then there weren t a whole lot of things that somebody could do for a job especially that would make you enough money to do something to go to college on. I knew that even though I was offered a small scholarship, it wasn t going to be enough to get me through school, and I knew my dad wouldn t have anything to help me with. I sure didn t have anything. My dad was like I said, he had a lot of jobs. One of the last jobs he had was a policeman. He had enough friends, knew enough people, that he knew how my oldest brother graduated, I think it was in 56. He got a job working for the FBI as a fingerprint expert in Washington D.C., so when I was going to graduate, and I didn t have a clue what I was going to do I thought, I ll go to work for the FBI too. I had an interview and I got the job. You have to understand that I spent time with family away from home, but I d never been anywhere by myself. Because my brother was already there, he came home and I graduated, I think it was May the 21st, 1959, and it was the first part of July, after the Fourth of July, he was at home and he drove me and a roommate of his back to Washington D.C. He had already found 18 me roommates and a place to live. It was in the area where he was living too. When I went to Washington D.C, I didn t know a soul there except my brother. The roommates he picked for me were just really nice, homey people. Nobody that made me nervous or out of place. I had been there three months, and he was drafted to Korea. Now it was during peace time, but they were still drafting people. I was on my own then. I didn t have a car, everywhere I went, and my friends didn t have cars either, we all rode buses. It was a pretty good ways from where I lived to where I worked, but it was pretty much a straight shot there. It wasn t that hard for me to figure out. I can remember one time getting lost where I decided to do a little touring. (Laughs) Well I got lost. I couldn t remember how to get back where I came from. I think somebody must ve just found me and told me how to find the bus that would get me back to where I needed to go, but that was pretty scary. I was out of high school, but I wasn t an adult yet. Finchum Eighteen years old? Chitwood Oh shoot. I was old when I started school because anyway, when I graduated I was already eighteen. So I was eighteen and a half when I went to Washington D.C. Finchum Very nice brother to help you do all that. Chitwood It was. He had a car (laughs), not that I was in it much. Finchum He didn t leave it for you when he was gone? Chitwood Oh no No, you know I don t know what he did with it. Haven t thought about it. He had more than one. Heck, my family the men, cars was their thing. What s funny is I married a guy who was a car nut too. Finchum What was your job in D.C.? Chitwood When I went there I didn t know what I was going to be doing. They give you an aptitude test. However they figured it, they decided I could be a fingerprint expert. It took us ninety days, I think. We learned to recognize each of the types of prints, and we learned how to classify them and learned how to fill out fingerprint cards, just looking at them. We had special little marks and things that we used to show the direction, the loops, or the fingerprints especially loops. We had arches, and they looked like arches. We had whirls, which were whirls. You learned how to count ridges of the fingerprints, and you learned to identify things that made them stand out when you had to search to find the matching fingerprints. 19 We were given something that we had to find. It was just a copy of another fingerprint card. We would search through them and you stood you were on your feet. When we started they put us in an area in what they called the identification building. It was mostly all fingerprints and I think it was a seven-story building. Oh yeah, everybody picture all these sheriff s offices, police departments, all the services because they had civil as well as criminal records. They had the old metal file cabinets, the kind that was about this wide and hit me about right here. (Gestures) You had to be careful because when you pulled the drawer out you were more and less searching, a lot of times, practically the whole drawer. You take out as much as you could, if you couldn t do it through the drawer, and set it on the cabinet on top of it. You learned how to put your hand behind it, and you learned how to use your fingers. You know how you flip pages to make a cartoon? That s what you were essentially doing. When you were flipping those fingerprint cards it was like watching a slow-motion movie. Your eyes was focused on that one spot and you didn t look at anything else. You d see it was really weird. You d see it right away When it was there, it was there, and you knew it (Laughs) Then you have to stop and think, it was really tiny, but we used an eyeglass, which was a magnifying glass on a stand with a little stem on it on the side. You just leaned over the cabinet and put that thing down and you would look at all the fingerprints on that card. You would have ten choices usually, but a lot of peoples hands aren t perfectly clean and clear especially when they re getting fingerprinted. You had to find something that made one of those a little bit more easy to see something than all the others. It was kind of some of those fingerprints were really hard to even find anything to hunt for. It was you had to be paying attention to what you were doing. I learned to do it and I did it good. Course we it was just these huge rooms with nothing but filing cabinets and people bent over them looking through all these fingerprints. Every now and then you d have to stop and talk to somebody, so there was talking going on, but you didn t talk and do this at the same time. If you found a wanted person, you got to stop and take that fingerprint card down to the main office where give it to them because this is something you wanted to handle right away. All the other stuff you just put it in a pile and say these are the ones you found and then you gave them to you had a supervisor that you d give stuff to. At the same time we were searching the criminal records, we were also searching the civil and the criminal were mixed together in other words. Because they had to be where they were classified and you wouldn t want to have two separate places to search for the same fingerprint. Finchum Double the work. 20 Chitwood Yeah. A lot of times something you found, you didn t know all the time if you were looking for, what you were looking for. You were looking for a fingerprint. You didn t know why. Finchum And that was before computers. Chitwood Oh yes It s so totally different now. Now I ve never been there to see the computerized version of the way they do things, but it would be beyond my understanding to even try to figure it out. I have seen some the library has some law enforcement magazine-type things, and they even have the exact same book in the Government Documents department that I learned to do the fingerprints from, in our department. It was a federal it was a book that was put out, I guess, by the Federal Depository. Anyway, it was there because I found it. Just all of a sudden there it was. I thought, Oh this is exactly the same book I learned from. I even had a copy of my own that I have at my house, somewhere. It s something you never forget. I could still search fingerprints and find the one I m looking for if I can get in the right place, because I don t remember all the details about classifying them. I know the different types of fingerprints, but I couldn t tell you how to locate them in a drawer, to look in the right spot anymore. I ve forgotten that part. If you just had me a picture of a fingerprint and I had to find a picture of that same fingerprint I could still do it. As a matter of fact, for 4-H and some school classes, when the kids were in school, I even gave a couple little talks and showed them how. I d let them make fingerprints with ink and stuff. They thought I was pretty good stuff. (Laughs) Finchum You are Chitwood Anybody who was trained for it could do it, but how many people do you know went to Washington D.C.? It sounds fantastic to say you re a fingerprint expert. Expert wasn t in what I would call it just meant I knew how to do search fingerprints and classify them. I wasn t any expert. You had to have a lot of training to be that. These are the guys who could find little pieces, because agents had to go to all these airplane crashes because a lot of times the only way they could identify them was just pieces of skin with fingerprints on them. Course you don t have fingerprints just on your fingers. Your body s covered with them. None of them would be the types that I would search because all I did was a fingerprint, but the guys the agents especially, trained far in advance of what I was, they were able to identify just pieces of things. Sometimes your lip prints. Nobody s lip prints are the same. There s something about your tongue too, course your toes and the palms of your 21 hands. I mean, it s a miracle if you stop and think about that you are so different from somebody. It was neat. Finchum How long did you do that? Chitwood I did that for okay, I went to Washington D.C. in July of 1959. I think it was December of 61, my mom and dad got divorced somewhere in there in the fall. Like I said, my mom needed somebody to help take care of her and the kids. She couldn t do it on her own. There were very few things she could ve done to earn her keep because my dad just left and left his family. The FBI doesn t normally transfer clerks because agents get transferred about every two years, but a clerk, no way, but it was a hardship. They did let me transfer. I transferred from Washington D.C. to Oklahoma City, and then I took a train home every weekend, and I would help do the house cleaning, the laundry, the grocery shopping, and any cooking I could do while I was there. I did that for three years. Finchum Wow. Chitwood My brothers were one brother was still in D.C., but the other one was going to college. He s the one that eventually became a preacher. My youngest brother, he was just I m three years older than him. Then I had my sister, I was ten years older than my sister. She was the one that needed somebody to help take care of her. I lost my train of thought. My mom couldn t do it on her own. When I decided they were old enough to take care of themselves with just my mom there, I knew somebody that was living in Illinois and I thought, I m moving to Illinois. (Laughs) Finchum Ready for a change? Chitwood Well, change nothing, I was after somebody. (Laughs) I had kept contact with this guy I worked with because he was in fingerprints too. He was going to college, George Washington University, while he was working for the FBI. He had intentions of becoming a FBI agent. I won t go into any great detail, but he didn t become a FBI agent, but he became a lawyer eventually. I had been with his family a lot and they liked me and I liked them. They were just really nice people. I just decided that there wasn t no way I was going to get a chance to know this person better and get closer if I wasn t close. We wrote letters and talked on the telephone, that kind of stuff. I d occasionally get to see him just because his parents are traveling through from once place going to another, and they would stop and make sure wherever I was living that I got to see them all. Anyway, I decided I wanted to move to Illinois where I could be closer because there was a field office there. I said they don t normally transfer clerks, well I d gotten transferred one time because I was a hardship case, 22 but the second time I actually got transferred and it was on my request was because this field office was having trouble keeping fulltime people working for them. They were in desperate need of clerical help. They knew I had all this training and administrative-type training. This is now moving from Oklahoma City to Illinois, so they knew I had a little bit of special events in my life that made me a little more attractive to them. They knew I was an adult and could take care of myself. I transferred to Springfield, Illinois, and I could go into a lot more detail. Let s put it this way, nothing came to pass. I mean I knew this guy for fifty years. I even knew him after I was married here in Oklahoma. He was a friend in other words. He was just a friend, but then yeah, that wasn t that long ago. There were some events in his life I didn t approve of so I thought, No more. This is enough. So that was history. I was in Illinois when I met my husband on a blind date (Laughs) It was interesting, but I was working for the FBI still. He had just gotten out of the Navy, and he lived his landlady had a niece who was working for, it d be kind of like the dean s office, in Springfield, Illinois, with me in the same building. She told me this landlady told this girl to tell me that she knew somebody that was just out of the Navy and she wanted to introduce us. Like I said, I chased this one guy for so long. I said to them, No way If he wants to see me he s going to come find me. I was on a bowling league at the time, so he met me at this bowling league where I was on the team. I tell my kids the first thing he ever saw was my rear end, putting that bowling ball down the alley. (Laughs) I wasn t a great bowler, but it was a lot of fun to do, we had a good time. He took me I don t remember how. I never had a car when I was working, I had a ride some way to get where I did my bowling. He took me, I m trying to think of the name of this place, one of them hamburger places. Hamburgers or whatever it was. He bought me something to eat and then he took me to the house that I was living at. It was a two-story, old house with apartments well, since it was a house I never thought of it like apartments, but it had rooms downstairs like that half of the house where there was a couple of girls living there. Then there was a little bitty place, two little bitty places upstairs. It wasn t very big, but one was mine and then across the hall was some other kids that I never really got acquainted with. It had a porch swing on the front, so we sat on that porch swing. He asked me for another date. Of course he was wanting to get acquainted, so I said, Sure I just remember driving to where I was living, because it was a blind date and I didn t date anybody. I didn t date anybody, I never went anywhere. I just remember looking at his profile as he was driving. I said, you know because I was thinking, Is this going to be the guy that I m going to really like? I had a great imagination and I guess I was romantic at heart. I just 23 remember thinking to myself, You know, he looks kind of like my dad. He didn t really. He was a man. (Laughs) He was fresh out of the Navy, very clean cut, very neat. It d be another story for the rest of all that. He had an interesting mother. (Laughs) He had a sister, but she was a lot younger than him. We started dating and he lived thirty miles from where I was working. I lived there in town, but he had a car. Now I won t go into all the details, all this kind of stuff because it has nothing to do Finchum Well at least say what his name was. Chitwood Oh I m sorry. His name was Arthur Lowell Chitwood. Finchum We need to back up before we go much further. We need to go back to Oklahoma City. Chitwood Oh gosh, yes. See, I was trying to explain why I think I ended up in Illinois. Okay, in Oklahoma City you have to remember originally I went there because my mom s my dad left home. Finchum And you took the train from Oklahoma City to Perry? Chitwood Yes, every weekend. Finchum You couldn t do that today. I don t guess Chitwood I don t really know. Finchum there s a passenger train that does that. Chitwood It was one of those trains that I knew that Perry had a depot and that the train would stop at the depot because it was just one of those regular routes. It might ve been the Santa Fe or something. I had been on a train a few times when I was younger. This is how I would get to my aunt s place sometimes when she would take care of me for a couple weeks. I probably had to walk ten blocks or more to get to where my mom was living at the time. All I took with me was the clothes I was wearing, and I had a little, white, round case and it had held a hairdryer. You know this is when you had to put the big old thing over your head and then you had holes running through it. That s how you dried your hair and got your hair to curl. I just used that and I put whatever change of clothes, I don t even remember what I took, it wasn t a whole lot, but I knew I was going home and I didn t care. I usually didn t do anything other than go and get her some groceries or something 24 because one of my brothers always had some kind of car there. I never had a car the whole time I was working. Finchum What was your job in Oklahoma City? Was it still doing fingerprints? Chitwood No, when I went to Oklahoma City there was no need for anything like that. I was what you would call an administrative clerk. They had these big metal drawers with little sliding doors on it that held file folders upright. These were all the reports on cases that the agents worked on. They would ask you for certain things and they all had a little classification system on how you would find them. You were also the one when they were done with things they would give them to you and you would put them in the proper place so they could be found again. Cases that were active, it looked like a library with all these stacks that these files were kept on, that s ones that they were doing something with at the time. If there was something they thought was finished or whatever, they were kept in these drawers for storage. You just it was kind of like sitting at a round desk. They also had what they called an indices, which was file cabinets that would look like our fiche room. There was nothing but cards in it with their names, addresses, and notes from the agents that would tell you names of people that were in these reports that they did. Sometimes they d want you to pull those because of some kind of information that was on them. Either that the name would be attached to something, you d know how to find it in a file. It was a lot of metal cabinets, big, round turnstiles, and there was a supervisor and assistant supervisor. In Oklahoma City now this is still Oklahoma City. I can tell you this, because it happened again. I worked with the assistant in this field office. Her name was K-o-c-h. No relation at all, and she pronounced it Cook I think. While I was in Washington D.C. there was a young man I worked with, he was a fingerprint expert also. His name was K-o-c-h, but he pronounced his name Cook . Isn t that funny? Three of us, no relation at all, on three different occasions, three different places. Isn t that something? I just thought it was wild (Laughs) But anyway, it was a really nice office. Well heck, Oklahomans are all friendly. We got along really well. The agents, I don t remember how many agents we had actually had there, but they were in an entirely it was all in the same building. I don t even remember where it was in Oklahoma City, it was somewhere in the area not too far from Paseo Drive or Circle or something. See, I don t know much about Oklahoma City. Like I said, I never had a car so I couldn t go anywhere. I always rode the bus home. Now when I was living there yeah, this is Oklahoma City Finchum In 1962? 63? Somewhere through there? 25 Chitwood Yes, I was there I ll think of it in a minute, when I left. I went to Illinois I do some little back and forth stuff because there are several places. I have to stop and think, now which place was I at when I did this? In Oklahoma City I m forgetting which was where, but I was a radio dispatcher in one of these places. That was Illinois, so scratch that, we won t talk about that right now, but in Oklahoma City I was just administrative clerk. I think I did occasionally help answer the phone or something. While I was in Oklahoma City I was born on November the 23rd. November the 22nd, Kennedy was assassinated. I happened to be out with the girls I work with. They had taken me out to eat somewhere for my birthday. As a matter of fact, it was at the Cattleman s. Pretty fancy place for me Finchum Pretty fancy. Chitwood But you know, it really wasn t that fancy of a place. (Laughs) I guess it was because the food was good. When I got home my roommate said, You have a message. You are to call your office immediately when you get here. I said, Oh shoot. Let me backtrack a minute. When I found out Kennedy was assassinated I was at work and I was in the break area. They have a radio that plays music. It must ve been a radio station because obviously we it seems like I remember hearing that something had happened. Course everybody had different sources of getting news anyway. However I heard it, I just knew that Kennedy had been shot. I had no way of it never even entered my mind that it would affect me in anyway other than just what had happened. When I was in that restaurant it was so quiet you could hear a pin drop. In other words, this was a happy occasion, me celebrating my birthday, but it was so quiet and so somber we just ate our meal and just talked. There wasn t a whole lot of fun. When I got back to where I was living, my roommate gave me that message to call. They said, Pack your bags. We have your tickets at the airport. You re going to Dallas. I thought, Oh shoot Finchum That night? Chitwood That night I thought so I had to call my mom and tell her. I said, Mom, you know I was going home every weekend, I m not going to be coming home. I said, I m going to have to go Dallas. I didn t know how long I was going to be there, but I still had my brothers were there. It wasn t, in other words, they weren t little anymore. I just told her, I m leaving. I packed my bags I m not one of these people I never had a whole lot of clothes because I m just not a clothes-person. I didn t have too much 26 picking of what I was going to take. I don t even remember if I had one suitcase or two. It might ve probably just been one and an overnight case. I was trying to think how I got I don t remember how I got to the airport. It must ve been a taxi. When I got there, there was another girl. There was one other person. She was more of a typist. We got on the same plane and when we landed at Dallas I don t remember anything about the weather. It must not have been any bad weather at that time. We were met at the airport by agents who took us I guess they took us to where we were going to be staying. It was some kind of hotel. This was in an older part of Dallas, it wasn t nothing fancy about it at all. Course I didn t know anything about that area. I don t think I d ever been there. I only had one roommate. Was trying to think it s been long enough I ve put out of my mind a lot of those details. Like I don t remember how I got to where we were working. It was very you wouldn t know what it was if you went to it. It was just another building and you went inside and this was kind of funny. When we got to the door of the place we were supposed to go into with all these other people from the FBI, the agent didn t have a way to get in the door. It was locked. (Laughs) He used a credit card to open the dumb door. This is where they were going to be staying and doing their work and stuff. I thought, Well that s real bright. You can get into anybody who had a credit card could get in that door where we were. (Laughs) It just sort of amazed me. Let s see, I was young, but I had been working a while. I just thought that was kind of odd. We just all had this common room. I don t remember a whole lot about it because like I said, I just remember it being very plain. Just a little brown building. Nothing fancy in it, no decorations, nothing. It was probably just a room they had found that was available and it was close to where they needed to be. I don t really know where the FBI field office was. I wasn t in that. This was just a building they were using. As far as what I was doing it was you know those indices cards I was talking about? That was pretty much what I was doing was typing those little dudes up. (Laughs) Boring Names of persons pertinent to the assassination investigation. They did gather us all together in some room, and they showed us the video that had been taken by somebody of Kennedy being shot. Told us what we were going to be doing, and they obviously didn t know how long we were going to be there, either. Just told us what we were going to be doing and you just went back and forth every day from your room. We didn t go anywhere. There might ve been a couple of times when my roommate and I shoot, we were given a per diem to buy food. They didn t tell you where to go to get it. We had to just hunt around to find a place to eat. We didn t have a car, course we didn t have much. We were just small-town kids. I wouldn t have known. If I got into a taxi what am I going to tell him? Where 27 am I going to tell him I m going? I don t know where I m going, I m looking for a place to eat We did find some area where they had a movie theater, so we did go to the movies a couple of times. I was only there a month. A lot of the typists were there for six months. I was only there from November the 23rd through, I think it was, December the 23rd, somewhere in there. Because of this per diem, I wasn t spending anything on food, we were just eating a lot of times we were just carrying crackers around in our pockets from where we had ate. That was what we snacked on. There must ve been some kind of little caf , it wasn t a big fancy restaurant or nothing, that we could eat at. I admit, when we found out when we were going home I did some shopping, and I bought some really nice Christmas presents. Then I had to get them home. I don t remember how, I must ve had two suitcases. (Laughs) My family had a nice Christmas that year. I have another little story to tell about that too. We were really worried about getting home because the day they decided they were going to send us they had a terrible snowstorm in Dallas. They finally decided you know I don t remember how I got to the airport, but we did get there, and the plane did take off. It made it to Oklahoma City. There was no one there to meet me. I don t remember how I got home. Probably by train. Anyway, I made it. When I walked into the door to where my mom and brothers were living, and my sister as a matter of fact, I think I had one brother at home, Charles, then my youngest brother, and my sister were there. My oldest brother, he was married. I think he might ve he was still in Washington D.C., or he lived in Arlington, Virginia, or somewhere. He had been to the service and when he came back he got they always give you your job back if you have to leave like that. He came back and instead of being a fingerprint expert they gave him the job working in cryptanalysis. So he didn t talk about that much. (Laughs) So my brother was still in the FBI. I m getting lost, I m lost here I ve forgotten what I was going to tell you before that. I try to pinpoint where I m at and where everybody else is. Oh yeah Walking in the door of my house. There s a Christmas tree sitting there and our house was, like I said, it was a rental house and we never had any pretty furniture or nothing. There was a Christmas tree sitting there and there was gifts sitting under the tree, wrapped. There was a dog. Three legs worked, one of them had something wrong with it. It might ve been broken at one time and never got fixed. It was probably a stray, I don t know, but he was living at this house with my folks. It had chewed big chunks out of the arm of the couch. There was no one there when I got there. I don t know where they were, but my mom wasn t even there It was just that dog. It had torn up a bunch of 28 the Christmas presents, and it made me so mad I took that dog to the animal shelter and I told them, I don t want to see it again. Wasn t very nice of me and I wasn t being very humane, but we didn t have anything, but what we did have that dog had destroyed it. I don t remember if he did anything else in the house. I can t remember where my family was when I got home because I had to I didn t come straight to my house in a car, somehow or another I either ended up on a bus or on a train again to get home because, like I said, there was no one there to welcome me. But we had a grand time that Christmas I remember I bought two of my brothers these big, heavy, wool, black-wool coats. The kind that came down past your calves, and black felt hats. I probably bought them something else to go with it. How in the world I got this stuff home I have no idea. I must ve been loaded on there. I don t remember what I bought either. I just remember them because I have a picture of them going I wanted to take a picture of them as they were going in or out of the door. I can still see it in my head with them wearing it and so proud of those outfits, because they d never had anything like that. They looked really nice. Like I said, I had more fun that Christmas because that s what gives me the greatest joy of anything I ve ever done. I love being able to do stuff for somebody like that because I was so privileged that we had enough relatives that did stuff for us all the time. When I had the opportunity, I would go hog-wild and enjoy every minute of it. I don t remember if I bought myself anything. I probably didn t. I just wanted you to know I do like doing stuff like that. Not for trying to get anything out of it. Who cares? If you want to do it, do it. Finchum During that time did you get to see the funeral? You wouldn t have gone to D.C Chitwood Oh no. Finchum so you just watched it on TV like everybody else? Chitwood Oh yes. You know how we had the bombing in Oklahoma City? Just non-stop TV. Course your TV screen was a little smaller and it was black and white and not that clear, but I can remember that s all you saw and heard. It was never off. It was on all the time just like it was in Oklahoma. I remember I was actually watching TV when Oswald was shot by Jack Ruby because he was right there on TV, they were leaving from somewhere. I can t remember if they were going or coming. I remember seeing that arm of Jack Ruby shooting Oswald and thinking, Oh my gosh I was just clerical. That was on our source of news. I don t think we ever saw a newspaper, we didn t buy the newspaper. 29 It was just you did your job and the agents did theirs. You didn t really talk about it that much. There was no trying to figure out who did what. I can remember I didn t tell you that when I did come to Dallas, and I said we were met by the agents, the agents took us all out to eat. I don t remember where this place was. It might ve been another what d I call that place? Finchum Cattleman s? Chitwood Cattleman s But it was in Dallas, Texas. See how my mind works? All of a sudden I think, Oh I remember there was something that was really special to me. Those agents took us and course we didn t have to pay for it. I m sure they used per diem and whatever. I d never been in a place course it was a lot fancier than what we had in Oklahoma City. I just remember the appetizer was one rib about that long (gestures) and it had something poured over it, and there was wine Oh They had little, I don t know if it was ice cream or sherbet, but it had wine poured over it. Red wine I think I had steak. I just remember, I thought, Wow (Laughs) Little old me with all these big old agents. One thing that I remember from this is that one of those agents, he could ve been the spitting image of Connolly. He had the gray hair, he even looked like him I thought, Man, (laughs) I m rubbing shoulders I worked for the FBI and I was around agents all the time, but they were just the guys I worked with. These I came to in a special place, these were people I didn t know and they were treating us like we were queens and kings. I thought, Wow I was impressed. Finchum Soak it all up. Chitwood You bet Course that was the only time we ate like that, but that was nice they did that. Oh I ve told this story to a lot of people. Certain parts I always leave out if I think it s going to be heard by too many people because we did something that wasn t part of the protocol. (Laughs) When we re off camera I ll tell you about it. Wasn t nothing illegal. In other words I was out and about and it was a big town and I was a small-town girl. This is all new to me. I was impressed. Like I say, when we got into the working mode we were in the working mode. There was no messing around. We were all in the same boat, we all knew what was going on, so wasn t a whole lot to talk about. Like I said, the TV was on all the time and that was all we saw. I remember the caisson is that what you call the that carried the body? I ll never forget seeing that on TV and the sound of those drums. There was some kind of drums, some kind of beat and the clip-clopping of the horses hooves, and that boot facing the wrong direction. Wasn t there a boot facing the wrong direction? Anyway, there was a boot (that had some significance), 30 on a riderless horse. It was so solemn; I ll never forget that. You see pictures in magazines, LIFE Magazine, all these pictures of Little John and his little saluting. I didn t see just the pictures, I saw it happening on TV in real life. It was very impressive. It was really something to be able to I was there. I was just a small fry in a big pan. Finchum From Perry, Oklahoma. Chitwood Yeah I ve written several little write-ups. I gave one of them to you, I think, of the way it was. There was a lot of things that we did that was so mundane and nothing exciting about it. Writing about it was a lot more interesting than actually doing it. (Laughs) It is a story to tell that not many people can tell. I don t know that my kids are even impressed because they ve heard it too often. Finchum Grandchildren then. Chitwood (Laughs) Yeah, there you go. First thing John Phillips tells everybody when they started to work for us, he would tell them, She worked for the FBI and she went to Dallas. Finchum I think I remember him telling me that. Chitwood I thought, it wasn t anything I wasn t special. I was just there and I was needed to do mundane, clerical stuff, but I had a story to tell just for being there. Finchum The historical spot. Chitwood You got it, I helped make history. Finchum You did. Chitwood At least my family s history. (Laughs) Okay, that s enough of that. Finchum Yes, so let s fast-forward then. When did you come back to Oklahoma from Springfield? Chitwood Oh, this was after I was married. I told you I met my husband on a blind date. I only knew him that was in June and December the 9th we were married. Finchum That same year? Chitwood That same year well shoot, at our age? 31 Finchum How old were you? Chitwood I was twenty-nine when I got married. That s old enough for Finchum Yes, that s old enough. Chitwood Like I said, I only dated a couple of people. Finchum How d he ask you? Chitwood Let me tell you something, on my second date with him he said he wanted to marry me then. He knew instantly, This is the woman I want to marry. Needless to say I wasn t convinced. Oh well. He was likable enough and we got along, and we shared a lot of the same interests. Like his dad was very handy with tools, and woodwork, and stuff. Arthur took he could do anything his dad did and sometimes even do it better. What s funny is, I could do anything his mother could do. She was crafty and did tole painting and all this stuff. We shared a lot of the same interests. He was in the right place at the right time. Like I said, we got along. We got married in December 1967 and Carey was born the next December. He was born on December the 5th 1968 and our wedding anniversary was the 9th. Then Missy didn t come along until 71. Finchum When did you move back to Oklahoma? Chitwood When we got married we lived in a little rental place to start out with, but then we moved. He worked at a power plant. It was, I think, like twenty-some miles or seventeen no I m forgetting, the power plant was like thirty miles or whatever from Springfield, Illinois. The house we lived at was about half that distance. The power plant was only three miles from this town called Pawnee. So there was a Pawnee, Illinois, and a Pawnee, Oklahoma. We found us a home and I m trying to think for a down payment I had some savings bonds I d saved. That s what I used to make my down payment on our house. It was in the country. There was a big soy bean field. There was maybe three houses and we weren t even next to any of them. The rest of the houses were at the other end of the addition. It was just a straight line with one road and it was a dirt road. It hadn t even been concreted or whatever they do to them blacktop. There was this huge, I don t know how many acres it was, it was like a city block of soybeans, so it was green all the time. Then there was houses all the way around it on every side. It was in the country the outskirts, the suburbs, of town. Pawnee Illinois was about the same size as Pawnee, Oklahoma. It wasn t a big place. It was just an old town, but it was only three miles from where my 32 husband worked at the power plant, so that was really neat. He d get home at four thirty in the afternoon and expect supper at four thirty in the afternoon, so I learned to live with it. (Laughs) That was kind of early. I didn t do anything. I was trying to think. I quit work when Carey was born. Maybe a few months old when I quit Finchum You had about ten years in with them? Chitwood Yes, I had about ten years with the FBI. I decided I would stay at home with my child. That was the main reason why we bought that house, so we could raise a family. They had a they built a church we used to have to go like nine miles to the Christian Church I went to, but it wasn t very long after we moved there the town of Pawnee built an Independent Christian Church like I m used to going to. I think my husband and I even helped with some of the stuff that they did to build that church. I was always real involved in anything that had to do with it. In other words, I did a lot of stuff. I was Sunday school teacher, choir director , Vacation Bible school anything artistic that had to be done, I did it. Then when my kids started school because we were in, when did I leave? My kids started school, they were in the grade school in Pawnee, Illinois. I got involved in PTA and I did lots of poster work for them announcing things and all. That s how I started learning to use my abilities. I don t know how they found out, but they did. I guess it was a small town and a lot of people I went to church with also had kids in school, so they knew the kind of things I could do. My husband worked shift work. His folks were living in Metropolis, Illinois. Before we moved to Oklahoma we went to see them about every, maybe every five weeks. Because with his shiftwork and all, he had one long period where he d have several days off, not just two days off, but anyway see I ve moved around enough I have to stop and think where I m at and what I m talking about it. I m in Pawnee now, this is Pawnee, Illinois. That s right, that s why I m talking about his folks in Metropolis. I had no family there in the area, but there are enough cousins and whatever would do some traveling and I can remember two or three occasions where somebody actually came to my house that was from my hometown not necessarily my hometown, but from Oklahoma. You pretty much your family was the people you went to church and school with. I think I was a member of some women s club that did stuff together too. Anyway, I didn t just sit on my duff, I liked to be doing something. I did a lot. Like I said, my husband was good at woodwork and stuff. I remember we built us a fence out of wood and it was just those six-inch panels or whatever you call them. They were stacked like this, so that you could see 33 through depending on which way you were standing, but you couldn t look right at it and see through. It was still private, but it would let air through. Nice, green yard. While we were there we built a double two-and-a-half car garage. Me and Arthur. The only thing that had to be done was the cement laid. I think somebody put the rafters on top. Everything else we did ourselves, and he had a workshop in there and that s where he did his little crafty stuff. We would go to oh where we living, probably at Fairgrounds and stuff. We made stuff and then we would sell it. I ve always done that. Eventually I quit because it got to be where it wasn t fun anymore. It was a chore because you were making multiple things of the same thing. That got kind of old. Finchum What you lacked in math you picked up in art, huh? Chitwood (Laughs) I was one of them people who I could look at something and make it. No one taught me how to do anything I was doing. I just knew how and I did it. Arthur, all he had to do was I d draw the patterns, he would cut stuff out for me in the wood and all, and stain it, and whatever he had to do, and then I would paint on it. It wasn t always things he d cut out. We used it was a lot of primitives. A lot of the back when I was doing stuff you had skillets, and pans, and stuff, and you spray-painted them black and painted on them. Those were primitives. I had lots of old doors with door panels. That was one of the fun things I liked to paint on because they were a nice size, they were nice looking, they already had a shape to them, but you didn t do anything to them except sand a little and then paint on them. I don t I might only have a couple of things. Of all the things I ever made and painted, I only have three things I think. We sold all the rest of it. (Laughs) We, for a while, made barn board furniture. I have one thing that we made and it s a boot, I called it a boot bench. It s just a it s about the size, a little bit bigger than that gray thing and it s all barn board. It has a tall back, like an armchair side. The seat doesn t lift up, but we made some you could use it as a storage place. We did a lot of stuff. Finchum Did you do that when you were here in Oklahoma? Chitwood That was in Illinois. Now when we came to Oklahoma we did lots of craftwork too, but we didn t built furniture anymore because it just took a lot more space. I lived out in the country on Mehan Road. We had a lot of room out there. We built us a two-and-a-half car garage out there too. That s where Arthur had that s where he did his work. I did most of what I was doing in the house. If somebody came into my house they would usually see a mess. (Laughs) 34 Finchum What year did you move back? Chitwood Oh Sorry. In 79. We came home to Oklahoma every year the eleven years I lived in Illinois. He only had one sister and she was a lot younger than him, but I had a big family. I had three brothers, and my sister, and tons of cousins. I used to tell my kids when we d go to visit, Now be careful what you say to the people you re talking to because they re probably a cousin and word would get back. (Laughs) It worked. Nobody kicked us out of town. It s really neat. I was born and raised in Perry and lots and lots of cousins. I d say we re pretty close-knit because we still have get-togethers. We ll meet and have like a reunion, family reunion. Not as often as we used to, and I don t recognize them anymore because they ve changed too much. There s a few that they didn t change that much. Like I have one cousin that I would recognize his voice anywhere. It s just this different kind of voice, but I had a lot of good-looking cousins, I really did. Like I said, my mom was one of ten. There s only one aunt left and she s really old. My family is gone. It s kind of scary, it makes you know, that I m getting old. Finchum But you appreciate all that too. Chitwood Oh yes. A family is a wonderful thing to have. I feel sorry for anybody that hadn t got one. We had our problems occasionally, but especially my mom and dad got divorced. She had a big family to help her out. It wasn t like we were isolated or anything. We always had somebody we could talk to and know what was going on. Finchum They were glad you moved back? Chitwood I m sure they were. I know my mom was. I was glad to be back That was a long time to live somewhere where my only family was my husband s family. He was raised a lot different. His mom and dad I would say they were well-off, simply because his dad had a really good job. He worked at a power plant too. Finchum So you moved back to Perkins? Not Perry, Perkins? Chitwood I had a Perkins address because of where I lived on Mehan Road. A couple miles north and it would have been a Stillwater address. So my kids went to Perkins School. Both of them did, and graduated there. Finchum How did you come to work in the library? Chitwood Oh 35 Finchum It was few years after you moved. Chitwood Now for a long time I didn t work, but when my kids were like twelve, thirteen, somewhere in there, it was costing more to keep them clothed and fed. My husband had a really good job, but it just cost more to live. I had a neighbor that lived in because I was in the country, they were my next door neighbors, but there was room for maybe a couple houses between us that was just land. They were an older couple. They had cattle and when we eventually got some cattle ourselves. We had some Black Angus cattle with the whole idea that we were going to eat we knew we were going to eat them, but my son got to show some of them for 4-H or FFA. Then we had pigs, a few pigs that my son and daughter showed. None of them were prizewinning animals, but they learned a lot by having them. As a matter of fact, we had one steer we called Murdock. If you remember the TV show (the A-Team) Murdock was the crazy one. Well, Murdock was the crazy one. He didn t have anything to do with he had his own mind and he wasn t very cooperative. If we needed to do something he would let me walk up to him, but anybody else he wouldn t let them have anything to do with him. He would let me get close enough I could grab his halter or whatever. He ran away from home one time. Some of my son s schoolmates got in a pickup and they knew where he was going, but that steer, Murdock, ran through all the pastures in a straight path to Perkins. I lived in I think it was ten miles, nine miles, and somewhere in there, from Perkins. Jumping fences and all whatever he did the kids were able to keep up, see him enough, to know where he was going. They followed him all the way to the Cimarron River on the other side of Perkins before they caught him. One of the boys that was in the pickup had a rope and lassoed him (Laughs) Wouldn t that have been a sight to have it on a video? Anyway, we were talking about being in the country and my neighbors okay, my neighbors. They were because we had things in common like the cattle and stuff we d never had anything like that before, so they more or less told us and showed us what to do. Plus I had another neighbor lived a quarter mile from us that was because the kids were active went to school together, and when we were in 4-H and FFA together, we were in a lot of little events they would have, so we got to know the parents of everybody that we were around. I told my neighbor that I needed to find me a job. She worked in the nursing home. I decided the first couple of jobs I had to start out with was I cleaned the church. Got paid to clean the church. Every now and then there was some other building in town, like the place where the city leaders met, where they 36 had their meetings and all, that I cleaned that. I thought, This isn t going to get me very far. My neighbor told me that there was a job opening in the Stillwater nursing home. I thought, well I was always real active with church work and doing things with people in the church and a lot of them were the older people and I thought I could probably I didn t have any training. They were pretty desperate for help. I interviewed for the job and my job, or what I did, was actually three jobs. Like I said, they probably should never had hired me because I wasn t trained on how to handle somebody who s in a nursing home and a lot of them were bedfast or pretty much that way. They were just it was like helping your grandparents out or whatever you had to do. Of course they had the nurses and all. I didn t have to worry about their health or anything. I was the one who was supposed to keep them active. So I had to plan things to get them moving around and little activities. Like I said, this is something a physical therapist should ve been doing some of the time. They had enough stuff there, and someone would tell me what other people had done. I may not have done it right, but I had them moving around and using their hands and walking just not sitting or lying down. I also had to entertain them. In other words it was like teaching Vacation Bible School. You had them doing these little projects where they were using their mind and doing stuff where they were creating things. Who knows what they did with all this stuff. (Laughs) Also, I directed a lot of activities in the nursing home itself. I had to make a calendar of the things that were going on every day. They had to have something every day that they were doing. I worked there six months. I said, They don t pay me enough to do all this Besides that, I knew that I wasn t really trained for all this kind of stuff. Even though I did it okay, they were glad to have me, but I just got to thinking about the different places I might go to look for work. I honestly don t know I guess it was just the idea that it was OSU, and I liked books, I just decided to see if there was a job that I could find in the Library. I don t remember and kind of advertisement. I honestly don t remember what led me to John Phillips . My son was one of these people who had a lot of friends and our phone was busy all the time. This particular evening the phone had been ringing off the hook. My phone was in the kitchen which was where I was most of the time. I was the one who was answering the phone. It rang it enough times, and I d answered it enough times for my son that I had reached the limit. I thought, Okay. I answered the phone. I said, Carey s Answering Service. It was John. (Laughs) He was calling to tell me he wanted me to come in for an appointment. I met him and Vicki Phillips . It was snowy weather. I just remember there was snow on the ground. It was very cold. It must ve been 37 on a they must ve picked a Saturday for me because I don t remember anybody being around other than them. I remember Vicki was sitting on a desk or something and John was just in there I guess. I just thought that was really I had this adult businesswoman just hopped up on a desk and sat down swinging her legs and stuff. I thought, And they re interviewing me? (Laughs) I had brought samples of some of the things I did at the nursing home so they could see that I had good handwriting, because I had to make these little calendars, and it was all done by hand, make the little squares and all that stuff. I did it all in ink. Plus the application form I filled out I did it all in ink and printed it. He liked the fact that I had good handwriting and appeared to be organized and that I was a dependable, probably, person because I worked for the FBI. (Laughs) His main interest was to hire somebody who would be there longer than two years. Well I said, Yeah I could probably be there for two years. Heck, I was there thirty-one years I worked in that department (Government Documents) now we moved around a lot because different things taking place in the Library, asbestos abatement and different things that were going on. Vicki was the boss when I got there. It wasn t that much longer when they decided they didn t want husband and wives working in the same department. They let them work in the same building, but they wouldn t let them work together. So Vicki went down to the I think it might ve been Physical Sciences or whatever it was called then on first floor. Then John remained. He had been her assistant. Now he was the boss. I worked for John the entire time, in the same department, the whole time I was there. I stop and think about that, you know, thirty-one years with the same boss? And John the atmosphere in our department, to me, it was like a big family and that s the way John treated us. He was the boss and he told you what to do, but he also treated you like family as far as every year giving us having those Christmas well, Christmas time dinners at his house where him and Vicki cooked like it was like two people cooking a whole Thanksgiving meal for what? Twenty people sometimes would be there? A lot of people. Besides feeding us, he would give everybody a little gift. It wasn t anything fancy. He would wrap something up and we all got a gift. It was really nice. I got to be I don t know how I managed it. I was one of those people who just took a lot of pictures, and I think the idea was I took pictures while I had the opportunity because I was away from home for so much and that s all I had was pictures to look at, to make me close to my family. So everywhere I ever went I took pictures, so I got to be the person that everything that happened in our office, that was of some importance or something unusual and all of John s parties that he gave, I took pictures. When he retired I 38 forgot how many albums he had. It filled a whole top shelf and maybe even part of another shelf. Plus he had a little box of things he hadn t even gotten in there yet, but it was and from 1984, November 1984, until the day he retired I was still taking pictures for him. He s got a ton of pictures. Finchum And you re not in very many of them. Chitwood Not many of them (Laughs) That s true But I did get to where every now and then I might hand someone there might be one picture at his Christmas parties or something because I would hand the camera to somebody. Would you please take my picture so they ll know I was here? (Laughs) I just got to where I took pictures of everything. It didn t have to be our department. After I got in the Library I was taking them everywhere. Finchum What was your job initially? Chitwood Oh gosh, when I first came to work the office has always been in the same area, but we didn t have CML (Curriculum Materials Library) had an area at the end of the hallway and there was a schoolroom, a classroom, hooked on to the area where the Government Documents Department is now. We had the fiche room which was a separate room. I don t remember I think the center part of our office and the back part of our office was what was the classroom. All we had was that main area in the front and back-to-back desks, those old, gray metal desks. They were put together so that each person was facing each other. I swear all the room between those desks, wherever they were located, you could get a cart through pushing it. You weren t beside it, you were pushing it or pulling it. It was packed and until that classroom I don t even remember what year it was that they were just gone. They weren t there anymore. They let us have that area. It was crowded and there was a lot oh, I can remember picturing when we got we started out, there was one computer in the office. They still had a little tape player a tape player with a cassette in it Isn t that what you call it? It was a cassette player, but with instructions that went with the video you were watching on the computer that told you how to operate and do things. Heck, I never even saw a computer. It was all new to me, so that was something new to me. The actual job I had when I started work there was, because they didn t know what I was going to do yet I don t guess, was fiche. (Laughs) One of the worst things in the world for anybody who s farsighted, and all I was doing was counting them, making sure they were all there. (Laughs) You talk about I m sitting here thinking, Is this all I m going to do all day every day? 39 I get to thinking about some of the stuff I did for the FBI because it was similar type stuff. It seems like I did something with files. Let s see, I don t really remember. It was just clerical type stuff. I don t remember. I think the reason it s confusing is because we didn t have the computers to work on. Everything we did was by hand. We had a form that we would catalog. That s what it was, we had a form that we d fill out, with certain types of information on all of them, for the books that we got in. That s primarily what I was doing was cataloging. I even classified. Clerks didn t classify then, it was just the librarians. I don t remember how many people were actually it seems like it was wall-to-wall librarians. At one time I can remember the back wall after we did get computers, that one back area on they had that little thing in the corner with one computer. The whole wall was computers. We had like fifteen students working for us. There was almost always somebody sitting at those computers that were lined up along the wall. They weren t anywhere else, you didn t have any on your desk or anything. We sure didn t have that copier in there. That was out in the Library somewhere. It was paper cataloging is what it was. John, I don t know why, but he showed me how to classify and he said I was better than the librarians at classifying. (Laughs) Maybe because it was new to me and I did exactly as I was told, and didn t have anything to compare it to or anything. Eventually I didn t do the classifying anymore because he got more librarians and they got better trained or something. I was just clerical everything I did was strictly clerical. I became involved in some of the things that were going on in the Library. Finchum Who was the dean of the library when you were hired? Was it Roscoe Rouse? Chitwood Yes it was. It was Roscoe Rouse. Finchum So you ve been through three deans? Chitwood Trying to think of his name. Finchum Dr. Ed Johnson. Chitwood No, wasn t there oh, maybe it was an assistant boss. Mr. Nelson, I remember Mr. Nelson a lot, being very quiet, but he was down in the dean s office. He must ve been the assistant, but I really liked Dean Johnson Edward Johnson. We got along. I don t know why but we got along Finchum He liked to fish, maybe that s why. 40 Chitwood Yeah (Laughs) We got along really well. I don t know if we were close to the same age or what it was. Maybe he just reminded me of somebody. I just thought he was one of those people who got involved and you saw him everywhere. I mean he wandered the floors. I can picture him walking past the windows checking out how the blinds were and all that kind of stuff. He would walk into the office, you never knew when he was coming, because he would just appear, but he walked the floors and mixed with the departments and you got to know him. As best I could tell you he s probably the only one who ever did it, the way he probably should ve done it. Finchum Very personable. Chitwood Yeah, he was. I never had any trouble getting along with him and doing stuff for him. He was the one who he found out what I was doing for John as far as trying to make displays and stuff because somebody else was using those display cases. I think it was Suzanne Reinman , when I came there, was supposed to be doing a display on the United Nations. When I first came there we didn t have the wall well I didn t we didn t weren t able to use the wall cases on the second floor . We had a standing glass display case that was it was only like this wide and it had two big old pieces of glass that you had to push back and forth. So you couldn t you had to reach around that other piece of glass to get even in it. It was hard to work with. You couldn t make interesting displays much because all you had was you could see what was behind the glass. In other words it was all glass. They recently took that away. There was a time period there where I didn t do any displays simply because they took that it belonged to somebody else. Historical something in history or something took it back. So I didn t have a place. And then when Dr. Johnson got to be the head of the Library the director, he knew what I had done. He was the one who said he was going to give me those display cases the wall cases on that one end west end of second floor . I did many times do something in both of them simply because nobody was using them for anything. That one area became my documents only documents display. In other words, John there were a lot of people. They would come up to the fifth floor and the first thing they would say, I ve never been up here before. They didn t even know what we had. John says, We need to be able to publicize what the Government Documents is and what we have, and what s available, and how to use it. So he said my job was going to be to fill that display case. I don t remember I filled it more often at the beginning than I did later. I only kept things there maybe I don t remember, but it was never more than I don t think I kept anything more than a month. I might have even had some things up there like two months just depending on what was going on. 41 Everything that I put in there was some kind of it was like I m explaining to people that when they walk by I made sure they knew it was a government documents display in some way or manner, and everything that was in there came from our department. My purpose was to explain what these books were and how they could be useful to the students. I m sure there s plenty and there s a lot of people who watched me because I was right down there in the middle of the hallway and people were coming and going constantly. A lot of times they would stop and watch me or they would talk to me when I was trying to put it up. Here I m all hot and sweaty and reaching in this old it gets hot in there behind the glass. This is what I m having my head stuck in all the time. Because it s tall I had to stand on the stool to get at a lot of that stuff. I could do anything I wanted as long as the end result was something that was decent looking and told you something that had to do with the Government Documents Department. Once in a while I would do something that was special, but not too many times. Sometimes for the holidays I would put something in the one that wasn t being used, Season s Greetings, or Happy Holidays, or something just to make it I had to be really careful because it wasn t supposed to be anything religious. It had to be Santa Claus, (laughs) but after I had been there a while and done a few I would do displays that was scenery. I loved making those white snow covered trees with the snow on the ground and a black sky in the background with lots of stars, but I always made one star bigger than any of the others. (Laughs) Anybody who had any smarts knew that it wasn t just a winter scene. This was Christmas time, and it had a special meaning, but nobody ever called me on it. (Laughs) Finchum Just so people will know it was on the west end on the second floor beside the Reading Room. Chitwood Yeah, and it s not even there anymore. It s just a blank wall. It s totally different. I did it for about twenty-eight years is how long I did it. Finchum I remember watching you cut and make the eagle. Chitwood That was one of my favorite things I started that out on a vacation where we went to see my husband s parents. I think they were living in Kentucky at the time. I took these little white cards with me and I can t remember if I had some brown, colored ones, with me too. I think I had cut them from some kind of heavy colored paper. I started out cutting the shape of the feathers and then I would sit there while my mother-in-law had a tendency to talk a lot. Boy, she isn t alive anymore, but anyway in other words you didn t get a word in edgewise. My husband always took off and went 42 somewhere with his dad. If my kids were there with me, they were more or less with him. This was done when I was older, so my kids weren t even anywhere around. I thought, There s no way I m just sitting in this chair and not be able to do anything, because there wasn t I was stuck with my mother-in-law. She was a decent person, but like I said it was like I don t care what I said she would tell me the same thing only it was her opinion and her opinion was always right. (Laughs) I would sit there and I had a pair of scissors and I just started snipping and turning them into feathers. You know I didn t count how many feathers were on there. It would be funny if somebody ever counted them. I didn t really know how it was going to look. I just knew what I wanted to use, I knew I couldn t make a whole eagle so I ll do the head, and I had seen a pictures that I liked of the way it was looking and the position. I probably spent as much time making that eye look like an eye as I did putting them feathers on there because I wanted it to look real. An eye is really hard to draw and make it look like it s a real eye. If you ve ever tried it, but I got the beak down. I used some I m starting to forget what I used, but I know I used brown paper grocery sacks. I don t think I used any newspaper. I just wadded it up in the shape I wanted, and crumpled it up, and laid it down, and forming the shape of it, and glued it on, so it looked 43 like a beak with dimension. In other words, I didn t want anything flat. I got it looking just right, the nostril hole and the tip of the beak and all that. I finally got that eye and I had sometimes the pictures I use aren t really clear and it s hard to even see the detail. It was really hard for me getting that eyebrow over the eagle s eye. If you ve ever had the chance to look at that eagle again, even in pictures, it has an eyebrow. Those feathers go a certain direction and they re a different size. That was really hard. It took a few times before I ever got it right. Putting the feathers on, I had to do things in reverse because each layer had another layer on top of it so that you started down here to work so it was kind of going against the current. It was natural to want to start at the top and work down, but you couldn t do it. Once I got going sometimes I d have to make a feather a little bit smaller than the others, I mean just trim it or something. I had more fun making that eagle than anything I ve ever done, and I was so proud of it because it was so official looking Finchum Beautiful. Chitwood It really was pretty I think I used it in three different displays. Finchum Where is it now? Chitwood I gave it to John when he retired well, I gave it to Vicki because I knew he wouldn t probably take it. She snapped it up pretty quick. (Laughs) I thought, Well how many of these are you going to see? I had no place to put it; it was too big. That thing was like this wide. That was I got lots of pictures of it though. I took pictures of every display I did. When I started out they were I didn t know exactly what they wanted of me, but I got braver the more I did. I pretty much did anything I wanted as long as it looked good. That was so lucky that I got to do something like that, because it s something I would tell everybody, I get paid for playing. To me, it was playing. For many, many years that was 50 percent of my job was doing those displays. It really was. Because it took a lot of time to gather the information, to decide how I wanted it to look, and then I had to make my background and whatever I was putting in it, and do all that lettering. That lettering, a lot of it, I did by hand, and then had to cut it out. Things look better when they re individual pieces and not like somebody slapped up a big old copy of a newspaper print or something, you know? It was handmade, almost all of it was handmade. Finchum On a limited budget. Chitwood Yeah. 44 Finchum Or no budget? Chitwood Yeah well, I m retired now right? (Laughs) A lot of that stuff was my stuff. (Laughs) I didn t want to have to depend on somebody else s resources to allow me to do what I wanted to do. If they didn t have it and I couldn t get it or they didn t want to spend money on it, I got it, because to me that was a part of what I was doing and I wasn t going to have it any other way. If I didn t want to do it, I wouldn t have done it. I didn t give a hoot. (Laughs) If I wanted something up there and it s what was going to take to make it look the way it should then I had so much stuff at home from all like Vacation Bible School, all that kind of stuff. I did all kinds of craft work, and sold it, and all this kind of stuff. I knew how to make stuff. No one had to tell me how, I just did it. And I had fun doing it. Finchum You did. I remember those days. Chitwood That broke my heart when they told me I wasn t going to be doing them anymore. That was just the last, what, two or three years? Was it 2012 I think is when I quit doing them. Finchum Yeah, about right. Chitwood We had oh, that was when they were building the Math Center. It would ve been during that time period that I didn t do them anymore. We had been John discovered, Well, we have a bulletin board. So I did occasionally put things on the bulletin board for just us, but they were a lot more simple and they stayed up a lot longer. Then it got to be when the math thing opened we didn t have so much space was taken up and kids had gotten used to going somewhere else because we weren t open for just anybody to walk in on our floor when all this was going on. I put something on there that was important. It s been up there for years and it s all about the Map Room. There s people who had no idea we even have a Map Room. I mean there s no publicity or anything on it. That s just not right because that s a pretty big deal if you knew how expensive some of that stuff was. Course maybe it s just as well that they don t, we d probably have a lot of burglars or something. I d hate to think that d somebody would ever break in there. John s part-time, but he keeps that place working down there. I guess he s working another year. Finchum I have no idea. Chitwood I didn t either, but somebody said something and I I don t even remember who I was talking to, but I don t have a clue how long Connie s (Kirby) 45 working. Now I made smart remarks, Anything I can do part-time is there? They said, No. I don t remember I guess because I m not a professional in what I do. Anyway, it was a flat out, No. (Laughs) Once you quit you re done as far as clerical. Finchum You stayed ten years longer than most would. Chitwood Everybody would ask me, they d say, When are you going to retire? I d say, I don t know. When it got past sixty-five I said, I like working here and I have no reason to quit. I think it was was it 2006, or 07 that Arthur died? So I knew I was going to have to retire sometime. I also I just decided Okay, they took my display cases away from me. I didn t really feel like I had that much purpose anymore and it wasn t the fun it used to be, so I thought Okay, it s time to retire. That made it I m going to be seventy-five next Monday. So I ve made it a pretty good ways Finchum You sure did. Chitwood And working fulltime too Finchum And could do it another ten. Chitwood You know I could do it a lot longer, but you got to quit sometime. I ve been let s see, when did go home? I was home all this week by myself. I ve had appointments and stuff, but I ve actually been in my house, and I told my kids I said, Now when I retire I m going to start getting rid of all this junk in my house, because I have too much paper stuff. I m one of them people that can t let loose of anything. I said, I m going to start straightening things up and make it a little neater and get rid of some of the stuff I don t really need. The entire time I ve been off, other than any other appointments that I ve had was, because I had to go talk to TIAA-CREF and get my a matter of fact I haven t even gotten it yet. They had to mail my retirement papers to me because I don t have a computer. (Laughs) That ought to be waiting for me maybe this weekend. I ve been spending this time, my first week off from not having to work all day every day, cleaning my house and working all day doing it. I got to thinking, My clothes are fitting a little different. But you know what it is. I m not sitting at a desk doing nothing well, not nothing, but not moving. I mean like when you re in front of a computer and your chair rolls around you don t even get up out of your chair and do something. You just roll it around and reach for stuff. The only time I d be moving was when I was running down the hall to go to the bathroom. (Laughs) Of course it was clear at the other end of the building. Then you had to come all the way back. So I didn t really move around that much, I wasn t everything I did was at my desk. I didn t have a lot of I wasn t building displays anymore and I got 46 plenty of exercise doing that. I ve lost a pound and a half in a week just from cleaning house Finchum There you go. Chitwood So now when I get my housework done, (laughs) but I leave my TV on most of the time. I just kind of and my favorite TV station, the Hallmark Channel, there s two of them. (Laughs) If I ve seen what I want I flip it to the other one, but I ve seen all of them at least five times. But they re nice shows, so that makes it pleasant to have something like that that can keep me from dwelling on anything else I m doing. And I haven t felt like I m like I haven t been working. Now I realize after a while course if I m not working in the house now when the weather is better course I have the winter to go through. I do lots of reading. Only trouble is I do too much reading. If it wasn t for my dog wanting outside I d be sitting on the couch all the time reading or doing something else. I like working outdoors, so I might have more flowers this year than I ve had. I might even start yeah, I used to have a big old vegetable garden. I might get another one of them. (Laughs) The weather has been so hot and dry the last shoot, two or three of those years. It s not worth it to try and spend money to water them when it was going to take so much of my own water to make them live. So I just quit doing it. Finchum But now you ll have the time. Chitwood Oh yeah. Finchum At some point let s I read in here too you had something to do with ELLSA (Edmon Low Library Staff Association)? Chitwood Oh yeah Finchum Want to talk a little bit about that? Chitwood I think as a matter of fact, I was on the committee that formed ELLSA. I don t remember how in the world I got involved in it. I know David the few people that I remember, I know David Peters was on it along with me. I don t remember too many clerical-type people being in on it. I don t know if it s because they knew I don t really know why unless they knew that they could use my artistic abilities doing something. I ve always been active in the church, so I m always been somebody it doesn t bother me to get in front of people and I m just me. I pretty much say things I shouldn t say, 47 (laughs) because I figure, Oh well, I m the one who s up here talking to them. If you don t like it, you can leave. (Laughs) Finchum Is this with Dr. Johnson or Rouse? Chitwood Dr. Johnson, because I think it was his suggestion. He wanted the Library the professionals and the clerical staff were just two separate groups, they didn t mix. He wanted people who worked in the Library to work with each other to make the Library the place that he wanted it to be. He decided he wanted to have a group of people who would meet together and create things that would draw people together to intermix. In other words, he wanted the clerical staff to mix and do things with the professionals. In other words, you had an education and a lot of the clerical staff did too, but I graduated from high school. I never went to college, but I had a good government job and I was a responsible person. Like I said, I d done a lot of leadership stuff in the church. I had the ability to do what anyone else was able to do, but just did it in a different place. I don t know how I even got on that committee, but I was. There was quite a few of us because I remember we all were sitting on one of those really long tables. It s been so long ago I couldn t tell you a lot of the people are gone that were on that. I think Martha Nimmo was on it. Like I said, I don t really remember, but I remember David Peters. We met several times. It didn t take us long to figure out what we wanted. We decided that we would have elections to have an ELLSA chair and an assistant, somebody to help the social part of it. Then of course you had to have a treasurer, because it took money to do stuff. I was trying to think who the shoot, Rich Paustenbaugh. I was trying to think, who was the first head of ELLSA? I don t remember. It was somewhere in there that I became the head. Rich was either before me or after me, because I remember working with him. He was one of those guys, he was a real character. He was a lot of fun to work with, but you had to restrain him occasionally. (Laughs)That s probably why we got along because I was kind of footloose too. (Laughs) We worked well together. Finchum Do you remember how they came up with the name? The acronym? Chitwood Edmon Low Library it took us a while. We might have even voted on it, the Library might have voted. I don t remember that much. That was a long time ago. Finchum And you were selected or awarded the Library Employee Award? Chitwood Oh yeah 48 Finchum In 19-something, 1994 I think I read. Chitwood Like I said, I don t remember the years. Finchum That was an honor. Chitwood It was. The main reason I got that award was because I was active in ELLSA and did a lot of stuff in the Library. Plus I did a lot of things that I tried to help make the Library a pleasant place to be. It was really nice that they gave that to me. I was trying to think I didn t even get to go to my own dinner or nothing, I wasn t even at the awards. I was in Florida. John called me and told me I got it and I wasn t even there. They had to have known before I had left because I left that weekend. I ve been mad at John about that. My daughter had to substitute for me. I had to tell her I said Okay, I m not there, but they re having a meal that you re supposed to go to. You re going to have to take my place. I said, At the awards ceremony I don t know what they were going to do, but they gave her that certificate that had my name on it, but she was there to take it from them. I forgot I wasn t even there. (Laughs) I thought, Gee whiz, one time I get something really nice like that and I wasn t even there. It was all John s fault. (Laughs) Finchum Need a do over. Chitwood Oh well, but it was nice. I enjoyed the glory. (Laughs) Finchum The Library itself has changed quite a bit in those thirty-one years. Including the big catalog disappearing, or was it already gone when you started here? Chitwood I remember helping empty those drawers and throwing catalog cards away. I was sad. Oh man, I got a picture, because some other clerical staff helped too, of me and some other people from the Docs (Government Documents) department sitting on these piles of garbage bags because that s what was in them. For some reason it seems like we were down in the basement. We were down in the basement for some reason. It might ve been when something else was going on, asbestos abatement or something. It couldn t have been because no, I don t think so. Scratch that, but I remember those bags of catalog cards. Finchum And some of those you helped type? Chitwood I never typed any cards, no. I never had to do that. I was a cataloger. Like I said, I classified for a while. That made me feel kind of special because nobody else, no other clerk has ever been taught how to classify. I remember 49 enough of it to know if I think they did it right. (Laughs) John said I did it better than the librarians and I ve told that twice. If John hears this he ll say, I did? (Laughs) There s a lot of things that you could probably cut out of here. Finchum You ve been great. What are you going to miss the most? Chitwood All the people. It s like having a big family. Because I worked in the same department all the time and I did stay fairly active most of the time, you got to know each other. Now I didn t always get along with everybody personality conflicts. Most of the people that I worked with I enjoyed working with them. They never made me feel like I was just a clerk because I knew I had a lot of background that contributed to what I was doing. It was just something that was there and I decided to use it. There s no reason for somebody not to have a purpose. I can t imagine just doing nothing all your life. That would be so boring, but it s a lot of fun to be mixed in with people. Now I ll be the first to admit I ve never thought of myself as a people person, but you know, because of the way I was brought up and the life I lived you know when I was younger I felt like I was a lower class than the people I went to school with. I wasn t active in school until like in my senior year of high school. The only reason I was active then was because I had a speech teacher where I learned to get up in front of people, and speak, and give oral book reports and stuff on big books. I think I did one on Ben-Hur, the real person, and I did something on the Magnificent Obsession, which I read when I was I was in high school, but it was a lower level. I love to read. I lived vicariously, but I learned a lot from those stories because a lot of the stories I read were about real people or whoever was writing it wrote well. In other words, it might have been fiction, but it was true life. Then also with the background I had as far as where I worked and the seriousness of some of the things I saw when I was working with the FBI. I was just well aware of my surroundings all the time, but I knew I had to mix with people. It was just like lightbulbs came on and okay if you want something done, do it yourself. So I just got involved and started doing stuff. I thought, Well hey, they like what I m doing I seem to know what I m doing. If I can lead some old people and tell them what to do, why can t I handle the rest of them? (Laughs) I mean they aren t any different than I am. It s just I always I just felt like there were some people that I wasn t comfortable with because I didn t feel I was as knowledgeable as they were and as well-trained. Finchum I hope I never made you feel that way. Chitwood No way. You re a great person. I liked you the minute I saw you 50 Finchum You were a good welcoming committee, I remember. Chitwood (Laughs) I don t remember that far back. Finchum I had to pose for a picture the first day. Marian says. Chitwood (Laughs) Oh okay, yeah. Like I said, I did take all the pictures in the office. I have a picture of every person that ever worked for John as long as I was there. Finchum That s amazing really. He has them? Chitwood Oh yeah, he has them. I don t have them. A lot of those pictures now okay, it was on me, most of it, but I wanted to do it. There was a few I kept for myself, but he got most of them because I wanted to do it. He did a lot for us. I had a lot of respect for John and for Vicki. Vicki was just more serious, but John was more person-to-person boss because he would talk and tell you stories. (Laughs) And John had because he did the hiking on the Appalachian Trail and all that it was a lot of fun to hear him talk about stuff he had done. Finchum Through the years when I was there you made lots of birthday themed pictures. Chitwood Yeah, yeah. (Laughs) Finchum Great times. Chitwood I just more or less took over. I didn t see any point if we re going to do something for somebody and you know we had that little break area, it didn t need to be just a table with food on it. I wanted to make that person it was for feel special. I thought, well if I can build a display, I can decorate this with something, this little area. It got to be anything that went on back there, nobody hardly ever tried to do anything themselves. They just assumed that I would do it. If somebody else wanted to do it I would ve gladly let them, but I probably wouldn t have liked it. (Laughs) I think you could say I m a perfectionist when it comes to doing things a certain way. Finchum I think we knew that and benefited from that too. Chitwood I don t like to put people down. If somebody does something and I know they put everything they had into it, I respect them at least trying. Not everybody can be good at what they do, but they can work hard at it. Most of the people that I get along with the best are people that I think I can relate to. Like you were just a down-home person to me and you talked about your 51 mom a lot. You even commented a few times I knew when your mom passed away that you were really missing your mother and every now and then I just felt like you needed me. Finchum You were correct. Chitwood (Laughs) That s what I like to be that way because when I was growing up I had lots of family, but very few people who were unrelated that I had any association with. I just got the feeling that I wasn t somebody they wanted to know or to get close to. It s like having a hidden identity that I kept to myself. It was when I got out on my own and away from everything familiar that I thought, If somethings going to get done, I ve got to do it myself. I joined a church. The first thing I did when I went to D.C. was I joined the church. I would go to things that these church people were involved in, little get-togethers they would have. Because it was a church organization a lot of the things we did required people to put themselves at like the head of the group because nobody else would. And when it came for somebody to say a prayer and everybody would stand around and kind of like, Not going to be me. I thought, I ll do it. I think that s what made me grow. I got secure. I thought, They re no better than me, but I ll at least get up there and do what s expected of me. They re going to have to learn...