 Kite Jacobs We usually start these tapes off by going around the table and introducing yourself by saying your name, where you were born, and when you were born. We ll do that, and then we ll get into some questions. Well, I m Norlene Peterson. I was born August 3, 1924 in the community of Eva, which is now out by Four Corners, 30 miles west of here. It s not there anymore. I m Mildred Ruth Jacobs. I was born September 9, 1924 here in Guymon. I m Doraleen Davis Wilson. I was born June 8, 1920 north of Hooker, Oklahoma on a farm. So you haven t moved very far at all. No, I ve lived about six blocks. I ve lived in the same house I m in now for 57 years. I ve been away, but I ve been back. My folks left during the Depression. They went to California and lived there a while. I married my husband and came back here. He s from here. You grew up in a fairly urban area, is that correct? You were born in town and grew up in town? I ve lived a lot of places. During the Depression, my father had a lot of different jobs, and we lived in a lot of different places. We lived in Texas County and Hitchland, Texas. We lived a lot of different places. What did he do? What were his jobs? During the Depression, he did whatever he could find to do. And the family would travel with him? And sometimes he would travel and leave us at home. We lived at Hardesty and Guymon. I don t believe we ever lived in Hooker until after I got married. 5 Wilson Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Kite Wilson Kite Jacobs Wilson Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Jacobs You didn t go to school there. So your mother and father, and then how many children? There were five of us. I was the oldest of five. My mother was Pauline Oiler from Hardesty. My father was Lloyd Elmer McCants from here in Guymon. So how many places did you move to during the Depression? I have no idea. A lot Do you remember some of the jobs that your father took on to keep things going? He was a mechanic. He worked on a lot of farm machines. He was a janitor at the school. Cut broomcorn laughing . During the Depression, unless you had a profession such as a teacher or something like that, you did most anything to keep your family going. A lot of times he worked away from home and would maybe come home on the weekends. What are you unwrapping there for us? Oh, some old pictures of my dad farming. That was one of the first combines in Texas County in 1917; this was before I was born. It was horse drawn, but it was north of Hooker. Henry Witt, you don t know him, but he s an old timer, and that was my brother. There are some of us kids, that s my daddy, and my sister. I was going to count how many horses it would take to pull that thing. I wonder if that s that dirty, really bad dust storm. Is it? Black Sunday. We had a lot more of them too. A lot more than just that one. Yes. So what was life like back then? What was life like for you traveling around much? Did you have a hard time making friends, or did you have a lot of new friends? Well, in my opinion, looking back then, we didn t know then, I think it was a 6 Wilson Jacobs Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Peterson Kite Jacobs Kite Peterson Jacobs Kite Peterson Kite Wilson Peterson Wilson Jacobs Kite very difficult life. Sure it was. But we didn t know then that it was. When you look back, what about it strikes you as being difficult? There not being enough to eat of what you wanted. I can remember going to bed hungry a lot of times. I can remember living in a two-room house where my two sisters and I slept in one bed and my two brothers slept with my mother and dad. We had a coal-burning stove. You d get too hot if you were close to it and freeze to death if you weren t. Did you ever pick up cow chips to burn? I sure did. I went with my dad during the winter, and he d shoot rabbits. We d fry rabbits and had biscuits and gravy, and it was a good meal. Oh, I hated rabbit. Did you like rabbit? Yes. I guess if you re hungry. I didn t. I did. Not even if that was all that you had to eat? We always had something to eat. I don t know how we did it, but when Daddy would catch those young little rabbits, I didn t like it. You didn t like the fact that he was killing them? Cottontails. No, I just didn t like the flavor of the wild meat I guess. I don t know what else it was. It tasted like fried chicken to me. Me too. So did you grow up in a farming area? Did you grow up on a farm? 7 Peterson Kite Peterson Jacobs Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Wilson Sure did. Were you born and raised there? You didn t move around? No, we stayed put. I used to pack a box and pretend like I was traveling. I used to wish I had a place to stay for more than a week laughter That s funny, and you would pretend that you were a traveler. Uh-huh, I was always pretending that I was traveling. I had such a vivid imagination. My mother helped me right along. She went right along with my packing and making trips. Where are you traveling to now Norlene? Did you have a lot of friends out there? Yes, see we lived in a community. We had a school, James School. I went to the old Frontier School first. It was just a room not as wide as this. It had a stove in the middle and about three or four desks down this side and three or four on the other. There was a stage up here with an old table that had been made. I had that old table for years and years. It was terrible. It was just a table that someone had made. It was a half mile off of the highway. We lived a mile and a half when I started to school. On good days we walked and carried our gallon of water and our lunch. And a syrup can with our lunches in it. And a syrup bucket. The schoolteacher usually boarded at our house. She would stay there. I don t know what she paid the folks, but she got breakfast and supper, and mother packed her lunch too. We grew up without anything that would be special to us now. I was a substitute over at the school where they had the teacher that wrote the book Twister that s a Sequoia book now. She lives in Norman now. She came and was telling the kids about Twister. To top the day off, we went to the basement at Northeast and had a tornado drill. I told them that while they were all down I d tell them about when I was in a tornado. So I told them the story of when everything blew away when I was about five-years-old. Being in a tornado is pretty special. There was nothing left but the house. Mrs. Wilson, how did you grow up? Right there in Hooker. During the Depression time, we lost our home. My grandfather came from Iowa. He was a fairly wealthy man considering those days, and he bought land. He bought my dad a Champlain filling station. My daddy s brother had the Champlain Bulkhouse. When the Depression hit he 8 Kite Wilson Peterson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Peterson Jacobs Wilson Peterson Jacobs Peterson Wilson couldn t get his money because of the stock market crash of 29. He lost everything. We lost the home that he had gotten for us, and we had to move out. It was the homeowners association that took over. My dad died in a dirt storm when I was 12. There were eight of us kids. Now was it your grandfather that couldn t get the money? He couldn t get the money. He outlived his other my dad died and my uncle died before he did. During the Depression, after dad died, my oldest brother, he couldn t find work. He tried, but he played poker. He was pretty good at playing cards, so he d play poker and bring this money home to Mom. I had one married sister that married a farmer that had cows, so they d bring milk. So I lived on bread and milk and beans. Mush. I swore that if I got to be an adult I d never eat another bean, but I like them now. We ve been noticing a weird phenomenon out here since we ve been here. It s that brown beans and fried potatoes and brown beans and cornbread were a staple meal. It seems like either they still love it or they can t stand it. That s what I swore. I swore I d never eat beans again, but I like them now. Were brown beans a staple for both of you? Mother and Daddy, well especially Mother, I suppose Daddy was plowing the garden, but we always had such a big garden. Even in the Depression, when the dirt storms would finally kind of settle down. It d rain in the Spring. Mother would put potato sacks, or anything she could find, up around the garden to protect her garden from the wind and the sand. She had a huge garden. And we had chickens and cows. We didn t have very many cows. I still think of the cream separator, oh I hated to wash that thing. Oh I hated that thing. I did too. It was such a moaning, lonesome sound. Sometimes we had a cow and sometimes we separated the milk. Since I was the oldest of five, it was my job to wash it and clean it up. If I didn t wash it and clean it up the next day s milk would be no good. Yeah, it d be soured. Anyway, this brother that played poker, he and two other brothers got on top of the boxcar where the hobos were, and they went to California. They found 9 Kite Peterson Wilson Jacobs Kite Wilson Kite Wilson Peterson Wilson Jacobs Wilson Kite Wilson Peterson Jacobs Kite Wilson Kite work there. Eventually my mother moved out there too, just before World War II. She passed away there, but we brought her back home. But I was married by that time, so I didn t go to California. I only went there on visits. The hobos were thick. They d have to almost fight for a place to sit. Do you all remember seeing hobos and tramps? Do you remember gypsies? Yeah, they d come into my father s filling station. Somebody would come by and holler, the gypsies are in town, grab your kids, because they ll take your kids and kidnap them and you ll never see them again I want to hear all of your gypsy stories, let s start with you. Well, were they not Assyrians? I don t know. They were dressed in loud colored clothes and handkerchiefs around their head. What would the men wear? I can t remember about the man. I m sure a man was around, but I don t remember. I just remember the colorful women. We were afraid that they would steal things. Well, they would. That was their lifestyle. They d trade my dad things for gasoline, beads. I wish I had kept those beads. I had the prettiest pair of beads that he brought home. Did they drive cars? Yeah, they had old cars. Well the ones that came by home, the way I remember it they had wagons. Wagons and horses. It seems like they would sometimes do cars if they could get them and sometimes wagons. Anyway, they stopped at the station to get gasoline, so naturally they had cars. What about your gypsy encounters? 10 Peterson Wilson Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Lemons Jacobs Wilson Kite Jacobs Kite Peterson Wilson Peterson Jacobs Well, we lived kind of down on what they call Teepee Creek, down lower. They would come from the north about a half a mile away. You couldn t see them until they were right there. I can still remember mother saying, Get in the house and lock the door, the gypsies are coming. So we would naturally get in the house and peak out. Then they d come to the door and want a chicken for their sick grandma. They d beg and beg. I can t remember whether Mother gave them anything or not. Finally they d go on. But as I said, the women were always dressed and had these great big earrings and bracelets. I can t remember anything about a man. We were attracted by the bright colors of the women I guess. Where did you see gypsies? At Hardesty. Do you know where Hardesty is? Yeah, we came through it on the way here. Okay, my most vivid memory of gypsies is living at Hardesty. Somebody would come around and let us know that the gypsies are coming, the gypsies are coming Grab everything, put it in the house Get your kids in the house because they will kidnap the kids and they will steal. We were scared to death. Frightened, scared of them. You were scared of them then? Yes. Oh yeah everyone was. Do you ever remember them stealing anything from you or your family? Not from us, but we knew that they would if they could ever get a hold of anything. Of course at that day and time, during the Depression and all that, you didn t have much. Anything we had we could probably get into a two-room house. No bathrooms, no running water. What about the tramps or hobos? They would come by. I can remember Mother fixing meals to feed them. Then sometimes, they would sleep, I don t know where, but they d sleep outdoors. I can still remember them coming, a tramp. Then they d walk on. They d ask if you had something. Mother would fix up something for them to eat. And sometimes they would even offer to do work around the house to pay for it. They were different from gypsies. They were our type of people. 11 Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Kite Wilson Kite Wilson Kite Wilson Kite Wilson Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs We were the hobos, this part of the country. They were our type of people, and we weren t afraid of them. I remember, my mother was very religious, and she used to say, Well, when the hobos come just be careful. And she said to remember that that could be Jesus knocking on your door. We weren t afraid of the hobos. I was more fascinated with the gypsies than I was afraid of them. It wasn t from anything they did, but it was from what was said. Your brother was riding the rails? Yeah, I had three brothers that got out to California that way. Did they ever tell you about their experiences doing that? Was it fairly easy for them to do that or was it hard? They got out there pretty quick, I think. The brother that played poker that I told you about, he got a job in a mine. When he wrote home it said that he was working so many thousand feet under the ground, and he had a picture of the tunnel. He was in the war then. Where was that? I can t remember now, the mine that he worked for his first job. Have any of you ever encountered any women or heard any stories of women that road the rails? My husband had an aunt that she hitched hiked up there. Did you ever talk to her about her incident? No, I didn t know she did it until one of my nephews on my husband s side came through here. He was telling me about aunt Othea hitchhiking. Did you have any close friends or family members that went out to California? The Okies, the people that headed out; did you lose any neighbors or relatives to that? My whole family went. Your family left here? I was possibly 14 years old when we left. Your family was kind of mobile to start with though. Did you travel in a car, or how would you get around? My dad was a mechanic, and he always had some old car that he was working on or some old car that someone had talked him into buying. He d spend 12 Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Kite Wilson Jacobs Wilson Kite Wilson Kite Wilson money that we maybe needed for food to buy a car. He went to California; I had several aunts and uncles in California already. He went out there and sent my aunt back with the car and the money to pick us up here in Guymon and take us to California. My mother didn t drive; my aunt drove the car. We didn t stop except to go to the bathroom or to get a loaf of bread and some bologna. We ate on the way. I can t imagine one woman driving that car. There were five of us kids and my mother. That was seven of us in that car. We never stopped anywhere to sleep; we slept in the car. My aunt got so tired one time that if my mother hadn t grabbed the wheel we would have gone over a cliff. I don t know how in the world she did that. I don t either. Maybe you five kids kept her awake That Grapes of Wrath story was pretty true to life of the people here in this country. It gave Oklahoma a bad name, but it was true to the degree that we did go through a lot of hard times, depression times. We didn t know it at the time; we didn t know any different. We thought everybody lived like that. I thought everybody experienced the dirt storms, and the dust storms and such as that, but they didn t. I was asked to speak at a high school group that was studying The Grapes of Wrath, a literature class that was in Georgia. My daughter-in-law taught in a college. She knew these kids were studying The Grapes of Wrath, so she asked if I would come and speak. I made out a little outline and told them about the Depression days. How did they take it? They responded real well. First, I asked if any of them had been in Oklahoma, and they said they d been in Oklahoma and talked about Oklahoma City and Tulsa. I told them to come and draw me a picture of Oklahoma. They drew a little strip for the panhandle, this one boy came up and drew it on the blackboard, so I made it longer and told them how big the three counties were out here in the panhandle. When you talk about the panhandle, most people think you re talking about the Texas panhandle. It s too fat to be a panhandle. You know, pans don t have handles that fat. It s a big old fat one, it s not really a handle, it s like a square. Florida has a panhandle. 13 Jacobs Wilson Kite Wilson Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs It s bigger than Oklahoma, not bigger than Texas. We should just be called the Oklahoma strip. I like the panhandle. What kept your family there in Eva? That was the worst part of the dust storms. We were in the James Community. The James Community is still going. They have the church and everything. The church there is the original schoolhouse that was moved from the old James Schoolhouse. To start my schooling off, we went to Frontier, which was a mile and a half from home. In the dirt storms, there were only six of us that went there. Cecil and Harvey Ivy drove an old Model-T car. They didn t walk. They got the Model-T. They d come to school and park that on the south side if the wind was from the north or park it on the north if the wind was from the south. Them and my sister got old enough, it was through the eighth grade see, so it was just my brother and I and the two Sparks kids. Then the Sparks moved to Red River. That just left my brother and I. They couldn t keep coal because people came and stole it all the time. Mother and Daddy would take some coal up, but it got to be such a hassle and the dirt was so terrible that they just moved the teacher s table and a desk for my brother and I and whatever little dab of books we d use, which was nothing, down, and we had school in our folks front living room. I was wondering that. Oh I enjoyed that, because Mother had a hot lunch for us. We got to run out and play at recess and I didn t have any chores I had to do. At noon I got to play, I didn t have to go work. I wasn t responsible to Mother and Daddy. Then they consolidated with James, which was two miles away. Then we had school there, and then they d have church on Sunday. We d always have to put our books up on Sunday from our desks because church was on Sunday and Sunday night. We didn t put our books up on Wednesday night, because they had prayer meetings, but we didn t put our books in the closet or where ever. Then we started hot lunches; oh, that was something. Having hot lunches where? Having hot lunches at the school. The families took turns sending food, like beans. I can remember Mother making what she called green bean soup, and I thought it was wonderful. I wouldn t touch it now. Yeah, it s still good. I remember when the school lunches started at Hardesty. My mother, that was her first job. My mother worked there, but I don t know whether she was paid for it or if it 14 Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite Wilson was volunteer. Each week a family or each day a family? I might be telling something I don t remember, but we had a little oil stove behind the piano. That s where part of the food would be cooked for the hot lunches or the water heated or the dishes washed. That s where they kept the dishes, was behind the piano. And then on Sunday, of course, we had church. Was the hot lunch program started because the kids were having a hard time getting to eat? People were having a hard time. Roosevelt. It was started to help the farmers get rid of their milk. We had a lot of dried milk, and it s not like the dried milk today, I ll tell you. It had great big lumps in it, and we had no place to eat. That was in the commodities that they gave us. That was the reason that the Hardesty School had hot lunches. That was when it was started in Hardesty School. So it was to help farmers get rid of their milk? And the government would pay the farmers for their milk. I m sure they would. And the WPA started up around that time. Daddy worked on the WPA. And I had a NYA job at school. I was assigned to a certain teacher, Georgia Criswell. Yeah, I know Georgia. Let s get back the NYA job and the WPA. I really have always admired Roosevelt. I think he did an awful lot for this country. Hoover was the president before, and we blamed him for getting us into a mess financially where we had the stock market fall, to where my grandpa couldn t get his money. Anyway, I was just assigned to a certain teacher, and I helped her grade papers. I d go to her apartment at night and grade papers. Anything she wanted me to do, I would help her. I would set in the office and answer the phone. It d maybe ring one time. That was in the superintendent s office. 15 Kite Wilson Kite Peterson Wilson Kite Wilson Peterson Wilson Jacobs Wilson Kite Wilson Peterson Wilson Kite Wilson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite Do you remember what you were paid? 5 a month. That s not bad really. I was paid 3 a month. Some of them just got 3, and I got 5. It depended on your financial condition I think. What about the commodities that you said would be distributed? Yeah, what all did we get on those? Brown beans. Brown beans and corn meal. Dried milk. And dried milk. Prunes. Where would you go to get it? I don t remember. They had the flour, and I remember that it had a printing on it. It said distributed by the United States Government on a little brown paper bag. My mom always made lots of light bread. Mind did too. Everyday she d make this bread. If it wasn t ready to bake at noon, she d pull it apart and fry it with sugar. They have them right down here at the Taste of China now; they re in little puffballs. I just love those. They remind you of old times. Uh-huh, they taste just like mom s bread. It was marvelous coming home to that homemade bread smell. When we d come to town we d buy a loaf of baker s bread and eat it slice by slice. Five cents a loaf. Yeah, it was just like eating cake. Do you remember government issued clothing? 16 Peterson Wilson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite Wilson Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Yes, shoes and a brown skirt and blouse. Mom worked in the little room where they d sew. I remember a dress I had. It was about the only dress I had. We d have to wash it, and I d wear it all week. I can remember that yet. It was blue print. I had a brown corduroy skirt and jacket that was issued. I kind of remember the corduroy now that you mention it, but I can remember those shoes. The shoes didn t really fit me. Oh no, and I always had narrow feet. Oh, I did too. I always got blisters on my feet. They didn t measure you or anything; you just said what you thought. And rations, we were rationed during the war. Oh yes, but I can remember an awful lot before the war. Let s stay before the war right now. So your family was very pro-Roosevelt, pro-Democrat? I don t know if they were or not, but as I look back now, I don t think that I realized it at the time, I wasn t that political minded, but as I look back, I realize now what he did for this country. Did you have friends that wouldn t participate in the New Deal programs? I don t suppose so, because everybody was tickled to death to have something to eat and wear. I don t remember anybody not. I remember people that had more than we did, but I don t remember anybody refusing any food or clothing. Well, this brick street out here was built by the WPA. What did you say your dad worked on? I suppose it was making roads. He took a team of horses and what he called a Fresno. Yeah, what was the Fresno? Well, it was like a great big thing that was pulled, and it d pick up dirt, just like a caterpillar front loader tractor now would. 17 Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Jacobs Wilson Kite Jacobs Peterson Kite Wilson Peterson Kite Wilson Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs A road grader or something. Yeah, they pick up this dirt with what they called a Fresno. Then they d take it and dump it, and then come back and get another load of dirt. What else he did, I don t remember. Do you remember feeling odd or weird about having to go to the government for food or clothes? Yeah, my mother and daddy were so proud; they hated to do it. We took the food and the clothing, but we wished we didn t need it. We were ashamed. We didn t want it. Was the government clothing pretty easy to spot? Oh yes. Brown. It was always brown laughter . Now I don t remember that at all. You re both younger than I. Yeah, I was born in August, and she was born in September. Maybe you were too old to get in on that. I was married in 38. That s when I started high school. Well, when times were tight, how would you handle a birthday or Christmas? We didn t have too much Christmas. What would be a typical Christmas for you guys? Well, we never had a Christmas tree. We didn t either. We d try to have a nicer dinner. I think most of the time we must have lived around Hardesty or Hitchland, around in there. I can remember coming into town and having dinner. I can remember one Christmas my aunt had little rubber dolls about this big set up there on a table for all of us girls. I don t remember what the boys got. That s 18 Peterson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Wilson Kite Peterson Wilson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Wilson Kite Jacobs Wilson Kite Jacobs all we got. Christmas and birthdays, like you said, they were just another day. One Christmas, mother had a phonograph, the kind that wound up like that. The case was red, and one of the records was Star of the East. I m sure that they must have played it over and over because I can still remember Star of the East. I don t remember ever having a Christmas tree until after we moved to California. We always had a Christmas tree and treats and school programs at the schools. We had what they called box suppers. Everybody had a sack of candy given to them. And they auctioned them off, and whoever bought it, you ate with them. The women took the suppers in the boxes, and the men bought them. Do you remember the Buffalo School? I know where it is, but no. They were great at having things on Christmas. That s how you might meet your future wife or husband. Yeah, that s true. Your sweetheart, you d let him know what yours looked like. You hoped that someone you didn t like wouldn t bid on it. Did that ever happen to any one of you? I think so, but I don t remember who it was. I had an old man get mine. I wish that they still had box suppers still. That would be kind of fun. They do in some places. And taffy pulls. Where do they have box suppers? I don t know, but I remember hearing about it on the radio or the TV or something. I thought that I didn t know they still had those. 19 Wilson Kite Peterson Wilson Peterson Jacobs Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite Peterson Let s do that again sometime, at the senior citizens center. That d be fun. Our church and our community, we had programs and visited back and forth. Who were those people that lived right across the street from the James Church of God? The Burns. Evert and Grace Burns, and they had a bathroom. Oh, I remember. That s not who I m thinking of. The Burns are the only ones that I can remember that lived right across from the church. It was two sisters. Two sisters that lived across from the James Church of God? Yeah, it seems like the church was here and right over here was there house. There was a family of Keelans that lived about a half of a mile East of the James Church. She died of cancer. When anybody got sick, they called on Mother. This woman, she d come to Guymon. There was an old quack doctor that came. She had cancer or something. Whatever they put on her ate her breast away. She got so bad, and Mother would go over there and doctor her. Mother wouldn t let me see, but one time I slipped in and saw when Mother was doctoring that. It was just a great big old wad of blood and yuck. You think it was just cancer, and we didn t know it? Yeah, I m sure it was cancer and they didn t know what it was. Jane, her name was Jane. Jane and Clara Thrasher. That s it. Yeah, but they didn t live across from the church. They lived three miles east and two miles south. Mystery solved. Jane was one of the schoolteachers that lived at our house for years. 20 Wilson Peterson Jacobs Kite Peterson Jacobs Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite Jacobs Wilson Peterson Jacobs Kite Yeah, she had a sister too. Yeah, Clara. I can remember my grandfather had a big place here on his hand. I was so small, maybe six or seven years old, and I thought that was awful bad. He told me that the doctor told him that that was a cancer. He said that he was going to feed it and it was going to eat and eat and eat, and then they were going to quit feeding it and it was going to come out. Whether it did or not, I don t know. I didn t want to see anymore. It burned itself into your memory. What about other old medicines from that time? Castor oil. Oh yes, and orange juice if they had it. Cini tea for constipation. I guess no refrigeration and all; my stomach wouldn t take all of the little things of food that hadn t been kept fresh. We didn t have any refrigeration. The only thing you had was the windmill barrel. What about that skunk oil and kerosene? If you had a cold they d put it on your chest. Wasn t it skunk oil? No, Mother always used lard and turpentine and kerosene. I guess some of us used to use skunk oil. Well some people may have. We ve heard skunk oil. Sugar with drops of kerosene in it. And clover lean salve. We d get those beautiful pitchers. I ve still got one of them. Oh, you ve got an antique worth something then. I remember one time when the itch was in school. Came to visit. 21 Wilson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Jacobs Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Kite Wilson Jacobs Kite Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Sulfur. My grandparents were quite a bit better off than we were, and my grandmother thought that if you broke out with these little blisters and you itched terribly, you were unclean. So for some reason or other, my two sisters and I were staying with my grandmother. She went and got a wash towel, put kerosene in it, and made us take a kerosene bath. You can imagine how that felt. Oh, hurt and stink. Anyone with bed bugs or the itch or fleas or lice, they were down there. They were low-grade people. But it was in the school, and there was no getting around it. Do you think that old medicine worked? I don t know. I think we were just strong people. We just got past the hurdles. Well, that s the reason we lived. I think faith, even yet today, if you believe in something. It s like all these vitamins, if you believe it s going to help you then it ll help you. I don t hear too many people using kerosene for medicine these days. It must have penetrated or something. I don t know what it did, but I ll never forget that. Well, what all would you do for entertainment with the little funding that you had? Oh, I had a lot of fun of it riding with the milkman. He had a dairy and an old Model-T Ford. He had a box built on the back, and he delivered milk. They were in bottles. With paper tops. Yeah, so he d go down the street and honk and all of us kids would get on there and deliver his milk for him. We d ride on the running board. There were running boards on cars then. That was fun for me. The kids, I don t know what the adults did for entertainment, I don t think they did anything, but I can remember us kids going out and playing hide-and-seek and kick the can. 22 Wilson Kite Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Wilson Peterson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Wilson Kite Wilson Peterson Kite Wilson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite Annie Over and Jacks. What were the rules for kick the can? You had a circle about so big, and you had a can in there. Someone would go and kick the can as hard as they could, and everybody would scatter and hide. You d have to run and get the can and not get caught. If you got caught, you were off of that side. I just remember kicking the can in a circle. It seems like we used sticks. We d get there with sticks, one on each side, and we d both hit it. You d hurt yourself. Maybe that was a different game; maybe you had invented a new game. It might have been a different one. And croquet was a good game. We didn t have any croquet. That was later. After I was married we had croquet. That was an adult game. When you got a little money. Yeah, when you got enough money to buy a croquet set. I remember when we were little we d just beat on things with the mallets. We d just pound things in the ground. We didn t know what we were doing. I wish we could play that again. That was fun. We had one set up in our backyard. Horseshoes, I ve still got the horseshoes out in the garage. I was pretty darn good at pitching horseshoes. I didn t have anybody to play horseshoes with me, because my sister and brother didn t like it, so I played by myself. How many were in your family? Three, and there were five years between us, so I was the middle one. At home, I would play horseshoes with myself. I d toss my horseshoe down. Then I d play like I was somebody else, and I d toss for them. Did you win a lot? 23 Peterson Wilson Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Wilson Kite Wilson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Kite Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite I imagine. See, you got three points if you got a ringer, if you got a leaner it was so much. I can t remember. I can t remember how much. And then so much distance from the steak. I played a lot of ball by myself. I loved ball. I loved basketball. And marbles. I wasn t any good at marbles, but I loved basketball. Did you ever play on a team? Oh yeah, the Hardesty team. We went to state. I played basketball too. For Hooker? Sure, never went anywhere else. Hooker and Hardesty and Adams, we were all very competitive. I guess you guys are a little too far apart in age to have played each other. When were you born? 20, but I didn t know you. You were more in the Hardesty area more. And we lived in California for years. I graduated from high school in California. Did we talk about why you didn t move back to California or why you ended up sticking around while everybody else was heading out? The folks, they owned the land. And you didn t lose it like we did. The folks paid on the land, but we had the land. Just before, in 29 my grandfather was a carpenter, and he built a real nice home for my folks. We didn t have a bathroom, but we didn t get the dirt in the house. We got an awful lot of dirt, but nothing like the people whose houses were not well built. The folks house was real well built. When did you move to California? 24 Jacobs Kite Wilson Kite Jacobs Kite Wilson Jacobs Wilson Lemons Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs We moved to California in 39. You were married and stayed here while all of your brothers and mother went out to California. Yeah, she went out there at one time. Well all of you guys were here when the really big storms go through. Oh yeah, that dirty Sunday. Didn t that happen in 1930? 1935. I was fifteen. I was eleven then. I was with two of my girlfriends. Us three girls were together, and I was scared to death. It lasted so long; it stayed dark so long. Where were you guys? Were you at someone s house? Well, we saw the storm coming up, and I was with my mom and we were headed for home. We didn t think we were going to make it. She was going to stop in at this hotel where she knew this lady, and my girlfriend lived next door. I told her I was going to Retta Ray s, and she told me she was going in there. Retta Ray wasn t home; she was down at Louise s and it was locked. So I ran down to Louise s. We three girls, her parents were out on a rabbit drive, so we were alone in this old house together. We just laid down on the bed. You could actually not see anything. Well it d come in just like that. They were so pretty when they came in, if you remember. Yeah, just rolling in. Just rolling in. It d be so quiet before they got there. The birds and everything would be ahead of them. Then here it would blow. Then it would just blow and blow and blow like it did yesterday. It didn t stop. No, it didn t stop. Day after day after day. Night after day. When it rolled in, it just kind of settled down on you. I was thinking it was in 1930, but it was 35? 25 Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Kite Peterson Wilson Kite Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Wilson Peterson 35 was the Black Sunday. Well, it started before then. The first one that I remember, it was real black. I think I was about seven. We were out at my grandparents, the Oilers, down there by Hardesty down on the river having a picnic and playing on the water, and we saw this coming up. We were about a mile from the house, and I didn t think that we were going to make it to the house, but we did. From then on, it seemed like it was all of the time. Well, one day the dirt would blow from the north. There d be a sand pile way high on the north side of the house. The next day it d blow from the south and vice versa. Those big old sand piles would just change places. And the fence posts. There d be dirt, topsoil clear up over the fence posts. And there was no vegetation. Your Eva area was one of the worst. That and Dalhart, Texas. I think you were in the middle. Daddy and grandpa would go out with the big old barge with the horses, and would dig soap weeds and burn the green spikes off of them and feed that root to the cows. The cows would just have soap bubbles coming down the side of their mouth. Then they had to sell everything but maybe one or two old cows. They had all these Hereford, white-faced cattle, and they had to sell everything, all of the horses and everything. Do you know what a barge is? I ve heard a lot about them, but I ve never seen one. I thought there was one in this picture. It was a big wagon that was high on one side and low on the other. I remember seeing them. You d pull them with a horse. What was it for? To stack your hay in or something. They would have a rope fixed in them some way, and whenever they would cut the crops in the fall, they would fill this barge with the crop and haul it in. They d pull with the horses on this rope and unload the barge that way. 26 Jacobs Peterson Kite Peterson Wilson Jacobs Kite Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Wilson Peterson Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson Wilson They were very ingenuous, weren t they? Then they d go back and get another, or you d head maize and throw the maize, as you headed it, into the barge. Of course they didn t raise anything then. For years, there was nothing raised anywhere, only maybe the gardens. Do you remember the first dust storm that you saw and what you remember thinking? No, I can t remember the first dust storm. I just remember the dirt blowing all of the time. I d just wish it d rain. I just thought it d be so nice to see a cloud come up and rain. It never rained. It never rained. You two remember the first time you saw something rolling in? I think it was sort of gradual. We weren t impressed with it. It was just a way of life. The one that I remember is that Sunday, but it went on for days and days. We had a lot of them that were nearly as bad. A lot like yesterday. Well yesterday, that was mild. It didn t seem mild, Doraleen, after not having to live through it for a while. I d get up of a morning and my lips would be the only thing, the rest of me would be brown. You couldn t have breakfast on the linoleum table because you couldn t see the print on the linoleum. Not linoleum, oilcloth. That was the day, when you d get to go to town and buy a new oilcloth for the table. When did things start to turn around for you guys? When it started raining. We were in California, so I m not sure. Probably in about 38 because that s about when I started high school. We still had some dust storms after that. 27 Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Kite Wilson Peterson Peterson Kite Peterson Wilson Kite Wilson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Peterson Yeah, but it started raining enough that there was vegetation. And there were some jobs. My husband always had a job. He was the superintendent of the city water works and the disposal plant. Oh, you lived high. Oh yeah, he made 60 a month, 50 when we first got married, but he was ten years older than me. So the rain brought with it better times? Do you remember the first exciting thing that you were able to do or buy when times had turned around? It was awful nice to get a refrigerator because we always had the wooden boxes and the ice delivered. We never even had a wooden box. Once in a while, the folks would buy a chunk of ice. The Shuberts, on Saturday, used to go to Texhoma and buy ice. Then they d make ice cream on Saturday nights. Once in a while they d have us over, and I thought that if I ever got so that I could, I d have ice cream every Saturday night. We made lots of ice cream. Do you now? No, of course not. We still have homemade ice cream every once in a while. A bunch of us get together and freeze it. So the refrigerator was something that you remember buying? Yeah, it was so hard to empty that pan where it melted. We were in California by that time, and I remember that it s a whole new, different way of life when you go out there from here. I can remember the first refrigerator that my family bought out there. I can remember when we first got there. They had a lot of what they called coolers. They were built in the southeast corner of the house. Two sides were screened in and went from the floor to the ceiling. These two sides were screened in and they had shelves in them. You d put your eggs and your milk and things like that in there. And water. Did you have water down below it? I can t remember, it seems like we did. It was cool; it kept everything cool. They had something up to keep the evaporation. We always had the windmill with the barrel in the summer. You put the milk in the half-gallon buckets and 28 Jacobs Wilson Peterson Wilson Jacobs Wilson Kite Jacobs Kite Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Wilson Peterson Jacobs tied a string around it. We didn t even have electricity. And the toilet was outside. I never had a bathroom until I got married. The first house we rented in 38 had a bathroom. And your toilet tissue was a Sears and Roebuck and a Montgomery Ward catalog. Yes, and you hoped for the pages that were soft, and not the slick pages And you d have to dig a new hole every so often laughter . And on Halloween, the kids would come along and turn it over. That was the big thing to do on Halloween, turn people s toilets over What about the first time that you got electricity? The first time I saw electricity was after my family moved to California. What about you two that stayed around here? The wind chargers were used for electricity then, with the batteries. We had electricity gas. The town had electricity, but the country had wind chargers. We had gas for heat. I remember before Dad died, I remember we had a gas stove. It had that asbestos back there. The burners were open. I always remember putting the galvanized tin tub in front of it for us all to take a bath. That s the way we had our baths. I remember the stove that we cooked on; it had all these burners. Coal oil stove. We had what, six burners? You had a big one; ours was four. And you had an oven that you could take off. I ve still got one. They make camp ovens a whole like what we had when we were growing up, only they re used in camping now. 29 Kite Wilson Peterson Wilson Kite Peterson Jacobs Kite Wilson Kite Wilson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Wilson Kite Jacobs Peterson Jacobs You said your dad died in a dust storm? Yeah, it was an awfully bad night. He died of a heart attack. He was out of work, lost his station, didn t have any money, and was so discouraged. I remember him setting in this chair and saying, Well, good bye, I guess I m going. We all jumped up right quick, and they laid him out on the floor. One of my brothers, he was fourteen because I was twelve, ran to get the doctor, Dr. Risen. He was dead before Henry ever left. I think they found a quarter in his pocket. There was absolutely no money. Nothing. That was the cheapest funeral I ve ever seen. You were there with your brothers and sisters and mom. Yeah, and besides being so cheap, it was such a pathetic thing to have happened to you. It was such a bad thing to have to go through. Was he not doing physically well? I don t think he was well. I think he was just so discouraged. And it was during the dust storm that it happened? Yeah, we were having a really bad one that night. I remember they had to send Henry out and how bad it looked when mom opened the door to see if Henry should go. The other brothers were working with dad, so that s why the fourteen-year-old went. He walked across the tracks over there. We didn t have any tragedy like that. Did you ever know anybody that got dust pneumonia? I ve heard of it, but I didn t know anyone personally. If they did at that time, we didn t know it because we didn t go to the doctor. I think I ve got it now. I never did smoke, but I have a kind of an emphysema, and they say it s from dust. I think I might have got that yesterday. Yes, you probably did. That was just a drop in the bucket compared to what we went through. If it had gone for days and days and days but I was just as discouraged 30 Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Wilson Jacobs Kite Wilson Jacobs Peterson Kite Jacobs Peterson Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson yesterday as I remember being. We were at Bessie Herald s house watching shingles fly off. They were all laying in her front yard. It was pretty crazy. We were just kind of looking out across the field at Hooker. There was just this haze and browns swirling around. It was nasty. We d get stuff in our eyes and we couldn t see. It wasn t anything like that big one there. Just imagine that going on for days and days and weeks and months. California here we come If those were the good old days They weren t, not for me. Well, I don t know. I think we didn t know any better. I still had fun, didn t you? We d have beautiful days in between when it was beautiful. Yeah, but I don t want to go back to that. If I had to go back to it, I wouldn t do it. So to me it s not the good old days. That s a bunch of bologna. But we didn t know any different, we were kids. I ve made this statement time and time and time again. I hope my kids and grandkids and great-grandkids never have to go through what we had to go through. Yeah, I do too. The Depression or the dust bowl? Both. That house in that picture over there, to the left of that school, our son lives in that house today over here in Guymon. Ken Peterson s house. He s the one that has Ken s Ribs and all that. Where s that? It s down here by the schoolhouse, the Academy grade school. He caters a lot. His house is just right there on the corner across from the schoolhouse. He has his catering business, most of it, there. He s got a big Ken s building down 31 Kite Peterson Wilson Jacobs Peterson Wilson Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Wilson Peterson Jacobs Peterson Kite Jacobs Peterson Jacobs here, whenever he gets the time and money enough to finish up the kitchen out there. So he doesn t have a restaurant? No. He s going to do the tri-county thing. The telephone company. It ll be like 2,000 or 3,000. I ve eaten a lot of his good ribs. I hope he s got something cooked up now. He usually has ribs to buy in the cooler or frozen. He never keeps anything else, like potato salad and beans and all of that. Okay, you re making me hungry. But that house looks just like today. They have completely gutted it inside and redone it, but the outside looks just like that. I made quite a bit of money babysitting. I worked for Judge Hughes. Yes, I remember Judge Hughes. My mother worked for him. I came over here when I was thirteen, and his wife, they were going to have some senator from Oklahoma City come out to be their guest, and she wanted some help. She looked at him and said, Why did you bring a young girl like that home for? Mrs. Jacobs, how did you feel when you got to California? Did you think that it was a great change or an improvement? Were you sad to have left? I was sad to leave. We got out there and we were just disoriented because it was a completely different way of life. You didn t say you were from Oklahoma because you were looked down on as an Okie, The Grapes of Wrath, you know and all that. You were just white trash out there, whether you were or not. I went on and graduated from high school out there. I could have gone I was in within walking distance of the University of California at Berkeley, but I didn t go. I thought I had to go to work as soon as I graduated from high 32 Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Peterson school. I could have gone at no cost, all books paid, everything paid, but I didn t. Where did you work? My sister called me from San Francisco Sunday, and she asked me if I remember the Montgomery Ward where I worked in Oakland. I did, that was my first job from high school, and she told me that they demolished the building yesterday. That was my first time to feel an earthquake, was working up on the fourth floor. We swayed back and forth. So your sister stayed in California and you came back. Well, I had met my husband here; our families had met before we went to California. Did you stay in touch with him? Not really, my mother did some with some of his family. He was in the service, he was drafted. Somebody let us know that he was out there, and we called or wrote to him or something and let him know where we were and invited him out to the house for dinner. Then it took off from there. We were married two weeks, and he was sent overseas to Europe. Well, what would you say are some things that you lived through what most people consider to be the most trying time in the history of the United States. Personally? You lived through it and you made it. What are some things that you carry with you from that time? How has that changed you? Well, the only way I could go to high school was to work for Mrs. O Donnell, that brick house that s north of the college. She had one room fixed up as apartments for girls to live in that went to college. I went as a high school girl and lived with all of those college girls. My job was to clean after all of them. They had a washroom and a hall down between. I had to keep the hall, the washroom, the one bathroom, and the shower clean. Then I had to go upstairs every morning and dust everything in the dining room and living room every morning with the dust cloth and take the dust mop and go around the carpet. If I didn t, she called me back. School started at 8:30, and I walked about a half a mile. Then I went to high school at Goodwell. I had this NYA job that paid 3. But, I didn t want the kids at school to know that I did all of this for Mrs. O Donnell. I had to do her ironing, and she had two sons. Do you remember Jimmy and Benny O Donnell? One of them taught at Hooker or Tyrone for years. I had to do all of the ironing for them. The Rayvern boy would deliver groceries. I didn t realize that he had to work and the other kids were having just as hard of a time as I was, so I would go to another room when he d deliver groceries, because I didn t want him to know that I was having to do all 33 Kite Peterson Wilson Peterson Wilson Peterson Kite Peterson Wilson Peterson Jacobs Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Peterson Kite Jacobs Kite Wilson of this ironing. What was your actual job? Was it to iron and dust? Iron and dust and clean. Whatever she told you to do. Yeah, but that was a full-time job. And you didn t make anything? All I made was my room. The room that you could rent then was 3 a month. So you didn t get paid any money at all. No money at all. Where would you eat? Well, mother would fix up this box of food, and we d cook. Then Mrs. O Donnell got so she would cook breakfast for me every morning. Mother would send eggs and bacon and butter and everything to her, so she had food to cook for me. Taking advantage of you. I couldn t have gone to high school if I hadn t had a room to live in. You lived in a house with a bunch of college girls? Oh yes. Did you learn some things that your mom didn t know you were learning? Well, I don t know. Did you smoke cigarettes? No. I can t remember any stories or anything like that. You had to check in and out. She knew what was happening to you. It was pretty regular. What was your question again? What have you carried with you, what impact has it had on your life. It makes me stronger. 34 Peterson Wilson Kite Wilson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Peterson Jacobs Peterson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Peterson Wilson Jacobs Peterson I guess. I think it did. Tom Brokaw wrote a book, The Greatest Generation. I just read that. He was raised in Nebraska I believe. He has a lot of things in that book. If you haven t read it you should read it. You can associate yourself with the things that he wrote about. Of course when you re called the greatest generation you re going to associate yourself with it. Well no, you could really identify. A tough life makes you stronger. We had to be tough or we wouldn t have made it. So this tough life made you stronger, coming out of that. We are also the generation of World War II. We did a lot of sacrifices. I lived on the West coast during World War II. We had black outs. We were rationed. We had Japanese boats off of the coast that were ready to attack. Growing up during the Depression and the dust bowl days, we had no idea what we were living through and going through. We had no idea how it was going to influence our lives. I think, for me personally, there s nothing that I can t face or handle if I have to. And that s because of how you grew up. It seems like if the dust bowl and the Depression made you stronger and able to face things and appreciate things, then it was the good times. I think that s the reason that I like shoes so well today laughter . It was a learning time. It was an inspirational You had to. You wouldn t have made it. I can t say it was a good time. It was a hard time. Do you think that the generations in the United States coming up now would be improved if they had to go through this? I don t think they would make it. Some of them would. They may be going through things that we don t have to face. They have drugs and all this. We had to face morals. If a young girl got pregnant and wasn t married It was bad. 35 Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Wilson Jacobs Kite Jacobs Kite Jacobs It was awful. What would happen? In the first place she d go off somewhere, her parents wouldn t let her live at home, she would have to go somewhere. If she had the baby she and the baby were looked down on, where they could never expect to have any kind of a decent life at all. Our morals were high but so were society s morals. Society has lower morals now and anything goes, just about. Maybe it s just more forgiving. Please yourself. It probably is but on the other hand, I just don t believe in this fast life that so many of them live. I have grandchildren that live with their boyfriends and fianc s now and I don t believe in it, but it s not my life, it s their life. Well, we re getting too philosophical now, so it s time to quit. We are, maybe we sound arrogant, but we are a very, very strong people that went through the Depression and World War II. That s why we re here. I m not putting other generations down because they have their problems also. I wouldn t want to live in theirs, and I hope they never have to go through what I had to. ------- -------..