 Nykolaiszyn with the Oklahoma State University Library. Today is Friday, December 7th, 2007 and I m in Tulsa, Oklahoma, interviewing Ginny Creveling. This interview is being conducted as part of the Inductees of the Oklahoma Women s Hall of Fame Oral History Project. Creveling was inducted into the Oklahoma Women s Hall of Fame in 2007. She is a community activist and civic leader who has devoted much of her work to helping women, children and families. With a long list of community involvement and honors to match, Creveling is deeply involved in the Tulsa community, and was recognized in 2006 as Tulsan of the Year by Tulsa People Magazine. Thank you for joining us today. Thank you. Well let s begin. Tell us a little bit about where you re from and your early life as a child. I was born in the Philippines, to Filipino parents. My father was in the Filipino Army, commissioned on the battle field into the U.S. Army which, at that time automatically made him a U.S. citizen, which then, when he married my mother, made her a U.S. citizen, which when their children were born, we were U.S. citizens. So we came to the United States my father stayed with the U.S. Army not as naturalized citizens, but already citizens of the U.S., which is a little different today, I think. Being in a military family, we travelled across the United States a lot. I think Japan was really the only place I got to live as young children do. Picked up the language pretty easily so, at one point in my life, unfortunately in which I was about seven or ten, I could speak three languages. And now I do well to speak English properly. I m the oldest of seven children. I have a sister and five brothers. Currently we re scattered from Florida to Texas, but most of us are in 5 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling California where my mother is, and I find myself in Tulsa, Oklahoma because my father was once stationed at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. And I graduated from Lawton High school, went to school at the University of Oklahoma. I loved Oklahoma so much, that when I left here and went back to California for a couple of years, when there was a choice to be made as to where to live, I chose to come back to Oklahoma. I find myself in Tulsa, because I drove up here one day, one weekend. We were so poor, my husband coming back from Vietnam, and not having a job, we were going to take a mini weekend vacation, and came to Tulsa and stayed at the Camelot Hotel, which I think is being torn down today, as a matter of fact as a public nuisance because it has been a neglected, abandoned building for so long. But at the time it was a castle. It was 1969, it was fabulous. We ate at the Pagoda Restaurant (Laughs) across the street, and we just thought, Tulsa was the best. We borrowed enough money to move, to pay for a month s deposit on rent, to pay a month s rent. Moved without a job, set about getting a job and here we are. Wow. Let s travel back to when you were a little girl. I know you moved around a lot. Tell me about some of your favorite subjects in school when you were younger. Always English. I loved English. I loved languages actually, I also really enjoyed history. And, did you find yourself attending large schools, or small schools? Describe for me the types of schools your elementary schools, and your junior highs that you attended, and your high school, were they large or were they small? What kind of population did you find yourself in? As a military family, living on military bases or in the cities next to a military base, they generally tended to be fairly large communities. I don t think I ever lived in a community that was really, really, big though, like Los Angeles, Dallas but they were fairly large. Lawton, at the time, was the third largest city, Lawton where I graduated from high school, in Oklahoma. I guess there are long stories and lots of factors there but, Lawton is not the large city one would expect it to be, given the military bases there. But they were mostly, I guess middle sized. Lawton High School, when I graduated from there, was the only high school in Lawton. Now I think there are three or four. Did you ever feel out of place, or like you didn t fit in, or like you weren t from around here? That s an interesting question. I just read something my daughter wrote, where she said that she did feel that way, and that is an interesting 6 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn question. I m sure I did, and I know there were things that would have been hard to ignore. For instance, I think I have cited this before. I recall travelling with my family in the late fifties across the deep south from a military base in California to Fort Lee, Virginia. And when we would stop for a rest break, finding restrooms and water fountains marked whites or colored, and having to ask my parents where I was supposed to go, so yes, knowing I was neither white nor colored, as a child not really knowing, it was really ignorance, asking where I was supposed to go. So that s something that did point out there s something different about me. Being in high school and having a boyfriend tell me that his parents didn t want me to date him anymore because I was not white. So yes, but I would have to say that those thoughts did not possess my thinking all the time. It s not something that occupied my thinking most of the time. I was the oldest of seven kids, both my parents worked. My mom worked nights and I had to take care of the young ones. I just think there were other distractions. So it s nothing I think I dwelled on, although, it was part in parcel of my life, part in parcel of who makes me who I am today, and how I think today. Well what was occupying your mind when you were younger, outside of not really paying too much attention to the differences? (Laughs) I think I had a lot of responsibilities as a child, and to understand that one would have to have a cultural understanding that in our family, in coming from our background, whoever s the oldest child has the greater responsibility. So, my youngest brothers are twins, they are the sixth and seventh children of the family, dividable by, I think two and a half minutes or whatever it is, and yet that older twin bosses around the younger twin, so that s the hierarchy in our culture. And so, I think I had a lot of responsibilities. My father was overseas and gone most of the time, leaving my mother with most of the work around the house, and because she worked a lot of that fell to me. And when I look back on it, and maybe by today s standards there would be some people who would think that it would be unfair to give a child that much responsibility, so there were a lot of things I couldn t do. But because I didn t know better, I didn t miss it. So those things are what occupied my time, where just having to get home in time for my mother to leave for work. I think my bus rolled home at 2:30, she had to leave for work by 3:00, so I had that much time to get home. And then there were those two babies to take care of, and the other kids and supper to put on the table. Makes me sound pretty ancient, but yes. You had lots of family responsibilities. 7 Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn And, you know, that was just life as we knew it, and we did what we had to do to make that life work. Sure. And I think it was during a time where other people were in similar situations with their families, where the older children had to take care of the younger children, so And it wasn t so unusual in my environment, because remember we were military families. There were a lot of military families that were facing similar life situations, and we all were just trying to make life work the way we could make it work. So, in between juggling taking care of the family and helping out with that, what did you really want to be when you grew up? When you were younger, what did you think you wanted to be? I don t know that I had dreams and aspirations which makes me sound like a pretty un-insightful person. I don t know that I did. We had very little exposure. We didn t get to travel much, unlike my children, who when they were young, got to go snow skiing, we had a boat and water. They had so much more exposure and travel, and I didn t have any of that, so there weren t those kinds of enticements. I ve had really wonderful experiences and adventures in my life. But I ve just been real lucky in everything I ve gotten to do. The great jobs I ve gotten to do, the great people I ve gotten to work with all just really by luck that I have found myself in circumstances that I have gotten work with people who are incredibly bright and talented and have taught me a lot. But as far as my at some point in my life saying, Golly, I d sure like to work in that kind of a job, and know those kind of people, I don t know that that ever occurred to me. Well did you have any people you looked up to when you were younger that inspired you? I was always an idealist, and I say that because maybe all children picture themselves to be, you know, in some situation where they get to be a hero or something, like the people you read about and see in the movies and TV. You picture yourself doing those kinds of things, but I can t point out any particular person to you. I will say that having lived this long, I think those kinds of heroes and those heroics we probably see every day, although they re probably not billboard names. They re just really ordinary people who do the extraordinary things that people do every day to make life terrific and to make life better for a lot of people who don t have it as well. Tell me a little bit about the role your family plays in your life now. We 8 Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling kind of have a picture of the importance of family when you were younger, but what does family mean to you now? I have the most remarkable family. I have a United Nations family. As you know, we re all Filipino both parents were Filipino, but I have an African American sister-in-law, a Chinese brother-in-law. We have a Japanese sister-in-law. We have, I think four or five different faiths, including Jehovah s Witness and Buddhist. So we have a remarkable family and the most wonderful thing about our family is our children are incredible people. They are bright, they re adventuresome, they re not afraid of much, they re very accomplished, very kind children. And so, I think, given the way that we were raised as children, the hardships and I m really am reluctant to say that because some people suffer hardships that ours don t seem like anything by comparison given the ones that we had to deal with, I think our family is pretty remarkable. My family s my touchstone, because sometimes, particularly in the kind of job I have had, where you get to go to social functions that are pretty elaborate, the kinds of job opportunities and volunteer opportunities I ve had. Just as an example, getting to be part of an escort team that both welcomed and said farewell to President Clinton and First Lady Hilary Clinton at the time they were here in 93 those kinds of things. My family is my touchstone because I never do forget how, from where I came, and that I get to do that sort of thing, makes me appreciate it so much more, how lucky I am. Was education important in your family? Did your parents encourage you to go to college, and get a degree? Of ultimate importance. My father did not have a college degree. He was in the Army young, Filipino Army. My mother did have a degree. Coming to this country, though, my mother s degree as a teacher was not recognized, so she never taught in this country. We were of modest means, my father was a first sergeant, and he had a large family so, we went to public schools. And in terms of colleges there really probably wasn t the money for it. It s expensive for all of us. My mother and father divorced when I was just out of high school, and somehow, just out of sheer will, she made sure that five of us got through school, and three of us have higher degrees. I don t know how she did it, and the two that don t have degrees was by their choice that they haven t finished. One of them works for the University of California could go to school tuition free, and is at a place in his life where he doesn t feel he needs it. That was at my mother s insistence, that we all finish high school for one, and that some of us were able to go to college and finish those degrees. 9 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Tell me a little bit about your college days, what school you went to, what you studied? I went to the University of Oklahoma and was in the nursing program there for a couple of years. My mother got ill, and she was in California at that time, so I went home to help care for her. And linking back to Oklahoma, married at that time I was married, and when my children were young enough to be in school, I started going back to school. And I took a class a semester, whatever I could handle, and it took me ten years, since I started again, restarted, but I finally get my degree in nursing from the University of Tulsa. And so it took me, let s see, I got it in 84, I graduated from high school in 64, so it took me twenty years to get that degree, but I did eventually finish. Why nursing? You know, I ve been evading that, by omission, but I will tell you, since you asked. In the Philippines, because of the economic, socioeconomic conditions there, the only escape out of poverty is through education. And the most respected people, professions there are doctors or lawyers, and for women, teachers or nurses. And that was in those days, and so that s what you had to be. Nurses even more than teachers, doctors maybe even more than lawyers, and so when I got out of high school in Lawton I said I wanted to be a teacher, and my mother said You re gonna be a nurse, and I said But I want to be teacher. She said, If you don t go to nursing school, I m sending you back to the Philippines. That is a true story, (Laughs) and so and it does not make my mother sound very, it s not a very favorable thing to say about my mother. But my mother is an amazing woman, amazing. If I could have half the sheer will power, and have the courage she had raising her children, I would have lived a very good life. Well, I m sure she was very proud when you got that nursing degree (Laughs) Finally. She was. And, you know if you ask her about this, I m sure she would have no recollection of ever having been that insistent with me, but indeed that is how it happened. And again, as part of our culture, I didn t rebel, as children might today. I just said all right. Now you went on and earned your MBA Master s of Business Administration in 2000 I did was that tough, going back to school? 10 Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling At the time I was single, my children were grown and gone, and I did not have grandchildren. Really at the time, I was working. I love my job, but I had time. And so, I had time to do something and it was either that or a bowling league. And the company wouldn t pay for bowling, but they had an educational agreement, so I went to school. And that also is a true story. Do you feel your MBA has definitely helped in your career now? I think it certainly helps. I like school for the things it teaches you, not for the processes it teaches you, for the expansion of your mind it gives you. Not necessarily for specific things you learn, and so the ability to analyze things, the ability to think beyond certain frameworks, yes I definitely think a master s program helped me Okay And yes, it was very difficult. In nursing school, I don t remember any electives because you have to take all these medical related subjects. So I didn t have finance and accounting and things like that, so I had a lot of prerequisites I had to take before I could even really begin my master s program, and (Laughs) yes it was hard. Well, I d like you to take me through your career, up to this point, I d like you to describe to me the different places you ve worked, and what you did and, if you could elaborate on that for me, please. My job with ONEOK is the only career job I ve ever had, other than being a mother. I told you it took me so long to get my degree. I was lucky when I got the degree. I did have a choice of working or not working, and I chose not to work. My children were little at the time and I chose to be a full-time stay-at-home mother, which I will say I believe is the most challenging as well as the most rewarding job any woman can ever accept. I think that stay-at-home moms should be credited with helping to hold together the fabric of our society, because it does make a difference to be home and be with the children. That doesn t mean to say, that working moms can t be credited with the same, it s just a lot more difficult for working moms and they re even greater heroes, I think. So all that being said, I did a lot of volunteer work as a stay-at-home mom. One of those volunteer jobs, because of who was on my committee, led to being offered a job with the Westin Hotel. And I ended up being the PR director for the Westin Hotel here in Tulsa for about eight years, working part time. And the life situation was such that the Westin Hotel was sold. At the very same time I was going to be single, and also at the 11 same time that both my kids were out of high school and out of the house, and it made it a time to enter another kind of job. I was lucky, again I told you I ve always been lucky The governor s meeting, the National Governors Association meeting was here in Tulsa in 93. Now, that is a very important meeting that happens somewhere in the country every year. And it s a meeting of all the governors of all the states and our five territories, and this particular year was 93. Almost all the governors were here, including President Clinton and Vice-President Gore. We didn t really know they were going to come until kind of the last minute, meaning just a couple of months before it happened. It was already a very complicated event, but what was so interesting about that is once the president, and then the vice-president was going to be here, my gosh, the Secret Service layer that goes over everything, is just incredible. It was a once in a lifetime opportunity, and I m really lucky to have been able to do it. So at that time when the Westin sold, that job just became immediately available. And the reason I was able to get that job is I had just graduated from Leadership Oklahoma, and one of my classmates was named the coordinator, and asked me to head the staffing for it and so, how lucky can that be that there was a new job for me to do. And so I did that and then when that was over, that was to be over in August 93. In May of that year, I realized that once this meeting was over, I would not have a job, and no ready income. And so, at that time I started visiting friends that I knew at different places, different companies just to see, ask them what the horizon might be and where they think I might fit in somewhere. These were friends who I d worked with in some volunteer capacity or another. Larry Brummett and I had worked on Leadership Tulsa together and ONEOK had given me a cadre of volunteers to use for the governor s meeting so naturally they were one of the places I went. They offered me a job that they created for me in community relations and agreed to hold it for me until August. So when I was through with the governor s meeting, I went directly to ONEOK. It was the job I wanted because everyone I had ever talked to who worked at ONEOK had said how much they loved working there. It was like family so I was really lucky to get that job. And now I ve been there for about thirteen years. I ve always in been a community relations aspect. The foundation was established in 1997 and I ve been there since the beginning of it as Executive Director. That s been a really fun job because, being there right in the beginning I was able to be involved in the establishment of policies and procedures and formats and goals and objectives and priorities. And it s evolved. It is a very important aspect of ONEOK, and I think what reflects that is the Foundation Board of 12 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Directors is made up of our CEO, Chairman of the Board, and our CFO, and our General Counsel. It s made up of the top executive management of the company. So it s a very important part of our business strategy to meet goals. It s not just a giving program to us. It s very much a way that we become part of the community. Well that s great. It makes you probably feel good to go to bed at night. I do have a great job. (Laughs) And what is so wonderful about this job is I think that as I told you, I come from a volunteer background. And so I m able to come from a volunteer background, and have that perspective, and also have the perspective of the corporate entity and the partnership between the community and its corporate community, and then also, our governmental agency. It s a terrific thing to be able to help facilitate, help be a part of and then to behold the successes that come from strong partnerships like that. Well, I d like to talk a little bit about some of things you ve been involved with and have you explain your role with these organizations. I d like you to tell me a little bit about Rainbow House. Rainbow House, let s see. I think that was in 1977 or 1978, and Rainbow House was a child abuse prevention program. It was a crisis nursery, where if one were to feel kind of at wit s end, had any concern that that crisis they were facing might end up with in any way neglecting or abusing their child, they could remove their child from that risk by simply taking them to Rainbow House. Rainbow House was a crisis nursery that was open 24/7. They just simply had to make a phone call to the taxi company with whom we had a partnership, the cab would pick them up and take them over to the Rainbow House, which was our partnership with the Tulsa what was called Vo-tech at that time. We had staff there that would care for them 24/7 until this crisis could be dissipated and the parent could come back for them. And then when parents would come back we could refer them to different education programs, different community resources, all to help them maybe prevent that kind of situation from happening again, or for knowing where to go and how to access establish community services should that situation arise again. Unfortunately Rainbow House was probably ahead of its time. That was at a time, I remember clearly, where the subject of child abuse wasn t even acceptable social conversation. I suppose there was some fear about it, and thankfully we ve gotten over that so we can help the children that need help. But it was a great grassroots experience and I want to give you some flavor to that, because I m really very proud of how the community responded. McDonalds, as you know, is a big company, so we were all just stay-at- 13 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn home moms, and just had this idea born out of coffee table talk, you know, What can we do to help the situation. I think we were all volunteers with DHS Department of Human Services and the children s protection registry at DHS. So this is something we came up with DHS, but we didn t know how to ask for the money or raise the money, or anything. I don t even know how we walked into McDonalds and told them what we were doing and asked what they could do. Well this man we have to be able to talk to was a franchisee and had like three or four McDonalds. What ended up happening was for, I think, two or three days in a certain time period, McDonalds permitted Rainbow House volunteers to come in, and we were behind the counter and we would serve all the customers that walked in. And previous to that we could sell these tickets that McDonalds gave us, and I don t think we had to pay for any of them. We could sell tickets for a meal you know, whatever the set meal was that they were promoting for five dollars. We sold them everywhere, all over the community, and then for those two or three days when they could redeem those tickets the volunteers would be behind the counter. We had our little gingham aprons, you know our Rainbow emblem. So it was fabulous. In terms of a fundraiser, it raised at that time I think it raised 50,000, which was a lot of money. But it also raised so much awareness. Everybody liked McDonalds, and here we had fathers and wives and older children serving the community McDonalds food. That was a great story, but again it was ahead of its time. And at some point, there just wasn t the funding available, and we had to close it. I was president at the time and it was probably one of the hardest things I d ever done, to have to go to a staff who was very passionate and very committed to what they were doing, and to have to let them go because we couldn t raise the money to do it. But it ended up merging with what was then the Children s Registry at Hillcrest Medical Center, which then merged with Parents Anonymous, which is now the Parent Child Center, which is a wonderful facility here in Tulsa that is involved with prevention and parenting education. Well what a great thing for the community even, in that short time span to help open the doors I think it was that. I think it was a catalyst for the great programs we have in Tulsa now. I don t know whether or not you know, but Tulsa has model programs in the area of child abuse. Child Abuse Network is an organization I m involved with now, and that program has been replicated in Israel. That s impressive 14 Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling It is impressive. I think there s one in Jerusalem now and another one due to be built soon. So, we Tulsa have model programs. I like to think Rainbow House was although we probably made some people uncomfortable but it did raise the question and it did put the question on the table. Well I d like for you to tell me a little bit about the National Conference for Community Justice and the Oklahoma Conference for Community Justice, if you could. Oh, I d love to tell you about that. The National Conference, it started off as the National Conference for Christians and Jews. I think that s how most people know it. It became, a few years ago, the National Conference for Community Justice so that it could be more inclusive and include Muslims and other religions. But about four years ago, National was experiencing some financial trouble. Long story, but the bottom line of it is that today I don t know how many regions are left with National. They continue to exist but most of us have gone on and become independent. Those of us who have successfully become independent organizations have recently this year gotten back together and formed the National Federation of Just Communities. It s a federation versus a national organization that has a parent, an organization that has the 501(c)(3). So we re all independent, yet in this federation we choose to come together and form a network where we can find and be resources to one another. And I m happy to say that it is from coast to coast that we have these and we re growing too. It s a much different kind of climate of sharing rather than being obligated. And everyone comes up with wonderful, innovative programs. The Oklahoma Conference for Community and Justice (OCCJ) became independent two years ago, and we finally got a 501(c)(3) a few months ago. We would not be able to do this if it were not for the help of this incredible Tulsa community and critical to that would be the Tulsa Community Foundation. They sheltered us while we sought our independence status. We continued to have independent donors. We also embarked on a capital campaign, not for building a building but for operations. We asked for two years of operating money. One year to operate and one year to hold in reserve to operate the following year so that when we were able to survive we had still another year to get our feet on the ground and be healthy and that s exactly what happened. We were able to raise that money. Over the last two years we ve had that ability to become stable, and we re embarking now on the year that we all thought was a dream and it has come true, where we can now grow and begin to outreach. The office in Oklahoma City closed several years before and so this 15 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling year s goal, it s an important goal, is to reopen services in Oklahoma City, and other parts of Oklahoma. We think that this is a mission that is important everywhere. And I guess I should tell you our mission. Our mission is to fight bias, bigotry and prejudice, anywhere it exists, through education and advocacy. I think we are the only organization in Oklahoma with the singular mission to do that. And I ve said this, I said this often during our futures campaign there are definitely social problems that will occur, for always, but no matter how good the solutions may be to those problems, that we may come up with for those problems, that unless we are willing to deal with the inherent underlying issues of human relations, that those solutions can never really be implemented effectively, unless we have dealt with the human relations conflict that are inherent in a diverse society. And we have a diverse society that we should value. We want a diverse society, but within that diversity are a diversity of opinions, and if we don t first lay ground work for mutual respect for different opinions, I don t know how we can get to then addressing solutions. That is what I think is the most import thing about OCCJ is that our mission is such that it is in the background, it underlies all the important issues we face. You may not even see the importance of our work unless we re not working right. If our work is going well, if there s someone like us doing the kind of work we do, then things move along much more smoothly. Unfortunately, that s in a perfect world and that doesn t happen and so conflict does arise. This organization is, thankfully, here still today and of service to anyone. Most recently the mayor and the police chief have asked us to work with them on a police community relations program, which I don t know if you know, there has been some conflict between the city and police officers over the last few years, and so this is a very important program that will be put in place. The city and police department really do want to work for better community law enforcement relationships. And that s not unique to Tulsa. I mean, you can read about it in the paper in any city, but the fact that, in Tulsa, we do want to be actively addressing that and then that they would ask OCCJ to help them, I think speaks very well of the organization. Do community members, groups, come to OCCJ, or does OCCJ actively pursue interests in Tulsa? Come to OCCJ for Like the police Yes they do, but I will have to say that our board has always been this way. The chief of police is a board member. The mayor is an honorary director, as is the governor. Our attorney general of Oklahoma is an 16 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling honorary director. So we have, and I think that really speaks to their understanding of the importance of having an organization that has the kind of gravitas that can call people together, call people to the table and to talk about conflict before it erupts in some unmanageable form. So we have corporate CEOs on our board, all the faith leaders on our board of all faiths the leaders of different faith communities are on our board. We already are a place where people have agreed to come to the table. Sometimes things don t hurt unless it s hurting you, but by being present already, hopefully you ve expressed a commitment to staying at the table, even when the hurt is you. It s great that Tulsans could get together like that and mobilize the forces You re absolutely right. That also was an incredible experience. (Laughs) And I was lucky to be part of it, and I guess it could have gone both ways. But I think those of us on executive committee that year just never faltered, just never had any doubt that the community understood the importance of our mission, and the importance of mobilizing and coming together to help us survive, and in fact, indeed they did. That s great. How important is volunteering to you? I suppose every generation feels like they ve lived through a place and time that was transforming. The transformation that has occurred during my young adult, and where I am today (Laughs) as an older adult, is that the profile of a volunteer has very much changed. As a younger adult there were a lot of stay-at-home mothers and so there was a ready volunteer workforce. My daughter s generation is mostly working mothers, and so they don t have the same time to do the same kind of volunteer work. I provide that as back drop because when I was a volunteer, when I was a younger adult, I remember at that time it was the people who were working who were smart and sophisticated and knew everything and could do anything and just knew more. And we were just housewives who volunteered. I don t feel that way anymore, and I think most enlightened people do not. As a matter of fact an argument could really be made that volunteers may be a stronger manager, because they don t have a salary or anything to compel you to work. As a volunteer leader, you have to find some other way to making people want to be there and want to work, wanting to give you their time. I think often times people from a volunteer environment, a non-profit environment, if you will they have better meeting management skills because they have to all be heard. No one has to be there and they have to make people excited about whatever committee they are chairing. Whereas in the corporate world, and you 17 Nykolaiszyn Creveling know my job I have one foot in each world and so, I find it fascinating. In the corporate world, they have reason. They can make you come to work, and at a meeting they can make you feel not that important, what you have to say versus somebody I mean there s always a 900 pound gorilla in the room, in a corporate world. Where in the volunteer world it s much more like a team effort for being there. So when you say how important it is, I believe that working women and men in the corporate world have a lot to learn and gain by involving themselves in community work. And at ONEOK, we promote that. We encourage that. We encourage all our employees to be involved in the community and I think there s a lot to be gained. I mean, they may think that they have all the skills sets. And I m not meaning this critically. One may think they have all the skill sets if they re really successful in a corporate world and I think once they get into the volunteer world, I think they realize how much there is for them to learn in terms of working with other people, and working together for common goals, that are not motivated by anything other than doing the right thing. They re not motivated by a monetary bonus at the end of it. Conversely, I think people in the volunteer world can learn a lot from corporate skills. On volunteer boards we re always looking for someone with financial skills, or accounting skills, or PR skills, or public affair skills. I think those of us who are just in the volunteer world can certainly learn a lot from the skill sets that people from the corporate world bring on our boards. So I think there again there s that partnership between community and corporate that is so important. I think that one really cannot succeed without the other at least not that effectively because the truth is non-profit, right now, is a business. Philanthropy is one of the fastest growing businesses in the country, or in the world. And so I think both have to understand the important role they play in raising the other up. Have you ever been in a situation where you ve had to convince somebody, or a group of people to volunteer, and they were kind of hesitant. Has anyone came back to you and said Oh, I m so glad we did that? I think we ve had those experiences. I think a lot of us have had those kinds of epiphanies if you will, but sometimes it doesn t happen and sometimes you expect one, an experience like that, and you don t get it. Sometimes you know ahead that that s not what you re going to get and that s fine, although it might disappoint the other person if you say no. But the truth is, just like it is in all life, there are matches and there are not matches and I think the important thing to find when you volunteer is a good match for you. Not only do you when you re invited on a board for instance, there s something they want from you, some skill set 18 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn some resource something that you have that could advantage that board. Well, that s fine. But I think that that board also has a responsibility to give back to you, that there is something that you gain as a person from that experience. It could be a skill set, could be just the satisfaction of knowing that you ve contributed to something. Whatever it is, I believe that the really good relationships are when the volunteer knows that there s something in that for him, he s gained something, his life has been enriched or he s grown in some way from that experience. And then the board that he serves on is also gaining from his participation on the board. Well the question you asked really, I can answer personally. I remember being in an organization where we call it a placement, and so at placement every year you answer this list of things, these are the committees I ve done, these are the committees I d like to do sometime, these are committees I never want to do. Well on the committees I never wanted to do, I never wanted to be the editor of our magazine, I never wanted to do public relations, and I never-ever-ever-never wanted to do public affairs. Well, I ended up being editor of the magazine, I ended up being (Laughs) chairman of the public relations committee, two skill sets that have helped me work more effectively in the job I have today. And to my great regret, I didn t have time, I never did work on the public affairs committee, because today I realize that if you want to make any real change, any real permanent change, you have to be willing to get involved in the political system. You have to be willing, and I never was, and so I successfully avoided it, but it was to my great disadvantage that I did. When you say do you ever have to talk someone into it and they find that it was good for them, sometimes, sometimes it is good to get talked into something. Well that s the wonderful thing about volunteer work, maybe a little more so than the corporate world because you get to try new things in a safer environment. You usually have a lot of support, a lot of latitude to try some things, maybe not, maybe fail a little bit and do better again but you have a lot of opportunity to discover discover new dimensions of yourself that you might not have otherwise, which might be scary in the corporate world because, you know, there s a job rating that goes with it. Just listening to you speak about not going into the public affairs realm, I guess there s no hope that you ll run for Tulsa Mayor or public office or No (Laughs) just checking. Tell me about any stumbling blocks or 19 Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling adversity that you ve faced along in your career. Let s see. It s interesting because I am of a different ethnicity, that had nothing to do with that, but it still was about being an outsider. When I came to ONEOK, I was an outsider it was a company. Our company s a wonderful company with a hundred year legacy. At the time I came in though, everybody was homegrown, meaning that even our CEO at the time, came in at a certain level and kind of grew his way up. And I don t know that managers were hired from the outside and I was hired in as a manager, but I was hired in to do a pretty cool job from the outside, and it wasn t posted inside. So there was no chance for anyone inside who many of them had been there forever and felt they never had a chance at it, and there I was, an outsider. That was probably difficult but it s not unlike the other outsider-insider things that we deal with. But, that was pretty tough, because I was an outsider in a company of a lot of insiders, a lot of family, a lot of people who d been there together, and having to somehow make my way. I d never thought about it till just now, but you know, I guess it s not unlike the rest of my life, coming to the United States, and doing that. So, perhaps as God has infinite wisdom perhaps that was his way of preparing me (Laughs) for those experiences that I were to have later in life. Tell me about a key moment in your career, whether it s in your volunteer career or in your professional career that you consider one of your biggest highlights. And if you have more than one, that s okay, too. I ve really had a lot of great experiences. I guess highlights where, if you mean those occasions where there should be confetti falling and everybody celebrating, I guess a couple of those I could point out. One is the Child Abuse Network. I didn t know this at the time they invited me to serve on the board, but they could have been closing their doors at any time. (Laughs) You know, it s hardly ever the cause. It s sometimes being able to find the funding to continue the cause. The Child Abuse Network I don t know if you know about it. If you don t mind could I take just a minute to say, the Child Abuse Network is for child abuse there s a spectrum of services. There s prevention and then there s the prosecution of perpetrators. Child Abuse Network is involved only when the abuse has actually been reported, and so our work is to aid in the termination of abuse and then to aid in the assessment and the prosecution of the perpetrators. It s a very unique, and hopefully less unique as years go by, because hopefully it will be replicated. I already told you it s replicated in Israel. It s a co-location of the police department s child crisis unit, the DHS s children s protection unit, the OU Medical Clinic pediatrics unit, and the District Attorney has an office there. It s a wonderful co-location of people who 20 will deal with determining if there s been abuse and going after the perpetrator, if the abuse is proven. It s an expensive venture, because of the co-location of all those agencies, and child abuse still, it s a lot easier just to pick em up and lock em up, instead of do the forensic evidence and all that, which ultimately saves tax payer money and is more fair to all the parties involved and really protects the children. It also provides a one stop place for the child, so they don t have to go to the police department and give testimony. They don t have to go to DHS and give another testimony. So, for the child it is the best thing to do. But I didn t realize and I d been involved with it before, as it grew because it really was born out of a community survey that was led by the Junior League of Tulsa ten years prior, and I was involved in it at that time. So, here is ten years later, and as often happens in non-profits, they were struggling for money. I was invited to serve on the nominating committee, where they had a structure where they had people who were not on board and people on board, on the nominating committee. So it was a very wise nominating structure. Little did I know, from that nominating committee I would be asked on the board and then be vice-president on it, that very next year which, I did, given the interest I d had in the cause for a long time, Rainbow House preceding it by some ten years, fifteen years. So I did, and I ll never forget the Executive Director of ONEOK made a contribution of 5,000 and she started crying, and I didn t realize why. It was because with that 5,000 dollars she could keep the doors open another month. And that s what happens sometimes with non-profits. That s why when you ask about heroics in a volunteer world, really when you volunteer for good causes to help people it s easy to see heroics happen all the time. Ordinary people like me get a chance to get involved in situations which may be kind of heroic in terms of saving, and helping the people it does. Anyway all that said, I did that and then (Laughs) I think a year later I was chairman of the board. But, it is true that the board that we had at the time, and the board that came on, the board that we had the executive committee it just everybody, was so dedicated to it and within those two or three years we kept Child Abuse Network together. We were able to call in other community resources. And the Child Abuse Network today is very strong and very healthy and is now to be the anchor piece in what OU Tulsa is calling their Children s Park, where they will have not only the Child Abuse Network and its collated agencies but co-location on this entire campus of other organizations dedicated to children s health and children s well-being. So there ll be All Kinds of Minds which is geared towards children s education. I can t remember the other things that were named. So, the Child Abuse Network is to be the anchor of that campus of other organizations that really fight for children s well-being. So, and we re very proud of that and so at the end of those three 21 years I remember I just remember a huge celebration by everybody because there was money in reserve, which is always good, and our executive director was still there, and we managed to give her a staff another a couple of staff people and so that was one of those hoorays for sure. Another one probably was the Oklahoma Conference for Community and Justice because National had dwindled 40 million to 22 and then in two years dwindled that to four and half, I think, and they were going to close some regions. We Tulsa were one of them. We got notice the week before Thanksgiving I think, and we called our executive committee together, and we made a decision that we would seek independence and we would make it Oklahoma-owned because we thought the mission was just too important to let it go. So we did that future s campaign. It worked. Our programs never ceased, we continued with the programs. We did a lot on faith. We could not have done any of it without the community, none of it. And two years after that, I happened to be chairman at that time, or president I don t remember what we were called, but as I was stepping off the position we had accomplished our independence. I remember writing a letter to all the board how I felt that so few times in life are all the right people at the right place at the right time doing the right thing. And so that was a real hurrah, and we had a reception. ONEOK also gave OCCJ free office space, and so they are now officed in our lower level. We had a huge reception with these huge balloons, and we had our office blessed and so Rabbi Marc Fitzerman of B Nai Emunah was there and then the Bishop Edward Slattery representing the Catholic Diocese was there and then we had Sheryl Siddiqui of the Islamic Society, and so they all gave a prayer and blessed the place. There are four entities in Tulsa without whom this could not have happened and one of them was the Tulsa Community Foundation, who I told you sheltered us. And the Williams Company who is one of the biggest companies in Oklahoma also, gave us a lead gift of 100,000 in that future s campaign, and lent us one of its brilliant the brilliant Michael Johnson to serve on our board and lead our campaign. And ONEOK, who not only gave us a huge donation, but also the office space, but also a lot of good guidance throughout the process. And then the Tulsa World. Tulsa World is the very first place we went to after that executive committee left and the board voted to seek independence. We went to them and said, Here s who we are, and we need your help in letting the community know that we need help. And so, it ran in the paper every week, every month, and they really documented our progress, and helped us ask for the right kind of help. Those four entities, we could 22 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling not have done it without. They were all four there and they all said something. And so that was a time when it was like, the confetti was falling and we really all celebrated, because it was one of those rare opportunities, at least in my world, where the right people, the right time, the right place, you know, the right thing. So that was pretty cool. Well let s turn to the Oklahoma Women s Hall of Fame. When you were notified that you were going to be inducted, what was going through your mind? (Laughs) (Laughs) Oh my Gosh. Oh I don t I was very surprised. I was very surprised. As a matter of fact, it was not you know I was very surprised. I can t even remember how I found out. Do you know? I don t. I think it was Jennifer Paustenbaugh who told me. And I think she ended up I don t even remember. But it is true when I tell you, (Laughs) I kind of go along through life and I m really just lucky. I was just shocked because I know, because I have several friends who are previous inductees and they have high level positions in their companies or their world, and they have a really broad reach. I told you about the two that I had nominated in previous years who were inducted, I m proud to say, and one of their reach is international, and the other s reach is to be the highest ranking law enforcement woman law enforcement officer in the state of Oklahoma at sometime. So I mean, I have no idea how I mean, of course I m very honored. You re I m still stuttering about it, aren t I? (Laughs) You are very modest. (Laughs) I I I m still stuttering about it. Well do you remember who presented you at the ceremony? (Laughs) I asked my daughter to present me. It was never a question about who when they said, You ll have to ask someone to present you, I just thought, My daughter, for a lot reasons. I m crazy about my daughter. I think she s one of the finest human beings I know. As well as my son but, because she is also a woman, she came readily to mind. One of the things I love about Tulsa is that you can be in Tulsa in Utica Square, and you can see generations of families and so I love it when I see a grandmother, a mother, a daughter and a grandchild, all there. And 23 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn that probably played into my mind that I wouldn t be there if it weren t for the generations, my generations itself, and my daughter was a ready choice. I didn t tell her anything, I just asked her to present me. I had lots of friends who said, If she needs any help have her call me, and to my knowledge she never called anybody. But she did she would have done anybody of any stature or position honor. I mean she was just terrific. She told on me a lot (Laughs) I was very proud of her and after she did her presentation, and I remember this, because the way it was the presenter would speak while you were standing there. So you had to stand there the whole time someone was talking about you, you know, you had to stand kind of next to them. And I found that a little bit uncomfortable. But, I enjoyed her speech because she was so engaged with it, she was really good. I mean, if I were just an objective critical eye, she had a great speech. She did a great presentation. I enjoyed it. I enjoyed what she said immensely and not really because it had anything to do with me, although I enjoyed thinking that she would say those things but because, she just did such a great job. And when she was through, then the honoree would speak. Well the audience got up after she spoke, and I knew it was for her, it wasn t because of who she was introducing, I knew it was. I would have stood up if I had been in the audience and had been listening to her. So, I turned to her, and I just kind of stepped back, and I remember doing this. It was just I remember doing this. I just stepped back because I wanted her to know that that ovation was for her, because she did such a great job. So, yes, she s incredible. She s an incredible woman. The one thing she did tell on me though is I told her the story of she hears the story about introvert-extrovert and I think she said, that her mother was an introvert although nobody believes it. She said, My mother can work a room but if you give her a choice, I say this about myself so I can remember what she said, If you give her a choice, she ll choose her two best friends in the room and she ll just stay with them. And she said, Often times my mother s two best friends are a rerun of Law Order and a good glass of Cabernet. (Laughs) So she did tell on me some too, but she did a great job. I d love to turn the tables someday, and do that about her, but I probably couldn t get through it, and she got through it perfectly. Well, you seem very touched and just overwhelmed. Oh, I was, I was. What does this type of honor mean to you? 24 Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling (Laughs) You know, I remember when I was thinking about asking my daughter to present me that the honor was also meaningful because of the example it gives to and it was my daughter I was thinking of at the time but you know, I think an honor like is an example for others to follow. Not that you re trying to set one, but it is something that can be held up as a way a life can be. And I remember that (Crying) for about my daughter. And then my granddaughter was in the audience and she got to see her mother speak, and so I was thinking that s an example for my granddaughter too. And I think that s how life goes, whatever example we choose to set, we impact someone. Well, how do you feel that now women look at you as that role-model? Oh Gosh. I hope they see more than when they me, just a role-model. Maybe just as somebody that they that represents values and demonstrates capacities that they would enjoy or that they enjoy knowing, or like being around. I feel a real responsibility for mentoring, and not necessarily in an active sense, not like saying, I m going to mentor that person. But just, if you have a sense that that person has this looks to you in any way that way, I think that you need to sense that and to know the responsibility that comes with that which means being responsive to them and being accessible and available but also, in a way that is really sisterly and not as a mother superior, you know. I just think it needs to be user friendly to be a mentor. Otherwise maybe the person you re mentoring presents themselves as not so accessible and a little unattainable. I don t think it should be this way, I think our mentoring women should be sisterly. Well that s a great approach. It s interesting how you use the term user friendly when it comes to mentoring, that s a really great way to look at it. Well, I do think this way about those relationships. You know, when you think about mentoring relationships you usually think about a mentor and a mentoree, and that the learning is one way. And I don t see it that way. I really see it as they do us a favor, those of us who are the mentor, whether or not the mentor be older. Sometimes I don t think the mentor is necessarily older. They do us a favor too, because they re so reenergizing, and they offer fresh perspectives, often from another generation and another background, that we might not have ever had were relationship not formed. So although, the information they may be seeking from you is more of a knowledge base, they have a knowledge base too that the mentor may not have. I find it very reaffirming. It gives me hope. I always look on the next generation that way. I said that to somebody the other day, as a matter of fact, when we walked in that restaurant and I waved to that young man from India. I said it to 25 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling him the other night, that people like him make me hopeful that here I am of this generation older than he, and that when the time does come that we leave the place of work, or the place of business or the place of involvement, or this place that I know I ll feel really good that we are leaving whatever we re leaving in really good hands. Now, I usually ask this question one way, but for you I have to ask it a little different because I just get this great sense that you have such pride in this city, and it s a very unique feeling that you just emanate about Tulsa Oh good. just seeing you, walking around the city, and greeting everybody with a smile, and how everybody s waving to you from their cars, I just think that s amazing. But I want to know what Tulsa and what Oklahoma means to you. You know, I have no idea. Perhaps I was searching for this and didn t even know it, being an Army brat. Searching for a place that you can say you re from, because I never had that when I was growing up. I know that I love that about I love that for my children. That my children can say they were born, raised, grew up, went to school, in one place, and that, no matter where they go, they always have these friends they were five year olds with, fifth graders with, that I never had, because I don t recall a friend from childhood probably not one until, maybe high school, maybe late high school. Which is just the way my life was, not better, or not as good, but the way that my life was. So maybe I was always searching for Tulsa, someplace to be from, and maybe I claim it because my children are from here so maybe I can claim it too. What I do believe about Tulsa is that it has great community spirit. I think that is not just an emotional sense I m giving you, it s well documented. Our United Way here, it has one of the highest increasing ratios in the country, every year. Our annual increase is higher it s in the top ten percent of anywhere in the country. Our United Way s that way. I told you we have model programs in child abuse prevention, just in little ol Tulsa, we have model programs in that. We have model programs in several social services. We re not known for it because we don t necessarily talk about it, but we do it. I think that in Tulsa the spirit is, if something that needs to be done its all hands on deck, you know, just get on deck and do your part. You may not be able to do it all, but do your part and it ll get done. And I just think there s a real sense of community in Tulsa. And that s possible because I think there is a willingness to work together across lines. Sure, sometimes there s 26 Nykolaiszyn Creveling conflict, sure sometimes there s not the willingness, but I think there are really level voices in this community, there s leadership in this community. Even when there is conflict like that there are voices that most of us will listen to and follow that can bring almost all of us to the table to resolve some problems. I think Tulsa s very unique and special, and I think that but also testimony to that and I live here, but I ve lived other places. The Junior League here, I m rambling now, but when I was in the Junior League, I was a regional officer, so I got to go to other junior leagues. And I always thought all Junior Leagues were the same but no, our Junior League really was special. I mean we were thoughtful, we were considerate, and we were very committed, and we were active, and we accomplished what we would set out to do. I think another example of how Tulsa is a leader that way is, oh gosh I ve lost my train of thought. Well, that s okay. Would you like to take some time out to say something about or to mention the people you would like to recognize, that have helped play an important role in your life? (Laughs) Oh my gosh, I don t know if you have that much time. There are so many people who have played an important role in my life, certainly everyone I ve ever volunteered with. I think most life affecting for me were a couple of experiences, and all the people who were involved in those experiences, and one of them, I have to say, is really the Junior League of Tulsa. I don t think it has anymore the kind of societal image that it used to have of white gloves. It was one of the most edifying experiences I ve had in my life, but again, I repeat, the Junior League of Tulsa was very different. The mission of the Junior League at one time was to train volunteers for community service. That mission changed to providing trained volunteers for community service. I think that made it a completely different organization. I was lucky, I was a member at the time that we trained volunteers, and I was trained at the Junior League. They provided me incredible training. That was very life affecting for me, it was very edifying, it really gave me a skill set so that I could travel across that spectrum of introvert-extrovert, because I had a skill set to present in an extroverted manner. Leadership Oklahoma is another one, it s an organization that takes you all across the state and introduces you to issues at statewide levels, and hopefully prepares you to be interested in and participate, in the political system if you will, in issues that in broad issues, over-arching issues, that involve common education, health services, stuff like that, and so that was very edifying for me too. And I did learn one thing in that experience, this is really true. I was in that room and, do you know about Leadership Oklahoma? 27 Nykolaiszyn Creveling No, I do not. It is an organization of I think it says, these are not my words proven leaders and to prepare them for participation in statewide issues and affairs. And so, in my particular class was, he was at the time U.S. Representative J.C. Watts, I m well, I ll stop naming, I m sorry, but a lot of really highly intelligent people, leaders from across the state were in there. And I remember sitting in the class program one day, and we were talking about the healthcare and how complicated that is, and I was sitting there thinking, These people are so smart, what am I doing here, really? They were so smart, they could see clearly through a problem and they could crystallize it down to some solution, and almost at that moment I realized what I was doing there. I was the pedestrian albeit, a well informed pedestrian. I was the pedestrian in the room that said, You know, that sounds dandy. Now say it in words where I can understand what you re saying, and then make me give a darn about it. And I realized that there does have to be those of us who can somehow understand it, but somehow also understand that there are a lot of us who don t understand it and that no matter how good you say it, no matter how good the solution you come up with, if you cannot communicate it down, and if you cannot make people care about it, it doesn t really do any good. So I learned that that was really a place I could play, a contribution I could make. That was also a very edifying experience for me, to know that place and know the value of that role that I could play and to be real comfortable with it, and I am real comfortable with that role, maybe a bit too much. So those were two organizations that were really life changing for me, and all the leaders that I got to work with in there. My mother probably is the single biggest influence in my life. As with all mother-daughter relationships there are ways in which you re alike and ways in which you re very different. I aspire to be like my mother in all the ways but in a lot of the ways we re very different which is surprising which may sound surprising, but it s really not. She s very strong, and fiercely loyal, and just an incredible human being. My daughter is also another very influential person in my life as is my son, but in terms of being, well my son is too, being a woman, learning from both of them. But the person I ve decided I want to live a long life for, I ve never really thought about living a long life, you live as long as you can, but I ve decided I want to live as long as I possibly can, because I want to see my granddaughter grow up. She is a pistol and I want to see all the things that she gets done in her life. She is incredible. She s going to be incredible. Faith has always been really important in my life, the people I work with, and from faith communities are very influential in terms of 28 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling Nykolaiszyn Creveling teaching me about acceptance and being still, but knowing when not to be still, being quiet but knowing when you mustn t be quiet. So I hope that answers your question. What would be your advice to women who plan on following in your footsteps? Don t follow in my footsteps. (Laughter) Why not? Make your own make your own. Fair enough. Fair enough. I mean there are great adventures to be had and probably greater where there are not already footsteps. As Robert Frost says so much more eloquently in his poem. Well, you re still working very diligently with ONEOK, what do you foresee yourself doing in the future, what s next on the agenda? Knitting. I don t know. I am at that place where I d like to think about retirement, and what would I do if I were retired? I d like to do all the things that I probably didn t have the chance to do when I was younger, which is not a unique story. One thing I would love to do but won t do, I would love to go to a third world country and help, but I probably won t because of the health risk. I wouldn t want to bring any of that back to my grandchildren, or bring it back and somehow be limited in the time I could spend with them. And I know that might be extreme thinking, but any degree of possibility of that happening would keep me from doing that. It is something that, if were I younger, and were there not other people in my life that I would want to be concerned with, I probably would do like a mini-Peace Corps thing. But I would love to go over and do like summers, and teach English in some of these under-developed countries. I d like to do that. I do have this degree in nursing. It would be fun to be an adjunct professor. We have nursing programs at both OU Tulsa and TU. And it would be fun to teach a nursing leadership course, not any clinicals. I never say I m a nurse, I always say I have a degree in nursing because I would not (Laughs) offend the profession that way, I ve never really nursed. But I think it would be fun to be involved again with students and, in a student kind of relationship. That d be fun. I thought about but I think it would be too much work it would be. 29 Nykolaiszyn Creveling Given the job I have, I ve listened to a lot of people who bring grant proposals, and I always have felt part of my job is to help them know how to make the proposals excellent, and to learn at least how we like to receive information, but also to give them some information that hopefully will broaden their thinking about what makes a good proposal specific to the particular funder. So, kind of toyed with the idea that maybe after retirement, partnering with two or three other people and providing that kind of service, consultation to non-profits and to companies about how to help non-profits be more excellent. I think that d be kind of something to do, and still provide some kind of service to mankind. And then at the end of this, I think about just knitting (Laughs), and playing with the grandchildren. I have four now and I d love to be able to do that, just to go when I want to go, and be with the grandkids. But I think maybe there s a way to have it all, to be able to do and hopefully if I m retired, if I ve retired wisely, I can do that and be part time whatever else I guess I want to do, and still be available to family more than I am now. Well if anybody can do it, I m sure you can. In closing today, is there anything you would like to mention or say that I have not asked you about or you would like to include? I don t think so. I ve sure enjoyed talking to you. I really have, and I really appreciate you making this comfortable for me to do. I m sure I ve just rambled, but you ve not let me think that. Perhaps the only thing that I would want to mention is that I ve kind of joked about this for a while now, but it really is something that is, that seriously can happen. I have, even before I moved here, I said to friends, At some point it s going to be just us girls, and we ought to find a compound (Laughs) where we can all live, still independently, but still close enough to each other there s a pool in the middle or something, where we can all be together and So this may be it because there are other condominiums here in this community available, and I already have a couple of girlfriends here, and so we re trying to talk in a few more. But it provides a metaphor for how I feel about girlfriends, and I know I would feel this way even if I were married at this moment, and I think I ll still feel this way, if by chance I m in another relationship down the road. I think women I have to say this more specifically, not broadly, not just women, but I think girlfriends are a family group that I think we recognize sometimes, but I d like to recognize them. I think girlfriends are a family group that I could not have made it, many times and certainly not, certainly not over the last few years, without girlfriends. I mean there's just something about women friends that is strong and loyal and true and always there, and I think that s I would like to recognize 30 Nykolaiszyn Creveling that. I m so lucky. I have a wonderful family of girlfriends. I just think girlfriends really understand how difficult life, jobs, family any situation can be for another woman, and they know how to be supportive through that. A great support system. Well I think that s a great way to end this interview. I do appreciate your time today, in contributing to our project. Thank you very much. You re welcome. ------- -------..