 HAZELTINE: How long is it? MANDICA-HART: About a half an hour. GEIS: (unclear) Whenever you’re ready. MANDICA-HART: This is Olivia Mandica-Hart and Glenna Hazeltine, Class of 1966. The date– HAZELTINE: Hazeltine. MANDICA-HART: Hazeltine, sorry. The date is May 21, 2011, and we are in the Alumnae Gymnasium at Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts. So just to start off, why did you choose to come to Smith? HAZELTINE: I’m embarrassed to say because my Princeton uncle told me this was where I should come. He was the most glamorous human being in life. He was only nine years older than I. He was every debutante’s escort. He had Lester Lanin hats stacked up in his closet, his walk-in closet, and he was a fierce student and a fierce competitor, athletically. He was, I thought, the most wonderful human being. He was probably the next F. Scott Fitzgerald. So when he told me to come to Smith, I did. MANDICA-HART: And what was your reaction when you arrived here? HAZELTINE: Wow. The– my parents thought it was wonderful that I was coming here, because I was much more likely to meet here a man who could support me and a Smith education would be an asset to his career. And that’s not what happened here. MANDICA-HART: So can you expand on that a little bit? HAZELTINE: Sure. I remember Mr. Mendenhall asking us what we wanted to be when we grew up, and married was nice, but it wasn’t the answer. And it’s also true that I grew up in Lancaster County -- which is a very conservative area -- and women were very much derivative of men, at least in my experience among the women I knew, and we did volunteer work for the Junior League. And my upbringing was to support such a role for me. I was shipped off to my grandmother at a very young age to learn to set tables and arrange flowers and that sort of thing. And here, I learned that women had a voice, that it resonated. It made sound. It was expected that we would have a voice. It was expected– we learned to expect to be heard. And I went to law school eventually, and my trench buddy in law school decided to emigrate to Israel, and I asked him why he wanted to do that. And he said, “Because in Israel, I’m not a Jew. I’m just me.” And I think this analogous thing happened here. Here, I’m not a woman, a chick, a lady, a female, and ruder words than that. I’m just me. And once that’s happened, there’s no going back. MANDICA-HART: So can you describe the general campus atmosphere a little bit? HAZELTINE: Oh, I arrived on campus in 1962, in time for the Cuban missile crisis. And I think that the 50’s expectations in which I’d been brought up came to a screeching and very abrupt halt during the years I was here. I remember sitting in the house mother’s living room, watching on television the Cuban missile crisis escalate, and believing that what I would be doing next was leaving Smith in order to go join the services that President Kennedy was suggesting that we would– that the country would need in case of war. In the fall of my sophomore year, Kennedy was shot. At the same time, we had the civil rights marches. The three men who -- Goodwin, Cheney, and Schwerner -- who were discovered in the dam. And the Freedom Riders happened during our time here, and it resonated– and the Vietnam War. You know, I’m a lawyer now, and the– one of the partners said to me he was surprised at my ability both to be a lady on the one hand, and something of a thug on the other. And I said, “Well, probably I’m one of the few people in life you’re ever going to meet who is at one and the same time a member of the Junior League and the SDS.” MANDICA-HART: So what were student reactions to all these events? To Vietnam, to the civil rights movement? Was there a lot of dialogue around race? HAZELTINE: It certainly was noticed that there wasn’t much diversity on campus, and that was a concern. I think that there were no– during my time here, there were no sit-ins or marches. I think that during my time here, people became involved, but it tended to be in voter registrations and quieter activities. I remember a professor in one of my classes attempted to incite us, and one by one, everyone got up and left. I think we were not objecting to activism; we were simply objecting to anyone but ourselves deciding for ourselves what form that would take. And as I said, I joined the SDS, which is a very polite thing to be at Smith College at the time. But that came to an abrupt halt when Diana Oughton blew herself up in a brownstone in New York and they became the Weathermen. MANDICA-HART: How would you describe a typical Smith student? HAZELTINE: Oh, I don’t think there is such a thing! (laughs) I couldn’t begin to do that! MANDICA-HART: Right. What did you study? HAZELTINE: When I was on campus, we had distribution requirements, so I studied the catalogue and got rid of the distribution requirements as quickly as I could. And let’s see– I went public school through the ninth grade, and then I got a scholarship to go to a private school. And in public school, it was– girls were supposed to be– during the 50’s, girls were supposed to be athletic and dumb, and I wasn’t either one of those. And when I went to private school and learned that people actually read books and talked about them, I thought I had died and gone to heaven. When I came to Smith and found out I could read books, talk about them, and get credit for it, I knew I had arrived in paradise. So– but I also knew that I hadn’t been exposed to a great array of academic courses, so I tried to take things that looked very exotic to me, and finally ended up taking all Art History and English courses. MANDICA-HART: And so what was your major? HAZELTINE: English. MANDICA-HART: English. Were there any professors or mentors that inspired you here? HAZELTINE: No. As a matter of fact, I was convinced I’d been taken by mistake, and I was scared to death if someone discovered I was here, they’d make me go home. MANDICA-HART: And you felt that way all four– HAZELTINE: All four years. MANDICA-HART: All four years. So you talked about being a member of SDS. Were you involved with any other groups on campus? HAZELTINE: Yes. I was Gold Key Guide. I was on– I was on Recreational Council, and I loved that because I wrote a column in the paper, which I thought was very cleverly titled -- “Total Rec” -- given the status of the social (laughs) life at Smith College. But that meant that I got to interview President Mendenhall. And on a regular basis, I would go in and have an opportunity to talk to Tom Menden– Mr. Mendenhall, and then write a column. And I think of anyone who actually incited me on campus, he did (laughs) -- no matter how you spell that word, in terms of being insightful. He gave permission, I think, to be more– I thought I had to be polite and restrained, and he certainly gave permission to be neither of those. I don’t mean to be uncivil, but that I did not have to operate within any prescribed parameters, in terms of my dealing with him, and by extension with pretty much anyone else. If I didn’t have to with him, I didn’t have to with anybody else. And we loved Uncle Tom. MANDICA-HART: So, he was sort of a beloved figure on campus? HAZELTINE: Yes, we adopted him as a member of our class. And he came, sat with us at reunions. MANDICA-HART: Wow. What expectations did you have for yourself when you graduated? HAZELTINE: Well, again, it’s the 50’s, 60’s. I think I first– I first acted out the expectations with which I’d been brought up. I got married two weeks after graduation. Now, the Vietnam War had an impact on the decisions we made, and to be married was a draft deferment, and that’s one of the reasons that we married. We would have married one week after graduation, but we shared a wedding party. One of my classmates married one of his roommates, so -- he went to Wesleyan -- so we had to schedule our weddings in sequential weekends. And I worked his way through Wharton, and as a teacher, I taught at Frankford Friends School in Philadelphia, which was a wonderful experience. And I had to be pregnant by the time he graduated, so that the deferment would continue, and our oldest son was born, and we moved to Chicago to follow his career. And I worked my way through a graduate degree at Northwestern. And then I followed him to Texas -- he was a petroleum banker -- and I taught school down there, and that’s when my 60’s training, I think, led me to follow the fork in the road I hadn’t taken, and I took my kids and moved to Philadelphia, went to law school, and put them in Quaker schools. So, first the 50’s -- I was a corporate wife -- and then the 60’s -- lawyer and my specialty is in civil rights law as applicable to handicapped students. MANDICA-HART: So, can you expand a little more on– it sounds like there were pressures of being a woman at this time, and can you just expand on that a little bit more? HAZELTINE: Sure. And it’s– we were defined externally, and I think at Smith, we did learn to define ourselves internally, but I had to grow into that for myself. And I have to say that my daughters-in-law -- one went to Mount Holyoke -- and they seem to integrate much better. I think we were a “turnstile” generation. I don’t think that it was a lesson– it was a lesson, I think, we learned and therefore, I hope, women after us didn’t have to. The first one and the other, but rather both together. I don’t think she feels like she needs permission, and I felt like I did for a long time. MANDICA-HART: So, what difference has a Smith education meant to you? HAZELTINE: Oh, it’s been profound. I–let me see. Like most women, I suppose my story is my mother’s. My mother graduated from college with honors in math. I suppose I’m fairly naked, being the fourth or fifth generation of women in my family to go to college on my mother’s side. Not the men, but the women, because everybody was a teacher. She was accepted for a Ph.D program at Pembroke, and while she was waiting to go to Brown, she went to Moore College of Art in Philadelphia, married my father instead, and I think her story is– I wish I could say unique, but I’m not sure it was, of her generation: these bright women who had to become locked into a mold into which they did not fit, which I think our generation broke. Smith is my alma mater indeed. It was such an alternative model for women. I think that the reason I could survive and could– when I went to law school -- I worked my way through law school -- I had no money. I think without Smith, I would not have known I could do it. MANDICA-HART: Do you still believe that single-sex education is important? HAZELTINE: Oh, I know it is. I have no doubt of it. Although I was a teacher before I went to law school, and I have sons. I think that -- perhaps paradoxically -- I think it’s very important for men to go to school with women. And I think that for a number of reasons. I think for my sons, it was important so they became full human beings. I think boys who are educated in single-sex institutions develop only part of themselves and, for lack of non-gender specific language, don’t access the sort of female parts of themselves. On the other hand, I think women who go to school and have a single-gender opportunity, have an opportunity to develop -- again, for lack of gender-neutral language -- both the male and the female parts of themselves. Which perhaps it’s possible: my daughters-in-law --well, I don’t know, one daughter-in-law went to Mount Holyoke, so she had the opportunity, too -- they tell me it’s not the case. I don’t believe it; I think that single-gender for women is very important to become full human beings. I think co-ed is very important for boys to become full human beings. MANDICA-HART: So you’ve been working within the legal field, and have you ever experienced gender discrimination? HAZELTINE: Oh, my. Sure. When I started out, I spent one summer in Texas and judges called me “Sweetie.” If I were taken out to dinner with clients, I had one client who assumed that they were pimping me (laughs). Basically, I was a sort of client perk. And when I began in a law firm in Philadelphia, it was clear that there was a culture that was very sexually charged. It made me very uncomfortable. I ultimately left and– but, yes, definitely. I think that’s changing, and after I left a large law firm and I became Assistant General Counsel for the school district of Philadelphia, and it didn’t happen there. MANDICA-HART: You said that when you were here, there was not a lot of diversity. HAZELTINE: There was not. MANDICA-HART: Do you see a change in that now, as you look at the campus? HAZELTINE: I’m not here when the students are here, and I haven’t been to a graduation that included the graduating classes for quite some time. I will tell you that the ambassador for my class came from Iraq. She’s fascinating to talk to. Another ambassador is Moroccan and American. The speaker today -- the student speaker who brought us all to tears -- is African-American. So I’m hoping that that’s the trend. The world has gotten a lot smaller since I was here, and I think it’s increasingly important that the world be represented on campus, as well as the campus going out into the world. When I was here, junior abroad really wasn’t encouraged. I think everybody should go junior year abroad. MANDICA-HART: Did you go? HAZELTINE: I was an English major, and they told me at the time -- at least, my recollection is -- that if I wanted to go, I would have to withdraw from Smith and reapply. And as I already said, I was sure they took me by mistake, so I was afraid they wouldn’t take me back (laughs), so I didn’t there go. MANDICA-HART: When you were here, did you have interactions with minority students, or was it sort of divided? HAZELTINE: There wasn’t an opportunity. Northampton, at that time, was a decayed mill town. It wasn’t diverse, either. And most of the colleges weren’t. The colleges were either male or female, then: the Seven Sisters were all female. My sons went to Vassar (laughs). So, I traveled to the men’s colleges -- which you did to have a social life -- so Wesleyan -- which actually, soon after we left -- was the forefront of reaching out to particularly African-American students. There were none on the college campuses then. MANDICA-HART: And how was the dating scene when you were here? HAZELTINE: There wasn’t much of one, which was, again, back to the column that I wrote for the– “Total Rec” for the Sophian. It was very stilted, and it was also a risk, because there wasn’t much for men to do on Smith’s campus, which meant that we traveled to the men’s campuses. And to be isolated as a woman on some of the men’s campuses was– led to some pretty experiences. MANDICA-HART: Do you have any advice for current and future Smith generations? HAZELTINE: (pause) When the year we graduated -- ’66 -- I think it was the president of Wellesley who said, “Be prepared for– to have more–” Well, first of all, Smith defined careers as a “self-chosen path through life,” not necessarily a profession, a paid profession. Most people think of a career as being law or medicine, that kind of thing. Smith was “self-chosen path through life.” And I think that is a wonderful advice to offer. In addition, the president of Wellesley our year graduating said that no one should expect to have just one career. We’re living longer, and given the constellation of abilities and skills that Smith women have, it would be, I suppose, a theft of one’s self to have simply one. Denzel Washington spoke at the University of Pennsylvania last weekend. He said, “If you don’t fail, you aren’t trying.” MANDICA-HART: That’s great. GEIS: I’d like to follow up on a couple of points you made. One was the– when you left Texas with your kids, can you talk about what strength you had summoned to do that, and where that came from in your life experience? HAZELTINE: I think it came from Smith. When I was working my way through law school with these two little boys, I used to be unable to sleep at night. But I thought, You know, I know there’s a place where life will make sense, and I know I can go there. I can get in my car; it’s five hours away. And then I could get up the next morning. And let me say, too, that my classmates were the people who– we all were– it wasn’t just me who was going through this sort of adjustment to who we thought we were when we were growing up and who we grew into, and so there’s a whole cadre of Smith women who– two o’clock in the morning, phone calls back and forth. And they were all over the country. So my support group were the Smith women. And they were in California and Oregon and St. Louis and so, it– we– there weren't too many objective correlatives for us. We were objective correlatives for each other, and so, it was Smith that did it. GEIS: How often do you come back? HAZELTINE: Every reunion. I was president of the Smith Club of Philadelphia, so I came back then more often. And my niece is currently Mount Holyoke’s, so I have come up and visited here when I visit there. It’s also true that Emily Dickinson’s house wasn’t open when we were here. The Dickinsons were still living in it. So I love coming back and going to Emily Dickinson’s house, seeing things that weren’t available at the time. GEIS: Thank you so much. This is– is there anything else you wanted to ask? MANDICA-HART: Is there anything you think we– that you’d like to talk about that we’ve missed? HAZELTINE: There’s one disappointment I had in Smith. My son at Vassar applied for the Seven Sister exchange at Smith, because he’d heard me talk about it, and he couldn’t get in. And I sincerely hope it wasn’t gender. I said, “If you’d like me to be your lawyer for this and represent you, I would be glad to.” He declined the privilege, but I think it would have been fun to have him see what Smith was. And I’m only joking, because I think it would be terrible if Smith were to take women. I think Vassar lost its identity when it took men, never mind both my sons went there. But I knew they were in the right place, because when I dropped off my older son, there was a large pink sign over the arch that you drove under that said, “Is There a Place for Men at Vassar?” And I thought, Now, they will know. MANDICA-HART: That’s great. Thank you. HAZELTINE: Sure. (BREAK) GEIS: Thank you very much. You don’t mind? HAZELTINE: No, sure. GEIS: You OK? So, can you just talk about what was– what happened sometimes when women left campus and went to other campuses where they were mostly in a male environment? HAZELTINE: I think that women were at risk sexually. I think of sexual assault and rape. And at that time, if such a thing happened, it was our fault, not theirs, and I don’t think– and nobody talked about it. And so, in part, I’m guessing, because Smith women are very open with each other. And that was not discussed. I believe it happened, and from my observation of Dartmouth and Amherst -- I don’t mean to be calling attention to any one particular school -- I know it happened. It was not discussed; it was not talked about. And it was our fault. And so, if I had, I guess, a wish for Smith, it would be a way to integrate men on this campus, rather than have women have to travel. GEIS: Thank you. HAZELTINE: Or, you know, my sons are a deeper breed than the ones– and part– I wouldn’t say it isn’t their faults, but I think that they know more than we understood how to breach the great gap between initial meeting and greater intimacy. And so, they tended to leap it. My impression of men at that time was that they were sort of like flashbulbs: suddenly, they went off at one (laughs) and you couldn’t always see it coming. So, I would like to see more normative relationships with men as part of the Smith experience. That’s my only concern about Smith. MANDICA-HART: Great. GEIS: Thank you very much...