 LABARBERA: I should be looking at you, not the camera, right? CLERK: Yes. LABARBERA: OK, cool. CLERK: All right. This is Celeste Clerk, interviewing Jen LaBarbera, Class of ’07 for the Smith College Archives. Hi. LABARBERA: Hi. CLERK: So let’s start with a general question. Where are you from? LABARBERA: I grew up near Buffalo, New York, an hour south of Buffalo in Fredonia. CLERK: How did you come to Smith College? LABARBERA: I was actually a transfer so I only got two years here which is unfortunate. I wish I’d gotten all four but I first went to Wells College which is in central New York. A super tiny school. It has only 400 — at that time it had only like 400 students. It was a women’s college. Then they went co-ed my sophomore year and I — we protested and I was part of a lawsuit to try to get them to not go co-ed and we lost even though we successfully took over the administrative building for a full week. But we lost and so I transferred and Smith actually accepted every single Wells student that applied. And it ended up being, I think, four or five of us that transferred here. So I started my junior year at Smith. I knew I wanted to be at a women’s college. I was touring around different women’s colleges on the East Coast mostly. And the first question that I asked everybody was “Is Smith ever going to go co-ed?” and the admissions office here their answer was just “No, because our students would burn down the campus,” which seems accurate as far as my experience of Smith at least. Also they gave me a pretty good financial aid package so, yes. CLERK: What did it mean to you for Smith to be an all-women’s college? LABARBERA: It was a space that I really needed. Maybe it’s not a space that everybody thrives in and every woman or gender queer person needs, but it was a space that I definitely needed in order to come into my own self and my own leadership. I needed that kind of push and that opportunity to be a leader without having to fight through a whole lot of mansplaining all of the time. It opened up a lot of space for me. Smith felt really safe for me. And I know that it was not actually safe and there were pieces of it that definitely were not — that definitely weren’t super-safe and weren’t safe for other folks that went to Smith; but for me, it was a space that I could really just kind of become who I needed to be. So I was able to — I joined a couple of clubs when I first got here and then I ended up being the president of one org and then an officer of the second org my senior year. I just found my niche of organizing and activism and it really — just the environment of Smith encourages you to be really active and really involved in a lot of things around the world and a lot of different causes that I maybe wouldn’t have gotten elsewhere. And I think a lot of that is that Smith is a women’s college and Smith is a space for people who — for whom higher education was not always for us. And so it also means a lot, and this may be outside of the scope of the question but it means a lot that Smith took their time but that they finally acknowledge them and are allowing trans women to also apply and attend Smith. When I was here we had plenty of gender-nonconforming and trans folks as well and that was also really important to be in that space that was welcoming and affirming of everybody’s gender expression. That’s a lot of things but, yes, I think — well, the last thing I’ll say is that Smith as a women’s college also for me was always fairly synonymous with Smith being a fairly feminist space and that was — that’s something that I’m really proud of for Smith. From my time at Smith and from what I know of the current environment, that’s huge for me. That’s my main source of pride as a Smithie is that all of my Smith friends are feminists. CLERK: What organizations were you a part of? LABARBERA: I joined — they may have different names now but I was active in a number of organizations and those were Vox which is the pro-choice group, AWARE which was Activist Women Advocating for Rape Education so it was the anti-sexual violence group, Feminists of Smith Unite and a little bit, just kind of ancillary, involved with Prism which was the queer people of color group. And then I became the co-president, I guess co-president. I might have ended up kind of being the president of Vox and then was the secretary/executive board for AWARE my senior year. CLERK: What did you study here? LABARBERA: (coughs) Sorry. I was a Study of Women and Gender major, which was the major that I transferred in with as well as Women’s Studies major at my first college. And then I was always — I basically mostly only took SWAG [Study of Women and Gender] and government classes so by the time I was in my first year, my senior year or maybe the second year of my junior year, I was essentially a government major. So I just added a couple more classes and declared a double major. (coughs) Sorry. I’ve developed allergies apparently. CLERK: It’s that time of year. What would you say was the typical Smith student while you were here? LABARBERA: I don’t know if we had a typical student. (coughs) We had — and I also know that my friend circle was fairly limited. I wasn’t really friends with any of the folks in the quad so much. They were kind of a different kind of person. But if I had to identify typical characteristics it would be that academic success was kind of the priority, always the priority. We did a million other things and other things were also super important but academic success was always the thing that was a given. Like, if you had to pull an all-nighter to write a paper because you stayed up for five hours making signs for a protest, cool. You still stayed up and did the all-nighter. It wasn’t ever a question that your school work would suffer for whatever other activities you were doing. That’s one characteristic. I would say another characteristic would be really aware and involved in things going on in the world. And, again, these are generalizations. It definitely wouldn’t apply to every — I’m thinking now of a few people that this wouldn’t apply to — but for the most part, everybody — and now, too, I’m talking to alums. I can make references to things that are happening in Washington, D.C., or things that are happening in specific states around the country and they — like, political things or cultural shifts and they know what I’m talking about. I don’t have to explain myself. I don’t have to explain why it’s important or what’s happening because they already know. (coughs) Let’s see. And all fairly attractive as well I would say. No, that’s not true. Confident. That’s something that we all struggle with but I think a typical Smith student finds confidence at some point during their time at Smith and then takes that out with them. (coughs) Can we pause for a minute? CLERK: Sure. Do you want some water? LABARBERA: Yes, please. CLERK: Do you mind if I expand on the last question? LABARBERA: Yes. CLERK: Did you study abroad? LABARBERA: I did not because I transferred in. I transferred in to a house that was mostly everybody but other juniors because everyone was JYA [Junior Year Abroad]. (coughs) Sorry. I made friends with sophomores and seniors because everyone was abroad. I would have absolutely if I’d had three or four years here but you were required to be at Smith for two so I could not. CLERK: What house did you live in? LABARBERA: I lived in Baldwin House which was — and being a transfer I don’t have the same kind of house loyalty that a lot of folks who were here for all four years and were in the same house for all four years have, but I did love living in Baldwin and living that close to town my senior year. My room was on the second floor and it was right above Hungry Ghost Bread so they would bake bread in the morning and it would just come straight into my window which was great. I also ate a lot of bread that year. CLERK: Do you have a favorite professor? LABARBERA: I had a few. I really loved — all of the SWAG professors were amazing and brilliant. But how many can I list? I really loved Alice Hearst in the government department. She was incredible and brilliant, for one. And also really compassionate and really helped me as I was getting into organizing and trying to figure out what I wanted my career to be. She really helped me to figure out a way to get to there without burning myself out in law school. She pretty actively discouraged me from going to law school which I am grateful for. And then she also was really compassionate when I was going through a lot of really difficult times. And Nancy Whittier taught this awesome queer resistances seminar my senior year. And I wrote a really emotionally taxing paper for it as a seminar paper. She was incredible. She was really compassionate and really lovely. She’s also one of my top faves. And then Lisa Armstrong in the SWAG department as well has continued to be one of my — like, we’re connected on Facebook which is about it but she was always really supportive of me. She was actually--my very first class at Smith was a feminist theory class with her. And — oh my gosh. I’m going to cry. Oh, this is amazing. Those are my three favorites. ??: (unclear) LABARBERA: Thank you so much. OK. I won’t tug it. Thank you. Oh, it’s a hot chocolate (unclear), too. Thanks. OK. I’m ready. CLERK: What was the feminist dialogue like during your time at Smith? LABARBERA: It was (pause) — so, in my junior and senior year we really built up, as far as the orgs go at least, a lot of collaboration among the different feminist-leaning organizations. Amongst ourselves we were pretty good. We tried very hard not to have events conflicting with each other. When there were really horrible anti-abortion bills it would be Vox and FSU [Feminists of Smith Unite!] working together to get letters signed and sent in to Congress. (coughs) Outside of it — I will say that I didn’t really have a whole lot of engagement outside of my circle of government or SWAG majors or minors. We were all mostly on pretty much the same page. It was challenging in that we were learning new things but it wasn’t necessarily challenging in that we were disagreeing about anything. Or we were challenging each other’s ideas about it. It was always also — I will say I was always fairly queer-oriented and kind of progressively so even in just those two years. It was progressively more and more queer which probably is reflective of we were probably all getting a little bit queerer every day. It was also fairly, although not perfectly, intersectional and trying to lift up voices of people of color and lower-income students. That was something that we tried to do with varying levels of success as far as leadership of the orgs goes. There was one incident — and I don’t know if this is really feminist dialogue — but my senior year we always put up the Clothesline Project around Seelye Lawn. That was the T-shirt project where survivors of sexual violence create a T-shirt and put whatever they want on it. If it’s a letter to their perpetrator or just a description of their feelings or an artistic whatever. And so that year we hadn’t put any out or put any in storage and I think we had 400 or so T-shirts. This was Spring of 2007. We were getting ready to put them up — or maybe we already put them up and there was, of course, this was the time of the Daily Jolt which was this horrible, anonymous online message board that was mostly an avenue for bullying. It was sometimes informative but primarily it was just mean messages because you could hide behind anonymity and that’s what people do. Somebody had posted this message that as — and by “we” I mean AWARE so AWARE was the organization that put up the Clothesline Project. They put up this post about — critiquing AWARE for putting the Clothesline Project up in the middle of campus because as a survivor it triggered them and they didn’t want to be triggered on the way to the library. They wished that we could have just put it away in a room somewhere. They weren’t saying that we shouldn’t put it up at all but “Can’t you put it somewhere more discreet?” To us it felt very much like — and the idea behind the Clothesline Project is that whole notion of “Don’t air your dirty laundry.” Don’t talk about sexual violence in public because it’s not polite and it makes people uncomfortable. And so that’s the whole point of the Clothesline Project is to be out and in public and to be visible. And so it was difficult to respond to because it was coming from a fellow survivor. There was compassion and we had done everything that we thought that we could do. We had a table that was always staffed right out in the Clothesline Project. We had counselors on-call at the medical center. We had set up a little safe space/decompressing space/processing space either in Seelye or the library. I don’t remember. So we had done everything that we thought we could do to support survivors in putting this thing up in public but it still created this huge backlash from this person and then from other non-survivors who also just didn’t want to deal with the fact that sexual violence happens, who didn’t want it to be in such a public space. So as the Board of AWARE we wrote an editorial to the Sophian in response and also put something up on the Daily Jolt which was then just trolled again because that’s what happens. But we did also send that to the Sophian and it was published in the newspaper. And then somebody also got upset because the — I think this might have been my junior year or my senior year. They blur together — but we had done a speak-out on one of the nights of Sexual Assault Awareness week and we had a speak-out on the steps of the campus center. We had amplified sounds. We had a little microphone bullhorn thing and people telling their stories. You could kind of hear it a little bit on the other side of Chapin lawn but for the most part you could only really hear it in that one space. And so we had gotten critiqued for that as well because somebody was, like, “I was just on my way back home and there I was listening to somebody’s rape story and I didn’t ask for that.” And I was, like, “Cool. None of us asked to be violated either.” It created this weird schism of everybody trying to support survivors in different ways but clashing in really painful and really difficult ways. Somebody who was not a survivor who was trying to speak for all the survivors in her life wrote another editorial to the Sophian. It was basically a battle of editorials citing super antifeminist scholars about how we were inflating the statistics of sexual violence anyway and not that many people are really victims and survivors. Saying that we were exaggerating it and that we shouldn’t be so public about it basically. And that Spring Dorothy Allison, who is an incredible feminist writer, came to campus and we ended up talking to her about it and she read both of them and was totally on our side. But it was a really difficult conversation to navigate because as AWARE we were also really protective of what we were doing and really defensive of the ways that we were going about bringing light to this issue of sexual violence. I think this is one of the down sides of being on a women’s college campus. People think that it just doesn’t happen here. The rates are lower, yes, but it does still happen and it’s not just UMass Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amhers] kids coming over and committing sexual violence. It’s people on campus, too. The feminist dialogue on campus became really contentious for a little bit. And then, as things happen at Smith, it blew over eventually within a week and people were talking about other things. That one week we spent a lot of hours in my friend Cara’s room in Park House just writing and rewriting and rewriting letters and public statements and things that we could say and do to try to mitigate what was happening. GEIS: (unclear) LABARBERA: OK. GEIS: One of the questions that you guys asked is around advice. So you have experience coming from one school and then to another, to Smith, becoming an activist and in the process of going through that process yourself becoming an activist and advocating for people and for yourself, how do you feel — where is there room for creating safe spaces now? How would you want a school to do that and for you as an individual, what advice do you have for students now in terms of your life experience and what’s important for you to feel safe? LABARBERA: Yes. OK. To feel safe at Smith? GEIS: In general. I think here would be one part of it and then also what’s been helpful. LABARBERA: It’s definitely been — there are still a lot of points in my life in which I don’t feel safe with myself or with the space that I’m in. And when I was at Smith there were plenty of times that I also didn’t feel very safe, mostly with myself. And I didn’t necessarily feel supported by the institution when I was, for example, going through different mental health struggles. And I don’t know if that’s changed, if those policies have gotten any better but when I was here they were not particularly helpful for students who were having any kind of mental health struggles. Advice for students trying to create a safe space at Smith? I’d say (pause) just to find your people because I think that my safest space was with my people. My safest space that I ever found when I was on campus was when I was surrounded by the Smithies who are still my best friends ten years later. When I was surrounded by them and we were in the library or when we were in the campus center, when we were in somebody’s room, that was it. I could feel really — if I was (unclear) on the way back on the bus and got harassed on the bus or whatever and I got back to Smith, I felt a little bit safer as soon as I stepped on campus but then I felt really safe as soon as I was in Lauren’s room in Emerson [House]. Or as soon as I was sitting down for dinner with somebody. Those people, those connections at Smith — there’s plenty of things that an institution can do from the institutional administrative level to make a safe space. And I think Smith is doing a pretty good job overall. I think that the responsiveness to students of color not feeling safe on campus has been OK this year. It’s a lot of talk and not a whole lot of action but also a lot of the action just has to come from the students themselves. You can’t force cultural change. So feeling safe in any space really depends on creating a safe space for yourself. So identifying whatever that means, “To be safe.” For me, that’s being able to manage my own mental health and part of that is having my chosen family and my circle of people, which is a lot of Smithies, around me or a text away at any time. CLERK: Thank you. GEIS: Is there anything else you want to talk about? LABARBERA: (pause) Not that I can think of. I don’t think so. GEIS: Thank you. CLERK: That was good. LABARBERA: Great. Thank you...