 Downs: My name is Susan Downs and I’m here recording with Patricia. Why don’t you state your full name? Hill: My name is Patricia Susan Ketchum Wallace Hill. I’m in the class of 1958. I think my badge shows that. I should leave it here where it can be seen. Our class is here for our fiftieth reunion and it’s been wonderful. Downs: What are your memories of Stanford? Hill: Oh my goodness, three books full [laughs] of wonderful experience. I came from a very limited, sheltered background and really didn’t know anything about Stanford and had never experienced anything like the backgrounds of my fellow students. My mother had told me that what’s important as much as anything is what’s in the library, what’s in the professors’ heads and I found that that was true. She was right on the mark. As for memories, they’re just too numerous to mention. I see, over the years as I’ve come to various reunions, that some things have improved so much it’s wonderful to see. And there are some things about which I’m disappointed. Downs: Okay, what were the things that disappointed you? Hill: What was life like in 1958? Downs: That’s good, at Stanford. Hill: In 1958, the dormitories were segregated. I didn’t see anything wrong with that. The dormitories were elegant and clean. The meals were wonderful and I find that as the requirement for such things in American homes has decreased, so has it here. Sometimes when I visit people in succeeding generations, for example, my sons and my nephew and so on, I’m shocked. The dorm I was in—1B on Roble—I had the fortune of just being with wonderful roommates. The custom then, I don’t know if it is anymore, was to room freshman with one girl as much as possible from Northern California, one as much as possible from Southern California, and one from out of the state or out of the country. So, they mixed us up deliberately and that was a definitely positive thing. I got to meet, my first year, people from backgrounds so varied that that was like a valuable class in itself. Downs: Were the Southern California girls different? Hill: Oh yes. And being in Northern California in those days was like a different country. Yes, they definitely were. I had participated actively in the YMCA Youth and Government Program during my high school years, and so had 2 been on campus every fall not really realizing what Stanford was. Stanford donated the use of Cubberley Auditorium to the Youth in Government Program and we had our political conventions there. So, people my age, my peers, who were from Southern California, had been bussed up to Stanford for those political conventions. The actual Youth in Government Program was always in February. And that’s just one of the many, little known, wonderful things that Stanford University has done. I hope they still do things like that. I know they do other things that are comparable. Downs: Can you describe how it was wonderful? Hill: The Youth in Government Program? Downs: I’m not familiar with it, so. Hill: Oh, really? Downs: Viewers might not be either. Hill: I understand that in later years, it morphed into another program called Boys State and Girls State, which of course is segregated, but ours was a program for everyone sponsored by the YMCA. And there were clubs called Tri-Hi-Y and Hi-Y in high schools all over the state. One of the major activities was an entire year of studying the law, government, civics, history and analyzing state 3 government and basically writing prospective laws, presenting them. My senior year I was… Downs: Your senior year at Stanford or high school? Hill: My senior year in high school, pardon me. Downs: Oh, so, how did this translate into Stanford? Hill: How it translated into Stanford is that when I arrived, I already knew a number of people from around the State of California because of this association. And I knew that I did not want to study political science. I wanted to study biochemistry. But it was a wonderful integrating of subjects that were very different. Downs: So, what did you study? Were you majoring in biochemistry? Hill: Well, I was told there was no major in biochemistry. I got separate degrees in biology and in chemistry. My field has exploded in the succeeding decades of my life, as everyone knows. I don’t think anybody predicted or in any way expected in those years that after the double helix was discovered that it would lead to the things it has. It’s been wonderful to watch it happen and I’ve appreciated very much coming back to campus. I love the reunions and particularly, we love the Classes Without Quizzes. Just as a side issue, my 4 children ask, well, why do you go to those reunions? Now, they’re from Stanford, too, but they’re at that age of their lives when they don’t set aside the time for reunions. They say, four days? What do you do for four days? I say, I wish they were six-day reunions. It’s always a hard choice, which of the Classes Without Quizzes one is going to attend. Many times my only criticism of the whole reunion is that they chose too small a room to house everyone who wanted to attend some of the Classes Without Quizzes. This year they’ve been wonderful. Downs: So, what was it like studying biology and chemistry and having two majors at Stanford? Hill: Great. My one sadness, I think as I mentioned on the way in here, is knowing that some of the professors I admired so much are gone and to the extent they could impart their perspectives and just factual knowledge, they did and it lives on. But still it’s a very sad thing to come back and realize I can’t go and see them and say thanks. Downs: So, what memories do you have of some of your Stanford professors? Hill: Professor Mohr was awesome. He was fierce. Some of us called him the Field Marshal behind his back. He taught much more than organic chemistry. He taught standards, accountability. He used students who had had their education interrupted by the Korean War as an example of what real academic work was 5 and let some of us who were continuing straight out of high school know that we weren’t putting out at our max. That was a good thing. He terrified everyone. His classes began in fall quarter with the old chemistry building. The lecture hall being so full, the fire marshal had to make some allowances for too many people for the rules [laughs] down to there being a couple dozen in the front. By spring quarter, the attrition was terrible. Downs: Wow. Hill: Yes. But he had a habit, which I guess now humorously I can mention, he would write with his right hand on the blackboard and move across the blackboard with his body. So, you couldn’t read the chemical equations. And then he erased with his left hand, almost before he had moved off the subject matter. You learned you had to come to class prepared and basically have his lectures be a review. He was actually involved in some of the early nomenclature of organic chemical molecules. That’s how, I don’t want to say primitive, but how early inorganic chemistry was. He was a master of it. He went to international conferences where they decided how the whole world would name these compounds and be able to understand one another when they couldn’t understand the spoken language. Dr. Olefin, absolutely fantastic man. I had one of the most wonderful surprises. We were studying the hard sciences, called the classes on the other side of campus “dessert classes.” Have you heard that term before? 6 Downs: As a hard core scientist and engineer, no I have not. Hill: No? Well, we called them dessert courses and one of the ones I enjoyed so much was comparative religion. I was very shy and a serious student, so I didn’t socialize a lot and I didn’t know what was happening. And one day I showed up for that class and the police were around. It was in history corner on the second floor. The crowds were monstrous. I know if it had happened now, there would’ve been press there. And the rumor was passing around, as we tried to get into our own class, this was Aldous Huxley giving one of his last public talks to the students of Stanford. I consider it one of the highpoints of my education that I got to hear him. Yes, that was a wonderful experience. Downs: What did he say? Hill: Well, unfortunately—see, I’d read I think everything he ever wrote. I admired him so much. And unfortunately, or fortunately, whatever, these are the tricks of fate; he was talking about the use—before the drug culture happened—of mind altering drugs. I don’t know if some of the students there chose to use themselves as experimental material or not [laughs]. We always suspected maybe they did. I’m of the view that the human brain is the only real matter in the universe that’s aware of itself and should have better sense than to experiment on itself in that fashion. Some people have done it unknowingly, but deliberately to do that to your brain does not make any sense to me. One of the other best classes I ever had was also a dessert class and it was the whole 7 year of fifteen units, five units every quarter, History of Art, History of Architecture and History of Painting by a Dr. Farmer held in Cubberley Auditorium. Wonderful class and, of course, one of my regrets is that Stanford has ceased to have the requirement of the History of Western Civilizations. I have spoken with many alumni over the year and when I ask them, which I always do, it’s as though I’m polling people, what do you remember that was best about Stanford? They’ll mention one or two or three things and for a number of years there, the History of Western Civilization was universally mentioned and I regret that it’s not required because after it was dropped, I met people who graduated during those years and when we talk and get to know each other, many times, I’d say fifty to sixty percent of the time, they will say, I feel I was cheated that I didn’t get the education you did. I was not required to do these things. I don’t think it should be limited to the History of Western Civilization, but I think it’s been made, what we used to call a “powder puff course” in that you can study some little segment and not get a view of the big picture. It should be an even bigger picture now than it was then rather than a more limited one. Downs: So, where did you grow up? Where did you come from when you went to Stanford? Hill: I was born in Colorado. I had the good fortune of having a mother who was an artist and a father who was an engineer. Those mentalities are the opposite ends of the stick. Our dinner conversations as we grew up were wonderful. 8 Downs: Where were you living when you went to Stanford? Hill: Sacramento. Well, the Sacramento area. Downs: You were a northern girl? Hill: Yes, I was from Northern California and I had roommates from Long Beach and Milwaukee. Downs: That’s quite a diversity there. Hill: Yes. Downs: Why did you choose Stanford? How did you come over? Hill: Oh, you’d be appalled. I was so ignorant, I didn’t know what a wonderful place it was and I got full scholarship here and I got full scholarship to the University of California, Berkeley. One of the reasons I chose—which is so superficial, it sounds silly—Stanford didn’t have sororities, and I thought I don’t want to spend my time on that. I don’t want to be included and I don’t want to be omitted. So, by going to Stanford, I can attend to business and I don’t need to be drawn off into the social scene too much [laughs]. So, that that’s the honest truth. 9 Downs: So, you’re not drawn off into the social scene? Hill: While I was here, I had the opportunity to start out on a wonderful life. And maybe I might mention also, that J.E. Wallace Sterling was a fantastic example of the kind of man that a lot of my classmates and I admired and wanted some day to become and that the speech he gave to us as the entering freshmen in Memorial Auditorium, I can quote parts of it verbatim fifty years later. How many people remember any commencement address or anything like that ten years later? Very few. But he was right on the mark and he had a way of triggering the deepest controversial and assumed parts of our youth and questioning and bringing them into question. Downs: So, what did he trigger in you? Hill: He explained what the purpose of the university was and he started out by saying you think you’re here to get an education and your parents think we’re here to give you an education and nothing could be further from the truth. I looked around me in Memorial Auditorium and I saw some yawns and I saw these other people who weren’t paying attention. I sat there and thought, you got my attention because that is what I thought and if I’m wrong, tell me. He proceeded to do so. He said that the university had three goals in mind and the first one was that over the next years to give us some idea of how ignorant we were. This is a humbling experience, which is good when you’re eighteen years 10 old. It’s good at any point in life but particularly then. Remember what Mark Twain said about how ignorant he thought his father was when he left home and how he returned a few years later amazed at how much his father had learned in a few years [laughs]? So, this was the point that J.E. Wallace Sterling made and he said the result of this is going to be a certain loneliness because after you leave the university, you are going to be in a world where lots of people think they know the major part of what there is to be known and you’re going to know more than most of them and you’re going to know that that is less than the percentage they believe. So, that’s a lonely experience. He said the next thing we aim to do is, during these years, to hone the skills to do something about your ignorance, which of course, involves critical thinking, analysis and on and on. By this point, he really had me sitting forward on my seat. And then he said the last thing: the last of our three major goals is that some time during these four years that we hope to have you with us, that somebody, somewhere and you will react in such a way that it lights a fire in you to spend the rest of your life educating yourself. Downs: Did it light your fire? Hill: It did, absolutely. Any number of these professors I mentioned and any number of other ones humbled me. My English—oh, we had what was called “bonehead English” in those days and I passed out of that. A lot of us were attending this higher level of English and we thought we were okay. My first essay came back with the back page in red letters diagonally across it 11 “illiterate.” The letters were almost an inch high. And then also in red down at the bottom, this English professor or teaching assistant, whatever he was, said, “My hours are—please come see me.” So, I went in there and he said, really, it isn’t that bad. He said, your writing is wonderful. Your grammar is perfect. Your syntax. But you just don’t have anything to say. Well, that of course, gave me writer’s cramp for the rest of the year but that, again, was part of the humbling experience which I consider was a real favor because I analyze and criticize my own thinking and think, well, this isn’t very deep sometimes [laughs]. That’s a gift that Stanford gave me. Downs: What student traditions and activities do you remember? Hill: Oh, the bonfire. What was it called? I think it was Tuesday evening that I very seldom could find time to attend but all the wonderful things that took place there. Flicks at MemAud. We called them “flicks.” You’ve probably heard the term. I probably shouldn’t mention the panty raids. Downs: Oh, please do. Hill: [Laughs] I lived on 1B in Roble my freshman year and as a senior, I was a freshman sponsor two quarters at Branner. We had serenades on the good side of the stick and panty raids on the other end and that was the culture of the fifties [laughs]. 12 Downs: Did they get any panties? Hill: No, no, it was all light-hearted fun I would say. But that’s as bad as things were. It’s like going to school in a time when whispering in class and chewing gum was the worst thing that ever happened, I think rather innocent. Downs: What are your most memorable experiences about Stanford? Hill: Well, one of them was hearing Aldous Huxley speak. Another was knowing what Watson and Crick were doing in my field and this sort of whispered scuttlebutt that was going on around the biology department about what were they thinking and what they proposed might be the case and the idea that this was all new. This was new human thinking that nobody had ever thought. Of course, biology was descriptive before them and since then, it’s been much more than that. Downs: Okay. Any impressions about your fellow students or the student bodies? Hill: Oh, that they were wonderfully diverse, not as diverse as they are now but what I learned from them was as good as any class I took. Yes, we were free because of the dorm system. I’m glad to hear now that everyone can live on campus. A couple of times, I’ve come back to reunions and there hasn’t been enough housing. And I’m really glad for the people who donated money to make that possible because living on campus is part of being able to learn 13 twenty-four hours, eighteen hours a day or whatever it is that we’re awake, you know, and we didn’t sleep a lot [laughs]. Downs: What do you remember? Hill: We talked all night. Downs: So, one of your most memorable experiences about being on campus? Hill: Well, my most disappointing one was that I have never seen my roommate Jane Burton again. I don’t know what has happened to her and the fact that there were card carrying communists living around the campus wanting to seduce, honestly, intellectually seduce women students. My roommate disappeared and she was much in love with one of these guys. And it’s broken my heart. Every reunion I ask if anybody’s heard about her. She’s just disappeared. Jane Burton, if you’re out there, I would love to see you again. Downs: Have you tried googling her or doing a search? Hill: Oh yes, I mean, who knows what her name may be. Yes, I have. Downs: And the alumni office must have the best idea of where she might be. Hill: I don’t think so. I’ve searched and searched. 14 Downs: How disappointing. Hill: A fabulous mind. She was a chemistry major and she was brilliant. Downs: Do you have any special memoires of any of the organizations that you were participating in? Hill: I didn’t participate much. My husband thinks it’s really strange when he asks me questions. He didn’t go here and when he asks me questions like that, I say, I studied [laughs]. Downs: Two majors, you sure did. Hill: I studied [laughs]. I was just so thrilled with the classes. Oh, one memory I recall so well was before I came down here when they sent the packet out with the catalog, going through that catalog and the massive frustration of looking at all the class offerings and then realizing that, you know, all these checks I was making were just impossible, that what a small amount of this material I was ever even going to get a little sniff at. That all fits in with Wallace Sterling’s speech, that you spend the rest of your life educating yourself and that they give us the tools and the drive to do it. Downs: So, how have you used your Stanford education? What direction did you go? 15 Hill: Well, I had very good fortune in that I happened to go straight from here to Pensacola, Florida, and there was a job opening. I badly needed a job and I applied for it. It took me four months to get security clearance for it. I worked for one of the German doctors who came to the United States at the end of World War II in space research. I worked for Dr. Dietrich E. Beischer as his lab assistant. There was a room full of applicants and, thanks to Stanford, I was the only one he called in. I said, well, aren’t you going to talk with them? And he said, no, I just wanted to be sure you didn’t have three eyes. He said, I wanted to be sure that what’s on your application is true. Downs: So, Stanford… Hill: It was wonderful working for him. Downs: …really opened doors for you? Hill: Oh yes, absolutely. Of course, I have experienced both total fairness in the workplace and the discrimination that used to take place against women. I’ve seen various degrees of both. It’s been interesting to see what’s happened over the last fifty years in that respect. That job interview, my Stanford degree and the courses I had taken got me the job. He didn’t care whether I was green or purple or male or female. 16 Downs: Just don’t have three eyes. Hill: Yes, basically what he was saying, are you real? Is this a phony application [laughs]? Downs: Okay. Hill: And, of course, praise to Strothmann who wrote the book on German and the fact that I took German for science or scientific German or whatever they called it, was a big factor because I ended up translating for this man as well as the biology and the chemistry and the physics and the math. The language was important. You talk about the influence of other students, I never knew there was such a subject as linguistics, not studying any specific language and how all this fits in with my field about the part of the brain which is pre-wired for language. That is just one little side benefit, the awareness of that, the fascination with the fact that that’s true is just one of the hundreds of things I could mention that I gained from the other students here. Downs: So, any of these particular students or professors that, other than the ones you mentioned, have a particular impact on you or had you wondering or inspired you? Hill: Oh yes, Western Civ, our—whatever they called him, he later became a full professor, but at that point, I don’t know what his status was. His name was 17 Donahue and his head was in the sixteenth or fifteenth century, or even the fourteenth. He managed to make it possible for us, as much as this is possible, to eliminate all the successive learning and to get behind the eyes of somebody who lived then and erase from our equations of reality, what life looked like to people then with what they knew and what they didn’t know. It reminds a lot of Mark Twain’s A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court. He had the ability, as he taught the discussion of western civilization, to put us in the middle ages for an hour or so once in a while. Downs: Wow. Hill: That’s a real art, yes. Donahue was his name. I never knew anything more about him except that he was a bachelor and later he became a full professor. But a fabulous experience. I’ve lived in Europe. I’ve lived in Germany, France and Spain. I still go to Spain regularly, and he shaped what interests me there the most. It’s a lifetime change that he made in my desire to travel. So, I feel fortunate. My husband and I often talk about how fortunate we are to have lived in these decades. Who knows, two, three hundred years from now, when they look back, who knows what is going to happen, but I feel that I have lived during the best time that ever has been, the best place on earth, and I also feel that I did nothing to deserve this. This is just a piece of fortune in my birth that I’m an American citizen and everything that’s been available to me that I haven’t earned. So, Stanford also gave me this feeling that it’s my business to try to leave it in as least as good a condition as I found it. I would hope better 18 but that takes a tremendous effort. And I do try. I do a lot of tutoring. I think that those first four or five years of a child’s life—well, I’m a professional mother and all my life, my adult life since Stanford, I’ve had other women criticize me, aren’t you bored with little children? On and on and on they go. And I say, look, if you don’t understand those boring first years, then you don’t understand your job. What’s happening to that developing brain during those years? They say you’re too well-educated to spend your life doing that, which I did until my children were grown up. And I say, if you don’t understand that that is the profession in the life, the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world. If you mess up your own progeny, there is nothing else really that you can do that compensates for semi-destroying another life. Downs: I agree. I wish more people felt like that. Hill: So, volunteer work is extremely important and an education at Stanford allows most of us to have free time to do that. I’m an environmentalist but I’m a conservative. Fiscally, I’m very conservative. Politically, I’m conservative and people say to me, but that doesn’t fit and I say I’m very critical of both political parties. There is nobody who represents my view of what should be. So, I always vote for the lesser of two evils. Downs: It’s hard to figure out who that is [laughs]. 19 Hill: That’s sad, that’s sad. Now, I think our founding fathers understood that that was going to be our problem and I think they were geniuses. I’ve made it a point, for example, of reading the Federalist Papers. I read another one each year. I discipline myself on New Year’s Day and I read the next one that I didn’t read last year. Those are habits that this Professor Donahue gave me. He wasn’t a professor but he should have been, and he was later. Downs: Wow. So, when you graduated, do you remember any particular ceremonies like throwing your hats up or anything kind of goofy, fun or wonderful? Hill: I didn’t go to commencement. My last classes were late Friday afternoon and I got married at Saturday on noon and graduation was Sunday. I wasn’t here. My parents were very disappointed. I look back on it and wish I could have done things differently. But when I look at the schedule for where I had to be, I had to do that. Downs: To get two degrees, you did that in four years? Hill: Yes. Downs: You were very busy. Hill: Mmm hmm. That’s what I said, there was an old song from our parents’ generation about we’re all here at college but we’re not here for knowledge and 20 when I heard that about age eleven or twelve I thought, something’s wrong with this picture [laughs]. No, I came here to soak up as much as I could. Now, I must say that at the end, I was burned out. I think a lot of students were and sometimes I would say to myself, I’m like a sponge that’s totally saturated. I need some time. And then I would say to myself, I know that within a few months, I’m going to regret that I am so saturated. I also regret that I don’t live nearby so I can audit classes. Downs: So, where are you living now? Hill: A lot of the time Spain, some of the time in Wisconsin. Downs: What are you doing in Spain? Hill: It’s a leftover longing from years ago when I used to work there. I have had so many jobs that I couldn’t list them and that’s another piece of freedom that a Stanford education has given me. I can do something until I’m tired of it. So, I’ve given tours of Europe. I’ve taught ballroom dancing. I’ve worked as a scientist. This is a freedom that an education gives you. I mean, you look at the people in the world, particularly the women in the world who are not educated, they have no freedom. And that’s one of the best things that was said in Maples, yesterday, the fact that the only way we’ll solve the world’s problems is to educate women and Stanford does it admirably. 21 Downs: Were there many women here when you were there? Hill: I was the only girl in most of the classes. Sometimes there were two of us. Downs: What was that like? Hill: It was fine. The guys were great. I’ve met a lot of them these last few days. Now, one thing I do tease them about is that usually I got there first and I was sitting in class, but when I came in after some of them were there, suddenly things became quiet. What it amounted to is they were cleaning up their language. Men now don’t bother to do that but the men in my class were gentlemen. And so [laughs] what was it like? I didn’t feel it was lonely. Many people said to me that, well, you can’t have a relationship with men that’s totally asexual. The fact is we were friends and that is something that, again, very few women have been able to be close friends with men. When I see them here, we sit down at a table and we’re just talking a blue streak and it’s all about our profession. So, that another gift that Stanford gave me. Downs: Yes, I know that one. Hill: You know the feeling? Downs: Yes, I was the only woman in many of my classes, too. 22 Hill: Really? What was your major? Downs: Engineering at MIT. Hill: Oh, how wonderful. Downs: Only woman, so, I know that one well and it adds to the opportunities. Any humorous or funny stories about Stanford you recall? Hill: Not particularly. I didn’t find it a funny place. I knew people who made attempts at humor that I didn’t think were funny. I knew some, what you might call, pre-hippies who would think that it was funny to do things that would offend their parents. I didn’t think it was funny. I had ultimate respect for my parents and I wasn’t deliberately going to do anything to offend them. But that was considered humor. Oh, also there was Commander Crandall who ran Lagunita. I dated a guy from West Point, another one from Annapolis [laughs] and Bancroft Hall in Annapolis was the biggest dining hall in the world at that point. And she ran the dining hall. She ran the dormitory on Lagunita as though it were a navy ship. She was a commander in the U.S. Navy and I thought that was wonderful. I never was going to go in the military but that was another gift Stanford gave me because I learned that kind of order and discipline and accountability. She was no professor or anything. I learned it from her because of the way she ran the dormitory. 23 Downs: Valuable lesson. Hill: She came to dinner in her uniform with her three gold stripes and we sat down with the hostess and everyone else. The manners and the decorum were exemplary and that has done me a good stead because I’ve been invited to participate in things that I think if I did not feel comfortable in those environments, it would have shown and I would not have been invited in the past fifty years. It’s happened so many times, I couldn’t recount really. Downs: What do you enjoy most about coming back to Stanford? Hill: Everything. Just walking around, seeing the developments, seeing how beautiful the grounds are. I’m an avid gardener. I’m so pleased with the, you might say, macro-landscaping of Stanford. It’s beautiful physically. I enjoy the architecture knowing how it was built. I wish there were more red tile roofs [laughs]. Sorry, but I think the original architecture was wonderful and a lot of the newer is, but I love Quad. I really, really do. I used to ride my bicycle as fast as I could from the entrance to Quad across through the church because the mosaic on the left side is such a fantastic draw of three-dimensional art. I never succeeded but I was always trying to determine at what point you could tell it was two-dimensional. It would seem to change with the light. The art of Stanford is beautiful. And then what do I enjoy about the reunions? Oh my goodness, you couldn’t make a list. It’s wonderful. It’s seeing how gracefully my classmates have aged, at least the ones who are able to attend, how healthy, 24 in fact, I would say this year, our fiftieth year, at least seven or eight of them I have looked at and thought, you look healthier and younger than you did five years ago. I’ve asked some of them and they’ve had the same experience. What is going on? Maybe there’s a greater awareness. I’m very interested in nutrition. I’ve been teaching it for years. I think there’s a greater awareness among Americans but particularly educated Americans that you are not what you eat, but you are what you ate. You are the accumulation of the molecules [laughs] and atoms you’ve taken in. When I look at my classmates, I try to find a common thread. I can’t, but the vigor of my classmates is a wonderful thing to see and how bright they still are. You know, we make jokes about losing our marbles and everything. I haven’t found that to be true. I find them more interesting every five years. Downs: What have you seen that’s changed about Stanford? Hill: There’s no, well, like I said, there’s no open space. The grant of land is the most wonderful thing any founders could do, but many of us talk about how difficult it is to explain to our spouses or something how to get somewhere because it used to be you could point and say see, over there under the trees and you could see the bottom of the building they were headed for, but no longer. The construction, the cranes, the new buildings—it’s a different place because of that. But that’s all for the good. We still have lots of land to go [laughs]. 25 Downs: Any other changes? Hill: I do not like the fact that the left-right political balance is no longer balanced. It used to be you could hear both sides exposed or the exposition of both sides more or less equally and I haven’t found that to be the case and I regret that. I think that’s a big loss. I also do not like political correctness in any form. We talk about free speech. What happened to the first amendment, that there are all sorts of things you can’t talk about? But the students with whom I’ve spoken during this trip have been shoulders above, not maybe, you know, the intellectual requirements to get in, okay. I don’t know about that. But their general attitude, a lot of the entitlement and the materialism is less, I think. I’ve talked with, at length, while my patient husband waited, with at least eight current students and—I was lucky maybe—but 100 percent of them were whole people. They were not self-centered, self-aggrandizing, greedy people. You say what changes have I seen in the student body? That is nice, really, really nice to see. They called us the apathy generation. The individuals I knew were not apathetic but in general, participation wasn’t great among my classmates. Oh, one of the nice things was that I dated a number of guys who had served in Korea and they were so much more mature than we were and that rubbed off. Having people who’ve had an interrupted education mix with the, what I call “the hothouse flowers”, the kids who’ve been showered with every material thing since they entered kindergarten, then to be able to associate with some people who’ve been out there and really had it tough was a good experience. And, of course, Stanford abroad is a wonderful thing. That 26 didn’t exist when I was here and I have visited many of the campuses and listened to various talks there and that is a valuable part. I was talking about how good it was for me to be able to know some foreign students, but to go there and live is a quantum leap in the positive. So, there have been some wonderful changes but I regret the lack of balance. I read in the last alumni magazine that eighty percent of the students are on one side, so that doesn’t make for a real conversation and discourse anymore. And a lot of people are shy when they come here. I was, and can be talked down. So, that doesn’t encourage honesty and integrity even when you overwhelm some segments. We used to do it with a different yardstick didn’t we? Decades ago we used to downgrade points of view that we didn’t agree with. Well, we still do. Downs: And that’s sad. Hill: That is sad. Downs: Because I can just imagine. I think we think alike politically, okay. Can you tell us about a lesson you learned at Stanford? Hill: Hundreds, hundreds. Oh my goodness, what would be even in the top ten? I learned so much here. I learned by example, you know, the do as I say don’t do as I do that so many parents exhibit, I learned here, do as I do more than do as I say. So, there are dozens of people that gave me examples by their own lives. Yes, there was a woman here who was the equivalent of what Condoleezza 27 Rice became. She came from Rice University and she really interacted with the women students. I don’t even remember her name but she was a model for intellectual integrity and humanity. She was wonderful. And see, I can’t even remember her name, just one of many, but she stands out in my memory, examples of how to be in the future. Downs: Have you had any time for any escapades at Stanford? Hill: Not really. I love that I was able to take horseback riding here and I loved that I was able to associate with some people who were refugees from some of the communist countries. And some of the, not wild by any means, things we did with them. There was a Russian student here who had a classic Ford convertible and he used to keep the top down on it and haul Stanford girls around from one place to the other. We did have, I don’t know if you’d call them escapades, he didn’t. He was sent to the United States, not with money, but he was sent with diamonds sewed into his clothes that he would proceed to sell in order to pay his tuition and so on. One of the most colorful people I’ve ever met. He was a Russian refugee. I would say that those ridiculous rides around in his car acting stupid were escapades, yes [laughs]. Yes they were. Oh, ah, this Jane Burton I miss so much, she and I wanted to ride horses at spring break from Stanford up to see my family in Sacramento. And I convinced her that this is not Texas, she was from Dallas, that there are fences and there’s private property and you just don’t do that. So, we rode our bicycles instead and it was wonderful. This was during the years of balloon tired bicycles, so 28 these weren’t these fancy, easy to ride bicycles now with gears. There were no gears and there were these big, fat tires. Riding on the freeways going against the truck traffic was as crazy as the mountain climbing or anything. I mean, it was really a crazy thing we did and I don’t regret it for a minute. Downs: When you came to Stanford, what were your dreams? What were your hopes? Hill: I wanted to be a medical missionary. I was going to go to medical school and I wanted to be a med. I admired Albert Schweitzer tremendously, Kagua from Japan, Gandhi from India, and I found that anybody who would sponsor me to do that wanted me to impress specific religious views on other people. I didn’t want to do that. I just wanted to go and serve people medically and I became disillusioned that that was their motive, really, was to use medicine and to use altruism to enforce conformity. I didn’t fit. Downs: So, did you… Hill: So, I didn’t do it. Downs: …try to go to medical school or? Hill: I did. I was accepted at a couple but I—well, this is interesting. I actually think that I fought the women’s lib movement between my ears before it was named and before it really existed because my grades went from good to not so good 29 during the period of time I was trying to decide if I could have a medical career and be a wife and mother. I decided there are only twenty-four hours in a day and I couldn’t do a really good job of either one if I was robbing from one for the other all the time. Now, I know people who do and have and usually it’s because they have tremendous outside support. I didn’t want to rely on other people. I didn’t even think in terms of asking other people to pitch hit for me and all that sort of thing. Flex hours did not exist in those days. Schedules were very rigid. So, I would say I fought the women’s lib issues before they became a national issue and decided I am proud of being a woman. I don’t want to be a man. I don’t resent men. I don’t find them threatening. I don’t think the world is fair to women but it will become so. I had that faith and I decided to be a professional wife and mother and I don’t regret that at all. Downs: Any other memories, concepts, things you’re enthusiastic about, bad memories? Hill: The only bad memories I have were a couple of times when I got sick. I hated that I couldn’t go to class [laughs]. I absolutely hate being sick. That’s my interest in medicine and I must say that over the years Paul Ehrlich has become a hero of mine as Linus Pauling was and Watson Crick, too, and they’ve been a big influence on what I think is important as far as taking care of the human body before you can take care of the human mind. You have to feed people before they can really be free. I learned those things in the biology department 30 as much as anybody could in any other subject. Yes, I guess I’m not very funny. I’m pretty serious [laughs]. Downs: Oh, but you’ve got a lot of great things going for you, good heart. Hill: I never went out to Rudy’s and Rossetti’s [laughs]. I didn’t. I wouldn’t even know how to get there and when labs were over in the afternoon, you know, chem labs or whatever, the guys would all say well let’s go dissipate and I thought, I don’t want to dissipate. Why would anybody want to dissipate? Didn’t make any sense to me, still doesn’t. Downs: Anything else? Hill: No. Downs: I want to thank you very much...