 Du: My name is Melissa, and I am here this morning on May 12th with Paola at nine a.m. in Mill Valley for the Stanford Pioneering Women Oral History Project. So, Paola, why don’t you tell me a bit about your upbringing and where you’re from? Gianturco: I was born in Urbana, Illinois, where the University of Illinois is. Shall I tell you a little bit about my family? Du: Yes, I would love that. Gianturco: My mother was born in Danville about fifteen miles from [Urbana]. She had graduated in English from the University of Illinois and expected to be an English teacher. [There were no] jobs for English teachers, so she accepted a job as the bookkeeper at a startup hospital and clinic that was being launched by my father and five other doctors who had been fellows at the Mayo Clinic. [00:01:07] She took one look at my father, broke her engagement [to someone else], and not too long later they were married and stayed married 15 for more than sixty years until both of them died at ninety. My father came to the United States from Italy. It’s an amazing family history. His father had been born in the arch of the boot in a tiny village called Avigliano, and he was taken by his older brother and taught to read by candlelight in Naples. Ultimately, my grandfather graduated both from the conservatory of music--he wrote symphonies for fun--and from law school, and was elected to Parliament. [00:02:05] During the course of his life, my grandfather was minister of education soon after Italy was unified. He unified the education system in Italy. He was also the minister of transportation and unified the transportation system. You can see my last name on train stations all over Italy. He was then the equivalent of the head of the US Supreme Court. [As a lawyer, he defended passengers] on a ship that had run aground on Gibraltar, and he used that money to educate all of his nine children. He explained to them that that was their legacy--that education was crucially important. That was his gift to them; [he gave the rest of his money away]. [00:03:00] So my father was, of course, very education-oriented, as am I, by the way. My father was also something of a genius. When he came to the United States at age twenty-five as a fellow to the Mayo Clinic, he had already finished his medical specialties in surgery, radiology, and pathology. He was always very creative in addition to being very scientific, so he was always inventing. As I grew up, we knew that we would never find the 16 baking sheets, for example, because they would be in the basement and my father would be inventing something with the metal. It was hopeless to try to have a regular life. [00:03:58] He ultimately retired when he was sixty-five, and spent the time between when he was sixty-five to ninety-one inventing medical devices. He was one of the three or four physicians who were responsible for the development of the subspecialties of interventional radiology and interventional cardiology, which was wonderful because he was committed to the idea that in order to be healthier, people shouldn’t have to experience the trauma of drastic surgery. He really changed the course of medicine. He gave all of his patents to the company that produced his devices for a dollar, and he really did save many, many people’s lives. [00:05:00] Again, there are lessons everywhere. Not only did I--from my Italian family--inherit the idea that education was important, but also, because my father was oriented toward helping people, [I] inherited an impulse to pay real attention to what people tell me and to use my skills to make their lives better. Du: That’s incredible. I’d love to touch a little bit more on your father’s love for education and how that impacted you, because in the late 1950s, when you were thinking about applying to college and going to college, around only 6 percent of women had college degrees. Do you think that your father’s great influence on you really made you think, “This [a college education] was definitely what I was doing,” or 17 how do you think that this [very few women attending college] affected what you wanted to do in light of what other women around the United States or around you were doing? Gianturco: [00:06:06] Remember I grew up in a university community, so most of the kids I went to school with from kindergarten on were daughters and sons of university faculty. There was never any question about my going to school somewhere. I was also the valedictorian of my high school class. Already the idea of learning was fun for me and something that was part of my life from the beginning. I may have grown up in a bubble from that perspective, but there was never any question about going on to school. [00:06:52] Although I will say that, because my father was so focused on the value of education, when I submitted my Stanford application I wrote about the idea that I wanted to learn to be empathetic. The night that [the application] was due--it had to be postmarked by midnight--I asked my father if he would like to hear what I had written. He was unglued. It was the only fight I ever had with my father. He said, “Empathy? You can learn empathy at home. Why would I spend this much money to send you to this wonderful school to learn to be empathetic?” I was so committed to that idea. It really had to do with my sense of what the world was. It was not, at that point, anywhere nearly as unified as it now is, thanks to technology and communications. [00:07:55] But I could see that I was part of the [larger] world. I had 18 grown up with a family that had come from another place. It seemed to me that [empathy] was crucial to learn. My father just thought it was a big waste of time. So I put on my boots in the middle of this winter night and put on my mittens and my big, heavy coat, and I said, “I am walking to the post office.” [laughs] My mother said, “No, no.” [laughs] So my father drove me in total silence. At midnight--silent post office, dark downtown--I dropped my application into the mailbox. I was just determined to do it. I am stubborn. [laughs] Du: That’s amazing. I’m also very curious. As you were applying to college and getting ready for the idea of college, what were your parents’ expectations for you as you were preparing to leave home and getting ready to go to Stanford? Gianturco: [00:09:02] Their expectations were that I would do well. [laughs] I had--they had--we shared a sense that it is an obligation to do what you can do well. It’s really not a choice. Everybody has a recurring terrible dream. My terrible dream was that Baryshnikov [Mikhail Baryshnikov] would come to me and say, “I’m stopping dancing.” It was just horrifying to me. I would always wake up almost in tears because it seemed like such a waste. I would say, “No, no, you can’t.” Of course Baryshnikov represented me, and I was representing to 19 myself the idea that one needs to take advantage of the skills and talents that you have. Defection was not an option. [laughs] Du: [00:10:09] Wow. Once you arrived at Stanford, you majored in history while you were there. Can you tell me about how you came to this department and also what it was like at that time? Gianturco: History Corner was still History Corner way back then. History simply was an area that interested me, and ultimately it turned out to make a huge contribution to my life, because I learned to see patterns in what was happening. That analytic ability--the ability to see patterns and trends--really shaped how I viewed everything. [00:11:02] I was interested particularly in Western European history, which was my specialty--mostly because I grew up during World War II and I really wanted to understand what [had happened]. My father, who was much too old to have been drafted, volunteered to be a doctor in the US Medical Corps because he was so horrified about what Hitler was doing to the Jews. I was born in July of 1939 before Europe entered the war in September. My father was torn because his volunteering later to go to war put him on the opposite side from his Italian family, and also because he had to leave his own newly growing family at a very important time. [00:12:09] My mother tells the story about his walking around and around and around the outside of the house, thinking and thinking and thinking. But ultimately he made what I consider to be a very important moral choice and did become a doctor in the US Army Medical Corps. 20 Du: Wow. So your father’s experiences drew you to the History Department. What was studying history like? You mentioned Western European history. Did you have any other interests within the History Department? Gianturco: There were other courses that were sort of superstar courses at that point, taught by people who were wonderful theorists and had particular areas of expertise that were very interesting. [00:12:57] I remember a course in medieval history that intrigued me because the professor thought that period could be traced by looking at the invention of the stirrup, and indeed he was right. There were many courses that interested me. I found it a provocative area of exploration. Du: What do you think are some changes that you experienced during your time at Stanford? Gianturco: I had always felt growing up that I was kind of an outcast in the middle of Illinois in the middle of the twentieth century. I was half Italian. There were no other Italians for hundreds of miles in any direction. I was smart, and--I don’t know how that is today, but that doesn’t necessarily make you the most popular person around. [00:14:09] I was pretty, and that was almost worse than being smart. [laughs] I was elected to be prom queen, for example. I was also, later on, a Stanford Quad queen. Do they still have Quad queens? Good. Mortifying. I mean, talk about discrimination. I always felt that people just viewed me as an airhead. [laughs] Du: Can you explain “Quad queen?” 21 Gianturco: There were two students, girls from each class, each year, photographed for full-page pictures in the Quad, the Stanford yearbook. Later in my life, when I was responsible for new business for Saatchi & Saatchi, I went to talk to the vice president of communications at Transamerica. [00:15:07] I knew he had gone to Stanford. He was a year older than I am. He said, “I’m so glad to meet you. I remember that you were a Quad queen.” [laughs] I thought, “Oh my God, I will never live this down.” When I was elected to be prom queen in high school, nobody invited me to go [to the dance]. There was no way to get crowned [without attending]. My mother called Bob Hindsley’s mother and somehow convinced her to get Bob to take me to this prom. I can imagine this conversation. “She’s really very nice. It’s only one evening out of his life.” Oh my goodness. I had grown up feeling like an outcast, and when I went to Stanford, I was suddenly surrounded by people who were as smart as I was and smarter. It was a huge relief. It was wonderful, really, to be able to talk to people who were always thinking and who were really listening. [00:16:10] I have good friends from that time, and I married a couple of Stanford men over the course of the following years, one of whom I have now been married to for thirty years, and the other one of whom I was married to for three years, but he is the father of my son. That actually hints at another thing that was important that happened at Stanford, and that was: I suddenly had a normal social life. I wasn’t considered a weirdo. [laughs] 22 [00:16:46] I had also grown up very allergic. Between August and November of every year, until it frosted in Illinois, I couldn’t breathe. Suddenly, I was outside of the hay fever zone, which was miraculous. I could breathe. For the first time, I felt normal on all of these dimensions that had really been inhibitors. Du: At Stanford, what were some of your career aspirations, and what did you think you would do after you had graduated? Gianturco: For as long as I could remember, I had thought I wanted to be in advertising. The two men who invented marketing research were Bill Marsteller [William Marsteller], who was my mother’s first cousin, and Charles Sandage, who lived down the block from us and taught at the University of Illinois. The two of them had launched the discipline of marketing research by interviewing farmers in Illinois. [00:18:04] When I asked the people in the neighborhood--the fathers in the neighborhood--most mothers were not working at that point--what they did that was interesting, Charlie Sandage told me about marketing research. I thought, “Phew, that sounds really interesting.” He was so excited about it because they were really forging new avenues of exploration and I thought, “That’s what I want to do.” And, of course, advertising is what I did for some thirty-four years. Du: When you were thinking that you really wanted to go into market research, were there any role models that you had very early on, perhaps other women in these industries that you looked up to, or did you just generally have this excitement and passion for market research? 23 Gianturco: [00:18:53] The latter. I didn’t know anyone except Bill Marsteller and Charles Sandage who were actually in that business, and I didn’t know how male-oriented that business was at that point. There were not very many women other than secretaries in advertising. Du: Going back a little bit to career aspirations, what were some of the career aspirations of your friends and colleagues at Stanford? Gianturco: Many of them wanted to be what women were assumed to want to be at that point, and that was teachers. One of them went beyond the assumption that girls would have to be nurses and was a doctor. I graduated at a time when things were really beginning to shift. By the early 1960s, the women’s movement had not yet gained real traction, but it was starting. [00:20:01] That was the first year that the Peace Corps accepted volunteers, so I had several friends who went into the Peace Corps. One of them was going to Thailand. One was going to Malawi. I thought that was like going to Mars. I couldn’t imagine [travelling] that far. Those women became professors, not just teachers. Already women were beginning to push the barriers, the assumptions, and the discrimination about what kinds of roles they could play. Du: Do you think that was particular to just being on a college campus with many very smart people, or do you think this was indicative of a larger shift in attitude at that time? Gianturco: I wasn’t yet aware of a larger shift, but I think that it was being seeded then. I do know that my close friends and I had just read a book that came out 24 about that time called Mrs. Bridge [Evan S. Connell, 1959]. [00:21:08] Mrs. Bridge lived a life as a lonesome housewife stuck in the center of the country raising a family, and ultimately her life was so boring that she turned on her car in her garage and asphyxiated herself. That story was horrifying. We vowed we would never lead that kind of life. It would be unimaginable. So we promised each other, as if it were a blood oath, that we would have interesting lives that didn’t consign us to that kind of vapid existence. Du: That’s amazing. I would also love to hear more about what you think the impact of your education at Stanford was. Gianturco: [00:22:01] I think that it sent me on a path, a lifelong path, with the assumption that learning is simply part of life. I have either taught or taken classes virtually ever since. I have also maintained friendships from Stanford that are very powerful and important to me, men and women who have been doing very interesting things, causing change, breaking down barriers and breaking glass ceilings, despite how hard it was. The glass ceiling was very much in place in the 1960s when we graduated. Du: [00:23:05] After you graduated, you started your career at Joseph Magnin. Can you tell me a little bit about how you ended up there after you graduated and what it was like to start working there? Gianturco: I had an advisor at Stanford who miscalculated the number of credits I had, so I graduated a quarter before anybody else [in the Class of 1961] was out. I remember borrowing a car and driving to San Francisco to interview at 25 Joseph Magnin, which was a fashion-forward store--the first store in the country to cater to working women. [00:23:57] For some reason, in March or April of 1961, skirts went from being mid-calf-length to way above the knees. [laughs] I thought, “I only have things to wear that are mid-calf-length.” So I sat in the car in the Union Square garage hemming my skirt and went in looking very chic in a very short miniskirt. I was interviewed immediately after another woman who was sitting in the waiting room in the human resources department. She looked at my hem, which I had caught, unbeknownst to me, with my heel as I got out of the car. Half of it was hanging down and half of it was way up in the front. She said, “Honey, your hem is falling out.” [00:25:03] I said, “Oh, I know,” as if that were a normal thing. [laughs] I was interviewed in this unlikely condition. Somehow, they thought I should come and work there. [laughs] I was a trainee for a year, and then I was very interested in going into the advertising department, which was not the track that you were supposed to follow. You were supposed to become a buyer. I decided to quit and go to New York and be an interior designer, for which I was not at all qualified. [laughs] Cyril Magnin, who was the patriarch and founder of that chain of stores, called me into his office. Their trainees did not leave after one year. [00:26:03] He was so eccentric. He was lying on a slant board in his office for this meeting. I walked in, and there he was with his head down 26 here. He said, “Why are you leaving?” And I said, “Well, I’m going to New York to be an interior designer.” He said, “If you were to stay, what would you like to do?” I said, “I would like to be corporate public relations director.” And he said, “Okay”--I knew that job was empty. He said, “Okay. Can you write speeches for me?” I said, “Sure.” I’d never written speeches for anybody. “Can you write an annual report?” “Of course.” I had never even read an annual report. But anyway, here we were in this bizarre interview. [00:26:48] He said, “Okay, you’re it. I’ll review it in three months.” He never reviewed it. So I began my career with this lofty title. I started by inviting the editors to have lunch with me and tell me what I could do to help them. This seemed like a reasonable way to start if you didn’t know anything about what you were supposed to be doing. I did PR for seven years, and during that time JM expanded all over Northern California, Southern California, and Nevada. It was really fun. I was working with the news media. I was writing. I was supervising photoshoots. I was hiring staff. I was also copying off press releases. I was a one-person band, but it was fun. Du: [00:28:04] Wow. When you first started at Joseph Magnin, how many people were there? And by the time you ended, had it grown a lot during the time you were there? 27 Gianturco: I can’t answer in terms of the number of people, because I don’t know those numbers. They had maybe ten stores in Northern California when I started, and when I left, they had maybe fifty stores in those states that I just mentioned. They had grown a lot. Du: That’s incredible. As the corporate public relations director, who did you look up to in order to get advice for the job, or even just as a role model to be a good leader for all the people you were leading? Gianturco: I had to learn really fast. The editors educated me about the media relations. I really hadn’t ever read an annual report, so I reached out to friends who had gone to Stanford Business School and said, “Can you get me some annual reports from the library?” I read them like crazy and then copied that style. [00:29:09] I was not formally mentored by anybody. I was just looking everywhere for help, and I found it. Du: I would love to go back to the moment you were in Cyril Magnin’s office and said, “I want to be the corporate public relations director.” Where did your ambition come from, and why do you think that you were given this lofty position, especially as a young trainee? Gianturco: Well, for one--I asked for it. The other thing that has held true my whole life is that I love doing things that I haven’t done before. Later on, that expanded to include things that nobody had done. [00:30:01] I’ve always been really good at jumping into the swimming pool and looking later to see if there’s any water in it [laughs]. It seems less important to me [to feel totally prepared]--because I knew I could somehow 28 figure it out, whatever “it” was. I’ve done a lot of things that I’d never done before and some that nobody had done. Du: Can you give me an example of something that no one had done before during your time at Joseph Magnin? Gianturco: Well, I don’t think anyone who had been corporate public relations director had been twenty-two. The woman who had had that job before me was thirty-five, which seemed very old. She had come from Vogue Magazine. She was so experienced, and she was British, which meant of course that she sounded smarter than God. [laughs] Nobody expected someone my age and without experience to do that job. Du: [00:31:05] Wow, that’s wonderful. You mentioned that you spent seven years at Joseph Magnin. What did you do after those seven years? Gianturco: JM [Joseph Magnin] transferred me to Southern California because they were expanding all over Southern California. That move put me back in contact with a Stanford man whom I had dated many years before. He and I got married, and I had a baby. When my son was young, I worked one day a week for every year he was old, because I had been hired by the first women-owned advertising agency in the country--probably in the world. There were no other womenowned advertising agencies anywhere. [00:32:08] I said to [the founders], “I really want to be at home when my child is little.” They both had worked right through having children and knew what a stretch it was and how it minimized the amount of time they could spend with their children. They totally understood why I wanted [that 29 schedule, so] we made a deal that would work--and it was an amazing time. No clients knew that I was [working part time]. I would talk to clients from home. Working from home was not a known or expected role. I would talk to clients from home when Scott [my son] was napping so that they wouldn’t hear this crying baby in the background. [00:32:57] I made up every excuse you can imagine. “I can’t come to a meeting today. There are dinosaurs on the freeway.” [laughs] I had to somehow pretend that I was working fulltime because nobody was working from home. At the end of the five years, I became a vice president of the agency because I had worked so diligently. [Nobody knew] that I had been working part-time. Du: Can you tell me a little bit more about the challenges you faced when you were doing this thing that almost no one else was doing, which was working from home while also taking care of your child and also being really amazing at your job? Gianturco: I also started my own business at that same time. An artist in San Francisco named Ruth Asawa was making dough cookie Christmas tree ornaments and taught me how. [00:33:59] I was making those for sale in my spare time, and on the day--or two days, or later three days--a week when I was gone, I would have the baby sitters paint my Christmas tree ornaments because I couldn’t get behind. I had to [ship] them out on deadline for Christmas selling. I was really working hard to keep my life full of productive projects. 30 There’s a lot of downtime when your baby is little. When your baby is bigger, there’s a lot to do that is engaging and interesting, but at the beginning there is not so much to do, so I was busily expanding my horizons. Du: [00:35:01] Was your husband working as well? Gianturco: Rob [Sangster, my then-husband] was working as a lawyer in Los Angeles. Du: What was it like having two working parents and managing a child? How did you divide the responsibilities of raising your son with your husband? Gianturco: He and I were married for only three years, and during those three years--how can I explain this? As was true for virtually all of the women whom I knew who were working, the women did two jobs. They did their job outside of the home and they did their job inside of the home. Men were not expected to participate in raising the child, or cleaning, or cooking. [00:35:56] My current husband [David Hill] is totally self-sufficient. He does his own laundry; he does his own cooking. I traveled so much to do all of these books over the last twenty-four years, but David wasn’t bothered by that at all. He just continued doing what he had always done, which was take care of his fair share of everything. But in the late 1960s and early 1970s, that was not what men did. They worked, and then they did other things that interested them. For Rob, that was sculpture. But he certainly didn’t take care of the baby. 31 Du: Because that’s not what men did, did you have different expectations, or did you take it upon yourself to work these two jobs and also do all these other-Gianturco: I took it upon myself to do all those other things and work two jobs. Du: [00:36:54] Wow. I’d love to talk about the period after you started your own business and transitioned out of your job at Joseph Magnin. Where did you go next? Gianturco: I was hired by the first women-owned advertising agency, [Hall & Levine Advertising]. That was what I did immediately after JM. That was really an interesting experience because there were no precedents. We couldn’t look to other women-owned businesses as models. At one point, we had seventy-five women working together, and the government told us that that was discrimination. We had to hire men. [laughs] I am sure that didn’t happen to anybody else. [00:38:00] Ultimately, [Hall & Levine] was acquired by Foote, Cone & Belding, which was at that point a very large international agency. The executives of our agency had to go through annual [executive physicals, which included the things that Foote, Cone] would test men for, like prostate cancer. We said, “Forget it.” There simply were no patterns for having a women-owned business, so we were making it up as we went along. We did some things that were atypical. ` The agency was located in midtown Los Angeles next to Lafayette Park. We looked at this beautiful park and all of the apartments around it, 32 and we said, “This is a neighborhood where everybody is living in silos. Why don’t we have lunch hour concerts and picnics in the park?” We did that every month, once a month, and the people came out of their apartment buildings and joined us. We arranged to have the Los Angeles city music groups come and perform. It was great. Nobody else was doing that, and as a result the neighborhood became a community, which it hadn’t been before. The law had just been passed [allowing] employee stock ownership plans, ESOPs, and we in the management group of [Hall & Levine] decided that we would have an ESOP, which meant that all of the employees got stock in the company. [00:40:11] [Everyone was] vested in the stock of Hall & Levine when they came to work there. That was really atypical. I don’t know another agency--or, in fact, another business--that was yet doing that. The principals--I was not yet one, although I became one later--often testified to the California Commission on the Status of Women because women were so badly represented in advertising and communications at that point. It was really shocking. [00:40:57] We knew that women did not go to shop at Safeway, for example, wearing their bedroom slippers [with their] hair in curlers pushing a shopping basket around. I mean, that is dopey. One of the real contributions that we could make to our clients--and one of the reasons that clients came to us--was that we would represent women with [respect and dignity in ads]. 33 For example, we launched Neutrogena soap and understood the fact that it doesn’t harm your skin, because it is a neutral soap. That was a very scientific approach to selling soap. Everybody else was selling soap as a beauty product. [00:41:54] One of our clients was Catalina Swimwear and Sportswear. During that time, women in swimwear ads were draping themselves nonsensically across the hood of cars. What? [laughs] We wrote poetry about being on the beach, and how free that feels. Our ads didn’t look or sound like anybody else’s. We were really breaking barriers in that way as well. Du: The management team at Hall & Levine, including yourself, were they all women? What was the gender ratio? Gianturco: They were one hundred percent women for a long time.1 Du: [00:42:51] How do you think that your company and your work at Hall & Levine changed the playing field for women not only at work, but also in the way they were represented in commercials and in advertisements? Gianturco: Our work was trendsetting. I was there fourteen years. By the end of that fourteen-year period, we had lost our competitive advantage because other agencies were getting better at understanding how to communicate to women. [As women became more and more central to the family spending role], it was crucially important that everyone in advertising understood how women made decisions and why. 1 Note from Paola Gianturco: Before the agency closed in 1981, there were two male vice presidents. 34 [00:44:04] I don’t know how much our agency was specifically responsible for that shift, but we were definitely a participant in that shift. Du: I have noticed a lot today how forward-thinking you are and how this has been a trend since before you had even gone to college. When you were working at Hall & Levine, were the other women there very forward-thinking [and did they push] you to think a lot more out of the box, too? Where did you look for inspiration during these very innovative and ground-setting years? Gianturco: [00:44:53] Hm. You’re right. We were doing things that didn’t provide us with role models. I looked to Joan Levine and Adrienne Hall, who were the founding partners. Joan Levine was particularly insightful about this. She was the creative head of the agency. I remember her talking with me at some length, on an ongoing basis, about women and power. I was very fearful about assuming a powerful role, because women were not supposed to do that. I was afraid of what I saw as the necessary trade-offs between being feminine and being powerful. [00:45:50] I remember Joan’s explaining specifically that power is not something you wield over other people. Power comes from behind your belt; that in fact you are powerful and that is a mode of being that you can access and use. It was a completely different definition from what I had assumed “power” meant. It was really Joan and Adrienne who were my role models. Adrienne was responsible for business development. That required a very assertive stance. Ultimately, when I joined Saatchi & Saatchi, that was my role. She 35 managed accounts [at Hall & Levine]; I was ultimately an account strategist [at Saaatchi and Saatachi]. [00:46:52] I learned things about business from Adrienne, and she also led me into extracurricular activities that were really interesting. She sponsored me to be a volunteer at the Los Angeles County Art Museum, for example. I volunteered in the Art Rental Gallery, which meant I got to go out and visit the artists in Southern California who were really pushing boundaries at that point. The traditional definition of “artist” was exploded in the late 1960s when Pop Art was happening. [laughs] I remember one exhibit in which there was a big tub of bubbling mud. [00:47:52] Collectors were just freaking out. The amount of money they had poured into art for their walls was in danger, and there were all of these strange things happening. I was part of that, in a way, thanks to Adrienne. There were many new things happening that were breaking down traditions in the 1960s and 1970s. Although I wasn’t part of a hippie commune--I was definitely part of groups of people who were thinking beyond what was traditional. Du: How do you think other people viewed you and the women that you were working with? Gianturco: [00:49:01] I think clients expected that we had some kind of secret inside knowledge that they really needed. Clients were very respectful of us 36 because we were playing this role that provided services and perspectives that were required to be effective and successful in business. We had lots of applicants to be student interns, for example; women applied to work with us, as opposed to applying to work in agencies that were mostly populated by men. Girls and women both viewed us with a great deal of respect and saw us as real trend-makers and tradition-breakers, which was a happy circumstance. [00:50:08] I would say to an applicant for a student intern job, “I will trade you baby-sitting my son for working with me half a day at the agency every week.” I would take all of my extra work home and teach her. We were inventing weird solutions because, as I said, there wasn’t much precedent. Du: Did you mentor anyone during your time at Hall & Levine? What was that like? Gianturco: [00:50:47] Yes, I mentored this woman [Robin Ryan] I was just talking about who came to work for us when she was a student at UCLA. She ended up working for us when she graduated fulltime, and later became a product manager for Bayer Aspirin and then later managed the McDonald’s account in New York. While she was in Los Angeles, she continued to take care of my son, who still considers her his big sister. Yes, I mentored lots of people, both formally and informally. Du: That’s amazing. I would love to transition now into your next job at Saatchi & Saatchi. What did you do after your tenure at Hall & Levine ended, and how did you find your way into Saatchi & Saatchi? 37 Gianturco: [00:51:52] The shift happened one morning during a Stanford reunion. I had flown up to the Bay Area. I had been on my class’s twentieth Stanford reunion committee. This must have been 1981. My great friend from Stanford, Linda Clever, was a Stanford trustee for a while and had been my friend from the beginning. She was president and I was vice president of Roble Hall when we were sponsors. Linda was giving a breakfast for some women in our class. My life was falling apart in every way. The agency [Hall & Levine] was closing. I was about to be divorced. Everything was up; all my roots were being pulled out at the same time. I walked into Linda’s house, and she said, “How are you doing with your midlife crisis?” [00:53:01] I said, “Well, it’s really a mess.” She said, “What do you want to do?” I said, “Well, I think I’d like to come back and work in Northern California.” She said, “Okay. I will introduce you to a friend of mine who runs an advertising agency, and he can tell you who to interview with.” That was David Hill, who has now been my husband for thirty years. David had started a subsidiary of an agency that was ultimately acquired by Saatchi & Saatchi. I joined his corporate communications subsidiary as a result of Linda’s introduction. I was responsible for business development, for supervising clients, and was a communications strategist for nine years. 38 [00:54:08] We worked with corporate clients all over the country. We had offices in San Francisco and New York. Suddenly I realized that I was working almost exclusively with men. Du: Were you living in New York now? Gianturco: No, I was living in San Francisco, but working all over the country. My son was then twelve or thirteen. I was doing daytrips all over the country so that I could get back [home at night]. Oh my goodness, it was a crazy time. I was working with Fortune 500 companies in Chicago, [New York, Denver…] Du: I would love to have you explain more about what it was like to transition into an almost exclusively male-dominated workplace. Gianturco: [00:55:03] It was bizarre. Nothing about it was like working only with women. The degree of constant competition was a real eye-opener. I had come out of an environment in which collaboration was an assumption. We competed at Hall & Levine with outside agencies for business, and there was nothing wrong with our competitive bone, I assure you. But we didn’t compete among ourselves. [The competitiveness] was a big surprise. [00:56:03] The degree to which business socializing affected business--whether on the golf course, in the men’s room, or other places I wasn’t allowed--amazed me. [laughs] What was going on? There was no way to figure out how to get into that circle. I was sometimes the only woman in meetings for six months at a time because I was very senior by this time, and I had been in this business for years. I was admitted [to the inner circle], but in client meetings there were no other women. They were outside the door someplace. That was a 39 big surprise. [00:57:07] I met all kinds of men as new business prospects. Some, trying to make friends with me, would tease me by mispronouncing my name, which makes me crazy. I think men didn’t know what to do with me, and I didn’t know what to do with them. It was like going to another planet. Du: How do you think you were able to be successful in such an environment, which was so different than what you were used to? Gianturco: [00:58:01] I was very analytical and tried to figure out what the game was that I didn’t know. I remember writing and delivering a speech called “Rules of the Game,” which I had been invited to present at a women’s conference [at Northwestern Michigan College]. I spilled the beans on what I thought were the assumptions. I remember that I started by explaining that unless you were willing to lead the orchestra, as opposed to just play in the orchestra, you lost and so forth. [00:58:51] I gave that speech, and the Traverse City Record-Eagle, the local newspaper--starving for news, no doubt--ran a banner headline about my speech. Apparently, they felt very threatened because not only did they use this as the lead story, but they also had a follow-on with man-in-thestreet interviews: “Gianturco says that this is how you should get ahead in business. What do you think of that?” The paper was swamped with letters to the editor because I had [cracked the code]. The fabulous son of a good friend of mine, who happens to live near Traverse City, wrote the paper and said, “I’ve known Paola Gianturco since I was sixteen, and she has integrity and is worthy of 40 your respect,” and essentially, “Lay off.” [01:00:04] It was wonderful. He was so young when he wrote this letter. But his was almost the sole positive male voice in this onslaught of attacks. I had no idea this was going on. My friend Mary Sutherland wrote me and sent me all of these articles, and I thought, “What?” I’m so glad I had people defending me. Du: What was this women’s conference? What was it for? Gianturco: Northwestern Michigan College had a women’s studies program at that point, and they were sponsoring a women’s executive leadership program. It was run by my friend Mary Sutherland [who invited me to speak]. I said, “Of course I’m coming.” Du: [01:01:04] Who were the other women speaking at the conference? Gianturco: I can’t remember. But I was definitely a voice in the wilderness. Oh my goodness. [laughs] Du: I’d love to go back to what you just said about your friend who vouched for you at the time of this newspaper onslaught. During your time at Saatchi & Saatchi, did you find other men who would vouch for your success and help propel you? Gianturco: When I was at Hall & Levine or when I was at Saatchi? Du: When you were at Saatchi & Saatchi in this almost exclusively male environment. Gianturco: [01:01:52] Yes. One was David Hill. David Hill was president of the subsidiary that I joined, and he introduced me to clients and new business 41 prospects with a flier that said, “POWOWLA.” [laughs] In fact, he later made this [play on my name into a] pretend license plate, which made me laugh. That flier introduced me with all of my professional credentials. [01:02:43] He was a wonderful mentor. I had a really awful client who, unbeknownst to me, took a commercial that we had created for them and had it re-edited locally. I found out about that because I was there for a client meeting and saw the commercial, which we had not made in that way. It was awful. I had no idea how to brook this discussion or to call out the client for having double-crossed us, for having not been willing to discuss this with us, and for having not been willing to cop to the fact that he was not happy with what we had done. It was a revelation about the degree of trust that didn’t exist, and I had no idea how to tackle that problem. [01:03:55] I remember sitting with David, who coached me about how to have that conversation. I said, “I’ve got to go and deal with this, but I don’t have any idea how to.” He told me exactly how to do it. He was really consistent in opening my eyes to this strange new world that I was inhabiting, and that was a big help. He really was a champion. Du: That’s incredible. Gianturco: He and I, however, came from very different worlds, so we had to work hard to figure out how to balance the two and use both. Du: What world did David come from? Gianturco: Well, David had--his whole working life--worked mostly with men. 42 Du: [01:05:00] Were you ever in any situations in which people doubted you in the professional workplace because of your gender? Gianturco: I don’t think so, but here is a strange thing to confess. When my hair went white, all of a sudden people listened to me. I always looked so young. I don’t think it was a matter of gender but instead, a matter of looking like a child for such a long time. [laughs] It was a hard-earned credential. Du: [01:06:07] What do you think were some of your personal qualities and characteristics that helped you be very successful and continue rising through the ranks during your time at Saatchi & Saatchi? Gianturco: I worked really hard. It was very important. The old saying is that women have to work twice as hard as men do in order to be acknowledged as accomplished. That really was true for me. I worked really, really hard. Du: [01:06:57] And can you tell me about some of the most exciting campaigns that you worked on during your time at Saatchi & Saatchi? Gianturco: Boise Cascade was one of our clients. Public perceptions of corporations are not positive in many ways, [but on top of that], Boise Cascade was a paper company that cut down trees. They planted six trees for every one they cut. we knew that; nobody else seemed to know that. [01:07:54] [Positioning Boise Cascade] as a responsible corporation was our charge. David was the creative director and we, as the strategic communications team, thought that there was no way to make a claim about [corporate responsibility] that would be convincing. We recommended that Boise Cascade open up all of its plants to the public and conduct tours of their forests so people could see. The 43 assumption was that people would then draw their own conclusions about Boise’s corporate responsibility and that Boise’s actions would provide them with a more positive reputation than anything we could claim and communicate in advertising or commercials. [01:08:58] It was a big deal to [open those plants to the public]. The communications people approved it, and the CEO approved it. It meant that all of the operating units had to open their facilities to the public. The ad campaign that year featured children learning about papermaking as a result of going on the tours. It was very unusual in the world of corporate advertising, which tends to [make self-interested claims]. [01:09:47] I mean, listen to corporate advertising. Corporations always talk about themselves. [laughs] They never have children talking about them. They never are as transparent as we asked our client to be. It was a campaign that really stood out then and in fact I think [it still would]. Du: I want to go back to your relationship with David. When did you get married? Was this during your time at Saatchi or near the beginning? Gianturco: I married David in 1988. I joined his company in 1981. He got divorced about 1984 or 1985, and I suddenly realized that he was a man as well as my boss. [01:10:53] We had, by this time, figured out how to balance our differences and use them. Each time we made a new adjustment, we grew closer until suddenly we were nose to nose. So, we got married in 1988. It was expected that we would talk with his boss, the president of Saatchi & Saatchi in New York, and explain that we were going to get 44 married. Pete McSpadden said, “That’s okay. We can transfer Paola,” because it was really unusual to have a husband and wife working together. We had already talked to all of our clients. We said, “In the interest of full disclosure, we are going to get married.” In fact, we invited them to our wedding. It was really fun to have a wedding with all the clients there. [01:12:01] There was nothing secret about this, and they knew that we were a good team and that David was number one in the company and I was essentially number two in the company. But it was, nonetheless, atypical in 1988 to have a husband and wife working together. We continued to work together until the mid-1990s. At first, I was still working at Saatchi fulltime, and then later I started my own consultancy and continued to work for some of the Saatchi clients. [The mid-1990s] was a transitional time. Du: When you were informing [everyone] that you and David were married and the reaction was, “We can transfer Paola,” what was your response? Gianturco: [01:13:04] David’s response was immediate. He said, “No, we’re not doing that.” I didn’t even have to talk about it. Du: Did you ever consider for a second that after you had gotten married you would put a pause on your work and take a break? What were your thoughts after you got married with regards to your career? Gianturco: [Post-wedding, everything at work] was just the same. We were just married as opposed to not having been married. David and I continued to be very different in our approach to everything. Accountably, I will think X, and he will think Y. 45 That continues to this day. I have finally come to understand that listening to David’s ideas is a good thing to do. [laughs] Oh my goodness, it took me a long time. [01:13:59] We did a book together. The third book in my set of six is a book that I didn’t expect to do, and I didn’t have time to do. I was already working on another book. But I had this whole body of work [photographs of Guatemala], and the publisher said they wanted to do a book [about that country]. I said, “David, can you write this book? Use my pictures. Just take it from here.” David had the idea that we would interview people in Guatemala. We went to Guatemala and began doing the interviews. Every question that I had was different from every question David had. We were having a tug-of-war in these interviews. The interpreters thought we were crazy. The people we were interviewing thought we were crazy. We were mad. I was mad. [01:14:54] David really upset the applecart. The book had already been designed, and David said, “I think this should be a bilingual book.” There was no space for a second language in this book. I promised myself that I would listen to David’s ideas, and would not respond for twenty-four hours. I walked all the way around that idea in my mind, and suddenly I thought, “Oh my God, he’s right. The people in the book should be able to read it. It should be in Spanish and English.” The publisher had never done a bilingual book. I called the publisher, who had already published two of my books, and said, “How would you feel 46 about redesigning this book?” And they said, “Great, if you find the person to translate it, we’ll do it.” It was a good idea. That was a good life lesson. [laughs] I had--until then-- just come out fighting to defend my ideas, which I had learned was part of the game. Du: [01:16:09] I’d also love to hear about your time in business. During the 1960s, a lot of the women’s movement and the sexual revolution was happening. I was wondering how these outside influences affected your work, the projects that you worked on for your clients, and the types of advertisements that you were making for them. Gianturco: I was reading all of the books at the beginning of the women’s movement, but I wasn’t really engaged--none of us were really engaged in the women’s movement. [01:17:05] The [movement began] in academia and moved out, thanks to Gloria Steinem, whom I knew as the founder of Ms. Magazine. She came to pitch us to run ads in the magazine. I knew her as a professional associate as opposed to someone who was running the movement. In fact, Ms. didn’t want business from most of our clients because [when they started] in 1972, they really wanted to focus on advertisers of cars and products that were being sold mostly to men. [01:18:04] They weren’t interested in [“women’s products” like] Neutrogena soap, which was in the category of health and beauty aids. They weren’t interested in Catalina Swimwear, which of course was categorized as 47 fashion. Our clients weren’t that interesting to them, but as a courtesy the Ms. staff would come, visit us and pitch us to advertise in Ms. That and testifying at the Status of Women Commission were the activities that brought us closest to the [women’s] movement. I think that women’s increasing awareness of their role and potential affected our clients powerfully. Otherwise, they wouldn’t have come to us for this inside knowledge that they assumed we had, and the fact is we did [have]. [01:19:06] [Most Hall & Levine women] were one hundred percent focused on the business and on our families. We were a very tight, sort of insular organization, worrying about how we could do our work well and grow the agency at a time when the environment in which we were trying to do that was at best polarized, and at worst not encouraging us to flourish. We were very focused on our work and on our families. Du: Earlier you mentioned testifying on the Status of Women Commission. Could you talk about that more? What was that? Gianturco: [01:19:57] I didn’t do that. Adrienne and Joan did that. There were new government commissions on the status of women looking at [and exploring] women’s issues. In general, discrimination against women was being examined. Du: During the time that you were working in business as well in the 1960s and 1970s, there were many gendered advertisements that were made and targeted to women. Did you ever participate in making commercials specifically for women? What was it like to participate in the making of those sorts of advertisements? 48 Gianturco: [01:20:56] When I was at Hall & Levine, 100 percent of our work was targeted toward women. Toward the end of my fourteen years there, we actually had Subaru as a client because finally the car business was waking up to the fact that women made decisions about buying cars. It wasn’t a general fact [that was] accepted in the industry. [Manufacturers had previously assumed that women decided the color of the cars families purchased, but]…lo and behold! Virtually all of our clients sold products to women, which is why they came to us. For example, for niche foods, we introduced ramen in the United States. We had kids [slurps] slurping noodles. As I mentioned, for Catalina Swimwear we ran print ads with poems about being on the beach and how great it is to be on the beach. [01:22:26] Catalina had seventeen different divisions of men’s and women’s sportswear and swimwear, and we did communications for all seventeen divisions. Once we photographed them in Tahiti with UTA French Airlines and the Tahiti Tourist Board as collaborative partners. We were actually pitching both of those two clients for their business. [01:23:05] The Tahiti Tourist Board said, “We’re hoping to grow the black pearl business here because we have to offset the only source of revenue we have--tourism. We’ve got to have something else. We’re going to give you a bunch of black pearls. Put them on the models as you shoot.” Well, you don’t exactly wear your best black pearls with your Catalina T-shirt. [laughs] But we figured out how to [showcase the pearls]. The client, a woman, and I got up at the crack of dawn [one morning and], with the art 49 director and the model, paddled out in an outrigger canoe to the reef that surrounded Moorea, the Tahitian island where we were working. [01:23:57] The idea was to have the model stand in her swimming suit wearing a black pearl necklace, looking fabulous--standing, seemingly, on the water--the reef, invisible, was one inch below [the water’s surface]. Suddenly the tide came in and upended the client, the model, and the art director. It was amazing. I swam from the reef to the shore and said in my best high school French, “We have a problem. Help us. Help us.” This little kid whom I found on this shore jumped in his outrigger canoe and helped everybody. Before I swam ashore, I had gone diving for a plastic bag [that contained] $150,000 worth of black pearls, which I had with me in my canoe. I remember wondering if I should save the client or the pearls. [laughs] What responsibility did I have? [01:25:04] We were laughing. Did anyone know if workman’s compensation covered drowning in the South Pacific? We had great adventures making these commercials and these ads. Many adventures. Du: Wow, that sounds incredible. [End of Part 1 of 3 - Interview with Paola Gianturco - May 12, 2018] 50 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD ALUMNI INTERVIEWS - PIONEERING WOMEN INTERVIEWEE: PAOLA GIANTURCO INTERVIEWER: MELISSA DU DATE OF INTERVIEW: MAY 12, 2018 PART: 2 OF 3 Du: I’d like to jump back to the end of your tenure at Saatchi & Saatchi. What was the transition as you were thinking about the end of your tenure? What were you thinking about next? Gianturco: I had--in a very sort of desultory way--been thinking about the possibility of doing something else, because after you have done anything for what was then almost thirty years, you lust after a change. [00:01:02] But I had gotten nowhere in my thinking. I would walk around on Mt. Tam [Mount Tamalpais] and think, “What next? What now?” I was too senior to start again at the beginning. I had a reputation, and I was well paid. I couldn’t envision what a natural next step would be, and I walked around the mountain and I walked around the mountain. I decided that I would write a book about the glass ceiling. [00:01:43] I realized that I knew a huge amount about working only with women and then working only with men through my own life experience, but that I had no sort of theoretical framework, no way to 51 generalize that experience. If I really wanted to do a book about the glass ceiling, I needed to get up to speed. I had the idea that I would use my one-month vacation--whoever has time to take a one-month vacation? Nobody. Not me. I thought, “I could use that time. I’ll take it in half-day increments and go back to Stanford and take courses in women’s studies--” because nobody was teaching women’s studies when I was there--and see if I can figure out what I can say about the glass ceiling that might be of interest to people. [00:03:00] I arranged to take Tuesday and Thursday afternoons off, and I signed up for a number of courses over the next couple of years. I didn’t care if they were undergraduate or graduate courses or continuing education. I took all of them. I took courses as diverse as “The Psychology of Women” and “Women in Organizations” and “Women in Theology.” I didn’t care, and I wasn’t taking any of these classes for grades, although I had to take the tests. I really wanted to learn--and to be intentional about learning--about women’s studies in general. [00:03:55] Having access to the libraries was a big plus. When I wasn’t taking classes those afternoons, I would go to the libraries and do research. Suddenly I had access to all the libraries, which was fabulous. I could look at trends that I suspected might be responsible for keeping the glass ceiling in place historically. I could look for years either direction. I could look cross culturally. Ultimately, I identified eleven or twelve different factors that I 52 thought [contributed to keeping the glass ceiling in place]. I began plotting a matrix of those factors. Du: What were some of these factors? Gianturco: [00:05:02] I was seeing trends in religions, for example. There are many ways that religions are a factor in defining women’s potential roles plus what is and isn’t acceptable in public and private life. Various cultures are completely different in their views of women. There are, of course, some matrilineal cultures still. I later discovered that we really [should not want to live in] matrilineal cultures, any more than in patrilineal cultures, or patriarchal, or matriarchal cultures. Anybody wielding power over anybody else is, in general, a bad idea. [00:06:03] I wanted to look at cultural differences because culture definitely helps define women’s roles. I wanted to look at, anyway, many different factors like that. I never finished the matrix because I had a call from [a dean at] Mills College, who had heard through some friend that I was working on this. She asked if I would be interested in teaching a course about women and leadership as a Mills executive course. I said, “Phew, I just don’t have time to develop a course, but let me think about it.” I realized that a friend who lived in the East Bay was working also on issues about women and organizations, [and I thought she might be willing to develop and teach this course] with me--and that it would be fun to do it together. [00:07:08] So we developed a course called Women and Leadership 53 and taught it at once at Mills. Friends at Stanford heard about the fact that we were teaching there. Now that I think about it, this may have even been Estelle [Estelle Freedman], because I invited Susan Krieger, Estelle’s friend, to teach one of those Mills classes with us. It might have been Estelle who was responsible for Stanford’s invitation. The director of what was then called the Institute for Research on Women and Gender contacted me and said that they would like to [offer our course as a summer] executive institute.2 [We taught Women and Leadership at] Stanford the next year and taught that course, an eight-day seminar, four times. Some of the companies that had sent women to that course--AT&T and Pacific Bell among them-asked us if we would teach the course onsite at their companies for Stanford credit, which we did. Within a very short period of time, maybe a couple of years, we had taught that eight-day course twelve times on top of the consulting that I was still doing all over the country. [00:08:59] The effect of that was, [first] I was just exhausted. Second, I had earned two years’ worth of money in one year because I was doing two jobs. Third, I had a million frequent flyer miles. I could [fly anyplace free] and stay anyplace free because hotels take frequent flyer miles too. I began dreaming about not teaching about Women and Leadership. I had now moved beyond the glass ceiling. The year 1995 was the year of Editor’s Note: The Institute for Research on Women and Gender is now called the Michelle R. Clayman Institute for Gender Research. 2 54 the Beijing conference--the UN’s Fourth World Conference on Women. I was teaching at Stanford while that conference was going on. All of us were watching what was happening in Beijing. We would watch the news every night to see what was going on over there, and all of us were very excited about it. Du: This was a world conference? Gianturco: [00:09:55] This was the UN Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, and there were something like 30,000 people there, women who were involved with NGOs, women who were involved with the UN. They were focused on women’s issues exclusively. One of the pieces of research that was released there--I read about it in The Economist --was that women in the developing world were sending their children to school with the money they earned. In many cultures men were given the prerogative to spend the money they earn on whatever they want: bicycles, beer, radios. Not yet cell phones, but later cell phones. And women inevitably were the ones who were left with the responsibility for feeding and educating the children. I thought, “My God, the [women] are heroic.” [00:11:02] This was also at the time that women were beginning to start their own microbusinesses using microloans, although-Du: And this is in the United States? Gianturco: Outside of the United States. Although no one was yet much talking about microloans. I thought, “I would love to go and talk with these women who are starting their own businesses”--because my whole life had been in large 55 corporations--“and see what it’s like for them.” I also wanted to document the fact that they were essentially taking on responsibility for the next generation and affecting not just their families, but their communities and their countries and all of us. [00:11:51] I had this germinal idea about what I wanted to do at that time. First of all, I decided I would take one year off, as a sabbatical. I knew people who took sabbaticals. I said goodbye to the clients, and I promised myself [that while I was on sabbatical] I would only do what I loved most, which was photography and travel. I had learned photography from my father. He put a camera in my hands when I was eight. I was not a professional photography by a longshot. I promised myself I would do, in addition to things I loved the most, what I wanted to learn next, which was about women starting their own businesses. [00:12:51] That turned out to be the first book. I thought it would be simple to do a photographic book, and that I didn’t have to be a writer, which I wasn’t. I could just do photo captions. I had taken pictures for a long time. I assumed I could take pictures. Nobody had done any photo books about women around the world at that point. I had always collected folk art, as you can see. I thought, “I have to know something about what I’m doing here, so I’m going to focus on craftswomen starting their own businesses in order to send their children to school.” [00:13:57] That turned into the first book, which is called In Her Hands: Craftswomen Changing Our World. That was a labyrinthine, transitional 56 time. I didn’t at any point say to myself, “I’m going to stop being in business, and now I’m going to do books.” But as you can see, I just sort of eked into it, finding my way as I went. Sometime during that year--I was traveling--I was driving across the breadbasket of Bolivia, having interviewed women all day. I was standing in the back of a Toyota pickup truck taking pictures as the sun went down. It was so glorious. I thought, “I have never had so much fun in my working life as I did today. I’m not going back to business.” And I didn’t. Du: [00:14:59] Wow. I would love to go back to when you decided on the idea for In Her Hands for your first book. What were your next steps? What did you do after you got the idea? How did you learn what making a book was like? Gianturco: By doing it. [laughs] I had no idea even what I had to learn. I thought I had everything I needed to know--oh my God, it was so much more complicated than I knew. What I knew was that I wanted to interview craftswomen, and so job one was trying to find craftswomen to interview. I used all of the connections with everybody I had ever known to find those craftswomen [plus connections from] people I didn’t know. [00:15:58] I would walk into stores and see things made in other places. I would ask the people [who owned the store] who they bought the objects from. How did they get them? Who made them? Where were they? I spent a week doing research in the library at the International Museum of Folk Art in Santa Fe--I explained to them that I wanted to do a book about craftswomen making crafts that were considered “women’s 57 crafts.” They said, “Well, that’s very interesting. Nobody has ever done a book exactly like that.” I said, “Oh, good.” So the curators of the museum began bringing in books they had about crafts that were being made by women. It turned out that crafts are segregated by sex; there are crafts that only men do and only women do. [00:17:01] For example, women tend to do weaving with back-strap looms or simple looms, and men tend to do weaving with foot looms or mechanical looms. As soon as there is a way to mechanize the production, men step in because [they see that there is money to be made]. Women tend to do [weaving] by hand. This is also true of ceramics. For example, women tend to do ceramics made by [rubs hands together] rolling clay in their hands, by the coil method, and men tend to use pottery wheels. Now more [men and women] do both. There really were women’s crafts. That’s what I wanted to feature in In Her Hands, which meant doing a lot of work trying to figure out which were women’s crafts--and where were the women’s crafts made. [00:18:07] I discovered when I talked with women rug weavers in Turkey that they were laughing because they had just been to some kind of a weaving conference, and there were Iranian men making rugs. They couldn’t believe men were making rugs in Iran. That’s women’s work. So that first book was really a project that explored much more than just the idea that women were raising their children and educating them, but 58 also looked at these collateral gender issues about women and crafts. Do you want to see that book? I’ll show you that book. I invited a friend to do that book with me. [sounds of a book being picked up] Ta-da. Du: [00:19:04] Wow. Gianturco: I must have used this for something. This was a library copy that I bought. Anyway, it was a really pretty book. Du: This is incredible. Gianturco: Toby Tuttle, who was my coauthor, was a woman whom I had hired at Hall & Levine. She wasn’t a photographer or a writer, either. So we were both helping each other and totally at sea. [laughs] Du: How did you ask her to come onto this project with you? Gianturco: Her husband had almost as many frequent flier miles as I had, and I said, “Do you think Tim would give you some frequent flier miles, and would you like to do this book with me?” [00:19:57] Both of us took the photographs, and both of us did the writing. We went to twelve countries and interviewed ninety craftswomen about their work and their children. So that was the beginning. I must say it wasn’t as easy as that. [laughs] It sure was fun to travel around. We had a great time--met people and loved talking with women around the world. Oh, another thing I did--before I leave the preparation stage: I found an anthropologist who had written about crafts, particularly about rug weavers, who taught at Indiana University. I went there and interviewed him because I was worried about [whether the women] would tell me anything 59 about their lives. [00:21:09] I mean, I am not from their culture. For sure, I am better educated than they are because most of the craftswomen were illiterate. People think there is gold in the streets of the United States. So if you say, “This American is coming to interview you,” that isn’t exactly like an introduction to your next-door neighbor. I thought, “I really have to talk to somebody who’s done a lot of work in these cultures who can tell me how to do these interviews.” That was another aspect of the preparation. Du: How did you find him? Gianturco: Reading, as always. Reading, reading, reading. He said, “Sit down next to her at the loom and ask her what she’s doing and be interested in her work.” I was used to marketing research. That’s not where you start! [laughs] [00:22:09] [Marketing research] turned out to be, by the way, a pernicious legacy. I had written 116 questions that I was going to ask each woman because I was determined that the input from each country would be identical so that I could draw some cross-cultural conclusions. Try doing an interview in which you’re using a translator for every question and every answer--and you have to get to 116 questions. You can’t do that. Also, [that approach] overlooks the potential for really rich stories. You can’t veer off and follow the lead of the person you’re talking to. You are stuck with this list of 116 questions. That was a lesson. Du: [00:22:59] What were some of the questions on that list? 60 Gianturco: I wanted to know everything: how did they learn their crafts, how did they meet their husband, how many children did they have. It went on and on and on. I learned very quickly that if you’re interviewing in Muslim countries and they have to pray every four hours, [laughs] you get interrupted, and then you get interrupted again. It takes forever. You can’t do that. There were many things for me to learn! Du: Can you go back and tell me more about how you found these women as you were preparing back in Santa Fe? You were doing a lot of research in the library. How did you find women in these countries, and how did you get in contact with them? Gianturco: I would walk into stores and see folk art and say, “Who made that, and where did you buy it?” [00:23:54] I learned about an organization called the Crafts Center, which is a nonprofit no longer in existence, but used to work with lowincome artisans in seventy-nine countries. I went and talked with them and said, “You work with low-income artisans in seventy-nine countries. Tell me who’s doing the most interesting work.” I talked to friends and scholars who were working in art and knew about crafts. I talked to people in museums. I talked to everybody I knew who ever bought crafts. Finding twelve locations was a snap. The hardest thing was to pare it down to twelve. I finally figured out how to balance the kind of crafts and 61 the geographies and the ethnicities and all of the things that I wanted to have balanced in the book. Du: [00:25:08] Can you also tell me more--especially because this was your first book--about how you learned to do professional photography and also about writing the book? What was it like to learn these [skills], and what were some of your challenges? Gianturco: [laughs] Oh my goodness. We had a fabulous book designer, but if you look at the photographs in In Her Hands, the fact is that these are not very snazzy photographs. [sounds of pages turning]. [Mostly portraits]. [00:26:01] I looked at these pictures after the book came out, and I thought, “You know what, I could have practically taken these pictures in my living room. You don’t have any sense of where you are.” I thought, “I have really got to learn how to expand my vision to include environments.” [The problem was, I was very nearsighted]. [00:27:01] After this book came out and I thought, “This was so much fun. I want to do more books.” [My next] thought [was], “I have got to learn to be a better photographer.” I began taking classes from National Geographic photographers who were teaching both at the Santa Fe Photographic Workshops and at the Maine Photographic Workshops--which are now called the Maine Media Workshops. Those were one or two-week courses with these superbly qualified photographers who work all over the world and who understand how to work all over the world, which is what I needed to know in addition to how 62 to do the taking-pictures part. I took probably seven or eight of those workshops from people who were really luminous at this kind of photography, people like Alex Webb, David Alan Harvey, Bill Allen, people whose work I really admire. [00:28:10] I learned a huge amount. These are very demanding teachers and very small groups of photographers, most of them professional photographers. I learned the most from Alex Webb, who is known for very complicated photography that is intricately composed in layers. For example, if you were taking a picture of me, you might start by including the microphone and then me and what’s behind me, and you would expect something interesting to be happening at all of those levels. [00:29:01] This was visually a huge challenge for me because, as I said, I’m so nearsighted that I focus on you and nothing else. It doesn’t matter what’s behind you. It doesn’t matter what’s in front of you, much less what’s to the side you. I worked with Alex Webb in Cuba for a ten-day workshop. I set my camera to wide angle, and I set it on a very small aperture, which meant everything would be in focus all the way back through all of those layers. I forced myself to learn how to see a different way. I looked at those first pictures, and I thought, “Who took these?” because it required a completely different perspective from what I had. 63 Du: [00:30:04] Can you talk a little bit more about this different perspective? What does it mean to see more in different layers beyond just what’s in front of you? Gianturco: Well, it’s much more complicated. It makes it possible to tell a story contextually as opposed to simplistically focusing only on the person. I might now shoot you at this moment in a way that would allow the viewer to see the bookcase behind you and the photographs on the wall and the little foreign dolls to your right, and suddenly I would have a sense of Melissa in context, which would be more information than I ever had in the photographs that were in In Her Hands. [00:31:18] [My pictures are] much richer now. It is very, very hard to do multiple-layer compositions. I have never really mastered that. I continue to work on it. I will never be anything close to as good as Alex Webb, but I continue to admire his work more than anyone else’s. Du: What are some of the challenges of multilayer photographs? Gianturco: [00:31:59] It requires sitting and waiting. Let’s pretend we’re out on the street. I want people walking behind you and in front of you and reflected in the window, and I want that composition to be important and engaging at all of those levels. I have to wait for something like that to happen. These images are not posed. And you have to have a very acute eye and a very fast finger, because it may be that that kind of composition happens once in twentyfour hours. [laughs] [00:32:44] You really have to be consistently aware and intentional 64 about what you’re photographing. It’s not just capturing a moment. It is capturing one moment that is composed at all of the layers that you’re including in the frame. Try it. It is amazingly difficult. Du: And I’d also love now to talk a little bit more about the text of In Her Hands. How did you learn to write for this book? Gianturco: Since I’m married to a writer, you would think that I might have said, “David, help me learn how to write.” I was so shy about my writing that I never let David read anything except the introduction to that book and only after I had sent it already to the publisher. [00:33:57] I joined a writing group in San Francisco. It was run by a fabulous writer, a Turkish woman who wrote screenplays and nonfiction and fiction and fables and children’s stories. Her name is Alev Lytle Croutier. She’s very talented. She had a women’s writing group that met every Tuesday, and I would busily write for a week and then take what I had written and read it out loud. The people who were in that group ranged from poets to lyricists to a woman writing erotica. There were eight of us, all writing completely different genres. Most of them were published; not me. [00:34:52] I could somehow--in that emotionally-neutral environment--gather my courage and read what I had written that week. Because there was continuity, participants had a sense of the whole project by the time I got to the end. I should say: I did all of this writing and all of this photography 65 before I had a publisher, much less an agent, much less any of the things that are required to do and have before you get to either one. Du: What did this mean for the journey of you making In Her Hands? Gianturco: It meant the book got completely made before I was sure it was going to be seen by anybody. [laughs] I didn’t think about that--I was so busy making it. I mean, it was a lot of work to do this. [00:35:53] I got to the end of it. Toby and I were having breakfast someplace in Bolivia. We were still shooting. She said, “Paola, what would you do if this didn’t get published?” I was just stunned. This was an affront from my great friend and coauthor. I said, “What do you mean, ‘not get published?’ Of course it will get published.” I don’t know what magic I had in mind. [laughs] It turned out there was a whole lot to be done. I needed an agent first. I wrote proposals and sent them to seventeen agents. Nobody told me that there are agents for text-only books and agents for photography books. Completely different businesses. A couple of the text-only book people said, “Well, if you just drop all the photographs, I would be happy to represent you.” And I thought, “Are the photographs that bad?” [00:36:56] Happenstantially, I had also written to agents who represent books in the photography book industry, which usually have almost no text--some, but never as much as my books. They would say, “Well, if you drop all of the text, we’d be happy to represent you.” I thought, “What is going on?” Finally, Alev, the woman was running 66 my writers’ group, said, “Do you have an idea of what you want your book to look like?” I said, “Yes, I want it to look like Painted Prayers,” which was created by an anthropologist photographer named Stephen Huyler. Alev said, “Well, I know Stephen. Would you like to talk to him?” Changed my life. Stephen turned out to be generous-spirited and spent three hours on the phone to me explaining how to do everything, introduced me to his agent, introduced me to his PR person--has become, since, a fantastic friend. [00:37:59] I then talked to his agent, who was also a packager--people who put books together, and then give the whole package to the publisher. I said, “Judith [Judith Joseph], what do I need to do?” She said, “Well, for one thing, you need to get a museum exhibit.” I said, “Well, my photographs have never been exhibited anywhere, [laughs] nowhere, no galleries, not even by a PTA [Parent Teacher Association]. Nobody has ever shown my pictures.” She said, “Well, you should have a museum exhibit, and you should have somebody writing the foreword who will be well-reputed and wellknown to publishers because your name is unknown plus unpronounceable.” [both laugh] [00:38:55] As you can see, the cover says, “Foreword by Alice Walker.” Judith arranged that. I said, “Judith, I don’t know anybody famous. I know no famous people.” She said, “Make a wish list of people you would consider having 67 write this, and we’ll talk about it again.” I made a long list--a long, long list-of people, none of whom I knew. And she said, “I’ll take it from here.” She sent Alice Walker the galleys of the book after we had a publisher. Judith had promised the publisher that the foreword would be written by somebody everybody had heard of. Alice Walker said she would love to write it--if I gave two hundred dollars to one of the groups in the book. Fantastic. Du: Who is Alice Walker? Gianturco: [00:39:52] Alice Walker wrote The Color Purple, and she is an extremely wellknown feminist fiction author and writer and lives in the East Bay. So having her involved was a big plus. I knew how to write proposals, so I began writing proposals to museums and just sent them to, maybe, fifty museums. I thought, “All they can say is no.” Lo and behold, the Field Museum in Chicago, which is the oldest museum in the country--a science museum that includes anthropology--said they would like to do an exhibit about In Her Hands. Heaven. [00:41:04] We now had fulfilled the two requirements that publishers require. Judith had been in the business for a long time--she herself had been a publisher and knew all the publishers. Within a week, we had three offers from publishers in New York. Toby and I flew back and talked with them and agreed to work with [one of those three]. The publisher then said, “What kind of promotion do you plan in addition to this exhibit?” 68 [00:41:42] We said, “None.” [laughs] So Judith, wearing her PR hat, called Oprah and continued to call the secretary who answered the phone once a week for God knows how many weeks, having explained to her, “Listen, my job here is to get my client on the Oprah Winfrey show. Expect to hear from me every once in a while, and we’ll be fast friends by the time we get to the end of this.” She just basically kept calling and calling and calling and calling and calling. Separately: Oprah, who at that point had never done any shows about international women, decided to do three. Oprah was newly engaging with women around the world and considering the possibility and had not yet opened her girls academy in South Africa. But she was beginning to consider issues that had to do with women around the world. [00:42:56] In the third of the three of that series, Oprah had the idea that the Spirit segment, which was a five-minute segment at the end of the show, would be about In Her Hands, and the rest of the segment would be about FGM--about female genital mutilation. We didn’t know that yet. We didn’t know what the rest of the show would be about. We didn’t ever meet Oprah. She sent her crew [to my house]. They photographed for a full day, interviewing Toby and me for this five-minute segment. In Her Hands is a seventy-five-dollar book. The poor publisher was asked to give Oprah three hundred copies of this book, which is a huge dent in a small publisher’s budget. But he swallowed hard, and they put a copy of 69 In Her Hands under every seat in the audience of the show. [00:43:57] I invited Alev, my writing teacher, and my whole women’s writing group to my house for a tea party and to watch The Oprah Show, which ran on a Friday at 4:30 in the afternoon--or something like that. The sales rank of In Her Hands on Amazon that Friday morning was something like 160,000. It was not exactly a hot item. The show ran. I remember watching it, and there were pictures of these little girls getting carried out of tents, having just been cut, crying. It was just heartrending. I thought, “How can the Spirit segment ever lift anybody’s spirits after this?” [00:44:54] We got to the Spirit section, and there was Oprah sitting in front of a photograph of the front cover of the book that must have been twenty feet tall, and she talked all about how wonderful this book was. They ran the Spirit segment. Then she announced that there was a copy of the book under everybody’s chair. The audience cheered. It was amazing. I looked at the sales rank on Amazon at the end of this show, and it was 128, and the next morning it was 74. I did nothing for two weeks except answer e-mails from people I never heard of about this book, and it sold out. Du: That’s amazing. Gianturco: It was totally amazing. Here I had worked for all these years to make this book, which sold out. Oh my goodness. [00:45:53] This publisher that I had been working with didn’t do paperbacks. Judith, the agent, and I began talking with people who did do paperbacks and found powerHouse Books, and they agreed to do a 70 paperback version of In Her Hands. Judith, being a smart agent, wrote into my contract that powerHouse had the right of first refusal on any of my future books. All of my other books have been published by powerHouse Books. Du: What does this right of refusal mean? Gianturco: It means that you, the author, present them with a concept for a book, and they say, “We will, yes, publish that,” or, “No, we won’t.” They have decided to publish all of the rest of my books; there have now been five more. Du: How long did you work on In Her Hands before publishing? Gianturco: [00:46:49] We did the test shoots in Turkey and Poland in 1996--maybe the end of 1995, early 1996. The book was published in 2000. It wasn’t the oneyear sabbatical that I had imagined. [laughs] I am now in my twenty-fourth year of my one-year sabbatical. Du: That’s so incredible to hear. During In Her Hands, you visited all these twelve countries. Do you have any standout experiences that you remember that you would like to share from these countries? Gianturco: Hm. Well, we learned a huge amount as we went along. For example, the first place we went was Poland. I had imagined this book would feature one craftswoman per chapter. [00:48:02] We got to Zalipie. Zalipie is a tiny village in southeastern Poland, and it took hours to find it. We went through farms. It was near nowhere. What drew me there was that the women painted the walls of their houses and the outside of their houses and everything else, including firetrucks, with flowers. How wonderful. This is a place where wildflowers 71 grow everyplace. The women began by making the sooty walls of their houses look less awful by painting dots of white and then making flowers around those dots. [00:48:59] They now make very intricate flower designs, and they embroider flower designs on everything that they don’t paint. It’s just an amazing place if you like the idea of craftswomen and floral designs. We finally arrived there late, at the end of the tea party that they had planned to greet us. I said, “Which one of you”--there were twelve of them in the room--“Which one of you shall we interview tomorrow?” They said, “One?” “One.” “Well, maybe if we have to pick one, maybe Sophia. She has the best kitchen.” [laughs] And I thought, “What does that have to do with anything?”3 [00:49:48] It became immediately clear that craftswomen in Poland-and many other countries--work in groups. They thought we were crazy. They thought, “Why would you ever just want one?” There was so much to be learned. Oh my goodness. There was no place to stay in Zalipie, not surprising, so they arranged to put us in the infirmary at the grade school. [laughs] So if you wanted to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night, you had to run all the way down the corridors to the little girls’ room with the little tiny potties. We were with the interpreter, each of us in one of these hospital beds 3 Note from Paola Gianturco: Sophia’s kitchen was covered with painted flowers! 72 in the infirmary. A mouse ran in, and it turned out that that the interpreter, who worked for the Peace Corps, was terrified of mice. [laughs] [00:50:56] We had this trauma in the middle of the night with her standing in her hospital bed yelling because the mouse was running around. Oh my goodness, there were so many adventures it was just crazy--all of them learning experiences. We ended up with groups of craftswomen, not just one craftswoman, per chapter. I learned fast to drop that 116-question business and ask sort of informal conversational questions and then follow up and let the person whom I was interviewing lead me. There was much to be learned. Du: Wow, that’s incredible. In Her Hands is now published, and it’s sold out. Incredible. [00:51:58] How did you begin thinking of your idea for a second book? Did you think that you would make one? How did the idea come? Gianturco: One of the chapters in In Her Hands is about women in India, way out in the desert, who make mirror embroidery. I really enjoyed being with these women in Gujarat. As I was packing up my cameras, one of them said, “Come back in the fall, and we will teach you the dances that we dance all night to honor the mother god.” I said, “You do? I am coming.” That gave me the idea that even though women are discounted and demeaned in cultures all over the world, there are also festivals that celebrate women, their spirituality, their accomplishments, 73 and their roles, and that nobody had ever documented that. I decided that my next book would be about festivals that celebrate women. Du: [00:53:19] How did you pursue this idea? What were your first steps? Gianturco: Well, I had one in the bag, because I knew that I was going back to India to document the festival that celebrated the mother god, which turned out to be the Durga festival. Very quickly I learned that there is also a Kali festival, also in India. Kali follows on Durga by three or four weeks. [00:53:59] How did I find these festivals? Well, I should back up and say that still preparing to do In Her Hands, I had read that authors have two years from the time you find a publisher and the book gets designed and printed, probably overseas, and shipped back. You may have two years to establish your credentials in this subject you have written about--the Stanford people who are listening to this are going to die, because they think they have to study their whole lives in order to accrue enough knowledge to write [a credible book]. I had read that you have two years maybe to establish your credentials in this field. [laughs] I thought, “Wow, I’d better get on it, because of course I have no credentials in this field, women and crafts.” [00:55:04] I told you I had gone to the Crafts Center in Washington, DC, to do some research. I joined the Crafts Center as a member and then used that leverage to talk to the director. I said, “Have you ever done any marketing research about your members? Do you have any idea what they’re interested in, and are you satisfying that interest?” She said, “Well, we don’t know. We have never--” 74 I said, “Let me design a marketing research study for you; I will conduct it and I will write you a business plan.” I was, within about six months, on their board, and ultimately I became chairman of that board. Guess what? By the time the book came out, I was chairman of the Crafts Center. [both laugh] [00:55:56] I did something else. I joined the Association of Women in Development, a luminous international organization that looks at women in the developing world mostly--it now has renamed itself the Association of Women’s Rights in Development. I said, “Have you ever done any research about your members? Do you know what they’re interested in, and are you satisfying those interests?” And they said, well, no, they hadn’t done that. I just modified the study I had designed for the Crafts Center, and we fielded it for the Association of Women’s Rights in Development. I analyzed and wrote up the results and wrote a business plan for them. Guess what? I was now on their board. [00:56:51] And by the time the book came out, I had both of those credentials, and those were wonderful avenues to explore for all of the rest of the books. [To get back to women’s festivals], I found ideas through those associations because these are people who are very deeply engaged with women in other cultures. Du: Wow, that’s incredible. [End of Part 2 of 3 - Interview with Paola Gianturco - May 12, 2018] 75 76 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD ALUMNI INTERVIEWS - PIONEERING WOMEN INTERVIEWEE: PAOLA GIANTURCO INTERVIEWER: MELISSA DU DATE OF INTERVIEW: MAY 12, 2018 PART: 3 OF 3 Du: For your second book, Celebrating Women, where did you get the idea, and how did you get started? Can you tell me a little bit about the beginnings of this book and starting to work on this project? Gianturco: Well, I told you a little bit about how this book started. It started when the women in India whom I had photographed for In Her Hands invited me back for the Durga festival. I began to discover that there were festivals all over the world that celebrate women for completely different reasons, sometimes for their spiritual lives, sometimes for their accomplishments, sometimes for their roles. [00:00:49] But what captured my attention was that nobody was writing about this. Women are so often denigrated in different cultures, but sometimes those very same cultures also celebrate them, and sometimes cultures where women are revered also celebrate them. For example, I went to the northeastern corner [of India] and visited a city named Shillong. The Khasi tribe lives in that area. The Khasi tribe is matrilineal. They celebrate the harvest festival, which honors the feminine 77 and fertility. [Both men and women] wear fabulous costumes and do amazing dances honoring women. And they do animal sacrifice. [00:02:00] Something very interesting happened. I interviewed the head of the men’s liberation movement. I have never been anyplace else where I found one. I said, “Well, I want to talk to the head of it.” I interviewed the man, who explained that the children take the mother’s family name--not the father’s. He felt so strongly that his own children should have his name that every time they brought home a report card, he would erase the wife’s family name off the report card and put his family name on the report card. What he never knew--he may not know it yet--is that his sister-in-law, who worked at the school, waited until the report cards came back, erased his name every time, and put her family name back in place. [00:02:50] But something very serious has happened, which is that the men, who used to be the protectors and defenders, now have no role. The women are so strongly in charge of this society that the men are [finding solace in] taking drugs and having real alcohol problems, and the women don’t want to marry them. It’s likely to be the end of the tribe. Du: Where is this tribe located again? Gianturco: Shillong, India. Du: Tell me more about the men’s liberation movement. Gianturco: There were about two thousand men who had gathered together to protest this terrible situation. 78 Du: This was something that you witnessed when you went to India to do the first project. Gianturco: No, [I went there for my second book, Celebrating Women. To document the] celebration of the harvest and fertility and the women. In the course of interviewing the women, [I] discovered that this men’s liberation movement existed. I’m a reporter. I’ve always wanted to look at both sides of everything. So I said I wanted to talk to him. [00:04:02] It really portends badly when either men or women hold the power, as I had also seen in the Shipibo culture in Peru, which I visited for my first book. That’s a matrilineal culture as well, and I asked the women I was interviewing, “What is domestic violence like here?” The one woman said, “Oh, we beat up the men.” There has to be a different way to go about this. Du: Yes. As you were looking for more stories for your second book, what were some other places that you visited, and what did you see? Gianturco: [00:04:54] Well, let me see what I can describe to you. Oh, I went to the West Indies, the feast of the cooks. This is a festival in which the women cook feasts and feed hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of people traditional foods that are part of their culture. I was in Sweden for Santa Lucia, which is the December holiday that celebrates the saint, St. Lucy. Girls wear candles on their heads and sing. It is so dark in Sweden then. I have never appreciated so much the fact that photography is the art of light because everything was lit either by candlelight or so dark that I couldn’t even shoot. At noon, the sun came up 79 about that much. It was like a shade going up at the horizon, and then it came right back down twenty minutes later. It was an amazing experience. [00:06:12] I was in Spain for a festival that celebrates life under the guise of celebrating death. This is a festival that honors the saint, [Santa Marta de Ribarteme]. People give thanks to her [because they are] alive after having had a near-death experience during the year. The men and women who have had that experience are carried in open coffins--around the town to give thanks to Santa Marta for the fact that they are alive. [00:07:03] In Morocco, they have a festival in which the women ask the men to marry them. One day a year this happens. The women ask the men to marry them, and then they are married en masse. There are many different kinds festivals that [celebrate] women. Du: What was the process of finding these festivals like, and how did that differ from your experiences finding the craftswomen from your first book? Gianturco: The process is almost always the same. It takes almost a year to do the research for these projects, and it’s a matter of reaching out to all kinds of people and trying to find the most interesting stories. [00:07:59] It was essentially the same process that I described before. That has gotten easier as I’ve done more and more books because finally I have a network that I can count on. But I didn’t at the beginning. I just was searching, searching. Du: I noticed that this book is a solo project whereas your first one was a joint project with Toby Tuttle. Was it different working on this yourself and going to the countries by yourself or not having a fellow-80 Gianturco: I had expected it would be [different]. When I started In Her Hands, I assumed that being a woman traveling alone was a fairly dangerous thing to do. I didn’t know how people in other cultures would view that. [00:08:51] As it turned out, I needn’t have worried about that because the groups I was visiting--the people whom I was interviewing--really sort of adopted me. So I’ve never felt as if I were traveling alone or as if it were dangerous. So I decided to proceed [with the next book] alone. Du: What do you mean by “adopted”? Did they invite you into their homes? Gianturco: Oh, for sure. I was always in people’s houses. I always do the interviews, if I can, in people’s houses. But all of my book experiences entailed situations in which I was greeted as an honored guest. For example, when I was working on Women Who Light the Dark a little bit later, I was in Nepal [in 2008] when they were in the process of changing governments from a king to an elected government, which turned out to be quite a violent time. People were driving through the streets and shooting people through their office windows as they drove by. [00:10:04] I was actually worried about whether or not I should continue with my plan to go [to Nepal]. I kept e-mailing [Nepal] from wherever I was before that--I think I was in Vietnam and then in Cambodia-and asking--“Should I come? Should I come?” I was e-mailing the State Department. And emailing my husband, “What does the newspaper say?” The women in Nepal kept saying, “Of course, come. We’ll take care of you.” And they did. It was great. I was never alone. I never felt afraid. 81 even with the head of the NGO that I was featuring [Lucky Chhetri, founder of Empowering Women of Nepal]. We were having lunch one day in her house, and all of a sudden UN soldiers walked past the window and climbed to the roof of her house [laughs] because she lived at the top of a hill and that was a good venue to see people below, enemies. [00:11:01] I thought, “Why am I not just terrified?” I knew I was safe. She walked out and said, “This is my house. You have no right to be here.” [laughs] Du: How do you think you were able to be so effective when bridging the cultural gaps, and all the [other] differences you had with these women, in order to reach them and have them invite you in as one of them? Gianturco: That’s a good question. I always take my other books with me--I know exactly how much every one of them weighs in case I have to unload and hand-carry the books. I show my books to all of the women I interview so they know what they’re getting into. [00:11:49] I also describe the idea of the book I am working on so that they can agree to be part of it. Usually the nonprofit or the organization that they belong to has agreed theoretically to let their members participate, but I always am very careful to be sure that each woman understands. Then, we talk for usually an hour. I never pick up my camera first, mostly because I am listening for things that might help tell a woman’s story or for places where she goes frequently. Maybe she says she’s going to the market, and I say, “May I come with you?” I always start by asking women how they would like to be 82 photographed. Before smartphones, it was a big deal in some cultures to be photographed at all, and in those cultures people always stood stiff with their arms at their sides and looked very formal. I would then send them back that photograph. [00:13:07] It confused them that I continued to shoot after that. I would continue to shoot for hours, and after a while they would just forget I was there. [My continuing to take pictures] seemed ridiculous to them, but anyway, that’s what I obviously wanted to do. Of course, later on they would become so oblivious [to me] that the photos would become much more natural. But it was just a matter of making it clear that I was there to listen to them and to focus on them. Many women were much less reticent [to talk] than I expected. Many women around the world are not listened to, ever. [00:13:50] The fact that I had come from so far away just to listen to them, just to take them pictures of them leading their lives, made me less threatening. I was something of a phenomenon, but I was clearly on their side. Du: What sort of questions did you ask them when you were having your conversations? Gianturco: Well, once I [abandoned my] 116-question routine, I would usually start by saying, “Tell me about your life. Where did you grow up, and what was your family like? What was your favorite food?” [laughs] I would just get the conversation started, and once they began talking, they would tell me all kinds of things that I would never ask, never. A Muslim woman in Turkey once went on at some length about the 83 fact that she was very careful to time her children nine years apart so that she could afford to feed and educate them. [00:14:56] She told me all about the birth control she was using and where she got it, and said, “The government helps us with this.” I would never ask [such personal] questions. But she wanted me to know that. Du: That’s amazing. And in your experiences going to all these different festivals for celebrating women, were there any festivals that didn’t turn out the way you expected them to? Gianturco: No, I really knew pretty much what to expect. There were individual events that happened in the festivals I wasn’t prepared for. I wasn’t prepared for the [part of the] Khasi festival where they cut off the head of the sheep, for example. I actually can tell you now that I can take pictures with my eyes closed. [laughs] I just couldn’t watch that. I thought, “Oh my God, why am I here?” There were things that happened that surprised me. Du: [00:15:58] Wow. And as you came to the close of Celebrating Women, did you already have plans in mind for your third book or how did that come about? Gianturco: I had plans in mind for my fourth book. My third book sort of sneaked up on me. Book three was called ¡Viva Colores!: A Salute to the Indomitable People of Guatemala. For each of the two books before, both Celebrating Women and In Her Hands, I had gone to Guatemala. I can get there fairly quickly--it’s five hours from San Francisco--and do a test shoot to be sure that I [could execute my idea. At that point], I wasn’t altogether comfortable yet with my photography. 84 I was specifically worried about Celebrating Women because many festivals happen at night, and there is lots of action--dancing and lots going on. As you know, it’s very hard to photograph action in the dark. [laughs] Your camera can’t handle both of those things, [action and low light, at the same time]. [00:17:10] So I was doing test shoots in Guatemala. I actually spent a summer doing pro bono photographs for the Ixchel Museum in Guatemala City, which wanted to document weaving villages that had never been photographed. So over the course of the ten-year period between 1995 and 2004 I had thousands of pictures of Guatemala. [They were not] taken as a project, but as explorations. [00:17:48] I was talking with the publisher about those pictures, and he said that he would like to do a book about Guatemala. But I was already working on the next project. I had begun researching Women Who Light the Dark. I had no time even to think about a book about Guatemala or even what would adhere all of those diffuse photographic elements. I asked [my husband] David if he would look at my zillions of Guatemala pictures and see if he could see any themes. He said, “I think the theme is color. Let’s think about how to make this book a celebration of these peoples’ spirits.” He and I then went together to Guatemala to interview the forty people who are featured in that book. He wrote the text, and all of the pictures are mine. That was a collaboration. Du: What was it like working with David? 85 Gianturco: [00:18:55] It was really hard. [laughs] For one thing, I have a huge respect for David, but David’s approaches are always different from mine. That makes life interesting when you’re married. Our approaches are so different that they bring us into conflict. As I told you, David had the idea that ¡Viva Colores!, should be a bilingual book, and I was just horrified when I first heard that because it seemed to me to be impossible. We were too far down the road to consider that. But in fact ¡Viva Colores!, [became a bilingual book], which much improved the quality of that project. But [creating together was not always] easy. Du: Did you learn new things about your photography and the places you were visiting as a result of being with David and working on this project with him? Gianturco: [00:19:55] It is great to travel with somebody who is as--David was creative director of an advertising agency, and he observes really, really well. And so I would be shooting over here to the left, and David would see something way over here to the right that I had my back to. I might--or might not-have been able to refocus and capture his picture. But he has a very accurate and astute visual capacity that I really respect. I am glad to have that working with me. Du: That’s wonderful. So at this period of time you’re working on ¡Viva Colores!, and you’re also beginning to think of your fourth one, Women Who Light the Dark. Was it very busy for you to manage all of these different books at once? 86 Gianturco: [00:21:01] It’s very hard to do two books at the same time for me because writing is an internal process, and promoting is an external process. I almost can’t do them at the same time. I was traveling to speak about and promote ¡Viva Colores! at the same time I was beginning to generate content for Women Who Light the Dark. It was very difficult. I was working twelve to fourteen days a day just simply to do it. These are not kind of throwaway projects that you do in addition to something else. They really are consuming and very demanding. So that was difficult. [00:21:51] I see Women Who Light the Dark as the first as a triptych. I think about Women Who Light the Dark, Grandmother Power, and Wonder Girls as different ways to tell the stories of girls’ and women’s activism at different ages in their lives. And, yes, I had begun to conceive Women Who Light the Dark at the same time I was trying to promote ¡Viva Colores!. Let me show you Women Who Light the Dark. [sounds of a book being picked up]. You can see where I was on the map on the inside front cover. I was in all of those countries. There were fifteen of them this time. Most of the stories in this book are about women who are heading NGOs and doing very interesting, important work--working on the most intractable problems that face women virtually everywhere. [00:23:00] The first story was actually about a group started by a high school English teacher [Betty Makoni] in Zimbabwe who started an organization called the Girls Empowerment Network. Betty had been listening to the stories that her high school students-87 her English students--were telling her and she discovered that the medicine women in their culture were telling HIV-positive men that they would be cured if they had sex with virgins. The men were having sex with--they were raping--these teenage girls, who were, of course, then HIV-positive. Betty Makoni decided that she would organize these girls and help them understand what was going on, how to avoid it, how they could help each other, how they could come to each other’s aid, and so forth. [00:24:02] The first photograph is these girls at their board meeting. I went to the board meeting expecting to see teachers and social workers. No. Girls! [laughs] This [NGO actually inspired my idea of doing a book about groups of activist] girls. Du: Was it ever difficult for you to deal with these emotionally tough issues? Gianturco: This was the turn in my own work when I made a decision not to avoid these issues. Some of them were so disturbing that I had consciously chosen to exclude them because I wasn’t sure I could handle them. I took a photographic course in the Czech Republic and promised myself--I was there for a month, taking one week-courses with very experienced professional photographers. [00:24:58] I promised myself that in the course of that month I would photograph everything I was afraid of photographing. It was a real stretch. I photographed people kissing, and I photographed people in church. [laughs] I just barged into all kinds of places where it was awkward to photograph--where I felt there were people doing things too private to be photographed--trying to get over my own inhibitions. [My ability to 88 document the girls in Zimbabwe] was the result of [my experience in the Czech Republic]. I knew I could photograph these girls who were working on this really horrific problem. Du: Is the way you approach these photographs of girls in tougher situations different from, for example, craftswomen? Gianturco: [00:25:54] The photographs are different, as you can see. That picture wouldn’t be in In Her Hands. But is the approach different? [My photography] has all been about learning. I continue to learn and continue to have different ideas about how to do it, and I do a lot of experimenting. The great challenge is to be able to edit down to the number of photographs that fit in a chapter. This is a chapter about women working on issues that have to do with domestic violence in Vietnam. The great freedom is that although there aren’t very many pictures in each chapter, you can take hundreds now with digital cameras, and [the Vietnam chapter of Women Who Light the Dark] is about when I began using a digital camera. For a long time after everybody else in this world was using a digital camera, my publisher was still insisting on film. In fact, I think this chapter [about Cuba] was taken on film and the rest were digital. Du: [00:27:04] How did that change your technique and your style or even just your process? Gianturco: Exactly [the way I just] said. You take millions more pictures if you’re not paying for film. So digital really opened up the possibilities for experimenting. Du: How long did working on this book take? 89 Gianturco: All the books, from beginning to end, take about five years. That’s a year worth of research, a year to eighteen months of photography, a year to write, and the balance to promote. Du: Tell me about the promotion process for any book. What is that like, and what does that include and entail? Gianturco: [00:28:02] It’s a big surprise for people to discover that creating the book is about a third of the work. Easily half, maybe two-thirds, is the marketing. Many people, particularly those who do photography books, don’t have thirty-four years’ worth of experience in marketing, which I had, thank goodness. It was as if, finally, I had hit something--some part of these projects--that I actually understood. So what is involved? I always do a proprietary website for my books. That’s like writing another whole book--I have somebody doing the technical work. I could never manage that. That would probably be the easiest part for you. It’s the harder part for me. [00:29:04] I always have a schedule of events, and those all need to be set up by me. For example, when I introduced Grandmother Power, I did fiftyfive slide lectures all over the US and Canada, which takes a huge commitment of time. Fortunately, [a book tour is] doable on frequent flier miles. But somebody has to get those events arranged and handle all the logistics--what kind of projector do you have and do you have a light on your podium--and that somebody is me. [00:29:54] I also frequently have traveling photography exhibits. You 90 just saw the beginning of the Wonder Girls exhibit in my dining room. Those exhibits and all of the arrangements to travel them are done by me. Also, I do lots of press. Usually I work with a freelance PR person who does media placement. Although I did PR for Joseph Magnin long away and far away, it’s now a very different business. [My books have had some] wonderful press breaks. I told you already about Oprah. But Wonder Girls has received publicity from Ms. Magazine and ABC News. C-SPAN photographed [my granddaughter-coauthor Alex and me] doing a bookstore event in Pasadena, and NPR has done interviews about Wonder Girls and on and on and on. [00:31:03] The combination of the photo exhibit and online presence and almost daily postings on Facebook--all of these things are part of [promoting] the book. Separately and additionally, I stay in touch with all of the groups in the book because I consider them collaborators. I really think that my name on the cover is sort of happenstantial. These women have given me their stories. I always send the chapter drafts back to them to fact-check. [Creating the book is] an iterative and collaborative process. [00:31:52] They are the first ones who get advance copies of the book, and I keep them up to date on all of the [events where] I’m telling stories about them, hoping to generate support and awareness of their work. Actually, we should talk about the fact that all of these books are philanthropic projects. We haven’t talked about that. Du: Yes, tell me about that. 91 Gianturco: A hundred percent of my author royalties from Women Who Light the Dark go to the Global Fund for Women. A hundred percent of my royalties from each of these books goes to a nonprofit organization that’s working on the issues in the book. I’ll tell you about Grandmother Power when we get there. Global Fund for Women is also getting one hundred percent of the author royalties from Wonder Girls. Even though the books are very ambitious projects geographically, because I’m using frequent flier miles, the expenses are limited enough that I can afford to give away the money I would earn. [00:33:10] I am committed to doing that. It’s one of the reasons that I work so hard on promoting the books, because the more you promote, the more you sell. Du: How do you choose which organizations receive all of your royalties? Gianturco: I work really hard to identify a recipient or beneficiary that is working internationally. Global Fund for Women has worked in 177 countries. So that means that the royalties can benefit women and girls practically all over the world. Grandmother Power--should we move on to Grandmother Power? Du: Sure. Tell me about Grandmother Power. Gianturco: [00:33:55] Grandmother Power documents the work of activist grandmothers all over the world in fifteen countries. [Activist grandmothers are] another topic that has never been explored, which, of course, makes it perfect for me. Grandmothers came to my attention when I was working in Africa 92 talking with women members of a women’s water collective in Kenya. Quite happenstantially, I just was talking with the whole group. I never talk to a whole group at the same time, but these women wanted to talk as a group. So I said to them, “Tell me how many children you have.” [00:35:03] And they went around the circle and one said, “I have four and eight adopted.” The next one said, “I have three and twelve adopted.” I suddenly realized as we went on and everybody was speaking in the same formulaic way, that what they meant was that they had three children of their own and that they had adopted some usually very large number of other children, many of whom were their own grandchildren because their own children had died of AIDS. Adoption was a pattern that I observed [as I continued to travel]. At that time I was working in the J-shaped region of the African continent that runs down the east side and loops up around South Africa. Those are the countries that have been most damaged by AIDS. [00:35:59] It is a pattern in those cultures that the grandmothers take care of their grandchildren. As their children die, the grandchildren run to the grandmothers after the funerals. In their old ages, when [the grandmothers are] too old to work and too old to raise food to feed a family, suddenly they have sometimes twelve to fifteen grandchildren living with them. The kids are grieving [because their parents have died]. The grandmothers are grieving because their children have died. That whole 93 sexually-active middle generation is gone. I left Africa after that trip and thought, “The future of this continent rests in the hands of the grandmothers. What are grandmothers doing other places?” said I to me. What I discovered was that all over the world, there was an invisible, international grandmother movement. They weren’t connected with each other. They had all taken a look at this troubled world of ours and had said, [exhales] “Not good enough for my grandchildren,” and had gotten to work. [00:37:09] The grandmothers in Africa were being supported by grandmothers in Canada--8,000 grandmothers in Canada--who are part of an organization--[Grandmothers to Grandmothers Campaign]--started by the Stephen Lewis Foundation. Stephen Lewis was Canada’s ambassador to the UN, and Kofi Annan appointed him as special envoy to Africa for AIDS, Malaria, and TB. After he had finished his stint, he came back to Canada and said, “I’m going to spend the rest of my life trying to stem the tide of AIDS in Africa.” [00:37:54] But Stephen Lewis didn’t have all the money he needed to do that. And he was [worried about the grandmothers raising AIDS orphans] in fifteen African countries where he had just been working. He and his daughter--who had been working for the UN in New York--started a foundation that could coordinate the grandmothers of Canada to help the grandmothers of Africa. The grandmothers of Canada loved this idea, and so they began 94 forming groups. The Canadian grandmothers will do anything to raise money for the grandmothers in Africa. Their work is not charitable. The grandmothers in Africa are now organized in groups that apply for grants. And it might be that they need just a little money, maybe enough just to buy seeds for a community garden. The grandmothers in Canada are raising money all over the place. They will sell ice cream at the beach. They’ll cater a wedding. They’ll make a quilt and sell it. It’s amazing to visit them. [00:39:02] The author royalties from Grandmother Power--this book--go to the Stephen Lewis Foundation in Toronto to help grandmothers [raising children orphaned by AIDs] in fifteen African countries. I am honored to be able to do that. Du: That’s incredible. Was this the book that you coauthored with your granddaughter? Gianturco: No, that is yet to come. Du: So which countries did you visit for this grandmother book? Was it countries in Africa? Gianturco: Fifteen countries. No, [not just in Africa]. Grandmothers are doing many things [in many places]. First of all, I should say that there are more grandmothers on the planet today than there have ever been because for a long time nobody lived to be older than thirty. So as longevity increased and as medical care [improved, women] began living long enough to be grandmothers. [00:40:08] It is really a very interesting population, very unlike the 95 crotchety old lady in her rocker with her crocheting. Grandmothers tend to be better educated than they have ever been. Many of them lived through the women’s movement, so they are very good at being activists. They’ve changed the world before. They know how to do it. Many of them have work experience. They are also [part of the huge] demographic swing toward older people, particularly in this country but internationally as well. So grandmothers tend to be a vital, educated, extremely activist-oriented group, and they’re working on all kinds of issues. [00:40:55] For example, they are working on cultural preservation and the environment and human rights and education and justice and health and politics and energy and so forth. This book tells that story. My author photograph this time is a picture of me with both grandgirls. That was prescient because, as you know, one of those grand-girls, when she was older, got to be my coauthor on Wonder Girls. Du: That’s wonderful. This is your fifth book by now, and by this time you’ve accumulated a massive knowledge about women around the globe. How does this understanding shape or affect your understanding of women’s issues domestically in the United States? Gianturco: [00:41:57] None of the books so far had [focused on] the United States, as you noticed. That’s a good observation. Wonder Girls does have three groups in the US. The fact is that since working in the first women-owned advertising agency, I really had not been very involved with women’s issues in the US. Although I was sympathetic, that had not been where my attention had been. And lots had been happening since I was paying 96 attention, which is one reason that Wonder Girls includes chapters about girls in the US. Du: [00:42:52] Again with all of these books, you’re venturing onto projects that have not been covered before. In these endeavors, are you looking to anyone for support? Gianturco: There are people who [specialize in] issues related to aging and women. There is still the Stanford the Center on Longevity run by Laura Carstensen, also a friend of Estelle Freedman, by the way. Laura used to be head of the Michelle Clayman Institute and then started this [Center on Longevity]. I interviewed her. [00:43:50] There is [an anthropologist, Kristen Hawkes], who developed something called the grandmother hypothesis at the University of Utah. She had the idea--based on work she had done with [the Hadza] tribe in Africa--that [explains why] human grandmothers exist--in other words, live longer than simply the time during which they menstruate. From an evolutionary standpoint it’s an unlikely reality that grandmothers live so long afterwards. [00:45:14] Hawkes’ idea was that the reason they do is so that they can help raise their grandchildren. I talked with her. What else did I do to prepare for this book? I interviewed the Canadian grandmothers. That was the moral equivalent of doing test photography in Guatemala. I talked with the Stephen Lewis Foundation people, knocked on their door, and said, “I think I might want to do a book about the Canadian grandmothers and the African grandmothers.” 97 [00:46:01] They said, “Who are you?” [laughs] So that’s how this book started. Du: Tell me about the projects you’re working on now. Gianturco: I’ll tell you about Wonder Girls. Well, what can I tell you about Wonder Girls? As far as I can tell, there are no other books that document the work of groups of activist girls. There are books about individual activists like Malala. But I was seeing, as early as 2007, girls in Zimbabwe who began a girls movement in their country. They made child rape a national issue using an interesting tool. [00:47:08] Remember, [the Girls’ Empowerment Network] was started by a high school English teacher. Those girls use poetry, which they write about their own experiences and recite in public. As soon as they do, [snaps fingers] their communities are mobilized to action against the men who rape girls. I’ve been interested for a long time in what groups of girls can do, even groups of very young girls. I was particularly interested in the age group from ten to eighteen. The UN says you’re no longer a girl after eighteen. You’re a woman. So Wonder Girls. I was thinking about this book for a while, both in relationship to Women Who Light the Dark and Grandmother Power. It was a natural next step to explore the topic of groups of activist girls, partly because I think these intractable problems will take a long time to solve. [00:48:16] I was interested in groups because once there is [an organizational] structure, the current participants can go on to the rest of their 98 lives--and younger girls can grow into that structure and continue the work. So I wanted to focus on groups from the beginning. [For Wonder Girls], I went to thirteen countries, one of which was the US, and interviewed fifteen groups of activist girls working on all kinds of initiatives from the environment to social justice to exploitation to child marriage and so forth. [00:49:05] I was very aware going into this book that I was seventyeight, and these girls were all ten to eighteen. Michelle Sangster, who is Alex Sangster’s mother, my daughter-in-law, said to me, “What would you think if Alex did this book with you?” I had said, “I had thought about that,” which I had, because it was really clear to me that the book would be better if [I collaborated with] somebody nearer the age of the girls. I didn’t want to ask Alex alone since she has a younger sister, and the three of us had been absolutely tied at the hip since they were tiny. And I thought, “I can’t ask Alex to do this, without Avery” and Avery was too young. [00:50:02] I’ll just digress a minute and tell you a story. My granddaughters call me “Grandmother.” They call their other grandmother “Grandma.” One time when I was visiting, they kept calling me “Grandma,” and then they were just mortified. I said, “It’s okay, because we’re all grands. I am, and so are you.” They were just at the age that that sounded like a club. So Avery--who [was seven and] had no teeth in the front of her mouth. 99 Her top and bottom front teeth were gone, so she couldn’t say an “S” if she had to. She said, “Grandmother, we need a ‘logan.” I said, “Okay, what’s our slogan, Avery?” She said, “We are grand. We’ll always be grand. Go grands.” [00:50:53] Alex just began practically rapping. She said, “This is our pledge. We are grand. We’ll always be grand. Together we’ll stand. We’ll lend a helping hand.” She was going on and on. I never can remember our pledge. I got meteorites that had fallen on China, which I thought was grand enough. So we started all of our meetings with, “We are grand. We’ll always be grand,” da, da, da. We would do the rap pledge, and then we would click our Chinese meteorites, and have meetings. Sometimes we would do beadwork, and sometimes we would make paper-doll clothes, and sometimes we would do tea parties. For years, we had done meetings. To work alone with Alex without having asked Avery would have been awful. I said I would discuss this [idea-of working with Alex] with Avery. [00:51:55] Avery, who was [as I said] at that point seven, said, “It’s okay, Grandmother. You should work with Alex. I’m not a very good storyteller.” Having watched this book come together ever since, Avery told me recently, “Grandmother, I just want you to know I was born to write.” [laughs] I think I’m on notice. I think the next book is going to be with Avery. So Wonder Girls--a hundred percent of the royalties from this book go to the Global Fund for Women. They have a special fund for [grassroots 100 groups of] girls around the world. I interviewed 102 girls in person, traveling on my frequent flier miles for a week to each place. [00:52:49] Alex worked with me in four places. Even though she was in school, she interviewed seventy girls from thirteen countries [via Skype and Facetime]. She took photographs with me when we were working together; a couple of these chapters are photographed almost exclusively by Alex. Remember the story about my father gave me a camera when I was eight? I gave Alex her first point-and-shoot camera--there were not yet cell phones with cameras--when she was two. She was so little. She photographed people’s feet and the dog’s tail and all these things down here where you and I don’t even look for pictures. It was a great way to see what her world looked like. Well, she’s long since graduated to a DSLR [digital single-lens reflex camera] and she is wonderfully free in her composition, her ideas about what to shoot, and very creative. So it’s fun to shoot with her. [00:54:05] But in addition to photographing and interviewing, she also wrote the last section of every chapter. Du: That’s very impressive for an eleven-year-old. Gianturco: Exactly. I came away from this project full of respect for Alex and young girls. This is her section, titled “How YOU Can Change Our World.” She set forth the challenge and the change and how you can help--all things she got from her own interviews. Down here she thanks the girls [whom she interviewed] by name. This section is so much her own doing that when I said--we were 101 talking about this project--“Alex, do you have an idea about what you want your page to look like?” She said, “Oh, yes,” and jumped on her computer and drew this layout. [00:54:59] I said, “And what color should the background be?” She said, “It should be blue. I’ll look it up and give you the exact color.” So that is her blue. Those are her stars--Wonder Woman’s outfit has stars, so Alex wanted Wonder Girls to have stars. I just sent Alex’s design to the designer when we got to that point, and her page looks exactly the way she wanted. Du: That’s amazing. Tell me more about what onboarding your granddaughter Alex was like onto this project. Gianturco: I couldn’t imagine how to tell somebody what I do and how to do it, [so I sought help]. Sidebar story: I am on the advisory board of a group of children at Saint Hilary School in Tiburon, an afterschool program called Pencils for Africa. [Here is the reason for the program’s name]: [00:55:57] A friend of mine, [Jackson Kaguri], from Uganda, grew up in such a poor family that his father couldn’t afford a pencil for each of his five children so they could go to school. So the father broke a pencil into five pieces and gave each child a stub. Jackson is now a CNN Hero [and has] started a school for 43,000 AIDS orphans [in Nyaka, Uganda. When Jackson told his pencil story at Saint Hilary School], the children said, “We could recycle our pencils. We can send them to Africa.” So the name of their group is Pencils for Africa. 102 I said [to the teachers who run that program], “I want to teach Alex how to do a good interview.” They had worked on that skill with their students because the Pencils for Africa children interview--by Skype--the children in Africa. I had [observed that] young kids are asked a question in school, and they give an answer. [Q&A] is not conducive to a fluid and expansive interview. What you’re doing right now--provoking a rounded, full, rich conversation--is just beyond their experience. I thought, “How am I going to teach Alex that?” [She and I] ended up having a phone meeting about it, since she doesn’t live around here. She called me, and I picked up my cell phone. I [searched for my] written notes, and I had a lot of stuff on my desk. [00:58:06] I put the phone [between shoulder and ear as] I was fishing around trying to find my notes. All of a sudden, I heard this little voice say, “Excuse me, please, Grandmother. I think I am looking into your ear.” I had never done a FaceTime call. I said, “Oh, Alex. How are you?” There were so many things that I learned from working with Alex. You can’t imagine. It was just an endless education for me. People always say to me, “Oh, she’s so lucky to have worked with you. You must have taught her a lot.” The fact is, the amount I learned from Alex was unlimited. It continues today. The experience was just great. As I said to you earlier, everybody should spend time with an eleven-year-old, everybody. [00:59:01] I would get us lost in Los Angeles, and she would [hop on 103 Google Maps and] say, “I’ve got it, Grandmother. Turn left.” We would be in Guadalajara, and she would be the only one who knew what the menu said--I don’t speak Spanish--because she was using Google Translate. It was great. She just plain knows a lot of things that I don’t know; many things [in addition to] technology. But anyway, working with Alex was a great joy and it made the book better. Du: That’s amazing. When was Wonder Girls published? Gianturco: October 2017. Du: What are some current projects that you’re busy with now? Are you promoting Wonder Girls? Gianturco: [00:59:49] Yes. I have been doing all of the things I just described to you about promoting a book. Some fun things that we have done? There was a photographic exhibit at the World Affairs Council in San Francisco for four months. Because they always do a reception for artists who have their photographs exhibited in their gallery, I said, “Let’s [delay the reception] for the launch of the book on October 11, which is the UN International Day of the Girl Child.” They said, “What would you like to have to eat at the reception?” And I said, “Oh, champagne and cake,” which is not what they usually serve at the World Affairs Council. But they had champagne and an amazing cake about the size of this desk with [an image of] “Wonder Woman” in frosting on the top. It was great. So we had a wonderful book launch with thirty photographs [from the book on display]. 104 [01:01:06] The husband of the woman who runs the girls’ group in Guadalajara had flown in for the launch, and there were several other important people with us. I did a slide lecture about the stories from the book. Alex moderated a panel of the chief operating officer of the Global Fund for Women and the executive director of One World Children’s Fund and the executive director and founder of Rise Up, all of whom have grantees in the book. There Alex was, sitting at the World Affairs Council in her great little black dress, running this panel discussion about girls’ issues around the world with these women who fund girls’ [groups globally]. It was great. Then we signed books. It was such fun. [01:02:10] Alex has been interviewed with me. Her first interview was with Lauren Schiller, who has an NPR show about women called Inflection Point. Both of us were in Los Angeles, and Lauren was here in Northern California. We were in a sound booth in LA. Alex had never been in a sound booth. It’s a very strange environment. I don’t know if you have [ever been in a sound booth]. Black rubbery knobs on the walls. Alex had worked so hard--she had asked for the questions ahead of time and worked so hard on her answers. But of course she was asked other questions that she wasn’t expecting, and she was so good. I was very proud of her. [01:03:02] I think many people in this country, and maybe other 105 places, tend to infantilize young girls and assume that they don’t have their own thoughts. It’s really just great to see that, in fact, they have wellfounded opinions [and ideas]. It really was fun to interview girls for the book, and it was fun to see that [same characteristic] in Alex. Du: That’s incredible. Throughout all of these books, we’ve talked about so many different women’s issues that you’ve been a part of and have helped document. Is there anything else about any of these projects that you’d like to mention? Gianturco: [01:03:45] Hm. I have been really surprised by how many readers of the books followed the pattern of philanthropy that the books model. For example, thinking all the way back to the beginning, to In Her Hands, I know now--happenstantially--of about $120,000 that went from the readers of that book to the groups in the book. Du: That’s incredible. Gianturco: There’s no way to track [donations]. We’re not set up to track anything. But when I went back to Gujarat, my interpreter said, “Do you want to see the houses that the women are building with the money from your book?” There had been a huge earthquake in Gujarat that had decimated the houses of the mirror embroiderers whom I talked about earlier. The women were indeed [working with] rebar and mud bricks, which they made, and they were rebuilding the village. [01:05:09] I said, “Where did this money come from?” They said, “Well, we thought you would know. A woman wired it to us the morning that she heard (that there had been an earthquake) on the 106 television news. She recognized the group from having just read your book, and she wired us $10,000.” Aid to Artisans called me one day and said, “Have you ever heard of this woman,” who lived somewhere I’ve never heard of either. I certainly did not know her. She had a family foundation that had given $50,000 to Aid to Artisans for the artists in the book. What? [01:05:52] Little by little, I began discovering that the fact that we always included the groups’ contact information, both in the book and on the book website, made it easy for people to make contact with them, and that in fact, unbeknownst to me, readers were supporting these groups. I had no idea. It was wonderful, really. Du: It’s amazing to hear about these wonderful networks and communities that you’ve built up because of your work. Gianturco: Who knew? Du: Just to tie everything together now that we’ve talked about your incredible career both in photography and in business, are there any other thoughts you have, any other things you want to share about any of your times in these fields? Gianturco: Hm. I think I want to talk a little bit more about my family. Du: [01:07:05] Yes, I would love to hear that. Gianturco: I mentioned at lunch that both of my grand-girls are Chinese-American. My son married a Chinese-American woman. Both of her parents had come from China. David’s son married a woman from Mexico. So his grandchildren are Mexican-American. Really, [our family is] like a little UN. 107 This is so different from what life was like in general when I was growing up that I find it very heartening. I think as we all become more connected with each other, positive changes are virtually inevitable. [01:08:10] My son, Scott, is as committed as I am to what’s happening with people around the world. He and I go to a poverty conference--an international poverty conference held in Mexico--every year. Alex and Avery said, “Well, why can’t children come?” They said, “We have an idea. Let us design a children’s program for this conference, and then we’ll all talk to the people who run the conference and see if they want us to run it.” They got yellow stickies, and wrote down all their ideas and glued them on the windows of their house, then took them down and rearranged them [until they] got the whole program worked out in their minds. [01:09:03] Their idea was that the program should be called Just Kids, and that it should be [attended by the] daughters and sons of the delegates who attended the poverty conference. Each child and delegate parent would have an hour to teach the other children what it was like to grow up in their culture. The people who run the conference said, “Well, yes, sure. We can give it a try.” And this is now the fifth year of that program. [Alex and Avery] run it. They introduce the speakers, and they conduct the Q&A afterwards. The kids do all kinds of things together. They do storytelling, and they do cooking, and they do dancing, and they do art. It is really amazing to 108 see what happens when you put thirty or thirty-five kids from all over the world together in the same place. I don’t know of anything else like it. [01:10:07] But Alex and Avery are convinced that if they all become friends and begin to understand each other and see each other year after year--maybe someday the [participants can work together to cause positive change]. There may be many different ways that [my work has influenced people]. I really don’t know any more details than I knew [about the donations] being kindled by In Her Hands’ readers. [01:10:54] I don’t know what will be the ultimate effect of my work but I’m beginning to see the outlines of a legacy. I am shy to say this, but I am really proud to see what’s beginning to happen. Du: You should certainly be proud of all this work. That’s amazing...