 Earl: This is Marie Earl with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is April 7, 2016. I’m here with Stanford University alumna, volunteer leader, and benefactor, Linda Meier. We’re conducting this interview at the Frances C. Arrillaga Alumni Center. I’d like to begin by asking you to tell us a bit about where you were born and where you grew up. Meier: [00:00:22] [laughter] I was born in Denver, Colorado. I moved to Los Angeles when I was two, so I have no memory of Denver at all. My father was a doctor and my mother was from Los Angeles. I grew up in Southern California and went to school at El Rodeo Grammar School [El Rodeo School], then Beverly Hills High School. I came to Stanford and I never went back. [laughter] Once one was up here, [one] really didn’t have to return. Earl: Were either of your parents involved in community service? Meier: [00:01:05] My father was. He was very involved in community activities, chaired the--I think it was called the Community Chest at the time. He chaired various boards. He raised my sister and me to focus on that. During summers, we would volunteer at a camp in the Los Angeles city area, which 13 was more of an underprivileged children’s camp. We tended to do quite a few volunteer kinds of things. In high school, we were both very involved in community activities, and I was involved in student government and the honor society. It was sort of part of my activity, part of my culture, part of my focus, and I continued it as an adult. Earl: I’m curious, what was Beverly Hills High like at that time? Meier: [00:02:16] Beverly Hills High was a very good academic school. It was interesting because it was very Beverly Hills and you had a Hollywood influence, which was very prevalent. The story on that was my parents had insisted that my sister and I go away to college, when that time came, and not to the same college. My sister went to Wellesley [Wellesley College]. We’re two years apart, born on the same day. I skipped a grade so we were just a year apart in school. My sister came back at Thanksgiving and was pointing to the attire and a variety of people that she would see on the street. “Look at that, look at that,” she’d say to my mother and to me. You sort of become quite used to it, a little flashy and a different way. I came to Stanford the following year [laughter] and at Thanksgiving, same thing happened. That was one of the reasons they wanted us to go away, I think. Earl: Are you close to this day, you and your sister? Meier: [00:03:32] We are extraordinarily close. We’re very, very lucky. Earl: Where does she live? Meier: [00:03:38] She lives in Los Angeles. She’s involved in community activities and in education. She’s really my mentor and my best friend. She is very close 14 to her children and vice versa with her. We’re very fortunate. Earl: That’s very nice. You ended up at Stanford. Did you think of other places? Meier: [00:04:09] I did. The Seven Colleges Conference [now called Seven Sisters] and Stanford were the only schools I looked at. Wellesley was out because Brenda was there. I was thinking of Smith [Smith College]. I didn’t like Radcliffe [Radcliffe College]. Vassar [Vassar College] was too remote. As I looked at the other ones, I came up to visit Stanford. I stayed, actually, with a friend of my sister and liked it very much. Earl: What were your impressions? Meier: [00:04:44] I liked the feel of the campus. I liked the students--and [it had] a lot of energy, very pretty campus. I almost had a foot-in-the-mouth disease because I went for an interview while I was up that year and I spoke with a freshman admissions officer. I was planning on being a math major and I was going to go on to business. I said to him, “I’m not coming to college for my MRS.” I thought I was being very smart that way. He said, “I don’t know what’s wrong with that because my wife and I were married as juniors.” I thought, well, I can cross that school off my list. Lo and behold, guess who did get married as a sophomore. So, you never know. Things happen. Earl: What about student life? What was student life like then? Meier: [00:05:50] I was a freshman in Roble Hall and Two Center. It was all singles. You ended up becoming friendly with certain girls. I had actually a very unusual situation. They had a bus tour and I was sitting on a seat and a boy 15 came in. He sat down next to me. I said, “Where are you from?” He was from here. His father was a law professor at Stanford. Then he asked where I was from, and I said I was from Southern California. I never volunteered Beverly Hills to begin with. I would sort of get to that. He said, “Well where?” I said, “Beverly Hills.” He said, “Well, my aunt teaches at Beverly Hills High School.” His aunt was Miss Hurlbut. When he said the last name, I said, “You’re Johnny, [laughter] because she used to talk about Johnny all the time.” That was Professor Hurlbut at the Law School’s son. It was amazing. Earl: What was the student body then [at Stanford]? I’m trying to [think] how big it was-Meier: [00:07:23] I don’t know what the numbers were, but it was not equal men and women at that time. It was just a very positive experience. I had a different experience. I had met Tony [Tony Meier], my husband, the summer before coming to Stanford. I hadn’t wanted to meet any boys or know anybody. Somebody had suggested that I meet him. He was getting out. I was coming in. I went out with him and he just was great, a real gentleman. He [Tony] was president of his fraternity, and he had made a ruling that you could not date freshman because some freshman girl had turned in his house for liquor or something. He was violating his own rules. I dated other people. I dated him and one thing led to another. I was not anticipating it at all. It was a very unique place--the classes were excellent. Earl: They were different from high school? 16 Meier: [00:08:46] Very. Very stimulating. It was interesting because we were able to coast as graduates of Beverly High. We had already had some of the programs--English and so forth. You felt very well prepared, very comfortable, and willing to try some different classes. As a sophomore, I had taken a sociology class. I believe the professor was Professor Cord or McCord. That was just very stimulating and very engaging. I took a class from a Professor Volkart [Edmund H. Volkart], which was sociology of health and illness. I was very impressed with that and really focused on that throughout. I had changed to a major in sociology, and I was doing research for him on a book he was writing. Then he moved to the University of Oregon to become head of the Sociology Department up there. It was at a time when Stanford Hospital was moving down here, in 1959. I did some research and interviewed patients to look at their familial relationships and how those impacted their health. It was at a time when psychosomatic illness became a very popular focus, but that was psychology. The sociological causes had not been researched and that was what Volkart was engaged in--I was fascinated with it. Earl: Was that unusual to have that kind of experience as an undergrad? Meier: [00:10:44] It may have been. I was lucky. Yes, I was very excited. It’s very interesting because, to me, sociology is very commonsensical. It really is logical, the way one looks at things. It hadn’t been studied. You could predict health and illness in different kinds of social groups and cultural groups. Things that we all take for granted, but it hadn’t been researched at that time. Earl: So there really was no hospital? 17 Meier: [00:11:18] The hospital came in 1959. That’s when I was doing the research-when it came down. Earl: Right at the beginning, you met Tony. It was somebody who suggested that you would be a good person to talk to? Meier: [00:11:33] Right, exactly. Earl: Was it typical/atypical to be engaged and/or married during--? Meier: [00:11:41] Very atypical. I was the first one. It was the last thing I anticipated. I had not planned on doing that at all. It wasn’t going to change what I was going to do. Tony was out of school. We were going to move to Portland, which is where he’s from. I was going to transfer to Reed [Reed College], but Reed didn’t have a lot of the classes that I wanted. Tony said, “If it’s that important, we’ll stay here and I’ll work and then, when you finish, we’ll go.” That’s exactly what we didn’t do because we never left. [laughter] We became engaged. Earl: Was that because he became so--? Meier: [00:12:20] We became engaged in my program. We were married in 1959. I was eighteen and it was January of my sophomore year. I took off winter quarter and then I went for a year straight so that I wasn’t behind my experience class. I graduated on time. I was going to go for my master’s and then I became pregnant with our first child. I had a thing--I didn’t want to be on campus pregnant. I always [laughter] had a mental block on that, so I wasn’t. Stanford was part and parcel of our lifestyle. It was different being married, but it didn’t impact my experience. I had very good friends, but I never studied past 5 p.m. 18 That was the deal that I made with Tony. If we stayed here and if I went to school, that I would be very programmed in my scheduling--I took a very heavy schedule and was able to do that, but I closed the books at five. Earl: Did they have married student housing? Meier: [00:13:32] No, we lived off campus. We lived in Menlo Park. The apartment building still exists. [laughter] I drive by every once in awhile. We got an apartment where children were not allowed because I wanted to study during the day. I didn’t want any noise. We were there for three years. Earl: What did your parents think about you getting married? Meier: [00:13:57] I think they were a little surprised, but they also knew I wasn’t someone who would do something in a haphazard way. I wrote them a letter. They had met Tony and had liked him, but hadn’t anticipated that I would be getting married at that point. It wasn’t changing anything I did. It’s funny because our boys are swimmers and have great time management skills, which athletes do. I think when you have a challenging program--the busier your schedule, the better your time management skills are. I was able to do that. I cooked and enjoyed it. We entertained quite a bit because Tony’s friends were all out of school and in San Francisco. We had a very normal married situation, but quite different from what I had anticipated. Earl: So interesting. What was it like to be raising children in this area? Were you close to mothers’ groups? Were you so busy with school-Meier: [00:15:16] You didn’t have play groups like they do now. We built a house in Stanford Hills, which was all young families practically. I became involved--I wasn’t going to be sitting home. I became involved in the Junior League and 19 became very active in that. I was involved with other mothers, but it wasn’t the same type of thing they do now. It’s much more programmed. I think we were a little bit more casual in that. We eventually had three children. Once I got into the sort of young mode, I was determined to have all my children by the time I was twenty-five. Don’t ask me why, but that was sort of it. Our children were all early. Our oldest was four weeks early, our second was six weeks early, and our daughter was seven weeks early. I just made it before--she’s on the twenty-second of May and I’m on the thirtyfirst. [laughter] I had all the children by the time I was twenty-five. I was involved in the children’s activities, just community activities--school things, the normal kinds of things. Earl: What about the things going on in the world around, like Vietnam? Were they felt here in this area? Meier: [00:17:03] No--we were just a window on that. We were very lucky because Tony wasn’t in Vietnam. I had some friends from college who were in Vietnam, but it wasn’t really a focus. We were sort of the complacent generation and so there weren’t major issues. Older generations were in the Korean War. I didn’t really know anybody who was that. My father was in World War II and almost got called back when Korea occurred. I remember the concern that he might have to go. We were a window on that time. We talk about it now because it’s quite different. The ones who went to Vietnam, that I’ve seen in reunions, were never the same. I don’t know whether any of your friends had that experience-Earl: My husband had a draft number, but didn’t get called up. 20 Meier: [00:18:05] It just was horrible, you know. Anyway, it’s not dissimilar to what we have now with the Middle East. Earl: What about the women’s movement? Was that something you felt here? Meier: [00:18:21] It was interesting. I’m not a feminist. I always tended to go in directions that were not typically female directions or interests academically-you know, math was my passion and that was very unusual. That was just my interest. My father was very interested in that. It was quite natural. My sister was very much into the humanities more, very fluent in French and so forth. Jing Lyman [Elizabeth “Jing” Lyman] tried to get me involved in CROW [Center for Research On Women]. Jing had suggested that I become involved. It was interesting because I will never forget there was a luncheon at Phyllis Draper’s home. Jing was doing a presentation on CROW, trying to engage these women as donors. Jing called me afterwards to see how I felt she had done. I said, “Well, you did a wonderful job, but, you have to realize women of today do not see themselves as donors. That’s really been a role that has been a man’s role. So, what you were asking them to do was not something they were comfortable with.” She said, “You know, I hadn’t thought of that.” It was sort of Jing’s feminist side. This is the Bay [Area] way. They had a difficult time. It was interesting because little did I realize that I would become so involved in women’s athletics. That was really just happenstance, I would say. There was a woman whose vision was to have women’s athletic 21 scholarship support. Her name was Peg Phelps. Peg was quite a bit older than I, probably twenty years or so, and was interested in starting a program. There had been a couple of coffees. I had been invited, but had refused because I wasn’t really interested. Peg was interested because she had heard that I had done a lot of organizational work and that I might be helpful in fashioning it that way. I had lunch one day with Abbie von Schlegell [Abbie J. von Schlegell] and I--don’t know if that name rings a bell with you--she used to work here. Peg Phelps popped up. I thought anybody who is that passionate about this, I need to listen to. That’s how I became involved. Earl: Was that the first really Stanford engagement then? Meier: [00:21:29] Yes, that--well, no. I had been involved with PACE [Plan of Action for a Challenging Era]. Yes, but it wasn’t really a meaningful kind of participation. You were just one of the volunteers. Earl: Remind me the acronym. Meier: [00:21:44] I can’t even remember what it was. Earl: It was a fundraising--. Meier: [00:21:49] It was a fundraising activity. I liked to do things that were meaningful, that challenged you. I’m big on challenges. Tell me why I can’t do it and then I’ll go. PACE didn’t give me much satisfaction, but the fact that one could create an organization, a board, a structure that could be effective was really intriguing to me. Of course, you had the challenges with the Buck Club [now called the Buck/Cardinal Club] and the men’s [athletic scholarship] support group, which had been very successful. Earl: Did they view this [the Cardinal Club] as competition? 22 Meier: [00:22:43] A threat, a major threat. Earl: How did you work through that? Meier: [00:22:51] I did a presentation for their board one day. We had quite a bit of objection--you know, “You’re going to take money from the Buck Club.” I was explaining, “Quite the contrary. I think it probably will enhance everybody’s fundraising.” I said, “Many of you have daughters, too.” There was just silence. I think that got through to them more than anything. I said, “Don’t you want them to have the same opportunities that your sons have?” There were some people who were quite difficult to work with and others who really sort of came around. I still credit Jim Plunkett [James William Plunkett] with much of our success. I asked him [Jim] to be on the board maybe the second or third year. He gave us credibility. He was admired by so many, such an incredible star, humble, and a wonderful human being. He had a golf tournament, the Plunkett Golf Tournament [Cardinal Club Celebrity/Amateur Golf Tournament]. Another one who had great vision and was involved, before I ever became involved, was Frank Lodato [Frank J. Lodato]. Frank was very interested in seeing this and he was a friend of Peg’s. I think they may have even gone to school together. Dick Madigan [Richard B. Madigan] was another one who was interested in this. Dick was an athlete himself. I’ll never forget that I had the first board meeting at my home and had drafted a structure with committees and various things. [laughter] Frank came up to me afterwards, and he said, “Now, who did this?” I looked at him and said, “I did.” 23 “Oh really?” I said, “Are you trying to tell me that you don’t think a woman can do this?” [laughter] I teased him unmercifully. “Who did this?” I love that. Earl: Do you think it was something that was bubbling up here at Stanford or was it in a national context? Meier: [00:25:27] It had to be. It was mandated with Title IX. Andy Geiger [Ferdinand “Andy” Geiger] is the one who made it happen. He was athletic director at the time. Andy had the guts to take on the Buck Club. That’s exactly what it took. It took guts and he was willing to. He ended up with some arguments with them and he was willing to do that [because] he felt so strongly about it. Andy is to receive a tremendous amount of credit. Donna Garton [Donna T. Garton] came to work with us in 1979. Earl: I was thinking that was maybe where you met Donna. Meier: [00:26:02] That’s where I met her. Earl: Started working together? Meier: [00:26:03] And we’ve been together ever since. She was a gift and so that was an important one. She has a lot of the historical perspective of what went on. There was competition because the Buck Club really felt the competition. We decided our best way to go about fundraising was to do event fundraising. You really wouldn’t have the constituency if you just did the normal Buck Club style of annual giving type of thing. Our first auction was in 1980 and, I think, Coming Up Winners was what we titled it. We’d pulled together a group. The beauty of event fundraising is that you can coalesce a group that isn’t a natural constituency. They don’t have to be Stanford alums. They want 24 to be interested in working on something that’s going to be successful, something that they believe in, and they like the camaraderie that one has in working with others. We were able to build a much broader base than just our board. Earl: Some of those prizes were amazing. Tickets for the Oscars. How did you get that? Meier: [00:27:35] We scrounged. We had a wonderful group. We did an auction in 1982 in Los Angeles that Cally Stenger--who was one of that older group, a friend of Peg Phelps, and had been an athlete--she helped manage that. In 1984, it was getting to a point where auctions were sort of the norm and, so, you needed to do something a little bit different. Our auctioneers that we had used were car auctioneers and so they were a little rough around the edges and quite vocal, to say the least. I wondered if we couldn’t do a national auction in different locations. They’re the ones who said to me, “No.” I said, “Why?” “Well, it’s never been done.” I said, “Okay, well, we have constituents in various cities around the country and it would really make us different. It also would enable us to get prizes because we would be--” I would go through the AAA [American Automobile Association] travel book and travel magazines and pick out certain trips or things that I thought it would be wonderful to have. We got statistics from the Alumni Association about our alumni base and the numbers who would be covered by exposure from this group. There’s that travel group that is in Seattle and 25 he does the private plane. Anyway, I called him cold. He was doing trains at that time. I said, “We’ve got a wonderful opportunity for you. We’re going to do this and the auction will be in New York, Denver, San Francisco, and Washington, DC.” We had four sites and you have the alumni base, and so forth. Anyway, he gave us a trip for a family. I read about a wagon train in Idaho, or somewhere. Anyway, [I] called them. We got that. Then we got the one that was really intriguing to me--the dog races in Alaska. Earl: Iditarod. Meier: [00:30:19] Actually, a friend of ours from Chicago bought that for herself and her son. These items were just amazing. We were able to do that. Then we did our final auction, which was not for the Cardinal Club. It was the one for the 100th Big Game, when we did it with Cal [University of California, Berkeley], and that gave us the biggest leverage ever. We had 2,500 people attend at the Cow Palace. We netted 2.4 million, so each school got 1.2. The only way I would do it is if we split it fifty-fifty because I knew we would be doing most of the work. I didn’t want to get into anything as far as judging who should get this or that. We had a very large committee, men and women. I started as the chair. When we had the 100th Big Game, Ted Leland was the athletic director at the time. Ted called me in and wanted my advice. He and the athletic director at Cal had talked about doing something for the 100th Big Game, which certainly was logical. So we met. John Kasser was the athletic director at Cal at the time. We had lunch one day. They were telling 26 me about the dinner dance they were going to do. I looked at the two of them. I said, “You’ve got to be kidding. No one’s going to go to a dinner dance and certainly not going to give you lots of money. You’ve got a fundraising opportunity of a lifetime. You know, we’ve done auctions. We know how to do them well. This one would be unlike anything we’ve ever done, if we did it for both schools.” It was an interesting process because Cal had never done fundraising, as we had at Stanford. I was the chair and I approached my friends at Cal and said, “Who’s the woman that you think--and I want a woman--should be the co-chair from Cal because we’ve got to have two. It can’t be just Stanford. It’s not going to work right.” They gave me the name of a woman. I invited her to lunch. We met in the city. She had never really done a lot of fundraising events, but she was on their foundation board and she was highly respected, a lovely gal. That’s how we proceeded. Earl: Why did you think it was important to have a woman? Meier: [00:33:13] To do events, there’s a lot of grunt work. There’s a lot of planning. The men don’t have that kind of experience as much, and they aren’t as able to be magnets for the variety of people. Women can, more than men, with events. You very rarely see men as actual chairs of events--working chairs. This was not [in] name only. This was twenty-four hours, seven days. Earl: I was thinking it may sound really fun and likely a lot of work. Meier: [00:33:51] A ton of work. I was closing the Athletic Department almost daily. We had two girls that we hired as staff. We centered it all down here. We had issues. You had to sort of navigate the whole path carefully. You could end 27 up with problems and issues when you have two different schools and two different cultures. Cal had never really done fundraising events--they didn’t have the kind of structure, have the kind of volunteers who knew what to do, how to do it, and just sort of roll their sleeves up. We had a big deal on the list because neither school wanted the other school to see their list. I was trying to figure out how to make that work--and what we did is, we each addressed our own groups [letters] and the envelopes. Then we merged them, so that we didn’t have duplicate envelopes. We got the envelopes from Cal. We were in the football dressing room, down at the stadium, which is where we had all of our stuff like that. These envelopes came back from Cal and Cal had paid people. They didn’t have any volunteers. There was no real quality control or people who sort of knew. The envelopes--some of them said Mr. Anthony Smith and then Linda Smith--didn’t have Mr. and Mrs. We had to redo them all. I called the athletic director because our group was just seething. They were not going to redo these people’s envelopes that were incorrectly addressed. I called John Kasser and I said, “We have a problem here [laughter] and I think we may end up exploding. Let me explain.” He said, “You’ve got to be kidding.” I said, “No.” He said, “I’ll send somebody down to pick those up immediately,” which he did. They redid them all and we averted what could have been a real crisis. 28 Earl: I think that’s one of the things I really admired in working with you, the attention both at the big picture level and then the detail piece. Meier: [00:36:34] Yes, if you don’t do it--if it’s not a quality product, it’s not going to work. John Kasser, when I told him, he said, “Do you think we’ll make two hundred thousand dollars?” I said, “John, we don’t do this for two hundred thousand dollars. [laughter] I guarantee you it’s going to be a lot higher.” When we were getting the numbers in, and we realized where we were going to be--we had kept the expenses down quite well--he [John Kasser] kept calling. He had budgeted for this. I said to him afterwards, “You never, ever put a fundraising event in a budget.” He would call me almost weekly. I said, “Nobody’s getting any money until we’ve paid all the expenses. I promise you, you’re going to--” When it ended up being 1.2 [million], he just was a hero. [laughter] I really enjoyed working with him. We had auction items that were one of a kind. Everybody who worked on it loved working on it. It was a lot of fun. It was huge. Earl: How big of a group did you have, through these auctions, built up of committed volunteers that you could count on? Meier: [00:37:52] We probably had at least sixty that came back and wanted to do it again, ones that I’d worked with on other events, like the opening for Children’s Hospital [Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital Stanford] or the Bloomingdale’s opening. You have somebody who’s really proficient at reservations and you have somebody who’s really good at marketing, then you get the whole group. A lot of those were Cal people, as well. They were 29 friends of mine that I like to work with. People want to work on a successful venture. I think they sort of let some of those divisions go away. Earl: Speaking of divisions--having worked on a Big Game auction, did that also sort of shift the relationship with the Buck Club and the Cardinal Club? Meier: [00:38:48] They were already merged. Earl: Oh, they were already there, okay. When did that merger happen and how did that come about? Meier: [00:38:53] I was not around then. When the Buck Club became aware that we were going to be successful and that people were gravitating to us, they offered to take us over and we refused. As we said, “You are not taking us over. We will go in as equal partners.” It was when we were really stable that they became the Buck/Cardinal Club. Earl: Where did the name Cardinal come from? Whose inspiration was that? Was that from the start you were the Cardinal Club? Meier: [00:39:34] Yes, the very beginning. I’m trying to think when we came up with that name because we didn’t have a name when we started. Joe Ruetz was athletic director before Andy Geiger. I think Joe had agreed that we needed to tackle--I was not involved at the time--Title IX, but Andy’s the one who implemented it. Earl: It sounds like a series of good relationships with athletic directors. Meier: [00:40:04] Absolutely. Earl: Which is really nice. Meier: [00:40:07] They have to be committed to it because they’re really sticking their necks out. It was interesting because when we were founding the group, 30 we met with various people in the development office whom I didn’t really know. Bruce Hinchcliffe, does that name ring a bell? Earl: Yes. Meier: [00:40:32] Actually, I think Bruce was in Tony’s class. We had to meet with Iris [Iris Brest]--Paul [Paul Brest], the dean of the Law School’s wife. Earl: Brest. Meier: [00:40:54] Iris Brest was not at all fond of event fundraising. When you think back on it, I can understand because we were going to be highly visible. If we failed, we’d be doubly visible and it would be Stanford who would have egg on its face, not us. It really was giving us a tremendous sense of responsibility. Earl: The Alumni Association, were they similarly worried? Meier: [00:41:24] Yes, development was not something that they were getting near. The university was concerned. Once we showed that you can do it, and do it in a quality way, and we had--that first auction was at Maples [Maples Pavillion]--John Brodie [John Riley Brodie] as the auctioneer and Master of Ceremonies. We tried to include known athletes, so that that would involve the whole group. Earl: You said you didn’t initially have a passion for women’s athletics. Meier: [00:42:12] I mean, I did. I swam competitively. I ended up doing synchronized swimming--in high school, I switched to that. I played tennis. It wasn’t women’s athletics versus men’s athletics. It wasn’t that. It was just sort of part of the normal lifestyle. Earl: As a student, did people go to football games? 31 Meier: [00:42:40] Oh yes, I was a cheerleader in high school, too. I was a big enthusiast as far as football and basketball. Earl: Was that part of your family culture? Meier: [00:42:52] Yes. Earl: Fly fishing and sailing, did those--? Meier: [00:42:57] No, sailing I never did. I don’t know how that got in there. Fly fishing is only because of Tony. Earl: Because he’s from Portland. Meier: [00:43:08] Oh yes, he’s a big fly fisherman. That’s part of my responsibility as a wife [laughter] is to learn how to do that. Earl: I’ve seen you at Stanford women’s basketball games. Meier: [00:43:19] Yes, we love it. Earl: Do you have a passion for particular Stanford sports? Meier: [00:43:25] We have supported tennis, a female tennis player. We’ve had a scholarship for many years. We love women’s basketball just because. In football, we are avid fans. But women’s basketball, I just think Tara [Tara VanDerveer] has done such an extraordinary job--the coaching on that team and the finesse that they exhibit. We now host a party for Tara and her team to start the season. We do a swim barbecue at our house for them. We’ve been doing that for about four years. Prior to that, for fifteen years, we had hosted a party for the men’s football coaches and their families. Finally, after fifteen years, Tony and I looked at each other and thought somebody else should be doing this. At one point, we had ninety-five people. When it got to younger coaches, we had younger families and all. We 32 started it with Tyrone [Tyrone Willingham], so it goes all the way back then and we loved it. Then we realized nobody did anything for Tara, so that’s how we offered to do that and do the team. Of course, it’s so small that you can do it. We do that and we look forward to it each year. Earl: Do you have favorite Stanford sports moments? Meier: [00:45:03] Not really. Each year there’s one or another. I think what I really take such pride in at Stanford is the quality of the student athlete. They are unbelievably academic. I think my proudest moment is when I hear them announce what their majors are, what they’re doing, and they’re going on for graduate degrees. It’s worth supporting because there’s nothing quite like it anywhere in the world. Earl: There’s a lot of talk now about how much it’s escalated, the competition across the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] and the programs. Meier: [00:45:49] And paying athletes and all that. Earl: Is that the kind of issue you would have dealt with on the athletic board? When did you join the athletic board? Do you remember? Meier: [00:45:56] Gosh, I don’t. I was on it twice because I chaired it twice. I think you’ve got a better record there than I. I was the first woman chair. The athletic board is really a visiting board. It isn’t a governing board. It’s always sort of had a little problem finding its role. I’m not sure it still has. At one point, fairly recently, they increased the number to seventy something, which was just ridiculous. It really doesn’t have much impact, as an individual participating on that. We just met with Kim Eber [Kimberley Eber], who is 33 fairly new in the Athletic Department, a very impressive young woman. We were just talking about some of the programs that they might do because one thing we haven’t been successful in implementing, or really carrying out, is having the donors host the student athlete at their home for dinner. Some do it, but it’s very few. It’s something I think they need to encourage. It’s like having any of the students over. It’s wonderful. We try to do that. We were talking about how they could sort of do a better job of getting more people involved. Earl: Do you want to take a little break? Meier: [00:47:36] I’m fine, thank you. Earl: You mentioned Packard. When did you become involved with Packard and how did that unfold? Meier: [00:47:46] Lu Packard [Lucile Packard] had invited me to be on that board. It was when it was Children’s Hospital at Stanford. It was before we changed the name to Packard [Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital]. I was vice president, and they asked if I would try to get the Ronald McDonald House at Stanford. In order to do that, you competed with other Children’s Hospitals in the Bay Area because the franchisees were the ones who determine who the recipient will be. We went down to Carmel and did a presentation against Children’s Hospital in San Francisco [UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital San Francisco] and Oakland [UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital Oakland]. We were chosen. Trying to get it through Stanford was one of the more difficult things. They thought the golden arches were going to appear, or something commercial. 34 I had to go through the real estate office, the dean’s office, and the head of the hospital trying to explain how this would be such an incredible service and would not be commercialized at all. We had gone back to Chicago to look at the Ronald McDonald House back there. It was a group of us and then we formed a board, once we were appointed. I want to say it was Clayton Rich--that’s who the dean was--and he was very stern. He was on Children’s Hospital [board] as dean of the School of Medicine. I had gone to him, discussed it with him and his assistant, and I came back and reported it to the next hospital board meeting. That’s when he corrected me, and I corrected him. [laughter] This was sort of the masculine side. Tony’s friends calling him- you know, congratulating him that “your wife took on the dean” and so forth. I wasn’t trying to be difficult. He was just incorrect. That was all. A month later, I was appointed to the hospital board. At that time, Stanford Hospital Board was an advisory board. I was the only woman. It was a time of huge friction between the community physicians and the faculty. Huge. You have no idea. Because I was the junior member of the board, I got the ridiculous role of representing the hospital board for a group meeting that the community physicians and faculty would have monthly. I came back from my first one appalled because they literally yelled at each other. I was so shocked--I couldn’t believe it--that this was the way they would be behaving in such an immature fashion. [00:51:16] Then we changed the board, so it was a governing board. Don Kennedy [Donald Kennedy] became president of the board, as he was 35 president of the university. We were going to be building some additions to the hospital. I suggested that we have an art program and so I became chair of that art program--that was twenty-six years ago. Peter Bing said, “My wife might be interested in that.” That’s how Helen was volunteered for that. I eventually became chair of the hospital board and I was on it for twenty years. I think they grandmothered me and I chaired it for five of those years. Those were difficult times. The hospital is in an extraordinary position right now, financially, and every way possible. It’s really strong. It’s got an outstanding board, a great mission, and a great commitment. We’re in a good place. Earl: I think you said to me that one of the things you were most proud of was having been associated with the evolution of the hospital board. Meier: [00:52:50] Yes, it was. It was a tough time, took a lot of time, a lot of effort, and a lot of people skills. Earl: I’m thinking of your sociology degree. Meier: [00:53:04] Right. I have said that so often--little did I ever think I would be using that and I ended up using it. It’s an incredible institution. They were recruiting chairs of departments. We had some friction between the dean and the CEO of the hospital, which was very unpleasant. You have times that are not so smooth. Earl: Structurally, a lot of things have changed. Now it’s Stanford Health Care, right? Meier: [00:53:45] Exactly, right. Earl: Are there some things that have stayed the same? You’ve talked about the 36 board. Meier: [00:53:53] Yes. You’ve got a trio at the Medical Center, which is different from other places around the country. You’ve got the Medical School, the Stanford Hospital, and the Children’s Hospital. I think they are working extremely well together. We will see when a new CEO is appointed. The intention is that that will be a very strong thrust. The dean is very much a collaborator. I think he’s done an excellent job. This is Lloyd Minor [Lloyd B. Minor MD] and then Chris Dawes [Christopher G. Dawes] who is at Children’s Hospital. Chris will be retiring, maybe in another year or two. He’s been there for a long time and I worked with him years ago when I was involved. He’s done an excellent job. There’s always a lot of change, but it’s such a large portion of the budget for the university and the medical center. Stanford Health Care was felt to be a stronger name, to connote patient care because patient care hasn’t always been the focus for the medical center. Research and teaching has been, so this is really a strong third leg. Earl: Now you’re back involved with--? Meier: [00:55:29] I’m with the hospital. I’m back on the hospital board. It’s been about two and a half years, I think. They asked if I would come back. Earl: How did they convince you? What was the sell? Meier: [00:55:42] I think it was because there were some new challenges and a more positive view. I had gone onto their campaign council. It was, I think, after that that they wanted to know if I would be involved. I chair the nominating committee, which ends up being a little bit more than I thought it was going 37 to be, which is good. It’s a very good group. It’s a balanced group and I really enjoy it. We’re getting some excellent people on the board. Earl: Do you see your contributions as different now, having been involved with the organization over a span of decades? Meier: [00:56:44] Yes, you do. I mean, you’ve got your historical side of it. It’s funny because I now see that--as we’re doing oral history and all--I do have a lot of history around here. I don’t really think about it and then when I go back and, my goodness, it’s been a long time. I know a lot of the players and have enjoyed it. I’ve seen growth. I think probably one of the most satisfying experiences that I’ve had has been chairing the Leading Matters program that we did with the Stanford Challenge. Also, being one of the co-chairs for the Stanford Challenge--traveling the globe, not just the United States, but traveling the globe and meeting people. I visited each site three times, on my own nickel--I want you to know, as Tony keeps reminding me. The first time was to explain to them what we wanted to do and to get input from them as to what they wanted for their community. At first we thought we could do a cookie cutter program-not the case, as you well know. You know better than many. We personalized the program for each spot. I would come back and explain to the executive committee what a particular city wanted or what subject might be of interest to them. Invariably, John Hennessy would say, “You should look into Joe Smith. He’s really a good lecturer on that subject and he’s a promising or accomplished faculty member and Mary Smith” or whatever. After this happening many times, I said to him, “John, how in the 38 devil do you know the number of faculty in such a wide array of disciplines?” His knowledge was just extraordinary. That was the process. The second meeting was to go--at that point, people we’d identified as chairs in those cities had identified committees. I would go and present what we would be doing for their event. The third time was the actual event. I think one of the funny experiences I had--we had determined that London was going to be our European center. Of course, you had Berlin and Paris who thought they should be, as well. I said, “Well, what we’ll do is we’ll go visit those three in one trip and explain why we’re doing that.” So, that’s how we would start it. [laughter] I arrived in Berlin and we were having a program at the campus that night. They had about forty people, which was more than we had thought. No one was smiling. I was standing there, and I didn’t know whether they were wavering or whether I was wavering. We had to go for dinner with a major donor that night for goose. Martin [Martin Shell] was there. Earl: This was Martin Shell. Meier: [01:00:24] Martin Shell--subsequently, Martin has said that he would never travel with me again. He said I did the Bataan Death March because we did [all of] Berlin that night. We had dinner with this man, a goose dinner because it was goose season. The next day, we flew to Paris. We had an event that night with a group. They argued that we should be coming to Paris--we shouldn’t be going to London. The next day, we were at the London ambassador’s home because he was a Stanford alum and had a large event there. I left. I was there two and a half days and Martin went on. He’s never 39 forgotten, but when I was traveling, it was business and I just wanted to do it as quickly as possible. It wasn’t a luxury trip, or any kind of a trip. It was effective. Meeting the people that I met was just incredibly satisfying. I enjoy that part of it. I really enjoy engaging with people and learning from them. Earl: Do you think about the legacy of that, which as I recall, was not blowing that fundraising goal out of the water, but engaging all those legion of volunteers? Meier: [01:01:47] Yes, we did. We called it “friend raising” and that’s what it was. It was not fundraising. We did it during one of the most difficult economic times, 2007 to 2008. We decided to continue with the Challenge and with these events. People appreciated the fact that we were doing this for them-to engage them and to tell them about what was going on at Stanford. It had a great impact on the fundraising, which we knew eventually it would, but that was not the intent. People became so positive about what was going on and excited, that we were successful in a variety of ways. I think engaging with people is such a wonderful opportunity. It’s so satisfying and rewarding because you end up with a lot of friends all over the world. Earl: Another outcome of the work, that I wonder how deliberate it was on your part, the president’s part, was having--the Alumni Association had merged into the university--an opportunity for the friend raisers and the fundraisers to be working on a project together. Meier: [01:03:11] That’s right. Earl: Really important. How conscious was that in your--? Meier: [01:03:15] I think we were very conscious, but I think you need to credit 40 Donna Garton with much of that success. You need somebody who is extremely open, trusted, doesn’t have an agenda, and has people skills. She embodies all of those. She, as an individual, had a huge impact. As you know, we had meetings with the Alumni Association and the development people from each department. That had never been done before. Once everybody became comfortable with that, it was even more successful moving forward. They’re a part of one big family. I think people really got that sense, and that hadn’t been the case before. You were at the center of that. Earl: And very happy to have the opportunity. When I hear you talking about a lot of this, I’m conscious not only of putting sociology to work but also the business skills set. Was that something that you had an intuitive sense for? Did you have any kind of formal training? Were you and Tony confidants? Meier: [01:04:42] I’d always been interested in business and had planned to go to business school. I changed paths. I used to, when I would do training for the Junior League, explain to the members that they needed to have financial skills if they were ever going to be effective in an organization--whether it’s a nonprofit or for profit. That business side was something that always interested me. I’ve sort of morphed into it. Budgets were something that were very comfortable to me. When you did fundraising events, you really had to be very careful because sometimes some women were not--with whom I had worked--so you had to explain that that’s not acceptable. It’s a business. Fundraising is a business, either you succeed or you fail. I credit Stanford. I had done fundraising in a variety of roles, but they had never 41 allowed a volunteer group to step into the role in which we did. Earl: You’re talking here about the big campaigns? Meier: [01:06:19] Not the campaigns, but more the fundraising events. Yes. Earl: The fundraising events, okay. Meier: [01:06:27] I’m grateful to Stanford for having given me an opportunity to do something more bold. I like to do bold things. [laughter] Earl: In a sort of related note, banking. How did you get involved with the establishment of University National Bank and Trust? Meier: [01:06:45] I had been on a nonprofit board with one of the men who was going to be on the founding board. He suggested me to Carl Schmitt, who was the founder for University Bank. They were looking for a woman. I met with Carl. Carl had been the state superintendent of banking and then he’d been at Wells Fargo. I had not known him before. It was in that process that I became involved. It’s interesting to be the only woman. I’ve done that with California Water Service Company. I was the first woman and the only woman for, probably, ten years. I’m going to be going off that board in May. I always feel that a woman has an advantage, but she needs to take advantage of that advantage. I think being feminine is something that gives you a huge advantage. A lot of times women don’t do that because they come in with sort of their muscles flexed, thinking they’re going to battle. You don’t need to battle. You prove yourself by your capability, or whatever you may be able to offer, but you don’t need to become a man to do it. Earl: What would be an example of bringing the feminine to a boardroom? 42 Meier: [01:08:35] Just the way you deal with people. I had one situation--I can’t really describe it because it’s a confidential thing--where we had a change in management. They asked if I would meet with an individual who was having some problems and I did. Matter of fact, I did that in another situation where there had been some accusations that were incorrect against somebody, but I was the one that they asked. I think you’re not threatening and, sometimes, they may think you listen more. Earl: It’s not by the fact of you being on the Human Resource Committee or something? Just Linda has the skills to have this conversation? Meier: [01:09:37] I think it’s sort of style. Again, if you’re not real aggressive--I think that’s part of it. The head of one of the companies that I’ve been on the board with came up to me after a meeting and said--I actually chaired the Compensation Committee for that at that time, too—that, “You have an instinct for being able to tell who’s going to make it or not make it at the company.” I was very flattered. You just sit and listen. You don’t always have to be the one talking. Earl: I’m curious, going back to the hospital board group of the community physicians and the clinical folks--yelling at each other. Your solution was to restructure, but what did you do in the in-between times? Meier: [01:10:45] You try to have them build relationships. When I first came on board, the real issue was resources. When you had labs, it was access to those labs and who had priority. When you had radiology, it was equipment. You also had a situation where the community physicians were softer and nicer to patients. You could see some nurses at the hospital who were just 43 inexcusable with patients. That wasn’t a culture. Now there’s a C-I-CARE program at the hospital and everyone is supposed to be part and parcel of that--the patient comes first. There’s just a whole culture that has been internalized that’s really, really essential. Earl: As I was reading about University National Bank and Trust, I was trying to think why would Linda be engaged and interested. There was the customer service piece, as well. Meier: [01:11:55] That’s exactly it. Earl: And relationships. Meier: [01:11:59] That was Carl’s whole theme. It’s funny because the men would talk about--I think they must have spent a lot of time at a bank or something. I’d go in, do a transaction, and leave. I’m not going to sit down and have a conversation. That was Carl’s thrust, that people really value that. He was right. I learned a lot from him and he was quite a character. I chaired the Marketing Committee for that board and Carl wanted a popcorn machine in the lobby. He was a little kooky, and a little corny, and he had this big thing. I was going to be darned if we were going to have a popcorn machine because I could imagine the popcorn all over the floor. I said, “Who’s going to sweep it?” You know, the practical side. We never did, but he said [laughter] it was my fault. I said, “Unless you’re going to be down there sweeping up those kernels, we’re not going to have it.” You just end up meeting really interesting people and you grow with that. Earl: Have there been many lasting relationships? You’ve talked about Donna Garton and how, for such a long time, the two of you have worked together. 44 Peter Bing [Peter S. Bing], you mentioned, have overlapped. Meier: [01:13:33] Peter’s been a mentor. Peter and I overlapped on the Board of Trustees. He was chair of nominating when I became vice president for the board. He was on the Hospital Board. He’s extraordinary. When I did the strategic plan for the Bing Concert Hall, Peter was the one who got me involved in that. Yes, he’s one of a kind. The university has been so enhanced by his involvement, his leadership, and everything he does. Earl: Other relationships that have really been critical through your Stanford engagement? University presidents? Meier: [01:14:24] Yes, I worked with Don [Kennedy] and John Ford very closely. Ken Bloem, who was head of the hospital, and John Hennessy [John L. Hennessy]. John and Andrea [Andrea Hennessy] are both very good friends. Jeanne Kennedy. There are just so many. I think one who’s been a real privilege for us to be involved with is Abraham Verghese. He holds our chair that we share with Joan Lane [Joan F. Lane]. But, I mean they’re faculty. Norman Naimark [Norman M. Naimark]. Earl: So faculty you get to know because of service on committees or they’re coming--speaking events and--? Meier: [01:15:29] Norman was one of our speakers and so we became engaged with that. Tara VanDerveer is a good friend. David and Kori Shaw are good friends. It’s all over the map. We’re very lucky, very blessed in that way. Sheldon King [Sheldon S. King], who used to be head of the hospital, he and Xenia [Xenia Tonesk King] have stayed with us of late. They were out here. Xenia had papers that she wanted to see if Hoover would want--they were 45 her father’s [William Tonesk]. We were able to help her arrange that. Earl: Checking time and seeing how we’re--. Meier: [01:16:18] We’re fine. Earl: There were a couple of other organizations. You mentioned Junior League, but I saw that you were also engaged with the Peninsula Center for the Blind and Visually Impaired [now called Vista Center for the Blind and Visually Impaired], PTA [Parent Teacher Association], Social Advocates for Youth. That was that period of time when you were raising your family. How did you decide how much capacity you had and where to invest that? Meier: [01:16:44] And driving kids to swim practices and stuff? Earl: Yes, because that’s really where you were building some of your skill and expertise. Meier: [01:16:50] It was interesting. The Peninsula Center for the Blind and Visually Impaired, which is now Vista--when I became chair of the board, we had very little in the way of funds. We were not going to make it for another two years max. I’ll never forget Lu Packard called to congratulate me. I said, “Now tell me, would you congratulate the captain of a sinking ship?” [laughter] I was trying to figure out how we could give ourselves some permanence. We owned a duplex on the corner of Addison and Cowper in Palo Alto. It had been a residence before my involvement, years before. This was a holdover from that. That was sort of part of the tradition and part of the feeling of the place. I talked to Tony about it. I said, “I think we need to sell these.” 46 He said, “You’re not in the real estate business, so that’s probably a good plan.” I asked him who might be somebody I should contact. He suggested someone whom I didn’t really know, who’s in the community, and Tony said, “He’s very community-minded.” I called him and he said he’d be glad to handle it. We ended up selling to Miramonte Health because one of their board members was willing to purchase the buildings. From that point forward, we turned around. We had an endowment. We had permanence. The vice president, the treasurer, and I went up to meet with LightHouse for the Blind [LightHouse for the Blind and Visually Impaired]. They wanted to see if we would be interested in merging. We went up--this was where having some business background was helpful. Turned out we went up to a full board meeting, which we didn’t know was going to be the case. The man who had invited us had really misrepresented the whole situation. He said that they would be willing to take us over. We weren’t willing to be taken over. We had just gotten ourselves into a steady position. I turned to the two men on either side of me and I said, “Are you ready to go? I think it’s time.” We got up in the middle of the meeting, thanked them very much, and we walked right out. [laughter] Sometimes being a woman--you handle it, but it’s sort of a surprise when you do that. That’s now going very strongly. It’s Vista and it’s a wonderful--it’s the only agency of its kind on the Peninsula. Earl: They just got that new building on El Camino Real. 47 Meier: [01:20:45] They’re going to be in that new building, which is wonderful. It’s just ironic because we have had two friends in the last year who have lost their sight and, it’s just--when it goes back, it’s just remarkable. At the other organization, Social Advocates for Youth, one of the men that I’d been on another board with had suggested me. It was an interesting program. It wasn’t really a well-structured organization and I didn’t really--I didn’t stay around. I think I left after two years. The Parent Teacher Association. My involvement with that was with the school district, actually. I chaired the Early Childhood Education program. I don’t know if you remember when that was a big thing in California. Each district had one. Again, my job was to pull together the different schools. We had three grammar schools at the time. One was Fremont, one was Laurel, one was Oak Knoll--no, and then we had Hillview and Encinal. We had some of the parents who resented the fact that the program was going to be at Oak Knoll, so we had to sort of pull together the group. I enjoyed doing that and so we were very successful with the program and the budget. We were exemplary in the state. Earl: Have your children gone on to be active in communities as well? Meier: [01:22:38] Very or extremely. Our daughter, who’s our youngest, has four children, the youngest of whom is a freshman at Stanford. She has two girls and two boys. The girls both went to Stanford. Her third child is at Princeton, graduating this year, and her fourth is here at Stanford. Her oldest daughter, Claire, has done Teach for America in New Orleans. 48 Laura has been very involved in educational activities. She just went back to school, for the last two years, to get her clinical counseling degree. She is working at a clinic, a grammar school, and a high school with emotionally- and mentally-challenged [students] in inner city programs. She’s done peer counseling, and she’s been national chair for that program. She’s been very involved and very effective. Our second one, Eric, was very involved at Duke when he was in school and organized nonprofit activities with the university leadership. Terry Sanford [James Terry Sanford] was president at the time. Our son, Tony, is our oldest. He was a swimmer at Harvard and ended up with some shoulder issues. He managed the Fogg Museum print department when he was an undergraduate student. He’s an art dealer that lives in San Francisco. He’s president of the American Art Dealers Association [Art Dealers Association of America] in New York. He’s on the Chinati [Foundation] board, which is in New Mexico--in Texas--and he does lecturing at graduate schools on art and business. They’re all very involved. Tony’s very involved, too. Always has been. He’s on the SIEPR [Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research] board here and DAPER Investment Fund, was president of the Children’s Health Council, and Menlo School Board. All of us have seen it as a responsibility to give back to the community. Earl: How do you and Tony decide? Do people ever come to you as a couple and say, “Will you help with--?” And sometimes you do and sometimes-Meier: [01:25:52] Sometimes you don’t. Right, exactly. It’s hard. We tend to have 49 similar interests. He chaired the Athletic Board, as well. I think we’re the only couple that has done that. It is hard. I do a lot of counseling people in nonprofit roles. I often meet with boards and discuss boardsmanship and that kind of thing. You only have so much to be able to distribute and so you sort of change-Earl: Do you have to say no a lot? Meier: [01:26:49] You have to say no a lot. There are so many needy things--only you could do them all. I was just asked to meet with a young woman who is involved with a program--she has a special ops husband in the armed services. They have started a program to provide resources for families of men--usually men, but sometimes women--who are returning from overseas. It’s counseling. I would love to be able to--at least I can counsel her and advise her as to how to do it. You know, you don’t have a bottomless resource. You just do what you can. Earl: I’m imagining the counseling that goes on just in the family, multigenerational comparing notes and strategizing--that kind of thing. Does that happen? Meier: [01:27:51] It does all the time. It’s funny. Somebody sent me a YouTube video of--I’m a big dog lover as is our whole family--dogs trying to navigate stairs. It shows puppies and different kinds of things. It’s hilarious because some of the dogs do very strange maneuvers. I sent it on to our kids this morning and Laura responded. She said she does a South City school today and she was going to show it to her students. [laughter] We shared that. Earl: That’s fun. I think that we’re at a pretty natural breaking point, if that is 50 comfortable with you. Meier: [01:28:41] Sure. Earl: This is Marie Earl with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is April 12, 2016. I’m here with Stanford University alumna, Linda Meier, who’s a volunteer leader and benefactor for the university. We’re conducting the second of two interviews at the Frances C. Arrillaga Alumni Center. I’d like to begin by picking up from our last interview. [I] read over our notes and had a few questions for you. One of the things we left off talking about was the Stanford University Hospital Board. Knowing that you’re back on the board, and so your leadership experience spans a long period of time, could you share a few of the key challenges you grappled with during your years of service? You mentioned one, which was strained towngown relationships. I wonder if there were other sticky issues that, as you look back on it, were important? Meier: [00:01:00] Probably one of the key issues was the governance regarding clinical care physicians. When I first went onto the board, the Medical School had control over the clinical aspect of the practice. It became clear that it was very important that the hospital be involved in that. The hospital took over that particular aspect. There were growing pains and issues, as far as 53 understanding who really had the governance. It was extremely important because the hospital had been criticized for an insensitive approach to patient care. We thought it was extremely important that the training for the physicians, as well as the actual implementation, focus on patient care and sensitivity. That’s really been a thrust. If you were to look at the hospital today, there is a program called C-I-CARE and it internalizes patient care and sensitivity. Abraham Verghese is very involved in the training of the physicians and the sensitivity. The hospital has really turned a corner. That’s very exciting for me to see because that was one of the areas that I was really anxious to see us improve upon and to really put as a focal point. Earl: Did the hospital also experience periods of financial stress? Meier: [00:02:42] Yes. It was not until after I was off the board that it was quite as stressful. That was post the “de-merger with UCSF [University of California, San Francisco] and Stanford. We were involved in laying the groundwork for it. It seemed to make a lot of sense. We were concerned about duplication. We thought that we could really compliment one another. I don’t think we anticipated the incredible difference in focal points and style, when you were looking at a state and a private. The two were cultures that were really different-there had been a lot of finger-pointing prior to that and it was hard to erase a lot of that. I went off the board and there was a question as to who was going to be the singular head of that program. That changed. It was a very rocky beginning and it just got worse. Fortunately, they were able to extricate both sides without too much damage, but it did have 54 impacts. Earl: As you see now, the growth for the two institutions--UCSF attracted so much more funding and attention, serving San Francisco. Stanford, likewise, has really blossomed. Although, I did see in the paper today, they were embarking on a cancer care collaborative--? Meier: [00:04:42] The Parker [Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy]. Isn’t it wonderful to see? Earl: Six institutions? It feels like the right decision. Meier: [00:04:46] It feels good, yes. It really does. There’s room for both. We’re all growing when you look at the healthcare systems. We’re all expanding and need to. There will always be that competition, but also, collaboration. Earl: A second topic I wanted to be sure to touch on was the process, mechanics, and strategy of charitable fundraising and promotional event, or community engagement, organizing. You’ve had a long and storied success record there. Are there certain keys to that success? Are there certain things when you say, okay, I’ll take on this opening, I’ll take on this big fundraising project--are there a couple factors that you really pay attention to and think are hallmarks of success when you go into it? Meier: [00:05:53] I think what I’ve enjoyed in that particular aspect of my volunteer activity has been opportunity to be creative. I enjoy doing something that’s a little bit different or that I think may work that hasn’t been tried. I love challenges. [laughter] Sometimes fundraising gives you that opportunity to try those challenges and to see if they work. I like working with people. I like working with very strong people. There are others who don’t, and so that 55 doesn’t always work, but I like seeing if together we can bring out the best. I always have very strong people with me and we’re a team. I think that’s probably part of it. You don’t want a lot of followers, frankly. It’s great to work with a bunch of leaders and hopefully have the best result that way. It does give you a chance to do something a little different. It’s not bureaucratic. It’s opportunistic. Earl: Thank you. The last thing that I thought, as I was looking back at the notes, I’d like to hear a little bit more about is Lu Packard [Lucile Packard]. How many people got to have the relationship that you had with Lu? Meier: [00:07:42] I was very blessed. She was absolutely remarkable, incredibly committed, and incredibly sincere. She was very modest and sort of grew in her confidence. She didn’t like to speak at the beginning and then, she did. David [David Packard] would be sort of standing at the back of the room cheering her on and encouraging her. Earl: She was really the driver for the Children’s Hospital? Meier: [00:08:17] Very much so. The big question was the naming of the hospital. When she agreed to have it named for her, Lucile Packard with one “L”--she made sure everybody spelled it correctly as far as the Lucile--but she became incredibly involved in a lot of the minutia that really made that hospital different. There was some friction with Stanford at the beginning and, I think, if we hadn’t had the strength of the Packards behind that, it might have been more difficult. Lu and I actually traveled around the country and looked at children’s hospitals because I chaired the Design Committee for five years. 56 We were looking at what we wanted to emulate, what we didn’t want to, and which colors we thought would be effective. We even got down to the details of picking out the threads for the carpets, with the color stripes we did for the signals for various departments. Lu was right there, with the sleeves rolled up, and she loved it. She really did. The sad thing was that she didn’t get to see it. Earl: Oh, I remember. Meier: [00:09:45] She was in the hospital and I was going to go off the board. I think my term was up or something. I was just--it was time. She asked me to come to the hospital to see her and if I would stay to see the hospital open. I did--I promised her I would do that. We tried to make the opening, as she would have loved. Even though it was quite elaborate, it was quite simple in various ways. Barbara Bush was our guest of honor because she’d been friends with the Packards. We had some very funny little situations because you had the Secret Service [United States Secret Service] everywhere. The children at Hillview School [Hillview Middle School] had collected pennies for Barbara Bush. I approached Gleim Jewelers to see if they would make a necklace for us and donate it, which they did. They wrapped it beautifully and we were going to present it to her. The head of the Secret Service, who was traveling with her, had to check everything--where she was sitting, what she was doing. I had the package. He and I had become rather friendly by this point because we’d been through a lot of situations and I’d learned a whole lot. He said, “I’m afraid that you’re going to have to unwrap it.” I said, “Well, I’ll tell you what, that’s perfectly fine if you unwrap 57 it as long as you can rewrap it.” It was never unwrapped. [laughter] We even had a situation where the Secret Servicemen had to sit at her place at the table. We had a very large tent. We had about seventeen hundred people. We tented the parking lot next to the Children’s Hospital. Where we had bumpers for the cars, we had to put risers over them to level the floor off. When we did that, it turned out that she [Barbara]--when she would have sat down, her chin would have been on the table because the table [laughter] had been raised. We had to change it. We had some of these situations, but she was delightful. She had some children come to the hospital and tour it the day of. Beverly Sills, the opera singer, was the Mistress of Ceremonies. We had the 49ers model with their children. It was fun, it was different, and it worked out very well. Earl: I think that would be a word that I would add to your keys to success. From a staff perspective, we worked hard, but had fun. Meier: [00:13:14] Yes, it should be fun because I think you should all have a sense of satisfaction when you’re done. It has to be fun. You have to have a good sense of humor otherwise you’d never survive. That was a good example because we had to rearrange the entire area. You just have to laugh. Fortunately, we discovered it before that evening because she [Barbara Bush] would have looked quite strange with her chin on the table. The other thing was we had to get a trailer for her outside the tent, where she could be sequestered beforehand. It had to be totally secure. We tried to find somebody who had a trailer that we could borrow. I remembered that John Lilly had been a neighbor of John Madden 58 [John E. Madden] and John Madden, you know, never flew. I don’t know if you knew that, but that was a thing about him. He drove in this trailer all around the country. We asked John [Lilly] if he would ask John [Madden]. We used John Madden’s trailer [laughter]. I was supposed to introduce her at the opening of the evening and she didn’t appear. That was one’s worst nightmare--that you’re opening something and the person doesn’t come out. That was what happened. She was late. We had all sorts of things that didn’t quite go as smoothly, but it worked out. Earl: I’m sure people don’t remember those pieces. Meier: [00:14:50] People don’t remember those, but I do. [laughter] Earl: I’d like to turn our attention to the Board of Trustees. You were elected, not an alumni. Meier: [00:15:01] No, I was elected. Earl: Elected in 1984. I wanted to get your general reflections on being a trustee. What do you remember about being elected and acclimating to the group? Meier: [00:15:15] It was an interesting beginning for me because 1984 was when my daughter was applying to Stanford. I was called in April and invited--Bill Kimball [William R. Kimball] was chair of the board at the time and he invited me to join the board. I had concerns about it. I thanked him very much and said I would love to think about it. I was concerned because my daughter had her application in and had not been accepted yet. I was worried that either she would think that she got in because I was a trustee or, if she didn’t get in and I was a trustee, would that be very embarrassing. I almost didn’t accept. I was talking to Tony about it, to my husband, and he said, 59 “You need to talk to Laura about this.” He said, “Don’t throw that opportunity away.” We talked and Laura said, “Mom, don’t [laughter] possibly refuse that.” She said, “If I don’t get in on my own, I know it’s my own because you haven’t been a trustee. And if I don’t, then it isn’t the right place for me.” She did get in and she now has three of her children who are Stanford alums or students. It was really an interesting time because we had difficult times toward the end of my tenure. It’s two five-year terms. I chaired the Development Subcommittee. Jim Rosse [James N. Rosse] was provost when I first came on board--and I enjoyed having an opportunity to work with him and to see how important that position is. I don’t think there’s any way, unless you’re really intimately involved with the university administration, that you understand that role. I think we’ve seen it today with the two Johns [John Hennessy and John Etchemendy]. It’s extraordinary. Etch [John Etchemendy] has been really vital to the whole progress that we’ve had at the university. I think the chance to work with others in the administration was a real privilege. To meet people from around the country, to see how sincerely and importantly they acted as trustees, and we’re still friends. It was sad--one of the trustees who was an alumni trustee from Southern California passed away. He was hit in a crosswalk. It [being a trustee] was a great opportunity. It was right after we had been involved with the 1984 auction, which was the telecommunicated auction that we did for the Cardinal Club. Some people knew me from that 60 activity and I had a chance to meet them. Tom Ford [Thomas W. Ford] was on the board at the time and Bill Ayer [William Emerson Ayer], so a lot of wonderful role models for me. I enjoyed that interaction immensely. Earl: How would you characterize the role of the trustees? How much is it a working board, an advisory board, a problem-solving board? What’s it like? Meier: [00:19:29] It’s a working board. It’s a problem-solving board. It’s much more than advisory. Everybody feels that responsibility. Earl: Does that happen in committees because it’s a fairly large group? Meier: [00:19:43] It’s thirty-two [committees]. It does happen in committees, but people do speak up at the board meetings. It’s a bunch of very powerful people. You have leaders in industry--Roy Anderson [Roy A. Anderson] who was head of Lockheed was on the board. He and I were co-chairs for the Centennial Campaign, with Peter [Bing] and Bill Kimball [William R. Kimball]. We had meetings at the Hoover building and those were times when we were having some stressful relationships with Hoover. As I remember, people were concerned whether somebody was going to be listening around the corner. It was really an interesting time that way. There were some rough roads. The indirect cost was very, very difficult and that was later in my tenure. It’s a real privilege to be a trustee. You’ve got a lot of homework to do between meetings and before your meetings. I think that every single one of those people did it. It was very rare that someone would not be up to speed. You have little fiefdoms within the university and so you learn about 61 those. I think there’s less of that today. It was a real education. At that time, I was on quite a few other boards, so it was interesting to see the contrast between them. Earl: You were chairing the Development Subcommittee? Meier: [00:21:45] Yes. Earl: During that time, that was the Centennial Fundraising Campaign [Centennial Campaign]? Is that right? Meier: [00:21:51] No, it was after the Centennial. Earl: But you had been involved in the Centennial fundraising? Meier: [00:21:59] I was one of the co-chairs for the Centennial Campaign. That was interesting to watch, stylistically, how different people are. You have a convening chair when you’ve got a group of individuals. Roy Anderson was our convening chair. Roy literally was a taskmaster for the development staff. He would want to know how much was raised in this area and you’d have a chart up on the wall. It was really fascinating to watch and it was very effective. That was a time when Hank Riggs [Henry E. Riggs] had been vice president. Prior to that was--oh goodness, I can’t remember his name. He preceded Hank as vice president for development and then, Hank was there for a very short amount of time because he went down to become president of Harvey Mudd. John Ford [John B. Ford] was quite young at the time--I think in his early forties. Hank recommended that he become vice president for development. I remember there was great discussion about it and Hank said, “He’s incredibly capable and will be a wonderful choice.” Of course, Hank 62 was right [laughter] on target. John took over and just did a fantastic job. Earl: What was your role then in the Centennial Campaign? Meier: [00:23:39] I suggested that we do an outreach program, surprise, surprise. [laughter] Matter of fact, there was a fundraising consultant who interviewed us and he asked what I thought. This was before I’d been named one of the co-chairs. I said, “We should be taking Stanford to our constituents and not asking them to come to Stanford.” He was fascinated with that. Anyway, as it turned out, we did what we called Centennial Celebrations. We traveled with those, and we had a paid production company. We had a curtain that we had painted--a scene of the quad and the church. We had a church backdrop for a stage and we had the quad walls that would surround whatever room we would be in. By the time we finished--I think we maybe did this over two years--that curtain was very sad [laughter]. I remember Peter Bing checking to see if the creases were showing. It was really cute because he was very much a detail person, as I am. Irv Deal [Irving Carlton Deal] was a trustee and very involved with athletics, as well. He also had a band when he was in college. When we did the Dallas event, he was up there playing. It was a real celebration. We did musical performances with students and they sang. It was a very different kind of thing from what we did with the subsequent outreach programs. That was my little baby. We did it and it worked well. People loved it. Earl: It sounds like the impulse was to be present in places where alumni were? Meier: [00:26:14] We had the numbers that would justify traveling to a city 63 Earl: I was thinking about Stanford moving from being regarded as a provincial institution to a national powerhouse. I wondered whether you were trying to underscore that? Meier: [00:26:33] We were. We needed to have people take ownership of Stanford away from campus. We really were able to develop constituencies in that way. It was wonderful because it’s effective and people really resonate to that kind of engagement. When it’s name only, it doesn’t really sustain itself and people don’t feel they’ve really done anything. They’re not going to come back and do it again. You really have to give them a sense of empowerment, responsibility, and productivity. Earl: Was that the biggest campaign that Stanford had done? Meier: [00:27:21] Yes. It was a billion-dollar campaign. I remember, when I was talking at various places, to get that “B” to roll off my tongue was really, [laughter] really hard. By the end of it, I was very fluid, but billion sort of-million came off your tongue much more easily than billion. Nobody had ever tried a billion dollars. We were the first. Earl: That was audacious. Meier: [00:27:50] Very audacious. Earl: Did the hundred part resonate with people? Did you find them supportive? Meier: [00:27:55] That was, yes. It was a celebration. Earl: What fun. During your tenure, I remember a news article about South African divestiture and the protests. Meier: [00:28:14] We had that. As a parent of a student, that was difficult for me. I was trying to remain anonymous and not impact my daughter’s experience 64 here, or life here, or have anybody know that I was a trustee. There was a discussion on the inner quad, I remember, and a stage, but I did not go up on the stage. Then, I saw a list of trustees on some of the pillars. I was most concerned. There was a tremendous amount of unrest, though not as much as had been in previous years, I think. I was vice president of the board toward the end of my term and Pete Wilson [Peter Barton Wilson] come for a program that we had. We had police around, and students, and a lot of antagonistic kinds of behavior. More so than we’d ever anticipated. I happened to be on the stage, because I was vice president at the time, and they threw oranges at Pete Wilson. I was close behind him [laughter] and I wasn’t sure whether I was going to be targeted or not. He caught one, threw it right back at the thrower, and I thought, “That really is good” because he had enough confidence to be able to catch it and to do it. All in all, you had these sorts of incidents, but it was not a tumultuous time. I think Stanford just continues to grow and I think the university tries to turn to the positive side, rather than the negative side. It was an interesting time. There was a lot of criticism. The indirect cost [controversy] was probably most impactful for the trustees. We were questioned time and time again and targeted by many people in the community and outside the community. It was definitely a national issue. I think that was hard for the university. Earl: What approach did you take to dealing with it? Meier: [00:31:23] Honesty, but also understanding of what’s public information and what was not. I think confidentiality is extremely important. I think we all 65 tried to take the high road. There were questions, good questions and rightful questions. Earl: Were those days when you went home from your board meetings and said this is stressful. Meier: [00:32:02] Yes. I’m exhausted. [laughter] Too long days and those were difficult times. Earl: As you look back, are you glad you had that leadership role and glad you were able to be part of, weathering that? Meier: [00:32:23] Very much. The thing that I don’t think I realized, when I first accepted the appointment as a trustee, was that it was a lifelong involvement. You’re on for whatever your term may be, but your connection is permanent. You’re always still considered a past trustee. There aren’t other situations and boards that one is on where you are referred to in that same way, thought of in the same way, and included in the same way. That involvement and engagement is something that you treasure and it’s always there. Earl: The next campaigns you were involved with were the Campaign for Undergraduate Education and Stanford Challenge. Can you tell me a little bit about that campaign]? Meier: [00:33:23] The Campaign for Undergraduate Education was a different campaign. I was the vice chair and my responsibility was outreach. We did Think Again. When Gerhard [Casper] stepped down as president and [John] Hennessy took over, Hennessy participated in the Think Again programs. Gerhard still participated in some, so that transition was quite smooth. Of course, they were very close being president and provost. 66 I like to do double entendre titles. I love figuring out what those titles might be and being involved in that [laughter] part of creating the program. It was interesting working with Gerhard. When we came up with the title, Think Again, Gerhard thought we were insulting our alumni. [laughter] I said, “Gerhard, that’s not an insult, I promise you.” We had some funny situations with Gerhard because he--and he can laugh at himself, as well. We were always looking for something that was clever and different for our giveaway for the attendees. We came up with what we thought was very clever, which was a flipbook. A flipbook is one of those where you flip the pages and it becomes a movie. We had a contest for [the role of] “The Thinker” and we called Tyrone Willingham [Lionel Tyrone Willingham], who was coach of the football team at the time. He suggested three of his players. Donna Garton was part of the selection process. Susan Wilson was our graphic designer, who’s incredibly talented, and we had the privilege of working with her and a couple of others. We selected a young football player and we photographed him in various situations. At the end of the book, we had coming out as a cloud, as one did in comics, the “Think Again” title from his head, posing him as sitting with his hand under his chin. We printed these and thought it was an inexpensive, but clever, thing to do. We took it to show Gerhard--I don’t know if you’ve ever heard this story, but it’s an infamous story, not just famous but infamous--and Gerhard took this teeny book, which was probably one inch by four inches and took it page by page by page. I knew we were dead. He did not approve those books. We still have some around. 67 Earl: I do remember that. Meier: [00:37:19] For Gerhard’s seventieth birthday, we were at a party--I gave him one of those books. [laughter] He remembered and laughed. You have some funny situations as you go through life. Earl: Did it end up with the cube instead? Meier: [00:37:36] We did the cube instead. Earl: Because I still have the cube on my desk. Meier: [00:37:38] Yes. It was so funny because Tim Portwood and Bob Pringle and I--three of us--went to present the flipbook to Gerhard. We didn’t have to go anywhere else. I just knew exactly that page-by-page was not going to work, and the flipbook was no longer an option. So you have some funny situations with that. We had another situation where we were trying to decide on cities for Think Again--no, this was for the Centennial. I said, “We could just do one city in Texas.” Everybody said, “Oh, that’s going to be hard because Houston will expect to be included along with Dallas.” I said, “Oh, that won’t be a problem. We’ll do wonderful programs and they’ll have a greater opportunity when Houston goes to Dallas.” We went to Houston to present our plan. We had arranged in Dallas for a tour of the symphony that was new at the time and a special tour of people’s homes--art tours. I just thought we had this wonderful package. We had probably only about fifteen people at the meeting in Houston, one of whom was the lead individual. He was quite vocal. We talked about what we 68 were going to be planning and what we were going to be bringing to Dallas. We explained that we had a hotel where we would have rooms available at a special rate for people traveling to Dallas and the programs that we had. This man turned to me and said, “Why would I want to go to Dallas?” [laughter] My naïveté as far as that relationship between those two cities absolutely was changed at that point. From that time on, we took programs to both Dallas and Houston when I was involved. We did Think Again in Dallas and Houston and we did that for Leading Matters, too. You learn a lot. Turns out, this man’s sister was one of our leaders in Dallas. We had a little friction going there. You learn a lot. Earl: Now the Campaign for Undergraduate Education was also a first of its kind, focusing on a renaissance in undergraduate education. Meier: [00:40:27] Exactly and just focus on undergraduate. Earl: How did you feel about that, especially being a parent of a Stanford student? Did you feel it was important-? Meier: [00:40:35] I thought it was wonderful. Absolutely. Really appropriate. We had a very interesting situation in that. When we were looking at our outreach plan, the Think Again program, we tended to use Seattle as a target city because we have a wonderful base there and we know we have wonderful volunteers. We had done that for the Centennial Campaign, too, and we did that with Think Again as well. We had a big question on the invitees. I felt we should invite all Stanford alums. Some of the individuals said no, it’s only an undergraduate campaign, so we should only invite undergraduate alums. We sent the invitations to just undergraduate alums and we had a 69 huge reaction. The graduate alums feel they’re part of Stanford. They’re not looking at whether they were just undergraduate or graduate [students] because they have a strong Business School alumni base in Seattle. They were upset because we were implying that they were not part of the Stanford community. We learned--from that point forward--to include the entire base. Remember that? Earl: Yes. Meier: [00:41:56] We had a big discussion on that. I think that’s a good testimonial to how the Stanford alumni feel about the institution. They’re not looking just at their school. They’re looking at the institution as a whole and feeling part of it. I think you want that to continue, so that that grows and it’s strengthened. Earl: Of course, the legacy of the Campaign for Undergraduate Education has been amazing, in terms of the enrichment of the experience of undergraduates now. I think maybe we’re jealous, but also proud. Meier: [00:42:34] Exactly. We were born too soon. That’s the thing, and much too early [laughter]. It has enhanced the whole--the depth of the programs and the quality--because we used to be criticized for that. If you looked at the Ivies, they were much stronger--and I think the campaign strengthened the humanities because we were looked at as a techie [university]. I think that’s not the case anymore, even though humanities still are not the largest contingent as far as the undergrads. There’s still a huge thrust and, I think, appreciation of the importance of humanities. Earl: I think one thing that people who aren’t intimate with university campaigns 70 might be surprised about--there’s the very visible achievement of dollars raised that can reinforce, strategically, parts of the institution. You had such a big role in the outreach part, building public understanding, support, and champions all around the globe. There’s also the element of institutionally-I’ve heard John Hennessy talk about presidents not having much power, but they do lead. One of the things that was always a part of the campaigns that you were a part of was bringing the academic experience into it and getting faculty on the road. I remember having to convince them. Getting them [the faculty] to buy into the themes and goals had a lasting influence on the institution. Meier: [00:44:24] On every aspect. I think there was a lot of mutual respect that was developed. I think the faculty really understood the importance of the alumni base and the interaction. Some of those faculty that we had to convince to travel, asked to come back again. They enjoyed it. They realized that they were appreciated and they got to showcase their programs and [see] how important people felt those programs were. I think it’s really important for faculty to know that the alumni base and the support base values them and understands their role. I think it’s interesting--you can see a change today because the silos are really broken down. I think there’s an institutional base that we didn’t have before, that’s so broad that it--. Earl: Of course, that was a theme of the Stanford Challenge. Meier: [00:45:28] Exactly. That’s what it was all about and it worked. Earl: Can you talk a little bit more about that campaign? Meier: [00:45:35] That campaign was fascinating because you watched John 71 Hennessy really work with the deans, have them collaborate, and have them really take a role that was not just looking at their own school. It was looking at university-wide initiatives and programs, their importance, and that interaction that they had within the schools. It was interesting because, after that campaign, we were asked to meet with people from other schools. They had heard about our campaign and wanted to know how we did it. One was Harvard. Isaac [Isaac Stein] and Martin [Martin W. Shell] and I met with their head of development. Earl: Isaac was the chair of the board? Meier: [00:46:43] No, Isaac was one of the four co-chairs with me. He was the convener. Earl: And Martin Shell. Meier: [00:46:50] Martin Shell. Harvard was going to have four co-chairs. They had identified two of them, so those two men came out. They were asking about our Leading Matters program and how we had structured it. I said, “We had leadership in each community that we had identified, and then they had helped us identify the committees for each community. We had universitywide support and we had identified what the subjects would be for those communities. They varied from each place to one another. The other thing that we were so fortunate about was that John Hennessy had been able to break down the silos.” Their head of development was describing their structure. I said, “It sounds to me as though you have very, very entrenched silos.” She looked at me and said, “You’re absolutely right.” 72 I said, “That’s going to be a really big challenge because John Hennessy was able to break down those silos and that was so conducive to our success, both financially, and as far as being able to integrate people.” Earl: The Stanford Challenge was framed as working together, across boundaries, on intractable world issues. Meier: [00:48:29] Right. Internally, it was interesting because we worked with--as you probably know--we worked with the different schools and the constituents within those schools. There had sometimes been some competition. We had the alumni base as the Alumni Association and we had the Development Office. That had not always been a collaboration that had been as strong as it was with that. I think everybody became a team and you’re so much more successful when you can achieve that. It takes the leadership of a president who’s going to make that happen, and he did. Earl: Did you have a favorite of all those campaigns that you worked on? Meier: [00:49:21] Probably Leading Matters, just because it was so innovative and very sophisticated. It was really a road show. The quality of the program was extraordinary. Technically, we had a fabulous film featuring students, programs, faculty, iconic images on a huge screen encircling the room. I saw it at least a hundred times as we developed it, but when I saw it in the nineteen different cities, you couldn’t help but get emotional each time you saw it. You saw those students. It gave you so much pride in the institution, in the people that make it run, the faculty that are inspiring these young students, and these students who just pick up and run with it. You’re creating the leaders of the future, and you can see that. 73 Earl: For both of those campaigns, the Campaign for Undergraduate Education and the Stanford Challenge, Think Again was the stream of outreach and then, Leading Matters. In both instances, there were certainly mentions of the campaign that was tied thematically to the fundraising part, but they were rather seeding ideas than fundraising events per se. Meier: [00:50:47] Very much so. I called them “friend raising.” They were not fundraising. We charged for the dinner, a nominal amount. Didn’t cover our costs at all, but I don’t believe in not charging because you don’t have a commitment as far as attending. Recent grads had a reduced rate. We never had any complaints about that. They were elegant, wonderful dinners. Everybody was quite aware that this was not being covered by their payment but there was a commitment. There was never any discussion of fundraising. It was “friend raising.” You could link successful fundraising to various people who had learned about certain things in various cities and responded. You could tell exactly, and many times they would say, “I was just so inspired by this.” It was definitely not a fundraising event. Earl: I think we had explicit engagement goals, as well, through the course of Think Again--I believe our goal was to double the number of volunteers and we ended up quadrupling the number of Stanford volunteers. Meier: [00:52:10] Right. They came back for more. They had fun. They enjoyed it. They interacted with people with whom they enjoyed that participation. As long as you give them [the volunteers] a sense of success and accomplishment, they will come back. Again, it wasn’t in name only, but in action. 74 Earl: I want to just make sure we touch on--there are so many areas of engagement for you--Stanford in the arts and humanities. You were on the committee--on art--1972 maybe--this was one of your earlier engagements. The Cantor Center [Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts] reopening and Humanities Center--what prompted all of that for you? Meier: [00:52:58] I have a great interest in art. When I chaired the Strategic Planning Committee for the Bing Concert Hall, one of the biggest thrills I had was when I first toured the Bing Concert Hall. I came out the front door and looked across Museum Way. You saw the Cantor Museum and it just took my breath away. I came home and I called Peter. I said, “Peter, I just had the thrill of a lifetime. I saw the connection in the Arts Corridor that you have created.” I’ve always been interested in art--and humanities. We were intrigued--Tony and I were both intrigued--with the Humanities Center. We went to see the one in North Carolina, when we went back to visit our son who was at Duke. You saw the engagement and the inspirational environment that was created by that kind of setting for the humanists. It was exciting to see that Stanford could. My first sort of deep engagement with the humanities was through Frank Lodato [Frank J. Lodato] who was a friend, colleague, and a fellow trustee. Frank had been on a committee with faculty, before I had come onto the board. They had some type of committee where you interacted with faculty and had discussions--I don’t know how often, or whatever--but he became really interested in the fact that the humanities were underplayed and didn’t have a sense of being very important. The faculty had that kind of reaction. He asked me if I would 75 help him create something, to do something about it, to raise awareness. We created a program called the Humanities Forum. We interviewed humanists, probably about fourteen or fifteen. We started with the dean of H&S [Stanford University School of Humanities and Sciences] and went down the ladder. It was just amazing. There was a downtrodden kind of mindset, and the fact that they like to be lonely and [laughter]--just the whole thing. It was very interesting. We created a program where people were invited. We would select faculty and the faculty would do a presentation. You would have people seated at tables and you would have support people from that program--other faculty members. We would have a presentation, then dinner, and we would present questions for each of the tables to discuss. There was a lot of interaction. [00:56:29] The people really enjoyed the fact that they got to participate and had a faculty member resource person at each table. At the end, there was a Q&A session. It was not a fundraising. It was really an awareness raising. People looked forward to it. We had the luxury of choosing subjects. That is really an incredible opportunity and, of course, that sort of led me down the path as we did the outreach for other fundraising activities. That really raised my awareness and appreciation of the humanists, and what they were achieving. We had Gerhard [Casper]. We were very tight on time. It was very structured. If they went over, we cut them off. We said they’d be out of there by nine and they were always out of there. It was at the Faculty Club. Earl: That was the seeding of something important? 76 Meier: [00:57:34] Yes, it was. That was how I got involved in supporting the Humanities Center and all. The arts are just an important part of life and enrichment. Earl: Can you tell me a little bit about Miriam Schapiro? It’s so wonderful. Meier: [00:57:52] Oh, yes. I had started an Art Commission for the hospital when we were adding to the hospital--what they called the “hospital modernization plan.” I looked at those plans and realized we were going to have these walls and halls and vacant spaces, and some things never change because we’re looking at that right now [laughter] with the new hospital. It was a very small group that I had invited to be part of it. Helen Bing was part of it. Ruth Halperin, Jill Freidenrich, Moo Anderson [Mary Margaret Anderson]. There was a woman by the name of Barbara Rees who was an artist. She used to conduct tours of studios, and so forth, in San Francisco. She was a good friend of mine. I asked her because of her knowledge and depth of experience. She said, “I hate committees.” I said, “I do too, believe it or not. Don’t worry, these will be productive.” Anyway, she became very engaged in the whole process and she contacted Al Elsen [Albert E. Elsen] who was then head of the museum. Al suggested Miriam Schapiro as an artist that we should look at for the hospital because we wanted something uplifting and different. Barbara came up with this. Tony and I decided to purchase those and donate them to the hospital. That’s how we were able to be engaged with the artist. We’ve used 77 everybody’s intellect, talent, and knowledge and been able to take advantage of it. Again, when you have really good people, you end up with wonderful results. Earl: I wanted to ask a bit about leadership and some bigger picture reflections on Stanford. How would you describe your leadership style? Who’s a model or a mentor or someone you may have--? Meier: [01:00:21] It hasn’t been a studied--I think you sort of evolve. I was involved in high school, you know, as an officer and in various programs and have always enjoyed being engaged. If I’m going to do something, I want to do it. I’m not someone who enjoys being listed, unless I really am involved. I like rolling my sleeves up. I like having a chance to impact. I think it’s just that kind of thing. It’s not anything that I plan. I don’t really think of it in that kind of sense. Earl: Did you plan to have basically a career that’s about volunteer leadership? Meier: [01:01:27] No, I actually planned to major in math and I wanted to go into business. I was thinking that I would probably go to business school. One thing led to another and [laughter] I met Tony and everything sort of changed. Business has always been of interest to me and, in a way, volunteerism is business. That’s the kind of volunteerism I’ve enjoyed, when it’s had a purpose, when it’s fairly structured. The social part of it comes, but that hasn’t been what I’ve been looking for. I’m really interested in something that has a purpose, something I believe, and that can be sort of a passion. Earl: Do you see a next generation of Linda Meiers? We used to say, “Who’s the 78 next Linda Meier?” Meier: [01:02:43] If you look at young people of today, and they’re not all so young, but I think the women are quite focused. We sort of just gave our time without thinking or counting it because it was like a job--I remember, sometimes, I would close down the Athletic Department when we were doing the 100th Big Game. It was a huge job. I don’t think any of us realized what a big job it was going to be. You just sort of do it. You don’t even think of it. It was my job. I would have gone to work if I hadn’t gotten as involved as I did in volunteerism. I wasn’t one to sit home. Earl: No regrets? Meier: [01:03:49] No regrets at all. I think I’ve had the most incredible opportunity that anybody could have--meeting wonderful people, working with wonderful people, working for great causes, seeing them come to fruition. What more could you ask? Earl: How about motivating others? On several occasions, you have talked about building great teams. How were you able to do that and get the others to stay with you into the wee hours? Meier: [01:04:29] I think success is really important to get people to come back. A lot of the people that I worked with have enjoyed the fact that we’ve been successful. They have said, “When you’re doing something else, let me know” and that it is fun. It’s always interesting. Sometimes, there will be one individual who may not get along with people as well as others. I love that challenge of bringing that person around. [laughter] I’ve learned some people skills in that. 79 People really are an important element. If you enjoy people, it’s just the best opportunity. I mean, you know, just in the people that you have worked with and met--that is so fulfilling. I think your children see you do that, they do it, and enjoy it. Our second son is in Portland. He’s on the Children’s Hospital Board up there--he’s come back and said some of the issues that they’ve had and, you know, they see because you see things with a different pair of eyes. Earl: So you’re directly seeding the next generation. [laughter] Any most satisfying moments, as you look back at your career of engagement as a Stanford volunteer leader? Meier: [01:06:14] Oh goodness, there are so many. As far as impact--and it’s something that I personally would not take credit for, but was very involved in--was the Cardinal Club. We probably had a much more global impact than we ever anticipated as far as women’s athletics and equality of opportunities. Stanford really took the lead in that. I think that probably wasn’t a singular accomplishment at all, but it was--I don’t think I ever understood the impact of that until we were sitting at a Rose Bowl game, when we played Wisconsin, that long ago. A gal I had met from Southern California was seated behind us. I introduced her to Tony. She had her children with her and her husband. She introduced me to her daughters, as I was one of the ones who helped them have the opportunity to play sports that they were playing at college. That was just sort of--I thought, oh my goodness. It’s very humbling. When you realize you’re involved in something that can have that kind of impact--and I 80 never thought of it that way--it was just, we had a job and we were going to do it and we were going to make it happen. Earl: One of the bits of validation is, year after year, the Sears Cup [now called Directors’ Cup] is Stanford winning, which really only happens because of the strength of the women’s sports. Meier: [01:08:19] It’s the totality of it, right. Earl: And being the winner, year after year, people can’t help but ask how did Stanford do that? Meier: [01:08:32] If you were to look at that, it was an interesting byproduct in terms of that--it wasn’t really a byproduct--but it was just not something I’d ever anticipated. I think some of the hospital programs when I first took over as chair of the board, when we were trying to push the patient care aspect. That was very difficult, but we did because that was just essential. Earl: Again, now it’s being institutionalized. Meier: [01:09:21] It is, totally. It’s wonderful. Earl: How about the flipside--the most frustrating, gut-wrenching Stanford moments for you? Meier: [01:09:36] Oh goodness. That’s a tough one because I think we were--well, probably when we were starting the Cardinal Club, when we had the resistance from the Buck Club members. You don’t really focus on those issues because, when you have those issues, you become stronger because of it. The program that you developed becomes stronger. I haven’t had anything that’s been so disturbing or difficult. I love challenges, as I said, and so sometimes those problems become opportunities. 81 Earl: You’re incurably the glass is half full, aren’t you? Meier: [01:10:29] You’ve got to, otherwise, you would moan and groan all day long. Earl: You’ve had the opportunity to work with a whole range of Stanford leaders, from presidents and provosts to development and alumni professionals. Any sort of striking differences or similarities that if you looked at university presidents you worked with-Meier: [01:10:57] They’re all different. If you go back--when you were talking about challenging--probably the most difficult one was when I first was appointed to the hospital board, I think I mentioned the role of being liaison to the town-gown committee. That was disappointing, as well as challenging and difficult. Earl: How so? Meier: [01:11:34] I saw a really bad side of people--the relationships, the lack of respect, the antagonism--and you don’t see that now. You have competition, but that’s not the same. That was real animosity and arrogance, just all of the things that you don’t like to see in people. That was difficult. Presidents-they’re all different. I worked most closely with John Hennessy, but I worked very closely with Don [Kennedy], not so much Gerhard [Casper] because I was on my way out--although, we worked together with Think Again. He became a very close friend, as well. Dick Lyman [Richard W. Lyman], I knew but not as a trustee. I think, of them all, John Hennessy is probably the most extraordinary one. He is an extraordinary leader and very bright, which they all are or have been. He has an intuitive way to him that is really quite extraordinary, down-to-earth, and 82 he’s very blessed. He has a wife who is an incredible compliment to him, a gracious, warm individual who sets the stage, as well. We’ve been very lucky at Stanford to have him, to benefit from his leadership, and to watch him grow in that leadership role. It’s been a privilege to get to work with people of that ilk. Earl: Peter Bing--has that been one of your--? Meier: [01:13:56] Peter’s been wonderful. Earl: I just was looking at campaign cabinets and the two of you--. Meier: [01:14:07] He’s amazing, one of a kind, just such a wonderful human being and brilliant, generous, and gracious. Very encouraging--he really is. Earl: Do you play complementary roles with him? Meier: [01:14:36] When we’re together, I think we probably do. Yes, I think we do. I still get to work with him on the concert hall, the Stanford Live program. When I said I would take that on, I said I would do that for just a year. Well, I did it for two years. Peter and I turned around and asked Leslie [Leslie P. Hume]--Leslie had asked me and so I said turnaround is fair game and fair play. Leslie and George [George H. Hume] are doing it and doing a fabulous job. I’ve stayed on the committee because when Peter asks you to do something, you can’t not do it and you’ve [laughter] got to stay. Earl: Have you, in turn, asked him to do some things? Meier: [01:15:33] Over the years, yes. Yes, always. He was on the Hospital Board and chaired the Audit Committee. If I’ve had questions regarding issues, I call Peter. Earl: It’s nice to have that person be available? 83 Meier: [01:15:55] It’s wonderful. He’s a very wise and very sensitive individual. He’s extraordinary. Stanford would not be the same without Peter Bing, as far as his--it’s not just his philanthropy. He gives so much more than money. He gives of himself, his wisdom, and his leadership. Earl: Stanford is a place much transformed. It’s been a fairly rapid transformation-maybe accelerating, if you look at the pace. Here we are in our 125th year, and the centennial we were talking about earlier wasn’t all that long ago, and there’s been a lot that’s gone on there. Do you see missed opportunities or risks in the pace of change at all? Meier: [01:16:58] No, because I think that’s the way the world is. I think if you don’t keep up with that pace, you’re going to lose the opportunities and you’re going to lose your position. Stanford should always take advantage of its entrepreneurial spirit. I think that’s one of the things that really sets us apart from the other institutions, ones I’ve seen where our children have gone or that I’ve interacted with. I met with the people from Duke, from Wisconsin, and with people from Berkeley when it was trying to develop its volunteer program. This goes back quite a few years. I’m a big believer in helping one’s neighbors and colleagues. They haven’t had the benefit of the constituents and the culture that we have here. I think, for instance, the way we handled the New York situation was incredible and that was John Hennessy. Other institutions would have described it in different ways, apologized, or been aggressive or whatever.It was not right. This was why. And we just moved on. It could have been much more of a blip than it was. I thought that was 84 an incredible example. I think we need to be careful. I think our new president has great challenges, but incredible opportunities and it’ll be interesting to see where he takes us. Earl: Do you have a sense of the next frontier? Meier: [01:19:04] I don’t. I haven’t even met him. I just hear wonderful things about him, but it’s going to be very interesting. He has big shoes to fill. It sounds to me as though he has that capacity. Earl: In your experience, do university presidents really have a strong, shaping influence? Meier: [01:19:26] I think they do. I think they really do--not just internally, but externally, too. They are the voice--also, the way they interact with the trustees, their approachability. I think that’s really an important element. Stanford’s presidents have been much more accessible than other institutions’--at least, it’s my understanding when you see them. There’s a lack of rigidity here and that’s part of our entrepreneurial spirit and style. It allows you to grow in ways that other institutions don’t. It was so interesting. Our oldest son went to Harvard. Harvard was just so rigid. Even just in the students. I mean, there’s just a different kind of style. Eric went to Duke for undergrad study and then came here for business school. Duke was sort of partway. It didn’t have the same kind of sense that Harvard does. There is a different style and there is a different style when different presidents take over. Earl: Yet, the place has entrepreneurialism from the outside. It’s part of the culture. 85 Meier: [01:21:11] Exactly. It is part of the culture and it encourages it. You look at what the students do, what they do on their own--it’s remarkable. We’ve had people like John Bravman--I think [John] had a huge impact on this place with undergraduate programs. We’ve got a lot of people to thank over the years. He was another one that we became friendly with, mainly through our travels around the world. When we were in Japan, John was there and was just incredible interacting with some of the alums. It’s fun to watch them in action. Earl: Silicon Valley. Many of your important commitments have been to Stanford, but how about networks beyond Stanford? We talked a little bit about the University National Bank and Trust, but your sense of how the region has changed and how Stanford’s relationship in the region has changed. Do you have any thoughts about that? Meier: [01:22:33] It’s interesting. I was on the Peninsula Community Foundation Board [now called Silicon Valley Foundation] and was on the Academy of Science Board [California Academy of Science]. The Peninsula Community Foundation Board is no longer. It’s now the Silicon Valley Foundation. We merged. I’m not sure bigger is better in all situations, in the foundation situation, in particular. It’s now the largest community foundation but it hasn’t had the impact. I’m waiting to see it really take on a community role. That’s what I loved about the Peninsula Community Foundation. I had the sense this was the direction it was going in. I said I was not interested in being on the new board because all they were talking about was how big they were going to be. Whereas the Peninsula Community 86 Foundation was interested in what it was going to accomplish, who was going to be benefitting, and what the needs in the community were. The board was really educated on those community needs. Our staff was outstanding as far as knowing the resources. I’m not sure Silicon Valley [Foundation] has the value system that I’d like to see it have. I’m waiting to see me be proven wrong--I hope. It worries me. When you look at this extraordinary wealth that’s being created, a couple of individuals are doing remarkable things with that wealth. You were talking about the Parker donations for cancer--it needs to be more than just those singular donations. It needs to be engagement. I’m not sure I’ve seen that and it worries me. It worries me with the young people. If they don’t have role models and values, we are in for a really difficult time. You look at what’s happening with the extreme wealth and the extreme poverty. It’s concerning. Earl: Is that something that’s shifted in Silicon Valley? Meier: [01:25:31] I think it has, but my knowledge is--you know, I’m on the California Water Service Company Board, so I’m familiar with the San Jose area and all. Earl: How did you get involved there? Meier: [01:25:47] I had been on a board with someone who was on that board. They’d never had a woman on the board before. He asked and I knew a couple of people on the board--it’s a small board. There are nine. Bob Brown, do you remember? Bob Brown--I think he was chair of the board of trustees way before my time, but he was head of a law firm in San Francisco. 87 Doug Brown is his son. Anyway, Bob was on the board and was chair of it. Bill Ayer was the one who suggested me. When I interviewed with him, I said, “I really don’t know anything about water. I certainly can do my best as far as learning.” It’s been one of my favorite boards. The people, and talk about a value system--that company has a value system that is extraordinary, a value of people and retention of employees. I’ve been very proud to be part of that. I’m going off of that because, as far as age, I’m now the senior one. I’ve actually been on the board the longest. We have two other women now. I chaired the Compensation Committee for that board and enjoyed it immensely. I learned a lot. It’s a wonderful group of people. Then, I was on Comerica’s Board, as well, because they bought University Bank. I was one of the two people that stayed on the board. It’s interesting. San Francisco--the Academy of Science--I was on that board for a while and then resigned. They were very meeting heavy in their activities. One year, they had a committee meeting two weeks before Christmas that was really not essential at all. After that, I sent in my resignation. [laughter] I thought if they don’t really understand the importance of time--personal time and family time and all--that that wasn’t okay. It’s a great program. Earl: Gender does come up in various spots throughout your career, the University Bank and the California Water Service Board had never had a woman. It’s in the press as an issue in Silicon Valley, that they’re a technology dominant economy. At the outset, I think you said I’m not a feminist. How do you--? 88 Meier: [01:29:15] Balance it? Earl: Yes. How do you balance it? What are your observations and feelings? Meier: [01:29:21] Hopefully, you’re chosen for your abilities and not for your sex. I know that sex will tip it over, if you have two candidates. We are always women and looking for diversity. I chair the Nominating Committee for the Stanford Hospital. In that role, we’re doing that, as well. I just don’t think it’s a banner I carry. I think that’s probably it. I don’t think it’s “in spite of” type of attitude or whatever. In ways, it’s probably enabled me to be in roles. For instance, California Water, they obviously were looking for a woman and somebody had been on a board with me. I think probably with the University Bank, because I didn’t know Carl Schmitt from Adam, but I’d been on a board with somebody for that. I think if you are participatory and contribute, it gives you opportunities. It’s interesting because the two other women who are on Cal Water are not at all feminists, but very accomplished. One heads human resources for a company in Southern California. Another one does board training and programs and is on other corporate boards. They’ve achieved on their own merits. That’s what I would hope would be the case. Earl: You talked a bit about your family. How have you been able to juggle what’s been a job and a half sometimes? Meier: [01:31:54] Time management. I know it’s funny because our boys swam competitively. I was the driver, as well. When you have a child turning sixteen and you are a parent of a swimmer, you’re very happy when they do that. I never did carpools because I don’t mind driving my own kids, but if 89 my kids aren’t going to go, I don’t want to have to get up at four thirty in the morning to drive somebody else’s children. They had five o’clock practice from five to seven every morning. You just sort of get in the routine. I don’t need a lot of sleep, so it worked well. I prided myself on being there for the kids and always being home with homework and all of that. I had a situation--Eric had a back condition and ended up being home for fifth grade. I homeschooled him for that year. I dropped out of everything and was able to step back in when he was ready to go back to school. That was a challenge. It’s interesting when you have that with a child because it impacts the whole family. When Eric would see our older son go off to swim practice, he would be really down. Our older son almost quit swimming that year. I said no, you’re not going to change your life in that for--but it does have an impact. Earl: It’s a big clan now with grandchildren. How many do you-Meier: [01:34:11] There are eight of us altogether. Eight grandchildren, I mean. Earl: Eight grandchildren. Do you have occasions when everyone can get together? Meier: [01:34:17] The older they get, the harder it is. We have done that. It’s turned out that one child’s been there for one day, but we try to. Yes, we do get together. We’re lucky two of the families are in San Francisco. That makes a big difference. We used to be able to do it when they were younger because the two oldest are Laura’s. They’re both working. One’s doing the Teach for America in New Orleans and the other one’s in New York working for Michael Kors. Her third is graduating this year from Princeton and then is 90 going to be going into the Marines. He majored in architecture at Princeton and he wants to go into the officer-training program. Her youngest is at Stanford. Our son, Tony’s two--the older one of the two is at Emory [Emory University]. She’s just learned that the head of the Sociology Department is nominating her for a Fulbright, which is really very exciting. She just doesn’t know what to make of it all. The second one is at SMU, his son. We have two granddaughters in Portland--one is a junior in high school and the other one’s in eighth grade. They grow, which is great. It’s fun. When they have turned ten, we’ve had sort of a tradition that I started with the oldest one of taking her to Washington, DC by myself. I’ve done that with each of the girls. Tony has taken them on a fishing trip for the boys because Tony’s a big fisherman. It’s fun when you have that chance, or when you’re with them and they say, “Gee, this is more fun than I thought it was going to be.” [laughter] They’re a gift. We’re very blessed. Earl: 2001, Uncommon Woman Honor. I re-watched the video. It’s really quite lovely. I know you professed to be a little embarrassed by the fuss, but what do you see as your legacy? When you think about it--sit back and say okay, what’s my legacy in terms of my Stanford engagement? Meier: [01:37:09] Oh goodness. That’s a tough one. Matter of fact, I was talking to someone about it the other day with this new Lead program. I think having volunteers understand how fortunate they are to work with the outstanding staff at Stanford and, I say that with all sincerity. In all my volunteer activities 91 with lots of different volunteer or non-profit programs, there is nothing that duplicates or even comes close to the quality of the people that you interact with. You are a team when you’re working. I don’t know whether the staff understands that, how much we value that. It’s a privilege and it is the kind of thing that makes us all look better. I think we get credit for things that we really shouldn’t get credit for, as volunteers at Stanford. I mean that sincerely. I think that the staff really makes the effort to have the volunteer look good. That’s extraordinary. I think maybe letting people know that volunteers are valued at Stanford and they’re used. I go back to the “name only” kind of thing. There’s so many opportunities that people have to do that and what a waste of any time or effort that’s put into that. As I said earlier, I love to do sort of creative things or a little bit different, a little outside the box. Stanford will gamble with you and let you do that. That helps you come back for more. Earl: Is there anything we didn’t cover that you think-Meier: [01:39:30] No, I think you’ve done an amazing job. You’ve uncovered things I didn’t even know about. [laughter] No, it’s a wonderful institution. It really is. I mean, you could have just decided on that other school, you know, how that-Earl: What would it have been for you? Meier: [01:39:54] It would have been Smith [Smith College]. Earl: Smith, okay. Our gain. Meier: [01:40:00] You realize that kind of thing is just sort of luck of the draw, I think. Little did I ever know I would become as engaged as I have. It was 92 nothing that I planned. I had no intention of that kind of thing, except I knew I’d be involved, just because that’s my nature. Earl: Have you slowed down at all? Meier: [01:40:24] Not really. [laughter] No. I enjoy being busy and it’s great. Again, I mean, you talk about meeting people or different situations that Stanford has sort of played a part in. When we were doing the Stanford Challenge program in Europe, we had gone for the initial program when I had gone to Berlin, Paris, and London. I came back again, for the committee that we had formed, to London and then I was going to Paris. Paris had a strike. Donna and I canceled the meeting with our representative in London. We canceled the meeting for Paris because there was no way anybody could get there or get around. I got a call--I was at the Red Carpet Club in Paris coming home and Donna called. She said, “You won’t believe this, but we hadn’t reached one of the people who was going to Paris from London and so she didn’t hear about the meeting being canceled.” I called her from there and there’s no way I could possibly apologize enough. I just felt horrible about it. Anyway, she’s become a very good friend of mine. [laughter] I had her stay with us when she was out here. So, you never know. Earl: Wonderful. Thank you so much for taking the time. Meier: [01:42:36] Oh listen, thank you Marie. Earl: I really appreciate it, as will generations to come. Meier: [01:42:40] Thank you. You’ve been great to invite me to do it and it’s been fun to reminisce...