 Pantell: This is an interview with Dr. Sarah Donaldson. I am Laurie Pantell. It’s January 3, 2015. We are in Stanford, California. Dr. Donaldson, tell me about where you were born and where you grew up. Donaldson: [00:00:22] I was born and grew up in Portland, Oregon. I spent my entire life in Oregon until I left to go to medical school. Pantell: Do you have siblings? Donaldson: [00:00:36] No, I grew up as an only child. However, I grew up on the same street and two houses away from my mother’s brother, and thus my cousins, Bob and Mary Ann, were like siblings to me. I spent all of my time with them. We did everything in the family together. Pantell: Nice. Where were you in relation to them in terms of age? Donaldson: [00:01:14] I was one year younger than Bob and two years older than Mary Ann. Pantell: Tell me a little bit about your parents: their professions and— Donaldson: [00:01:29] I’ll tell you what I know, which isn’t very much. I was born in 1939. My parents were married a couple of years before that in difficult 13 times, during the Depression; everybody was very frugal. My mother had gone to a school called Monmouth. It’s in Ashland, Oregon, and it was an education school, a school to go to, to become a teacher. She was educated; she had a college education. I actually don’t know where my father went to school. They were married, and they both worked at a company called W. P. Fuller & Co., which was a company that sold paint and wallpaper and glass and such. [00:02:23] I think the company headquarters is in San Francisco, but there was a branch in Portland, Oregon. My mother worked as a bookkeeper there, and my father I think was a salesman. I don’t know exactly what he did. At any rate, when I was three, my parents separated. My father moved away from Portland, and he moved to Northern California to the San Francisco area, so I was brought up by my mother. I didn’t know my father very well. I knew him peripherally in that he’d come to visit me once a year when he visited his parents, who lived in Portland. [00:03:07] He sent me birthday presents and Christmas presents—usually things that were inappropriate and were not things that little girls of that age used or wanted because he didn’t know me very well. So I was raised by my mother. The part that shaped my life is the fact that I was raised by a single mother at a very difficult time. She worked, and she was very frugal and worked hard to make ends meet and worked hard for me to have all the things that she wanted her daughter to have. [00:03:56] As I think back on it now, I am who I am probably because I learned a lot from 14 my mother. My mother must have been a very influential role model for me, because she was bright, effective, efficient, and could do everything as far as I knew. She could keep a household and go to work every day and raise a daughter. She was a great gardener, and she was an appreciator of music and all sorts of things. It wasn’t so common. In the early 1940s, during World War II, things were rationed. [00:04:44] It was a very, very difficult time. She succeeded and she gave me all the things that I needed, and so I was instilled with very good habits: work hard, do your best, do your homework, succeed in school. I was a nice little girl probably because that’s the way she raised me. Pantell: How did it affect you to be a child of a single parent in that era? I imagine there weren’t too many divorced couples— Donaldson: [00:05:30] I don’t have any recollection of it, because I don’t think I ever considered myself that way. I don’t have any memory of that, nor do I have any reason to think that that was any influence on me because I went to school when my mother went to work; I would walk two doors up, and I’d go to school with Bob and Mary Ann. We went to school together and we came home from school together. I went to their house after school until my mother came home from work, at which time I came home and she made the dinner, etcetera. I grew up with Bob and Mary Ann as siblings. [00:06:11] Their mother, my Aunt Mary, and her husband really raised me as a daughter as well. We had family vacations together, and I was disciplined along with Bob and Mary Ann just like siblings. I don’t think that I actually suffered any of 15 the problems, whatever they are, that children who don’t have any siblings suffer from, or children of single parents. I don’t think I recognized any of those things. I was just too busy doing all the things that I did. I don’t think it had any impact on me at all. If it did, I’m not aware of it. Pantell: Do you think your mom had a view about education for women? Donaldson: [00:07:04] She had a view that it was very important to go to school, do well in school, do your homework, be on the honor roll. That’s the way I grew up. My mother had gone to school, and so when I graduated from a good high school in Portland called U. S. Grant High School, (a very high percentage of Grant graduates at that time went on to college—very high, like 90 percent or 95 percent), there was an expectation that everybody would go to college. [00:07:44] The only difficulty was where I would go to college because my mother didn’t have very much money. She was encouraging me to go to a state school. I applied for scholarships; I got scholarships. I got a scholarship to go to Willamette, which is a private school in Salem, Oregon, a very nice school. But I didn’t want to go to Willamette. I wanted to go to the University of Oregon in Eugene, which is where most of my friends went. Bob and Mary Ann went to Oregon State in Corvallis, but I wanted to go to University of Oregon. [00:08:19] It is a state school, and state tuition wasn’t very expensive. I had a scholarship. I wanted to go to Oregon because I was very social. To me, peers and being popular were extremely important then, and everybody, all of my girlfriends were going to University of Oregon. I wanted to be like everybody else. 16 At that time, the culture was that you went to state school, you pledged a sorority, which I did, and girls who went on to school did so to become a teacher, a secretary, or a nurse. [00:09:18] Those were the three things that young women did. In high school, I took typing so I could be a good secretary, etcetera. I worked every summer. I went to camp every summer as a little girl. Then when I was too old to go to camp anymore, I did volunteer work at the camp, and then I worked as a counselor at the camp. Then when I was too old to be a counselor and too young to have a work permit, I did volunteer work as a candy striper at Multnomah County Hospital, the county hospital for Portland and its environs. [00:10:12] I wore a little seersucker pinafore, and I went to the hospital on Saturdays and Sundays. Usually we worked as nurses’ aides, or nurses’ helpers, and I helped the nurses do things like make beds, and I learned how to give bed baths. I filled water pitchers, and I took trays to people’s bedside at mealtime, and I washed dishes, and those kinds of things. [00:11:06] Then when I was old enough to get a work permit, which was age sixteen, the county hospital hired me as a nurses’ aide. I did that for a couple of years before I went to college. So I decided to study nursing when I went to University of Oregon, Eugene. That was my declared major. The nursing program at University of Oregon, at that time, was a five-year program that consisted of two years at the university and then three years at a nursing school. [00:11:48] After the first two years, one then transferred to the medical center, to what’s now called the Oregon Health Sciences Center—the University of Oregon 17 Medical School, Dental School, and Nursing School on one campus. After that five-year program of two-plus-three, you got a bachelor of science degree and a registered nurse degree. I was active at Oregon; I pledged Pi Beta Phi, and I lived in the house; I was a popular cheerleading enthusiast. Then I went to University of Oregon Nursing School. [00:12:37] Upon graduating from nursing school, I got a job working for a physician who was on the staff at University of Oregon Medical School, a young surgeon whose name was William Fletcher—Bill Fletcher. He was recruited by the head of the Department of Surgery whose name was Dunphy—J. Engelbert Dunphy, quite a well-known surgeon in American surgical history—a Harvard-trained person who had been recruited to develop a department of surgery at Oregon. [00:13:21] He brought along a couple of his bright young trainees, one of whom was Bill Fletcher, and told Dr. Fletcher to start a cancer program. About the time when Bill Fletcher was recruited and became a junior faculty, I was coming out of nursing school and he was setting up a cancer program. He needed a nurse, and he recruited me. Right out of nursing school I went to work for Dr. Fletcher as what today we would call his oncology nurse. We didn’t have those terms in those days. [laughter] I was like his right-arm girl in a way. I worked in the operating room with him. I worked in the clinic with him. [00:14:09] I made home visits with him. He did clinical trials; I kept his records for him. I was his data aide. I filled out all the forms on experimental chemotherapy drugs; 18 they were all done by surgeons at that time because the field of medical oncology hadn’t opened up yet. I did everything with him. He was doing research as well. I worked in the lab with him, and I assisted him in the lab. He did small-animal experiments, and I had my own small-animal experiments. I worked with him for three years. [00:14:46] I learned a lot of medicine from him because I worked with him….for him, all day every day. One of the things I did in the operating room for him was to run his pump oxygenator when he did isolation perfusion. It is a way of giving systemic chemotherapy, but locally-regionally. When the blood from the patient comes out into this machine, you add this cancer medicine, and then it goes back into the patient as extracorporeal circulation. [00:15:43] There are other technical things that he taught me how to do. He said that I would be more helpful to him if I actually knew what I was doing. [laughter] Why didn’t I take physics? He suggested I could do that maybe in night school. There was a city college in Portland called Portland State College. I took night classes at Portland State while I was working for him in the daytime. In order to take physics, I had to take the prerequisite, which was trigonometry. The prerequisite to trigonometry was Algebra II, and I’d only had Algebra I. I had to take Algebra II, then trig, then physics. [00:16:41] About the same time, he was doing some work in the lab using radioactive substances that he got from Oak Ridge, Tennessee. He was inducing breast cancers in rats and then tagging the breast cancers with this 19 radioactive substance and then sectioning it and doing operations on the rats and giving them chemotherapy and studying their response. Anyway, the bottom line was that we were using this radioactive material in the laboratory. [00:17:11] In order for him to be licensed to use this substance, all of the people in the lab had to pass some tests and had to be certified as knowing how to use this radioactive substance, which meant that I had to take organic chemistry. The prerequisite to organic was inorganic, and so I had to do that, because although I had had some of these preliminary studies as a nursing student, these were higher-level courses. So I was taking these courses in night school, working for him in the daytime, and then doing private-duty nursing on the weekends to make extra money. I had boundless energy. [00:17:53] After I’d been doing this for a couple years, one night we were working late in the lab. I was working on my hamster project and he was working on something else. He suggested we go get a drink after work. I was putting melanomas in these little hamsters and then amputating their legs and studying their metastases. I finished working on all of my hamster legs, then we went down to get a drink. I think it was a Sunday night. There was a little bar near the campus, not very far from the hospital. He bought me a drink and said, “You know, Sarah, I think you should think about going to medical school.” [00:18:45] I said, “Medical school?” It had never occurred to me to go to medical school. I was perfectly content where I was. I had a wonderful job, a wonderful life, I was happy as could be. I was in a great place. It was not my idea to go to medical school; it was his idea. I had a lot of reasons 20 why I couldn’t go to medical school, which I told him. The main reasons I couldn’t go to medical school were because I was too old, because I was a girl, because I didn’t have enough money, and because I wasn’t smart enough. Of course, he had a counterargument for each of those. [00:19:32] Or, he didn’t have a counterargument, but he would allow me to realize that it wasn’t an argument at all. When I said I was too old, he said, “How old will you be in ten years?” I think I was twenty-five at the time. I said, “I’ll be thirty-five.” He said, “How old will you be in ten years if you don’t go to medical school?” It was the same thing. It wasn’t going to make any difference. Then the argument about not having enough money: At that time, in fact, it was not difficult to get scholarships and loans or to borrow money. There were a lot of governmental programs that helped people get an education and that provided low-interest loans. [00:20:11] He told me that I could apply for scholarships and loans. Then I said I was a girl and it wasn’t part of the culture where I grew up to do that sort of thing. I’d never been out of the state of Oregon, and it never occurred to me to do something other than what all my girlfriends were doing, which was becoming teachers, etcetera. He was a graduate of Dartmouth College, Dartmouth Medical School, and Harvard Medical School. . [00:20:47] He told me that Dartmouth Medical School—the third oldest medical school in America—was, for the first time, opening up its doors and admitting women. For the past two hundred years, it had been an all-male school. Hanover was a male city, a village, but they were going to be 21 taking women into their medical school. He said they were looking for women, which was absolutely true. He knew that because he was a Dartmouth grad; I wouldn’t have known that. [00:21:18] Then I said, “Well, I’m not smart enough.” He kind of ruffled his feathers and then he reminded me that medical schools had committees of erudite professional educators whose task it was to be able to determine who had the wherewithal to be able to succeed in medical school, and did I think that I was smarter or better than these panels of experts whose job it was to pick a class at medical school? “No, of course not.” Anyway, the matter dropped. [00:22:04] We didn’t talk about it again. Then a couple of weeks after that, the grant funding from the New York Cancer Society for my hamster research project was coming to an end. In order to continue the project, he told me that we had to write a progress report and recompete for the grant. He said, “They’re going to be meeting in New York on such-and-such date. If you want to continue your project, you’re going to need to go to New York and redefend the project.” [00:22:52] I said, “I can’t do that.” He said, “Why?” I said, “I can’t do that.” He said, “Well, if you can’t explain your own project, then you don’t deserve to continue working in it.” That put me back a little bit. Then I said, “Shouldn’t you do it?” 22 He said, “I’m operating that day. If you want to continue this project, you need to go.” I’d never been out of the state of Oregon at that point. “Well, OK.” Then he did something really crafty. I was very naïve….refreshingly naïve. [00:23:37] He said, “You know, if you’re going to New York, you ought to go visit my sister Sally. She lives in Woodstock, Vermont.” I’d heard about all of his sisters. He had five sisters and their family homestead was in Vermont, and I’d heard all these stories about his family. He said, “The meeting is on Friday. I think you should take the train up to Woodstock and spend the weekend with Sally. She’d love to have you up there. It’d be wonderful for you to be able to see what New England’s like when the leaves are turning colors.” [00:24:14] I was blinded with excitement about this. Then he said, “Oh. And when you’re visiting Sally, it’s just five miles away from Dartmouth. You ought to stop by and see Dartmouth.” I said, “Oh, that would be wonderful.” He arranged for me to meet with the people at Dartmouth, and I did. It was for an interview for the medical school. I was so naïve and just going along with his show that I didn’t even understand what was going on. [00:24:47] It was one of those wonderful New England days. I didn’t stay with Sally that night; instead I stayed at a place called the Hanover Inn in Hanover—a wonderful, stately old hotel that opens onto a big green where the Baker Library is and where the kids were out practicing football. It was the first or second week in September. The leaves were turning colors. It was 23 a blue sky, a few cumulous clouds floating along, cold and crisp. Wonderful, wonderful fall day. I thought, “This is where I want to go to school.” [00:25:28] I fell in love with Hanover, sitting on the curb in front of the Hanover Inn, which I’m sure he knew would happen. I came home with an application in my hand and filled it out on my flight home. But there was more to the story than that, because I didn’t just visit Dartmouth. He had said, “As long as you’re going to be in the East, you ought to visit some other medical schools as well.” He told me where I should visit. In ten days, I visited Dartmouth, Harvard, McGill, Columbia, Cornell, Johns Hopkins, Washington University, and Case Western Reserve. Pretty wonderful schools. I filled out the Dartmouth application first. [00:26:26] While I was working on the Harvard application, which was two weeks after I had filled out the Dartmouth one, I got a letter from Dartmouth saying I’d been admitted. Dr. Fletcher was away at that time. He was at the American College of Surgery meeting in San Francisco. The mailman came that Saturday morning with a letter that said I’d been admitted to Dartmouth. I didn’t have any idea what to do. I called Dr. Fletcher. I got him in his hotel before he’d gone off to the meetings. I said, “Dr. Fletcher, you’ll never guess what’s happened. I got a letter from Dartmouth.” [00:27:03] “Oh, did you, Sarah? And what did they say?” I said, “I’ve been admitted!” He said, “Wonderful. Are you going to respond?” I said, “Well, they want a $50 deposit.” 24 He said, “The department will cover it,” which of course meant he just opened up his wallet, I’m sure, because I really didn’t have any resources. I sent in the $50 deposit so I could start school the next September. I didn’t have any idea how I was going to manage this. At any rate, I was busy getting ready to go off to medical school. [laughter] Pantell: I want to hear all about your medical school experience, but before you say more, I want to go back a little bit in time and ask, when you became a candy striper and you first got interested in nursing, how did you choose that versus the other professions that women tended to go into? What was it about the health-care field that caught your attention? Donaldson: [00:28:31] Why did I want to be a nurse, you mean? Pantell: Yes. Donaldson: [00:28:35] I’d been a candy striper and then a nurses’ aide, and there were three things that women did, so nursing was a natural for me. I liked taking care of people, I felt comfortable in the hospital, and I liked dealing with all those people at Multnomah County Hospital. They had nothing, and I could make them feel better. It never occurred to me to not want to be the very best nurse ever. In fact, I got this nice award called the Oregon Nurse of the Year Award. That’s why my life was so happy. I was at quite a lovely level. [00:29:27] I had no reason to do anything else. In fact, my mother was quite protective. She’d gone through hard times. Unlike her, I hadn’t seen hard times because I was in this protected environment of Portland, Oregon. She didn’t want me to go to medical school. She was extremely fearful that I would fall on my face and get hurt. 25 She was very proud that I had done so well, extremely proud, and happy that I was such a successful nurse. She was not anxious for me to bite off something I couldn’t chew, not anxious for me to aspire to something that was totally impossible. [00:30:23] Going to medical school, a family without any means, leaving the state of Oregon meant a big change as we had no family connections outside of Oregon. She was afraid that sending me off to an allmale school was like sending her daughter into a pack of wolves. She was very, very protective of me. I had no idea what the world was all about. I was very, very naïve. I hadn’t experienced life. She was not happy when I announced I was going to medical school. She was not at all happy. She was upset to think that this doctor had so influenced me to put me on a path where I was at high risk to fail. [00:31:26] I understand that; because of her background, she was so protective of me. I was the only thing she had. She was quite upset when I went to medical school. We did not have much communication for the next several years. Dr. Fletcher was always available though, and I talked to him regularly. I called him and cried when I thought I was failing chemistry. He was very, very supportive of me through all of this. I couldn’t talk to my mother because she would say, “You know I told you so. Why don’t you come home right now?” I couldn’t admit to her that I had any insecurities because that was not in my character to do. She did come to my Harvard graduation. [00:32:15] I’m sure she was the happiest person that was there. But she was very, very protective and 26 very afraid that I was going to hurt myself. After I got out of medical school, my mother continued to pay my nursing license annually so I would always have something to fall back on if I didn’t make it. She had been so impacted by the war and what that had done to people that she was very, very conservative and hanging onto those few things that she had that were substantial. She knew how to succeed because she had done it and she had raised and educated a daughter. She did not want me to fall on hard times. [00:33:09] Now I can understand that. At the time, I thought she was an old biddy and didn’t get it. I was curious and filled with wanderlust and craving to know more about whatever there was that I didn’t know much about. Pantell: Please go ahead and talk about medical school. I didn’t mean to get you off track. Donaldson: [00:33:34] Medical school was interesting because Dartmouth had no women in the undergraduate school. In the medical school, I was in the third class of women. There were six women in our class out of forty-eight students. That was a big proportion. We all lived together in a large home that the school had set aside for the women because the dormitory was all-male. The school wasn’t set up for women. We didn’t fit in because it had been an all-male school. [00:34:16] Everything was geared toward men. They converted this old home, which had been the home of the first president of Dartmouth College, into kind of a sorority house or a dormitory for women. All six of us lived there. It was within walking distance of the hospital, and it was wonderful. We became very, very good friends, the six of us. We’re still extremely good friends and still keep in contact. 27 What was it like? It was a big eye-opening experience because I had come from Oregon, and [00:34:56] everybody else in the class had gone to an Ivy League or New England school, the Seven Sisters, the private boys’ schools. They were all New England cultured, wealthy, smart boys who had been given a lot of things. It seemed to me like the parents, grandparents or grandparent’s parent’s parents of everybody in my class had sailed with Christopher Columbus and then discovered America or had grown up on Cape Cod or on Plymouth Rock. They were all filled with history and had been in New England forever. [00:35:55] They thought I lived in a teepee in Oregon. Most of them had never been to Oregon. It seemed to them like the Wild West. I’d never been to New York. I didn’t know anything. At Dartmouth, there’s not very much to do other than go to school. That’s what everybody does. Hanover’s a very small town. All you do at Dartmouth as a student is go to school and ski (I was a good skier because I had grown up on Mount Hood outside Portland; [00:36:34] I was a strong competitive downhill skier) or drink beer. That was the drink that they drank in New England. Every weekend there was a keg party and we drank beer. The class did everything as a unit, so the girls in class did everything along with the guys in the class. We’re all very, very good friends. We studied together, worked together, shared cadavers together—one cohesive group. We’re still very, very close. That Dartmouth experience was very important to me. 28 Pantell: Did you notice that there was any preferential treatment of the male students? Did you experience any sort of imbalance as a female in a maledominated class? Donaldson: [00:37:20] I get asked this a lot, and the girls in my class have been interviewed a lot about that question. My roommate, Susie, is the one who ends up talking most about it. I didn’t notice very much difference. The only thing that I can remember that was awkward was that you had to work real hard to find the things you needed as a woman. There wasn’t very much carved out for women because it was all for men. There was no locker room for women. There weren’t bathrooms for women. There weren’t places you could buy nylon stockings. [00:38:09] You had to go to White River Junction to get stockings. Women things were not available because everything was directed toward male students. In that respect, it was a little bit awkward. The medical school didn’t have a dressing room for women. It was that way when I got to Stanford, too. The operating rooms had dressing rooms for the men. If you were a woman, you went to the nurses’ dressing room because there weren’t facilities for women in medicine. [00:38:46] When I was [laughter] at Dartmouth, my classmates were all very tight. Because Dartmouth been an all-male school, everybody in the school belonged to this medical fraternity, which was popular in those days. It was an all-male medical fraternity. For years, everybody at Dartmouth had belonged to this fraternity. When our class came in, we all belonged to the fraternity, except six of us were women and it was a fraternity for men. Anyway, I was elected out of my class to be the secretary. 29 [00:39:35] It was in my job description to do the communication for the male fraternity. Since the fraternity was only for men, it wasn’t acceptable for me to be signing my name as Sarah because that’s a girl’s name. [laughter] I wasn’t supposed to be in the fraternity at all, so I used the name Sam. All the mail that I got at Dartmouth from this male fraternity was sent to Sam Donaldson. That’s an answer in a way to the fact that it wasn’t set up for women. But the classmates were nice to us. As far as I can remember, they were nice to us. They were always nice to me. Pantell: Were there any women faculty at the time? Donaldson: [00:40:32] There were very few women faculty. The professor of physiology, Dr. McCann, was a woman. There was a woman in biochemistry. But they were basic scientists; they weren’t clinicians. They were scientist types, but very few. It was a wonderful place to go to school. Pantell: You spent two years at Dartmouth. Donaldson: [00:40:59] I spent two years there. Medical school was four years, but your first two years at that time were basic science. They were classroom classes where you had to take hard-core science classes. After those two years, you did clinical rotations, where you actually got introduced to taking care of patients, and you got experience in clinics and in the operating room. Hanover didn’t have enough patients to train medical students in the clinical years, but they had enough scientists to teach us the basic science part. [00:41:39] So after two years, all the medical students transferred to another school. About two-thirds of the class transferred to Harvard, and the 30 other one-third transferred to other wonderful schools of their choosing— Hopkins, Columbia, Cornell, McGill, Penn. So the class split after two years. From my cohort of classmates, of the six girls, four of us went to Harvard, and we lived together on Commonwealth Avenue in Boston. Of the other two, one went to Columbia and one went to McGill. The six of us are still good friends. The four of us who went on to Harvard just fit in with our Harvard classmates. Pantell: You were in the minority, I assume, at Harvard as well. Donaldson: [00:42:30] I was a minority for a couple of reasons. One is that I was a woman. But the other reason is that I was a Dartmouth transplant. That was seen as a second-class way to get into Harvard Medical School. It wasn’t the original class. It seemed to me like they were all very snobby, but they were probably just proud of what they had. Then other transfer students came in. I knew the ones I was on rotations with. I didn’t ever get to know all of my Harvard classmates. [00:43:03] The ones I took rotations with I see at reunions and such and we’re all good friends now. At the time, I didn’t feel totally accepted by the Harvard men. Pantell: The Harvard men were different than the Dartmouth men in some way? Donaldson: [00:43:20] Yes. At Dartmouth we were very cohesive, because living in Hanover, there wasn’t very much to do other than be at Dartmouth and do things together. It was a wonderfully protected and very supportive environment. The culture at Dartmouth was that once you got in, they worked really hard to keep you. There was a lot of support for students. If students weren’t doing well, or were flailing, professors gave special tutorials; 31 professors were always having students into their homes as was typical in a kind of small New England school. [00:44:09] Harvard was in the middle of Boston—the undergraduate school was in Cambridge and the medical school was in Boston. Boston was a big city, there were many schools in Boston, and the bustle of this big city was entirely different. I was living in a big city and taking the MTA or the bus to go to the hospital every day, whereas at Dartmouth, I put on my boots and I walked in the snow to the hospital. In Hanover you can walk anyplace you want to. In Boston, of course, you can’t do that. Pantell: Before we leave the early part of your life, because I want to know, of course, about when you arrived at Stanford and everything that happened after that, I just have a few more questions about the young part of your life. You mentioned your mother being a big influence in terms of your work ethic and how to take care of yourself and that you learned so much from her. Were there other influences in your early life—your cousins or your other extended family or other people that influenced the path that you ultimately took? Donaldson: [00:45:36] My best friend in high school, Nancy, did exactly the same thing I did. She also worked as a candy striper. She worked as a nurses’ aide and then became a nurse. When I went to Oregon, she went to Stanford. She was a little bit more worldly-wise because she went to Stanford. She ultimately came back and went to Oregon Nursing School. Our paths diverged a little bit when I went to Oregon and became an enthusiastic Oregon Ducks supporter, attending football games, sorority house parties, all of that business. Nancy was doing the same thing at Stanford. [00:46:17] We were 32 absolutely like Siamese twins—very, very best friends throughout high school. We continued being that way. In fact, she ended up marrying my high school boyfriend. Nancy and I have been good friends forever and ever. Nancy was supportive of me. She was like a sister to me. Pantell: Do you think there was any other aspect to your background that impacted your later career choices? Any other factors that we haven’t discussed? Donaldson: [00:46:58] Without question, Dr. Fletcher was very influential because he introduced me to things that otherwise would have seemed impossible. He didn’t allow me to believe they were impossible. If I had not had such a strong mentor, or such a strong, influential man in my life—I didn’t know my father that way. I didn’t have a male role model. Not that Dr. Fletcher was like a father figure to me, but he was a man whose influence was great upon me, and I admired him immensely. [00:47:43] I think he had more impact on me than I realized at the time. I only realized this recently because he died last year, and I was asked to deliver the eulogy at his funeral by his children. I did that, but it was hard for me because I hadn't actually known Dr. Fletcher since I had gone off to medical school. He had continued his life in Oregon as a surgeon, and I’d gone off in another direction. I heard from him regularly at Christmastime, and he served as an advisor and counselor and such in my later years. I didn’t know him intimately well because I was off doing these other little things. When I went to deliver the eulogy, I thought to myself that I haven’t known this man for the last forty years. 33 [00:48:34] But I was able to deliver this eulogy and talk about what kind of an influence he had on students like me. There were dozens of other students. I was just the one who was asked to be the spokesperson at this gathering. It could have been anybody, I’m quite sure. The impact of a great educator on the next generation and the next generation to come, and the ripple effect of important people like that—because we all have important people in our lives who influence us in ways that we don’t understand at the time—that is significant. I think that probably Dr. Fletcher had a huge part in molding me to be the person that I turned out to be. Pantell: I want to ask a couple of questions about the cultural environment that you grew up in. You talked a little bit about your childhood and growing up in the Depression and that it created some difficulties for your family. Donaldson: [00:49:38] And World War II, yes. Pantell: And World War II. As you were coming of age, were there cultural influences that you think impacted your choices or your life trajectory? I know it was the early 1960s that you were— Donaldson: [00:49:59] When I came to Stanford as a trainee and did my radiation oncology training, it was the time of the Vietnam War. Young people were very disturbed about the war and about President Nixon. They expressed themselves a lot. There was a lot of behavior and attitudes that came from the environment that bothered me. Kids were writing graffiti on the walls, and girls became flower children and we’d smoke pot, or act out to make a point. I didn’t have time for all of that. [00:51:01] There was a lot of rabblerousing, strong people, banner-carrying women, the feminist movement, 34 Gloria Steinem, and all of these people who were making statements that women should do this and women should do that. I was aware of all of that, but I was never part of it. Why wasn’t I part of it? I think I was just too busy doing the things I was doing. I was very focused and threw myself into every aspect of my training and my education, studying for the next exam or the next milestone. I didn’t follow those divergent paths or get distracted by going braless or having lipstick raids or writing graffiti or doing things that were against the law— [00:51:58]riding on a motorcycle or being a wild one—I didn’t want to smoke. The youth were doing all these things to express themselves because they were all very unhappy. Boys in my class were unhappy because they didn’t want to go to Vietnam, and they protested the war, and they didn’t want to be drafted. Because the guys in my class were at risk of being drafted and had to go into the service, I thought I should volunteer to go into the draft because all of my classmates were. They were being drafted and having to go, and so I thought that I should go do service on the ship Hope, or be Clara Barton carrying out blood in France on the battlefield or something. [00:52:48] I just thought I was supposed to do that because all my classmates were being asked to serve. Whether they wanted to or not, there was a compulsory draft. It seemed to me if they were being drafted, I should be drafted, because we were all exactly the same. That’s the way it was when I went to medical school. I felt exactly the same as anybody else—the same assignments. I had to work hard. I didn’t 35 feel like I was privileged, and the women’s movement didn’t affect me in some ways because I was busy doing what I was doing. [00:53:26] When my classmates got drafted after medical school to go to Vietnam, I too was upset and satiated and tired of being a student, and I wanted out. I wanted out of America because we were all very upset with President Nixon and impeachment and these tapes and all of these things that were not very honest. I wanted out. I wanted to go travel. So I ended up going to France for a year. That was a character-building experience if there ever was one, because when I got to France, I couldn’t speak French, didn’t know how to succeed, didn’t know how to survive. I didn’t know anything. [00:54:15] That taught me a lot, really a lot. You do learn to manage on your own if you’re hungry enough, or if you’re cold enough, or whatever it is, you learn how to figure out how to make do. That’s what France did for me that year. Not because I learned much radiotherapy. I made friends there, but it was sheer grit to make friends in France because the French were not very nice to Americans. They’re still not very nice to Americans. I couldn’t speak the language. I was like the “ugly American.” It took some time because here everybody’s nice to everybody and it seems sort of plastic. [00:55:02] When I went to France, there was history and culture and churches and architecture and Bastille Day, and all of these things that were very substantial to me. I was very impressionable because I really hadn’t been anyplace. It was a big effort to go to a hundred different stores. You go here to buy your pastries, and here to buy your meat, and here to buy your cheese, and I was used to going to the Safeway. There wasn’t any Safeway. I learned 36 how to survive in those conditions. [00:55:43] Then when I came back to America, I had a very difficult reentry, because America seemed very plastic to me and new and modern and without substance and without any depth and without any history and without any character. That year in France was very, very helpful to me because I did learn how to appreciate things that I’d never known before. It was extremely difficult for me. I was very unhappy. I cried many, many, many a night. I didn’t know anybody. I couldn’t really talk because I didn’t know French very well. So I walked. I am sure I have walked every single street in Paris. I knew the city like the back of my hand. [00:56:29] I knew every museum, when it was free, when it was open, and every cathedral, and every spectacle of whatever it was. Paris is a wonderful place to be a student because you can walk everyplace and spend all this time sipping coffee on the Left Bank and in bookstores and studying people and watching painters and listening to all these erudite people. [00:57:06] I became totally mesmerized by all of that and became very much a Francophile. I ate cheese, had salads after my meal, and all of that stuff that seemed so important. It still has an impact on me because now I understand the French way of life and how to survive there. It takes you some time to learn to survive in France; it takes a long time to make a friend in France because it’s a friendship of depth, and it’s different than here. It was very, very important to me. It was a wonderful year. What I learned out of it all is that the more important things in life are the things that are the most difficult, because that year in France was difficult. 37 [00:57:57] Medical school was difficult for me. It was very hard for me to go to school. I was older than everybody else. My mind hadn’t been trained for the last three or four years into reading lots and studying with the kind of work ethic that my classmates had. That was hard for me, starting at Dartmouth. I was very, very insecure and felt like I couldn’t succeed and I wasn’t smart enough. I did succeed, but it wasn’t a pushover. The people in my class were really bright. I was not the brightest person in my class. I was probably one of the more hard-working people in the class, but certainly not the most gifted. [00:58:48] If I look at my life, that’s probably been true all the way along. I learned from my mother the importance of working hard, because you have to work hard for whatever you get. I can say that I have worked hard, but I’m not the smartest—maybe one of the hardest working. As Sharon Bower1 would say, I’m probably one of the more efficient because I am organized. I learned that you have to be organized or else you might run out of time, or something might come up and derail you, so you have to cover your tracks. That’s why I went four years in advance to learn how to give this talk2, because if I’d waited to the last minute, I might need more time. Pantell: Can you tell me what led you to the field of oncology, and specifically pediatric oncology? Sharon Bower, wife of Stanford psychology professor Gordon Bower, is a long-time friend and public speaking coach of Sarah Donaldson. 2 The presidential speech Sarah Donaldson gave when she became the president of the American Society of Radiation Oncology in 1992. 1 38 Donaldson: [00:59:43] That’s a very easy question for me. I didn’t choose it at all. I just landed there. That takes me back to Dr. Fletcher again. He was a surgeon whose responsibility was taking care of cancer patients. Today we call the field surgical oncology. He was one of the first surgical oncologists. He taught me a lot of medicine when I was working for him. I was comfortable working around patients who had cancer because I was comfortable helping Dr. Fletcher with everything he did. When I went through medical school, I wanted to be just like Dr. Fletcher. [01:00:24] I wanted to be a cancer surgeon just like Dr. Fletcher. I went through medical school with that being my goal. I applied for a surgical residency at the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston, and I was accepted into the residency to be a surgical house officer. They had had only had one woman before. Her name was Tenley Albright. She had been an Olympic ice-skater of some renown and is a very prominent person among Harvard alumni right now. People knew about Tenley as the first woman surgical house officer at the Brigham. I was given the opportunity to be the second. [01:01:14] I was on top of the world until all of a sudden I felt very insecure. I knew I was good in surgery because Dr. Fletcher had taught me. I was a whiz. I could tie knots and suture and put in tubes—that technical stuff was really easy for me. Then I thought that I was not smart enough in medicine, and if I was going to be a really good surgeon, I needed to know more medicine. I needed to know about infectious disease and cardiology and how to treat ketoacidosis and how to digitalize patients, and all of this 39 stuff that general internists do. I thought in order for me to be a really good physician, my skills in medicine needed to be better. [01:02:05] I thought what I needed was a year of medicine internship. I went to Dr. Francis Moore, who was head of the surgery department at the Brigham, and said, “Dr. Moore, I think instead of being a surgical house officer, I need a year of medicine. I think I should apply in medicine.” He said, “Sarah, that would be just fine. We’ll hold a place for you. You go off and be a medical intern and then come back and we’ll hold a place in surgical residency for you.” So I went off to Seattle, to the University of Washington in internal medicine—they have a very, very strong internal medicine program— because I thought I was weak in medicine. I loved medicine. I loved Seattle. I loved the University of Washington. My internship was one big positive experience. [01:02:49] I was on duty every other night, I was on every other weekend, I worked around the clock, I reveled in the experience. I loved it. I did well. At the end of it, I was offered the coveted position of medical resident at the University of Washington, a highly sought-after position. I accepted. I said I would love to be a medical resident. Then I realized that I had a year earlier committed to being a surgical resident in Boston, and I had just accepted a medical residency in Seattle. Once again, I didn’t know what to do. I went back and talked to Dr. Fletcher. I said, “Dr. Fletcher, I don’t know what to do.” [01:03:30] He said, “Well, Sarah, what do you want to do?” 40 I waffled with that for a long time. Then ultimately I said, “I want to be just like you. I want to take care of cancer patients.” He then said, “You know, you don’t want to be just like me.” He said, “If you really want to be a cancer surgeon, then that has to be your whole life. And you like downhill skiing, and you like giving dinner parties.” He knew all the things I liked to do. I was a pretty well-rounded individual and curious about everything and jumped into everything and was having a good time at everything. [01:04:09] He said, “To be the best cancer surgeon in the world, you’re going to have to give up all those things because you can’t do all those things at the same time. Why don’t you think about radiation therapy?” I said, “What?” I didn’t know anything about it. He said, “The world of radiation therapy is a new field. It needs bright people. It needs surgically oriented people. Why don’t you go down and talk to Malcolm Bagshaw at Stanford about radiation oncology.” [01:04:38] Dr. Bagshaw was one of the two radiation oncologists in the Department of Radiation Oncology at Stanford at that time. The chair was Henry Kaplan, and Mal Bagshaw was his right-arm man. Bagshaw was the clinically oriented person. I went down and talked to Dr. Bagshaw. I spent a day at Stanford, had a wonderful time, got along fine, and I came back thinking, “I want to be a radiation oncologist.” I called Dr. Fletcher again and said, “Dr. Fletcher, Dr. Bagshaw offered me a radiation oncology residency.” [01:05:15] He said, “Well, what do you want to do?” 41 The point is that I was so undifferentiated, I didn’t know what I wanted to do. I wanted to do whatever the last thing was that I had seen. It was Dr. Fletcher who said, “The world of radiation oncology needs to have somebody like you. It’s a field that’s just beginning; it’s a burgeoning field that needs more surgically oriented people; it’s a field where if you want to make an impact, you can make an impact.” And so I came to Stanford. It wasn’t me who decided it. It was Dr. Fletcher who decided it. It was one of the better gifts that he gave to me. Pantell: What was your initial position when you arrived at Stanford? Donaldson: [01:06:04] I was a resident. Karen Fu and I were among the first residents in radiation oncology at Stanford; we were the first women. Pantell: How did you feel about the university and the department at that time? Donaldson: [01:06:17] It was a very small department, and it was wonderful. It was one of the strongest departments in the hospital. It had terrific leaders: Henry Kaplan, Malcolm Bagshaw. They were very, very dynamic leaders and very big men in the field. It was one of the very first training programs in radiation oncology. We all reveled in it. We all did well. I loved it. I stayed on for my residency then took a year out in France because I didn’t know what to do. I was at odds with what to do. At the time there wasn’t anybody doing pediatric oncology. [01:06:58] It was not carved out because it wasn’t a field yet. There were pediatric surgeons who took care of babies who had cancers, but if they needed radiation therapy, they went to radiation oncologists. There wasn’t anybody on the Stanford faculty doing pediatric radiation oncology. When I was a 42 resident, I liked taking care of the babies who had cancer, so I’d oftentimes volunteer to take care of them. I thought that would be a good field. [01:07:30] The fact was that nobody was doing it was an opening that I could see. I asked Drs. Bagshaw and Kaplan about that field, and they both said if you want to do pediatric radiation oncology, you need to go to France and study under Odile Schweisguth because she was this grande dame of pediatric oncology at this big cancer hospital institute, Gustave Roussy in Villejuif. So that’s what I did. After that year in France, I wrote back and I said, “Look, my year’s come to an end, and I’m really interested in coming back to Stanford” and they carved out a position. They said, “OK, why don’t you come back and start a cancer program.” [01:08:09] This was the early 1970s. It was 1973 when I came back to Stanford, so that was a long, long time ago. There wasn’t a field of pediatric oncology. There wasn’t a children’s hospital at Stanford. There was nothing unique for children. They were just sort of merged in with all the other patients. Pantell: When you came back, were you an assistant professor? Donaldson: [01:08:36] Yes. I came back as an assistant professor. Pantell: How did your faculty colleagues react to you during your first few years at Stanford? How did that change over time? Donaldson: [01:08:52] There were very few people in the faculty. There were Drs. Kaplan and Bagshaw. There were a couple of senior faculty and a couple of junior faculty. We were an extremely tight family. We did a lot of things together. 43 The family... that was the Bagshaw culture. We were all very, very good friends, all very, very tight. They were very welcoming. We worked hard. Everybody rolled up their sleeves and worked as hard as they could. Pantell: What were the challenges involved in setting up a program like that? What were you facing at the time? Donaldson: [01:09:33] In order to take care of children with cancer, it’s a team medicine approach. You have to have a surgeon and a radiation oncologist and a medical oncologist and social workers and people who are just oriented to taking care of children. It wasn’t just me; it required working with other people. That took some time. It took some time for the Pediatric Department to realize that pediatric cancer was something special. Then finding a place and the continuity of care was very important—being able to treat them not just acutely but continue to take care of them down the line. [01:10:17] That had to be set up and established and built. It was a beginning field. Not just in Palo Alto, but every place around America. These little cancer programs were beginning to grow around the country with a lot of emphasis from the National Cancer Institute. It was the ground floor—working hard and building and rolling up your sleeves and doing what was right. Pantell: There was setting up the medical protocols. Were there also challenges in terms of the structures at Stanford supporting what you were doing? Donaldson: [01:10:56] Yes. Stanford was a small medical school and a small hospital. It grew very, very fast, and pretty soon they needed a unique children’s hospital 44 because the children were all in a special building as part of the Stanford Hospital, where the Ronald McDonald House is now, called the Children’s Convalescent Hospital. That’s where they put children who had infectious disease, like tuberculosis or leprosy. Before penicillin and antibiotics were available, they’d house those children in isolation units. [01:11:29] Eventually, the antibiotic era came in and you didn’t need all of that, so that convalescent hospital became a children’s cancer hospital. Ultimately, we needed the children to not be farmed out over on what became Sand Hill Road; they needed to be in the hospital and close to the operating rooms where all the action was. Then enters Lucile Packard, who contributed the money to build a children’s hospital. Lucile Packard had had several children of her own who had needed services at Stanford Children’s. She and her husband were very strong supporters of Stanford and of children. Lucile was a wonderful lady. Pantell: Can you talk a little about your progress toward tenure? How did that evolve for you from starting out as an assistant professor? Donaldson: [01:12:34] It’s a big uphill course and a very terrifying one, especially if you enter as I did. It seems like everybody else is smarter than you are and more gifted. It seemed like it was impossible. There were these little milestones: at set times you were being evaluated for the next promotion. I remember being afraid that I wouldn’t make it, that my contributions hadn’t been good enough. Malcolm Bagshaw was a good mentor. He was a very good department chair to me, telling me, “This is what you need to do in order to 45 secure tenure. [01:13:23] A committee is going to look to see if you have independent grant money; they’re going to look to see how much you’ve published and the merit of these publications.” Mal told me all those things, so I had an advisor and a road map and a plan, and I just worked hard at it. But it’s very scary, and it’s a lot of stress. You feel extremely inadequate when you’re going through this process. The stress is really terrible. You don’t have much security that you’re going to make the grade. Pantell: As far as you know, was your path of tenure typical of other female colleagues and other male colleagues? Donaldson: [01:14:11] There weren’t very many women in medicine, and there weren’t very many women in academic medicine. The women I went to medical school with—we all went to this wonderful Ivy League academic school, but we didn’t all stay in academic medicine. Many of the people in the class went into community practice, private practice, lucrative practice. They needed money to pay off their bills and secured a job that paid a high salary. Salaries were much higher in private practice than in academic medicine. Those were the stresses of the day that dictated what people did. I was different because I wasn’t driven for money; I was driven for happiness. [01:14:59] Happiness was doing all the things that made me happy, which included the environment that I was in. I’ve been happy in every environment. I was happy as a resident and then as a junior faculty at Stanford. The department became my family. I was particularly happy there, and I didn’t want to do anything else. It was easier for me than for some people because I only had to look after myself. I didn’t have to look after a 46 husband and I didn’t have to look after my own children. It took all of the resources I had to take care of myself and to work really hard and to write papers and write grants and be focused and meet job expectations, which were enormous. In a way, it was easier for me because I didn’t have as many distractions. Women today have it much harder than me because they have to really multitask. Not to say it was easy for me, but I think it’s harder for others, because I only had to take care of myself. It took all my resources, all my energy, all my talents to do what I was asked to do. The Bagshaw-Kaplan team gave 110 percent and expected 110 percent. I certainly didn’t want to let them down because they were really big heroes in my environment. These were big men on campus. I never wanted to disappoint them. In a way, you’re your own worst enemy because you drive yourself. Looking back on it, it’s very ironic to me, because Bill Fletcher said to me, “Sarah, you know, if you go to medical school, you shouldn’t become a surgeon because it’s going to dictate your life. [01:17:10] Become a radiation oncologist or whatever you want to do. You can choose the pathway.” A lot of women went into anesthesia, dermatology, psychiatry, or radiology. That’s what, in my era, women did—I suppose because they thought they could dictate their hours or they could do this part-time, or all the other things that we now know lead women to pick the fields they do. I picked radiation oncology because it was a pathway to taking care of cancer patients and it’s what Dr. Fletcher advised me to do. 47 A lot of people think radiation oncology is easier than surgery or neurosurgery or orthopedic surgery or internal medicine. [01:17:52] But the fact is I work harder than practically anybody I know. I get up at five in the morning; I come home from work at eight in the evening; I work on the weekends—and I do that because I love it, not because I’m making money doing it and not because that’s the job description. I suppose if I wanted to work nine to five, I could work nine to five. You make for yourself what you want to make for yourself. Nobody told me I had to do that. I do that because that gives me gratification. It’s ironic that I went into an area about which the Dr. Fletchers of the world said, “You can do this and still downhill ski and still give dinner parties.” [01:18:37] So I went into it for the wrong reasons but doing the right thing, and I’ve had an extremely successful and rewarding career, much more so than my friends. Susie, who’s a really good downhill skier and who was Olympics bound—she’s a successful pediatrician as well. But academically, I’ve had more openings and wonderful honors than many of the people in my class. No question. They were all brighter than I. [laughter] I know that. You make for yourself what you do, and you have nobody else to blame. It’s not even blaming. I bear the responsibility for the decisions I’ve made, and I have not one regret. Not one. How many people do you know who don’t have any regrets in life? I have no regrets in life. How fortunate can that be? I think it’s pretty wonderful. Pantell: It is. It is. 48 I imagine there are a lot of different dimensions to your job, such as patient care and research and teaching and mentoring younger doctors. How do you balance all those, and is there anything you like more or less? Donaldson: [01:20:09] I love all of those things. That’s why I have this wonderful job at Stanford. It allows me to do all those things. I love doing clinical research. In pediatrics we could do that because it was a field that was waiting to be developed. Doing clinical trials and bettering the outcomes for children with cancer was an opportunity waiting to happen. I just entered at the right time and established clinical trials. That’s been a very, very rewarding part of my clinical career. [01:20:43] The environment at Stanford, an academic environment where there are so many brilliant people around you all making these wonderful contributions, makes it a very, very stimulating place to work. And I suppose the thing that gives you the greatest long-term gratification is not what you do yourself, it’s what you teach other people to do. That’s where the ripple effect comes in. They are the ones who continue your work. The youth of today are really bright, and they say the same thing about the next generation. When you can instill principles and practices and good lessons in these extraordinarily gifted kids who are going into medicine today, and they blossom, there’s nothing that makes you any happier than that. [01:21:40] Except for me, taking care of patients. I get a lot of positive feedback from taking care of patients. I have a great job because I take care of general patients. The thing that I’m known for is pediatric radiation oncology. Today the large majority of children are cured of their 49 disease. They’re cured and they don’t have all the bad side effects or late effects or sequelae or handicaps that cancer victims once had. It’s a reality today that people can be cured of their cancer and live normal lives. [01:22:17] There’s nothing more gratifying than taking care of somebody at age ten, and then at age twenty-five they go to university, and at age thirty you get a wedding invitation, and at age thirty-five, you get a birth announcement, and at age forty-five, you’re taking care of their child or their next-door neighbor or their mother, and so pretty soon you’re part of this huge family that you’ve known for a long time. It must be what general practice was like in 1800. I’m part of many, many people’s families that I’ve known for a long time under the most stressful of circumstances. [01:22:59] I have the most gratifying job. What can be better than taking care of children with cancer who’ve survived and live normal lives? That is a home run over and over and over again. I have extremely gratifying rewards that come in every single day. It’s not without stresses because it’s very, very difficult being a parent of a child who has cancer. That’s the worst. Of all the horrible things you can ever imagine, the worst is having your own child have a malignancy. It destroys families, it destroys relationships, and it’s very devastating. If you can just help somebody get through that, it’s hugely rewarding. I have a wonderful job. I love my job. I like every aspect of it. Pantell: This is an interview with Dr. Sarah Donaldson. The interviewer is Laurie Pantell, and we’re in Stanford, California. It is January 31, 2015. I’m wondering about either people or organizational units that have been key to your success at Stanford and in what way they have been able to help you along your way. Donaldson: [00:00:46] That’s an easy question for me because I think that the key to my success came from the people in my department: the Department of Radiation Oncology in the School of Medicine. When I came into the department both as a resident in training and then on the faculty, I was the only female. Another gal, named Karen Fu, transferred into the residency, so there were two women in the department. Then when I came on to the faculty, Karen had taken a job elsewhere so I was the only female on the faculty. [00:01:23] The department leaders at that time were two enormously successful, well-known, well-established, highly regarded radiation oncologists: Henry Kaplan and Malcolm Bagshaw. They exuded excellence and were highly connected and gave 100 percent and expected 100 percent 51 out of everybody in their family or on their team. Both of those men opened many doors for me and gave me many, many opportunities—extraordinary opportunities that I wouldn’t have had in another environment. It was because I had the good fortune to train at Stanford and the department was a very strong one—it was tiny, but it was a powerful one because the leaders were powerful. [00:02:18] They built it into a highly regarded, visible department in the School of Medicine, nationally and internationally. So for those people who were coming into the family, our role models were these terrifically talented physician-scientists and educators, and we all sort of stepped into our job at the same pace as the leaders, and they provided many, many opportunities. Henry Kaplan, who was department chair when I was in training, had the philosophy that his own success would be built upon putting Stanfordtrained radiation oncologists in leadership positions and as heads of departments all over the country. He was strong, and he was dedicated to educating the entire world on the Kaplan philosophy, and the best way to do that was to take his own clones—his students, his trainees—and watch them succeed as leaders. So that was the environment. [00:03:38] There was very little expertise in radiation oncology at that time. Stanford was one of the earliest places to have a training program, and it was a powerful one. It was the culture in my department that established my work habits and my ethics and my way of doing things. I just parroted and followed the leaders and tried not to disappoint them. I tried to do what 52 I was told, to follow my job description, and so did everybody else. That was the environment and that was my family. It was all good fortune. You can’t position those things to happen; they just happened that way. I worked hard and maybe I had some talent— they must have thought I did, but I didn’t see it that way. I didn’t know enough to know anything other than you follow the leader. [00:04:56] And they were wonderful leaders. They were very, very interested in populating the country and, to some extent, the international connections as well, with the best in cancer management and the use of radiation therapy. It was a very small discipline at that time, and it erupted with the explosion of technology. Kaplan and Bagshaw were very much on the front; they were the pioneers. So all the people who were around them or had the fortune to be in their department profited from what they did. Pantell: How did your department change over time, or when they retired? Did the culture change at all and if so, how? Donaldson: [00:05:58] The culture in the department really hasn’t changed, but medicine has changed a lot. We don’t practice medicine now the same way we did then because things have grown—our little tiny department is now a huge department, and we’re very spread out and have a big connectivity. The practice of medicine has changed enormously, with quality and safety and advances in health care and much more advanced technology. All of those things have changed a lot. But the culture in the department is very, very cohesive. 53 [00:06:39] That’s a strength that I believe is unique to Stanford. Other places don’t have that. And that’s been from department leaders. There have been very few. I’ve been at Stanford for more than forty years, and we've had three department chairs. We’re now on the fourth department chair. She’s a gal who was a junior faculty who had been at Stanford. Each one of those department chairs was in a leadership position for about twenty years. Kaplan was chair for twenty years, [00:07:18] Bagshaw was chair for twenty years, Rich Hoppe was chair for eighteen years. So we have had very little turnover, and the culture and the people have remained the same. The family is the same. The family unit is larger; that’s changed. And medicine is practiced much differently now than it was then. Particularly cancer management is a multidisciplinary interaction: close interaction with surgeons and medical oncologists and radiation oncologists and pathologists and radiologists and these teams of people who do things that are programmatically defined by pathology or disease sites or names of diseases or parts of the body or whatever. [00:08:12] We practice not in a little silo anymore, we practice along with other people of like interests but different disciplines. That’s a change in the practice of medicine, but it’s all to the good of patient care. Pantell: I’m wondering who over the years you worked most closely with and whether you can share any memories or stories about them. Donaldson: [00:08:41] I’d have to say Malcolm Bagshaw, who was my chair, and his successor, a fellow named Rich Hoppe. Henry Kaplan was the leader when I took my residency. At the end of my residency, I went to France for a year 54 (we talked about that), and when I came back, Kaplan had stepped down to go into the laboratory and do other things. Mal Bagshaw was the new chair. I was a junior faculty to Malcolm Bagshaw, and therefore he’s the person I would identify with. [00:09:18] After about twenty years, Mal stepped down. I was helpful to the dean in identifying a new chair, and that was an internal appointment: Rich Hoppe. Rich was a couple of years behind me in training, a very, very good friend, and I really wanted him to be the successor. It was a national search, but I really wanted him to win because he, in my opinion, would make a wonderful, wonderful chair. In his deliberations about whether to become the chair, I told him that if he’d take the job, I would never say no to anything he asked of me, and I would help him in any way I could. [00:10:09] I didn’t realize at the time what a powerful offer that was. I was a little bit senior to him in terms of experience and years on the faculty. What happened was that we could cover twice as much ground and be twice as effective because it was a divide-and-conquer kind of thing. Rich could go to one duty or committee meeting or assignment, and if there was something else simultaneously, he could send me to do the other. So I had a welldefined role, he had a well-defined role, and we met frequently. [00:10:50] One of my own goals in serving as vice chair in the department was to try to put out as many fires as I could before Rich was aware of them, before they were even smoldering, before they erupted. I was very much trying to troubleshoot anything that might have been a problem, kind of like 55 a good lieutenant. That was highly effective. We had a very, very good working relationship and had the same goals and philosophies. I guess I would name Malcolm Bagshaw and then Rich Hoppe as my closest friends. Mal died several years ago. [00:11:43] Rich Hoppe is now retired from being the chair; he is still working, and it’s been a very nice collaboration. Happiness in your job makes all the difference in your life. I believe if you’re happy in what you do—because it’s more than eight hours a day, it’s like twenty-four hours a day—if you’re really happy in your day-to-day activities, in what drives you to get out of bed in the morning, then the rest of your personal life is happy as well. And it’s probably vice versa. I haven’t actually thought about it from the other way around. You have to have a happy personal life in order to function well at work, but my orientation was very much toward Stanford. Pantell: You mentioned being vice chair of the department, and I know you served on some other committees and in other leadership roles at Stanford. What role did you like the best? Donaldson: [00:12:50] Oh, I’ve done every job in the department. I think I was acting chair for a while. When Rich was appointed the chair--and Rich had been the program director--he continued to be the program director, and I suggested to him that it was a conflict of interest and that he should appoint me to be the program director because I was highly qualified and I should do it. You can’t do the chairmanship job and be program director at the same time; it’s impossible. 56 The job that I liked the most is being program director. I loved that job. I have stepped down from doing it, not because I didn’t like the job—I loved the job—but it was time. . . [00:13:36] One of the things that I do well at Stanford and that I really love is mentoring whoever is around who wants to be mentored. There’s a lot of people in this climate who want to be mentored. So junior faculty are perfect. We had a junior faculty who aspired to be chair at some time, but her portfolio wasn’t very well rounded. She was a terrific clinician, had a well-established research career, but she didn’t have an education portfolio. So I suggested to Rich at one of our strategy meetings that he ought to appoint her to be director of education in the department and to have oversight over the program director, the fellowship program, and the medical student program, and I’d be the vice program director. [00:14:33] I’d be her little lieutenant because I didn’t need that line item on my CV and I thought she did. She took it, and we did a wonderful job. Now she’s Associate Dean of Admissions in the School of Medicine and has continued on her education pathway. So that was terrific. I guess I’ve done many, many jobs in the department. I can’t think of any job I haven’t done. I’ve run lots of committees and chaired lots of committees and done lots of assignments. But I think the one that continues to be the most rewarding—and perhaps the most difficult—is one in education because it’s tough being in training today and there are all different levels. [00:15:17] Medical students are different than residents, and residents are different than junior faculty, etcetera. But when you see the product at the end, then it’s all very worthwhile. It’s very, very gratifying to keep the 57 practice of medicine, or whatever your particular contribution is, up to your own standards by instilling those standards in the youth of today because they grow up to be the leaders of tomorrow. And they’re going to be the people who will take care of me—or take care of us. They’re the people who will be department chairs. [00:16:00] I get asked a lot about recommendations for people who might be good people to be on a committee, a national committee, an international committee, on a short list for a department chair position. I’m liberal about giving out names because I think that that’s what we ought to do. That’s what people did for me, and that’s what we all ought to do. Give people opportunities, and they can accept them or not accept them, depending on what they want to do, but somebody has to give you the chance. Pantell: You mentioned that program director was perhaps your favorite role and I’m wondering why— Donaldson: [00:16:41] It was difficult because it’s hard to satisfy young people today. They’re very smart. And we have a wonderful, wonderful residency program. It’s just the crème de la crème. It’s terrific. We recruit the best. Radiation oncology is a highly competitive field right now. We have very, very, very top applicants for very few positions. And so we don’t have any trouble attracting very, very good people who want to train at Stanford. And then if you can take those highly talented people who are really bright and have already demonstrated their productivity and then put them in this new 58 environment and give them opportunities, it’s terribly gratifying. It makes you feel good. [00:17:29] At the end of the day, it’s a ripple effect. It’s not just one person; it’s who they’re then going to affect, and who the next offspring are going to affect. So it’s a multiplier effect, and it happens very rapidly because the process goes very rapidly. Radiation oncology training is now four years. They’re in the door and out the door very, very quickly. And it’s gratifying to me because some people don’t like to take enough time to educate others. [00:18:10] Stanford tends to attract people who are very bright and talented, academically oriented, probably researchoriented people who could be winning Nobel Prizes in the next decade. That’s the kind of person that Stanford attracts. Now those physicianscientists, aren’t always the best teachers because they’re busy pushing science, and that’s their passion. If their passion is discovery—curiosity and discovery and being innovative—then their reason to be may not be handholding students and listening to them whine along the way. We all contribute in a different way. [00:19:10] There are not a lot of people who care so passionately about helping the next generation, because—actually Stanford cares a lot about education, there’s no question about that—but they also care about research and science and getting funding to answer fundamental questions. It’s a multiplicity of job descriptions here. Pantell: I’m going to ask some questions about your experience as a woman at Stanford. You mentioned that the field of medicine has changed quite a bit over the years. How has the field changed in terms of gender? 59 Donaldson: [00:19:57] [laughter] When I came in, there weren’t very many women in the field, so the pool of women was very, very small. It wasn’t that I was a pioneer, but because I was early to enter, I became the first woman to do a lot of things. That’s changed now because half of an incoming medical school class are women. Women are still not half of the academic council or half of the professors because there’s a dropout rate for women that we have to continue to work on. We don’t retain all the talent that we recruit.[00:20:54] But it’s much, much, much better. I’ve been thinking about this because you had told me we were going to talk about this. I’m trying to think about how it happened and how I felt because I get asked that a lot, and my colleagues in medical school, my good friends who I went through all of this with, answer it differently than I do. So why do I answer it differently? The thing that led to the women’s movement—I was never banner carrying, shouting, making a statement, burning a bra or all that business that was the feminine movement that you read about. I didn’t do that. [00:21:40] Why didn’t I do that? I didn’t have time to do it, but, thinking about it, I was a toddler during World War II, and I was raised by my single-parent mother. In World War II, women went to work and did jobs that they needed to do, and many of those were men’s jobs. That was what women in the United States of America did. So that’s what I grew up with. My mother was working the whole time, and then she continued to work. So I grew up thinking that women go to work, and women and men 60 both have jobs, and women and men both do their jobs. That was the standard; that was the culture. That was the way I grew up. [00:22:27] So in medical school, there weren’t very many women in our class, but there was one curriculum and everybody had to take the same tests—everybody was the same. When I came on as a junior faculty, I had a job and the other junior faculty had jobs—we all had the same jobs. I wasn’t treated any differently. What was expected of me was the same as everybody else. [00:23:02] I never felt that gender was a distinguishing factor. It certainly, to me, didn’t seem to be a hardship. Yes, I was a female, but everything else was exactly the same as far as I could tell. I never felt discriminated against. Quite the contrary, I think I was given more opportunities because I was a woman, because, at that time, there was a huge emphasis on gender sensitivity and discrimination and all of these things that framed the 1950s and the 1960s and the 1970s. Unlike the equality we have now, it wasn’t always equality then. [00:23:51] At Stanford there was a huge effort to try to have every committee and every position of leadership populated by women applicants or women candidates. Since there were very few to pick from, I got asked to do a lot of things. I considered them opportunities. But I think they were opportunities of gender. So I never felt the discrimination. Today I read books about the Women’s Movement—that kind of passed me by. Although I was in the middle of it, I didn’t realize I was in the middle of it because I was busy doing my job and doing the same job that the 61 person in the desk next to me was doing—just like my mother did. [00:24:41] She did a job that could have been done by a man, and I was doing a job that could have been done by a man. In the final analysis, it didn’t matter as long as the job got done. So I never have considered gender to be a handicap. In fact, I think that I got many, many, many opportunities. Many doors opened to me because the pool of women was small. It was easier for me because I wasn’t a wife, I wasn’t a mother, I didn’t have to multitask. All of the things that make it very, very, very difficult for the youth today, I get it because I spend time mentoring them. I understand the problem of multitasking and trying to be all things for all people. [00:25:29] It was easier for me because I didn’t have to do all those things. In a way, I could be very selfish. I didn’t have to take care of anybody else but myself and then do what I wanted to do. What I wanted to do was succeed at Stanford. I didn’t want to disappoint Henry Kaplan or Malcolm Bagshaw or Rich Hoppe or Dean Pizzo or whoever happened to be the person in leadership. So I never really saw gender as an issue. My friend Karen Fu, who was a trainee at the same time I was, reminded me of the day we came to Stanford. The room where the residents sat had lots of posters of Playboy pinups, posters of these braless calendar girls all over the walls. [00:26:26] I didn’t remember, but Karen told me we walked into the residents’ room said, “Take those down or we’re going to put male nudes up on the wall.” I said, “Karen, did we say that?” 62 She said “Yes we did, and they took them down.” [laughter] So there probably was an environment of what today we’d call harassment or not a very nice way to act, but I don’t remember it bothering me. [00:27:01] But my colleagues at Dartmouth, my friends, the girls in my class, talked about it all the time and still do, and they’re asked to speak about it and write book chapters on it and speak to women’s groups, etcetera. And they do. And I do, but I don’t remember it being negative. Maybe I just don’t put those things on my main menu. Maybe I just don’t let them bother me. If they bothered me, I didn’t put them in long-term memory. Gender has always been a card that’s worked very, very well for me. I’m sure I’ve had opportunities I wouldn’t have had otherwise because the pool of available women was very small. [00:27:49] The pool of women in academic radiation oncology was extraordinarily small, so when I came up the ranks in various societies and national positions of leadership, and I was the first to do this and the first to do that, it was because there weren’t any before me. It just happened to be that I came along at that time. I think there’s opportunities of happenstance. When I’m talking to young people today, I tell them to be prepared for anything that might happen because you don’t know when you’re going to have an opportunity. You have to be prepared, so if you get an opportunity you’ll be ready to take it if you want it, because that’s what happened to me. Except I didn’t have any mentoring. [00:28:39] I mean there were men who mentored me, but there was no queen mother who was looking 63 over and saying, “Now dear, this is what you’re supposed to do.” There weren’t any. Maybe that’s why I feel strongly about it. I don’t know. Pantell: To what extent and in what ways do you think women in the field of medicine have shaped the discipline now that there are so many more women in the field? How do you think women have changed medicine, specifically in your area of medicine? Donaldson: [00:29:19] To be a woman today and go into medicine, you have to be really talented. You have to be really, really good because it’s harder for women. Women are supposed to also be the mothers and go through pregnancy and delivery, and there are some things that men can’t do that women are supposed to do. In many respects, it’s harder for women. In my opinion, when you look at a class, a group, a cohort that’s got men and women in it, women are oftentimes very, very talented, if not the most talented. [00:29:54] We have these super people going into medicine right now. Women can do science as well as men can. They can think math and science if they've had the right education and teaching all the way along and had the right opportunities. Also women by nature are caring, giving, sympathetic caregivers. We are. We breastfeed our babies, that’s what women do. Women have brought a caring sensitivity into medicine that would be lacking if there were no women in it. Women listen, women are more handholders, women naturally form support groups, they help each other; they’ve learned to do that. [00:30:53] For example, look at cancer. We have many breast cancer support groups and ovarian cancer support groups. And we have women’s chat-and-chew and bridge and women’s this, that, and the 64 other thing. Men don’t do that to the same extent that women do. Women help women. Women share tips of their own success with other women. They do that better than men do. And it’s very, very helpful because if you have a friend who’s gone through this and says, “Oh, this is what”. . . tips of efficiency—women share those things. [00:31:37] That has helped contribute to medicine because women make good pediatricians, they make good obstetricians. They can talk firsthand about what it’s like to not have a breast or to deliver a baby because they’ve done it. Women can be wonderful neurosurgeons as well. It’s not the discipline. It’s the aspects of humanity that women oftentimes exude. It’s not to say men don’t have that. Of course, there are some who do. It’s not about gender, but women bring a softness and a caring to the practice of medicine that rounds it out a bit. [00:32:29] Medicine is a far better discipline because there are women in it, because there are many things that women do and do extremely well that may be less comfortable for men to do. Pantell: Do you recall when you first arrived at Stanford and then how it’s changed over time—the reaction of your students to your gender? Was that ever an issue, or did that come up at all? Donaldson: [00:33:03] No. I don’t remember it ever being an issue. There are students who have wanted me to be their advisor or their counselor or their mentor, but I don’t ever remember having any problems in that respect. Pantell: I read that you served on the Committee on the Education and Employment of Women. This was in the mid-seventies, which was at the height of the 65 women’s movement. Do you recall that role, and if so what was the experience like? Donaldson: [00:33:42] I don’t recall it. I remember I was on that committee, but I don’t remember anything other than a committee. I really don’t have any memories of what it was like. The reason I like to do the committee work for Stanford is I meet a lot of very interesting women along the way. But I probably wasn’t the most interesting one at that time on that committee because there probably were women who had agendas or had strong opinions about the women’s movement. [00:34:17] I did it because I was invited to, and I had learned early on to say yes when I was invited to do things because you don’t get anywhere if you say no to everything. So I said yes to a lot of things. And I met a lot of really interesting women: women in the law school or the school of business, in education or H&S (School of Humanities and Sciences), and women in other parts of the university I wouldn’t have met otherwise who were so smart and so well-read and so well-spoken. Such big leaders. I love doing those kinds of committees. I don’t remember it as a chore, I don’t even remember what the issues were. But I remember the people who I served on committees with because many have gone on to be presidents of colleges and universities and the Condoleezza Rices of the world—really, really outstanding individuals, [00:35:11] the kind that Stanford tends to attract. If I hadn’t done all those little committees, I would never have met those people. I have a lot to thank Stanford for because you can just sit in a little cubicle and do your job, but if 66 you participate in as many Stanford activities as you can, you meet fabulous people. You become a much more well-rounded individual. But I don’t remember that committee particularly. Pantell: I know you said that you didn’t experience discrimination, in fact really the opposite—that there were so many opportunities for you because there were so few women in your field. Do you have a sense that Stanford has policies and procedures that changed over the years to better accommodate female faculty? Donaldson: [00:36:08] Oh, yes. Oh, for sure. Stanford’s worked very, very hard at that and in a way they’ve been leaders in the field. They’ve done a very, very, very good job at it. There’s a lot of attention placed to not just women but any targeted minority—Stanford believes in diversity and that diversity contributes strongly to the health and well-being of whatever group it is, and that’s true. Stanford has worked very, very, very hard to promote women, to give women opportunities, to give them tools and resources to allow them to succeed—things like child care or extended leave for pregnancies and all sorts of stuff. [00:37:06] But they could probably do more. One of the things I did as a program director, when we had pregnant residents, was to set up a place where breastfeeding women could go and pump their breasts and save the milk so they could then continue work for a period of time. Otherwise, women would have to go into the bathroom—the worst place in the world, the dirtiest place in the entire hospital—to do something as important as giving attention to your breasts so you could feed your baby. [laughter] Men 67 don’t usually think of things like that unless somebody plants a seed because it’s not an issue for them. Pantell: Could you talk a little bit more about your role as a mentor. You said you like to be in that role and you seek it out, but tell me how you go about mentoring young women medical students and residents and what you like about it. Donaldson: [00:38:24] I make myself available. I always have my door open, never have it closed. I seek opportunities to have one-on-one sessions with students or residents by taking them to lunch or having coffee or chitchatting. I don’t just wait for them to approach me but actually suggest that we meet. I’m probably a better mentor to female students than to male students. And why is that? I don’t know. It’s a little bit easier for me to hang out with women and identify with women, and I can do that in a mentoring position. [00:39:23] And it all comes back to benefit me. For example, we had a couple of residents--this is twenty years ago or something like that—who were these power women who could do anything, and they were also good athletes. One of them one day asked me if I belonged to the gym. I said no. They said, “You ought to come to the gym with us.” And I said “When?” And they said “There’s a step class at 5 o’clock on Tuesdays, and we get out of clinic at 4:30, so we can get there by 5:00.” [00:40:07] The long and the short of it was a couple of the girls who are less than half of my age invited me to go to the health club with them, to participate. So I did that. And one thing led to another. It wasn’t just the step 68 class. Then it was a spinning class. Then going on bicycle rides with them. I was program director then and I defended doing all of that because I got to know them well when I was hanging out with them. Students or trainees won’t open up their hearts to you until they have your trust. And they don’t trust you until they get to know who you are. I actually don’t know how people get to trust somebody. But it doesn’t happen overnight. [00:41:04] If you hang out with them and do activities outside of the hospital with them, and oftentimes I’d take them to dinner afterwards, then we got to know each other as people. Then you can find out what the issues are because they dare to really talk to you about whatever is bothering them, personal or across the field. When they tell you about them, then you can do something about it. But you can’t do anything about it until you know about it. [00:41:42] A lot of people won’t whine because they think that it will come back to hurt them. One of the ways I’ve been effective is hanging out with students, residents, and faculty. Now, how did that personally benefit me? I’ve had fun along the way. But it’s also helped me stay physically fit, be younger, be more active, understand the new generation. I say to the residents I never would have gotten a touch-tone phone; I would have been using a rotary phone if they hadn’t all had touch-tone phones. Then it became cell phones. [00:42:26] Then it became computers. Then it became tablets. Then it became iPhones. You wouldn’t do those things unless the people you were hanging out with were doing them too because you learn from the people who you associate with. I think that’s helped me personally as an individual. 69 But I didn’t do it because it was self-serving. I defended it because I thought I could a better job if I understand what the issues are. Students will not tell you what the issues are until they trust you. [00:43:11] Students won’t give honest evaluations of faculty because if they think you’re not a good teacher and they give you a bad evaluation, they think it will come back to harm them. So they’re very, very careful what they say. They’re careful because they’ve learned to be careful. They’ve learned what it takes to succeed. It’s very hard to change that behavior. Not that we were supposed to change that behavior, I suppose, but it’s very hard to make students change. But if you can really be accepted by them, then you get to know what their concerns are, and you can be better advocate for them. Their problems are different than yours because there’s a generation or two between you, and you wouldn’t know it otherwise. It’s probably like parenting. I’m not certain because I’m not a parent, but it’s probably like parenting. Pantell: Do you have any advice for young women today starting out in an academic career? Donaldson: [00:44:22] I’m asked that question so often, and I probably always give a different answer. My answer would be the same for everybody, but I think it’s harder for women. I tell people to be prepared for whatever might come their way, to give 110 percent on everything, to work their hardest. I tell them that when they’re going through their training that their success will frame the next step. So if they want to get a crème-de-la-crème job, they have to be a super, super resident and set a series of short-term goals in order 70 to get to the finish line, because the finish line can seem impossible.[00:45:14] Who could ever imagine being a professor at Stanford when they’re a trainee? Set your goal as something achievable and work really hard for that goal. When you get there, don’t rest on that laurel, but keep looking ahead for a lot of short-term goals. I tell people they have to map out time lines and time frames and what they want to achieve at this time. It doesn’t matter if it’s a year or six months or one month or one week or one day. Whatever their time frame is, they have to set out what’s realistic and do it—and don’t go out and play until they get it done. [00:45:51] When their checklist is done, then they can go out and play. That’s exactly what I’ve done, and I think that that’s been helpful. Otherwise, you get too distracted doing too many other things and you never accomplish anything. You have to be disciplined, particularly women because they’re busy trying to succeed in their profession and succeed in their marriage and succeed in their mothering and succeed with their in-laws and succeed in keeping their house together and succeed in everything, and it gets to be overwhelming. [00:46:26] You have to have discipline and be very, very efficient. I’m the most efficient person I know, and everything that’s ever worked for me I tell other people about. Why shouldn’t I share it? If it works for me, it’ll work in spades for somebody else. I tell young people that they have to work hard, do a terrific job, be the best because they have to distinguish themselves, because they’re in an environment of many, many, many, many, many good people. If they want 71 the best job, they have to stand out. So they have to do distinguishing things to stand out. I say that to men too. But I think I relate better to women. [00:47:17] They’re so much fun. They’re so smart. They’re so good. We’re really attracting fabulous women into medicine right now. I think they’re just superb. Not to say that men aren’t superb too, but the women are really superstars. They have to have been to get where they are. Pantell: What is one thing you know now that you wish you’d known when you started out in your academic career? Donaldson: [00:47:51] I didn’t know anything when I started out in my academic career because there was no one [laughter] to tell you what to do. I guess that’s a question I don’t have an answer for. A lot of things I learned along the way by just stumbling into them. I suppose that, to be really honest, it would have been easier if somebody had been there to give me some advice along the way. That didn’t exist. I guess I didn’t know what I was getting into. I kind of fell into it. [00:48:40] And for wrong reasons and not. Would I have done the same thing if I had known what I know now? I don’t know. I guess it would have depended on how much security I had or how intimidated I was. It would have been pretty intimidating to think of coming to Stanford for training and ending up on the faculty. That would have never entered my mind. If there had been somebody to say the things that I’ve told you I say to students now probably would have been helpful. Pantell: As you continue your work at Stanford, what do you hope to accomplish? Donaldson: [00:49:32] I’d like to make a mark on as many people’s lives as I can. There are the patients, and that’s part of the job; that’s why medicine is fun. But I 72 could be a physician outside of Stanford and I would get that, so that’s not unique to Stanford. But at Stanford, in an environment of all this talent and these young people, I’d like to make a mark on contributing to their success. It’s all about this education thing. What could be better than just watching your own students succeed? That’s pretty gratifying. Really nice feedback. Pantell: You’ve received many awards and honors over the years. What awards or honors have been the most meaningful for you? Donaldson: [00:50:45] At the national level the first thing I did that was distinguishing was becoming the first woman president of our national society, the American Society of Radiation Oncology. Everybody who’s a radiation oncologist belongs to this, so that’s a big deal. I was terrified about it. But it was fun. It was a big entrée to a lot of things. But it was just a job. Where I made the biggest contribution at the national level was serving on the board of the American Board of Radiology (ABR). [00:51:27] They’re a bunch of physicians who establish the criteria for certification. They’re the examiners who determine the curriculum that you need to pass in order to become certified that you’re acceptable to practice radiation oncology or radiology. I was a trustee, and then I was made an officer and I became the first female president of the ABR. It includes not just radiation oncology but diagnostic radiology and nuclear medicine and physics. That was terrific fun [00:52:15] because it was a bigger picture, a bigger piece of the pie, and it established the criteria for education for the entire discipline. This wasn’t just working in my own department or treating the one patient or mentoring one resident. The American Board of Radiology is a very powerful 73 board in terms of the American Board of Medical Specialties, and I became very active in that, and it includes the American Boards of Surgery and Internal Medicine and Pediatrics and on and on and on. It’s this ripple effect again. I loved that job because the impact was enormous. [00:53:04] And I was able to do things; I cracked the code in a couple of things that seemed like they never would be able to happen. I set goals for what I wanted to achieve when I was an officer, and I went about doing that. There were two different boards for physics at that time: the American Board of Medical Physics and the American Board of Radiology. Physicists fit in either one or the other. And they kind of competed with each other. I thought it was crazy that there were two competing boards in medical physics. Why wasn’t there just one? [00:53:42] There was a whole lot of background why this camp didn’t talk to that camp. I thought we’ve got to get these camps together. A lot of people had tried to do that, but it was something that I wanted to do. And I did it. But it didn’t come overnight. I started working on it way in advance and ultimately one board was merged into the other one and into the American Board of Radiology, so now we have one certifying board. That was terrific. Things like that were very meaningful. I didn’t do it by myself. [00:54:21] I couldn’t because I wasn’t a physicist so when I would go and talk to the physicists of the group, I wasn’t one of them, but I took along my army, my helpers, my team. One would go talk to their leaders and have these retreats together. It wasn’t just me. I was sitting at the head of the table, and in a way I kind of looked like sweet Sarah, 74 but the powerhouses were all around me. I was flanked by really, really strong, articulate people who believed the same way. But it was easier for me to gently move it. I guess that’s what women do. They gently get their way. [00:55:07] It happens easier and it’s more accepted if you do it in a way that the people you’re negotiating with or that you’re trying to get to come to consensus think that they figured it out on their own. Women are pretty good at that, at getting an idea and then when their partner or whoever they’re trying to convince thinks it was his idea, it gets done. It doesn’t matter whose idea it was, it’s just that it gets done. That’s the way I did things in the ABR, and it was the right thing to do. So I love the ABR. [00:55:47] That opened a lot of things for me. The most recent thing I did was serve as president of the Radiological Society of North America (in spite of the title, it’s an international group). The RSNA is this enormous society of radiologists. It’s the biggest radiology society in the world. And they have these huge conventions; sixty thousand people come. I was taken onto the board maybe because I was a woman or a token radiation oncologist. But anyway I became the president. [00:56:21] And that doesn't happen very often because 90 percent of the members of RSNA are diagnostic radiologists or physicists or members of other radiologic sciences. Here I was a woman as president, a radiation oncologist, very much a minority. Ninety-five percent of the people who are diagnostic radiologists (and don’t know squat about radiation oncology) are men. 75 I was very much in a minority position, which I knew, and I wasn’t easily accepted. I came to the first retreat and the first board meeting, and nobody asked me to have dinner with them. You can tell when you’re accepted and you’re not. [00:57:08] They were nice to me, but I wasn’t in their camp—even after I had been an officer for a long time and then I became the president . . . now you have this huge name recognition and it’s up in bright lights and you’re giving this presidential lecture and it’s being taped all over the world. Now I know maybe what Condi Rice felt like when she was young, when she was a little black student in Alabama, with discrimination when black people went to the back of the bus. Now here I am in medicine and an officer but I was distinctly a minority, out of my element, leading this organization where the large majority had no reason to trust me because I wasn’t one of them. It was a phenomenal experience for me. [00:58:10] It was a great journey. I learned a lot. And they became better too because the whole process was good for everybody. Those experiences have been extremely wonderful experiences for me, but they have been tough. You never stop learning. You never ever, ever stop learning. That RSNA job was eight years, and I thought, “I don’t know if I’m going to be alive eight years from now.” How could I do that? I had no security that I could do that job. But it’s the same principle that I tell students about: you just have to set short-term goals. [00:58:52] For me it was getting the report for the next retreat done. Or setting the agenda for our next strategic planning retreat, or setting the agenda for the change in bylaws, or 76 whatever these little assignments were and just doing them, and doing 110 percent because that’s what I tried to do for Henry Kaplan and Malcolm Bagshaw. And then at the end, it all pays off and it’s terribly rewarding, and the person who does the greatest amount of work is the one who gains the most. In order to deliver a good lecture, you have to know that subject so well you can convince the whole audience about it and they won’t fall asleep. You have to be pretty dynamic when you do it. [00:59:37] It’s that way with leading a society too. You have to exude the enthusiasm and walk the walk and talk the talk and convince all the doubting Thomases that yes, you’re going to represent them well. I loved that opportunity and that experience. It was terrifying at the beginning, and it was extremely rewarding. In retrospect, the most important things in my life have been the things I have had to work the hardest for. My greatest honor was not any of those. It was being selected by the dean, Philip Pizzo, for the Dean’s Award at Stanford. It was meaningful to me because to be accepted at home by your colleagues is huge. [01:00:32] In many respects, it’s easier to be accepted on the outside, because they’re not people you work with all the time. They’re just people who know you by reputation or have heard you give a talk or name recognition—for whatever the reason, you get voted in, but to really be accepted by your colleagues at home is huge. In my feeling, that’s the best of all. I’ve had wonderful, wonderful, wonderful honors. The best is when I got the Dean’s Award at 77 Stanford. That was really, really nice—the most meaningful thing that’s happened to me. I owe Stanford a lot. Stanford’s been very good to me. Pantell: I know you’ve written many articles as well as a couple of books. What publications are you most proud of and why? Donaldson: [01:01:29] The publications I’m most proud of are the ones that have influenced the field of medicine. My particular area is radiotherapy and in radiotherapy, it’s pediatric radiotherapy. The publications about which I’m most proud are publications that have made a significant impact or changed the discipline of pediatric oncology with respect to radiotherapy. Early on I had a home run. It happened only by chance because I was given a chance by Henry Kaplan who told me to write a protocol. We saw a difficult patient. [01:02:11] It wasn’t clear what to do, and he said, “Why don’t you write a protocol,” and I did. Then we started treating all the children who fit this cohort. It was a child who had very advanced Hodgkin’s disease and he was only 18 months of age and required high doses of radiotherapy to big areas of his body. That was not going to be possible to sustain. I knew that. It would have carried terrible toxicity, and Kaplan knew that too. We decided to do something different, and that’s why he said write a protocol, because it was an experimental treatment. [01:02:46] So we gave lower doses of radiation and supplemented it with a treatment that was totally experimental called chemotherapy. So there was less than standard doses of radiation and experimental chemotherapy. We did that because we didn’t want to have any side effects from the radiation. It was a home run because it had been an incurable disease before, and it became a curable 78 disease, and it’s still curable. Ninety percent of all the children in the world with Hodgkin’s disease are cured. [01:03:16] And they’re cured using this treatment that was pioneered at Stanford in 1969, when I saw that first baby, with Henry Kaplan as my attending. He gave me a chance. He gave me an assignment. I did the assignment and then I worked on that for a career. That’s been very gratifying because it’s impacted patients around the world. That’s the way children with Hodgkin’s disease are treated today. I had a similar experience in another very difficult kind of cancer that affects children. It’s a sarcoma called rhabdomyosarcoma. When I was a trainee, a group of pediatricians started a group where they talked to each other about standardizing the treatment for children with rhabdomyosarcoma. [01:04:10] It was very rare and nobody knew how to treat it; every person had had one experience of one patient, and they couldn’t learn anything by it. So they put together this group. When I was a junior faculty, I was asked by the National Cancer Institute to be a site visitor and to critique this group. I was very young to be asked to do that job. I was flattered. I took it on to do the Henry Kaplan kind of 110-percent job. I was critical. I wasn’t politically savvy; I was politically very naïve. I did my job--like Kaplan would have us read a book chapter or something and dissect it. Read a scientific article, dissect it. [01:04:59] So I read the report and wrote a long, scathing review pointing out all the fallacies, all the weaknesses. In retrospect, that was not a politically very strong thing to do. I guess if I regret anything, it is that I was so naïve when I was going through the report because I was inexperienced. 79 At any rate, the chair of the committee received the report. He was a very wise man and he turned around and offered me an opportunity to serve on the committee—the committee that I had just written this report for. That was a huge opportunity for a junior faculty, [01:05:52] to be the radiation oncologist on this national committee. It was huge. I said yes, and the first thing he said to me was “Here’s our report from our last review. There are a lot of problems identified here. Fix them.” And they were all the things that I had written. That man became provost and chancellor at University of Nebraska. A very, very, very smart man whom I still have huge respect for. What I learned from that is sometimes you take your biggest critic and you put them on to your team, you put them into your family and have them work with you. [01:06:40] That’s what Barack Obama did with Hillary Clinton. He barely won the race and then he asked her to be secretary of state, the Madeleine Albright position. So now she has this huge international responsibility to go around and solve all the problems of the world—and he put her on his team. I have watched many, many leaders do that. Take the biggest squawker and give them an assignment and have them work with you or for you. [01:07:18] I’ve written articles about pediatric Hodgkin’s disease and rhabdomyosarcoma because I was given a chance early on to move the field forward and to do so with the goal of curing children and retaining an important quality of life. Those kinds of opportunities don’t happen very often. I’ve written lots and lots of papers, but the ones that I think have been 80 the most meaningful or helped the most patients or maybe the most doctors have been in those two areas. Pantell: Is there research that you’d like to do going forward? Donaldson: [01:08:03] I get lots of opportunities to do research and I say yes, but I give those opportunities to junior faculty because the only way you get a chance is to have somebody open a door for you. I accept a lot of things on the condition that I can share the responsibility. Then I give it to a junior faculty and I’ll say, “Let’s talk about it in advance about how would you like to do it, and run it all by me.” Then I sign the forms. They do the work because there are too many things in the world to do. [01:08:51] You can’t do them all yourself. And at Stanford there are lots and lots of talented people who just need to be given a chance. That’s true nationwide too. I help women not just at Stanford, but women who I meet through one national or international committee or another because women need to have a big sister. If they have a big sister who helps them, then it becomes easier. [01:09:26] I didn’t have a big sister because there weren’t any sisters when I went into this field because it was a field that hadn’t been born yet, or hadn’t been discovered. It’s much easier if there’s someone along the way who can help you. Pantell: Those are all my questions. Is there anything you would like to add? Donaldson: [01:09:51] No. I’d like to be able to see it at the end because it’s very hard to know how others see you. I just talk with my heart because that’s the only way I know how to do it. But I’m still a little puzzled how I emerged to be one of the people identified for this project. I can’t imagine how my little 81 story is going to have any impact. But maybe it will. Maybe some recurring theme will come out, or maybe the colorfulness of my story will embellish somebody else’s story. I’m curious to know about that. It’s flattering to be invited. I said I would do it because I was curious about it. It sounded sort of novel. Nobody had asked me to do that before. I wouldn’t have met you otherwise. Pantell: Sure. Thank you so much. Donaldson: [01:11:32] It’s been a pleasure...