 Marine-Street: This is Natalie Marine-Street with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is August 26, 2016. I’m here with Jean Chu, an emeritus staff member who has held several important management positions at Stanford, including service as the dean of undergraduate admissions from 1984 to 1991. We’re conducting this interview as part of the Stanford Staff Oral History Project, and we are doing so at Jean’s home in Menlo Park. Jean, I’d like to begin by asking you to tell us just about where you were born and a little bit about the place where you grew up. Chu: [00:01:04] I was born just before World War II in 1937 in Swansea, which is in South Wales. I was brought up in an English speaking family, although surrounded by Welsh speaking people, which was an interesting dynamic. I lived in Wales until I was sixteen years old, so I had my most formative educational years in Wales. Marine-Street: Chu: What was Swansea like? What kind of a place was it? [00:01:40] It was very interesting after World War II started because there were major steel works nearby. The Germans bombed the center of Swansea. It was a town of maybe fifty thousand people. They bombed the whole center 13 beyond recognition. It was absolutely astounding as a child. I was eight years old when the war finished. I have vivid recollections of an air raid warning sounding and having to run in the back garden and into a bomb shelter, or under the stairs of the house. But then to go into the town center and see it just completely demolished. It’s very different now, of course. It recovered like London did after the blitz. Marine-Street: Chu: Did they have blackouts and things? [00:02:37] Oh, yes. Blackouts, very seriously taken, blackouts, especially since the Germans--Wales is on the western part of England, but the Germans infiltrated so far. One of the things I found amazing, my father was in the Royal Air Force and had access after the war to German maps. The maps of my hometown were so detailed they even had little back lanes in it. It was a bit frightening to see how much they knew. I mean these were the days before Google Maps Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: You lived outside of the city a little way? [00:03:15] Yes. A little way outside the city. When the air raid sirens would go off did you have a bomb shelter in your backyard? Chu: [00:03:24] Yes. We did. Unfortunately it wasn’t very well designed. It always filled with water. Wales is notorious for rain, and so when it rained the shelter flooded. Our most common hideaway was under the stairs of the house. We had a little bed there. I grew up mostly with my great aunt who was childless, my great aunt and uncle. I stayed in their house during most of the bombing raids. She was a very calming influence. I don’t know why I wasn’t more 14 frightened. You know, you could hear these planes overhead dropping bombs. Marine-Street: Chu: Was your dad in the air force before the war began? [00:04:14] No. I was so young I don’t remember the exact details. Most men over the age of eighteen served in the armed forces. Marine-Street: Chu: How about your mother? Did she work in the war industries at all? [00:04:34] No, she didn’t. My mother didn’t work until after I went to high school. I was the first in my family to go to college. Neither of my parents were college educated though both were very intelligent. My father worked in a solicitor’s office, and my mother worked in some clerical job after I went to high school. I don’t remember the details. Marine-Street: They weren’t college educated. What kind of expectations did they have for you in regards to education? Chu: [00:05:05] I think they were very proud of me. As my great aunt used to say, “Jean always has her head in a book.” How you bring up your children to be curious and self-motivated is, I think, an art and a science. I was very fortunate that I loved to read. I loved school. I was always incredibly proud of being a very good student. Where the motivation came from is hard to know. Marine-Street: Chu: Do you remember the kinds of things you liked to read as a child? [00:05:52] [laughter] They probably didn’t exist in this country. There was a series called the Biggles books which was about an air force fighter. Then the Worrals books about a woman who served in the armed forces. They were World War II related. They made a big impression on me. Then I loved 15 mathematics. My great uncle was the manager of a department store and he would bring home these big ledgers. He would write out in the ledgers a whole series of sums for me to do and would give me a page to do. Then he would mark them and put “excellent” or “good.” This was a great source of delight. Marine-Street: Chu: Did you ever go into work with him in the department store? [00:06:42] I didn’t go to work with him. When I went to high school we both took the same bus every morning, the Number 9 bus, which took him to his work and me to my high school. The high school was really an incredible experience. It was an all girls’ high school, all women teachers, and there I had my first role models. They were all unmarried. I think there was one, my Latin teacher, who was married and she was considered an aberration. They had incredibly high standards. At the end of each term the head mistress would stand in front of the whole school and read out the reports of each grade form--form they were called. I was so competitive that I always wanted to be first to be read out, meaning I was top of my form. Marine-Street: Chu: They’d read you in order? [00:07:46] In the order of your grades, yes. I’m sure today that would be unheard of. Privacy. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: They even went all the way down to the last person? [00:07:55] Yes. Oh, my. [laughter] [00:07:56] Yes. [laughter] Yes. Everybody knew what their standing was. It was fine for me because I was always number one. I had a great competitor, 16 Jill. I still remember her name. Jill Dadds. She went to Cambridge and I went to Oxford. Jill and I always used to alternate Number 1 and Number 2. Marine-Street: You mentioned that the teachers weren’t married. Did you recall, did they have to quit or was it just common expectation? Chu: [00:08:26] The phrase “blue stocking” in England referred to academic women whose life was devoted to their careers. I had the same experience when I followed through to Oxford, too. Marine-Street: Tell me about what your science education was like then? Did you know that you wanted to do science that early? Chu: [00:08:50] Yes. English--British. I say English because I did finish my last three years of high school in London. The British system tended in the 1950s to be --I’m dating myself--very, very specialized. At the age of fifteen you took a series of what were called O Level Exams. That was Ordinary Level. Then A Level, which was Advanced Level. And by the time you got to Advanced Level you were essentially studying three or four subjects. In the Sixth Form I studied pure mathematics, applied mathematics, physics and chemistry. That was it. Marine-Street: Chu: Was that something that you got to choose, or did they direct you? [00:09:40] You chose. Of course, the other wonderful thing about being in an all girls’ school, if you were good at math or physics you weren’t considered aberrant. Somebody had to be leader in that flock. It was quite a shock getting to Oxford and being surrounded by men. In my graduating class at Oxford there were five or six women and a hundred and twenty men. To go from an all girls’ school to that environment was quite something. 17 Marine-Street: Tell me a little bit about applying to Oxford. What was the admissions process like? Chu: [00:10:31] You had to take these A Level exams. The first thing they looked at were your A Level grades. Oxford and Cambridge, being elitist institutions, had their own entrance exams. I don’t remember about London University. I took entrance exams in, again, pure and applied mathematics and physics. There was also a general exam which I took in my high school. The papers were sent to my high school and supervised by the head mistress. Not very many girls applied to Oxford and Cambridge because it was highly selective. I’ll take this with me to my grave: In this general exam I can remember still two questions. One was, “Can one have pleasure in one’s arm?” Marine-Street: Chu: Hmmm. [00:11:27] I remember being thrown by that. You had a choice fortunately. That was not one I chose. Then one which was more appealing to me as a scientist was, “What determined the color of a hen’s egg?” [laughter] I mean, nothing you could have studied in class. Right? Unless you’d been a philosopher. I’d never studied any philosophy. How can one have pleasure in one’s arm? OK. Then these exam questions were sent off to Oxford. If you met their standard, you were called for an interview. I was called both for an interview and I had to do a physics practical exam. Then I remember with incredible joy getting this letter saying I’d been admitted to this Oxford College, St. Hugh’s. Marine-Street: St. Hugh’s was a coed college then? 18 Chu: [00:12:25] No. I went up, as they say, to Oxford in 1956 when there were five women’s colleges. Margaret Thatcher went to an all women’s college. The current prime minister of the U.K., Theresa May, went to my Oxford College. Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, is that right? [00:12:50] In my day, there were five women’s colleges and twenty-six men’s colleges. We had our tutor in our college, and then we went to joint university lectures with my hundred and twenty male colleagues. Then we all took the same exams. The exam system was formidable. We took what were called honor moderations at the end of the first year. Then you didn’t have another exam that counted until the end of your third year, your final year. It was called Schools. You had to dress up in this academic outfit. Then the results of your Schools papers were printed in the London Times. Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, my. [00:13:33] Yes. It’s a variation on a theme of my high school principal reading out the order of merit in the class. Marine-Street: Chu: These were written exams, not oral? [00:13:46] They were written exams and there were two practical exams in physics. You got a first, a second, a third, or, God forbid, a fourth, or you failed. If you were a borderline first or second degree, you got called for what was called a viva, an oral exam. Fortunately, I was lucky enough—well, I say lucky. I worked incredibly hard. I got a first, an unviva’d first. I was very proud of myself. Marine-Street: An unviva’d first? 19 Chu: [00:14:24] Yes. A viva was the oral exam if you were borderline first or second. If you got an unviva’d you were a clear cut [first]. Marine-Street: Chu: You were clear. I see. How wonderful. [00:14:35] It’s a brutal exam system. In fact, I’m going back for my college reunion in a couple of weeks. I’d be curious to see if the exam system has changed. It was so brutal. A number of people committed suicide. I mean they just couldn’t take the pressure because-- Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: While you were there? [00:14:55] Yes. Oh, my. [00:14:56] Because it was that exam which determined the class of your degree. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: You were the first in your family to go to college. [00:15:09] Yes. I always imagined Oxford as a place where generations had gone before and that there would have been a lot of class [hierarchy] there. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:15:21] That’s exactly right. Did you encounter that? [00:15:23] Yes. I did. In fact, when I subsequently came to live in the United States in 1962 one of the great senses of relief I had was I had escaped the British class system. First of all, you could tell by people’s accents, upper class, lower class. You could immediately tell when you walked into a room and you started a conversation whether someone came from a privileged family or not. 20 I’ll never forget. This is an example of the class system: I spent one summer vacation as a waitress and I wanted to go on an Oxford/Cambridge ski trip. I’d never been skiing. I saved up enough money. And who should be on the Oxford/Cambridge ski trip but Winston Churchill’s grandson. [00:16:30] As we picked up our bags at the end of the Oxford/Cambridge ski trip, Winston Churchill came along and said something like, “I wonder whose bags those peasants belong to.” Marine-Street: Chu: [laughter] Winston Churchill himself? [00:16:54] Winston Churchill’s grandson who was my contemporary at Oxford. Oxford has produced many British prime ministers. David Cameron, Tony Blair [Anthony Charles Lynton “Tony” Blair]. I mentioned Theresa May. Margaret Thatcher and Theresa May are two Oxford women prime ministers. David Cameron and Tony Blair and [laughter] the notorious Boris Johnson [Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson] who’s now foreign secretary, all went to Eton, the probably snootiest upper class British public school, as they are called, and then all went on to Oxford. The class system was pervasive. Marine-Street: Chu: I would imagine it would have affected socializing. [00:17:48] Yes. It did affect socializing. The things that sustained me were tutorials. Tutorials are when you have two students meeting once a week with a tutor. My tutorial partner was from another college, Somerville College, and she’d been a London debutante. [laughter] I sort of gloated to myself, but she wasn’t very smart. In fact, as they say, she got sent down after the end of our first year at Oxford because she wasn’t up to it academically. You know, even 21 though I was a working class Welsh woman from a Welsh high school, I was smarter than she was. In the end smarts prevailed. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: You found other people that you liked there socially? [00:18:47] Yes. Yes. I did. I think, one has lifetime friends from college years. How did the class differences manifest themselves in academics? Was there any of that? Chu: [00:19:02] Eton is probably the extreme case. It was an all men’s school. Still is, as far as I know, an all men’s school. They learned Greek and Latin from the age of ten or twelve on. I mean I did learn some Greek in high school, in my wonderful Welsh high school, and I did take three languages, but these children were so privileged. I always argued with my American husband that there was no class system in the U.S., and he said, yes, there is, but it’s more subtle than in the U.K. Marine-Street: Chu: Did you encounter any gender dynamics in studying with so many men? [00:20:03] Just in the sheer numbers in physics. A hundred and twenty men and six women. It was a little intimidating in class. I was of a generation where most of the men, in fact I think all of the men, had done what’s called National Service. It’s a required two-year service in the military, so they were all two years older than me. They were much more experienced both in terms of life and in terms of practical experience in the lab. You know, if you’d been in the air force and learned how to make radios, you were much better off [laughter] in the lab than somebody like me. Marine-Street: Chu: Did you have to teach yourself how to make radio type things? [00:20:57] I read a lot of books. [laughter] I studied incredibly hard. 22 Marine-Street: I’m a little confused about how things worked at Oxford. You would go to these lectures, but it wasn’t student participation type of lecture. Is that correct? Chu: [00:21:19] [laughter] You didn’t ask questions in lectures. It’s this one great thing about the system. It’s Darwinian. It’s survival of the fittest, because if you can’t go away and study on your own and teach yourself, you aren’t going to survive. Or you could go to your tutor in this much more intimate setting of one-on-one, one-on-two. In physics it was always two students, one tutor, or one student, one tutor. They guided you through in preparation for the exams. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: The lectures were just the professor giving information and…. [00:22:06] Yes. You didn’t ask questions. You just took notes. Did they ever call on you to answer a question in lectures? [00:22:13] No. Never. It was just purely presentation on their part. [00:22:16] Yes. Yes. Yes. Don’t bother the professor. Marine-Street: How did you interact, if at all, with the male students in an academic setting? Chu: [00:22:24] First of all we had lab sessions where we socialized. The lectures in my mind were almost a total waste of time because it was seemingly disorganized and you couldn’t ask questions. There was no interaction. It wasn’t the time to socialize. But there was always an hour gap between lectures in the morning. We had lectures back to back to back. Three or four of us would go and have coffee in town. Marine-Street: Tell me about your tutor. 23 Chu: [00:23:07] [laughter] I was in an all women’s college, so I had a woman tutor who was a classic British bluestocking. She was unmarried. I can’t imagine she ever had a boyfriend. She totally devoted her life to her work and expected me to do the same. [laughter] When I finished my Schools, the final exams, she asked me to stay on and do a doctorate degree working with her in the Oxford Observatory. I did that for three years. Then I got engaged to an American and I think she was heartbroken. She’d hoped I was going to carry on the tradition of her life at St. Hugh’s. Poor Dr. Madge Adam. Marine-Street: I want to try to understand what was going on in the wider world at this time. 1950s, in the United States, the Cold War, of course, was very much in people’s mind. Was that in your consciousness at all studying physics? Chu: [00:24:17] I remember the Russian satellites causing a lot of--I mean it was scientific competition, the fear that the Western world would be left behind. Of course, there was still incredible aftermath from the war. As I mentioned, my hometown, the center of the town, was completely demolished. In London, the blitz demolished a significant part of London. It took years to rebuild all of that. As I remember, [for] a number of years after the war there was food rationing. I remember never seeing a banana or a pineapple, those kinds of things that couldn’t make their way into the U.K. during the war. We had ration books and we had little coupons we had to give out to get sugar and eggs and things. Marine-Street: If following in your tutor’s footsteps was not something that was in your life plan, what were you thinking you might do with this physics education? 24 Chu: [00:25:38] That’s a good question. I’m going to answer this in a roundabout way. My great aunt, even though she wasn’t college educated, really nurtured me through my childhood years. I remember her saying when Sandy--that was my first husband--gets a better job will you be able to stop working. I mean, the role models I had were women dependent on men. Women did not have careers. I certainly was very enthusiastic about getting as much education as I could. The fact that not only was I the first in my family to go to college, but I was called Dr. Holmes. That was a source of enormous pride. I hadn’t thought beyond that. I wanted to teach. Of course, this is, again, a classic women’s profession, teaching nursing. I applied for jobs in the United States and my friends all thought I was crazy. I had the sense of adventure even at that age. I wanted to explore the world. This great uncle, the one who set me all these sums, he’d never been outside of Swansea. Amazing. Amazingly cloistered environment. Anyway, I had a sense I wanted to explore the world. I looked to coming to live in the United States. Then I married an American. My first husband was a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford. He came back to Harvard to do a PhD and then he came back [to England] and we got married in Oxford. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: You met him when he was at Oxford. [00:27:41] Yes. How did you meet? [00:27:43] We met on that famous ski trip where I had been a waitress in the summer to earn the money. 25 Marine-Street: In the U.K. at the time, was there much of a women’s movement? Did you have a sense of there being any kind of broader movement of women? Chu: [00:28:01] No. I’ll give you an example. Women’s consciousness was just on the cusp of being raised. I played a lot of sports at Oxford. My main sport was what was called net ball. Basketball in this country. If you were on an Oxford University team representing the university, men got what were called blues and women got what were called half blues. It was as if women’s sports didn’t count. I never thought to ask why aren’t women getting blues. Why are men getting blues, and women got half blues? There was also an athletic club called the Vincent’s Club at Oxford, and it was only open to men blues. [laughter] We never questioned it. It was absolutely astounding in retrospect. My first consciousness raising came in the United States. My mother-in-law was a very liberal, forward-thinking woman. I remember she gave me [laughter] Betty Friedan’s book, and I remember being shocked. What was she trying to do, disrupt my marriage or something? [laughter] It’s interesting that the U.K. had a woman prime minister, and here we are in 2016 before the U.S. is even close to having a woman president. But I think the women’s movement in this country was much more energetic. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Let’s get you to the United States then. [00:29:58] Yes. You apply for jobs, but then you’re here for a while as Sandy’s finishing at Harvard? 26 Chu: [00:30:09] In classical, unexpected twists and turns of life, I became pregnant almost [laughter] immediately after we got married. Here I found myself in Cambridge, Massachusetts. I was on a postdoc. Sandy was a year behind me getting his PhD. He got a PhD and we moved to Berkeley where I delivered our first child. I couldn’t cope with moving three thousand miles from Cambridge to Berkeley, having my first child, and looking for a job, especially since I knew his position at Berkeley was only going to be a two-year appointment. Then he got in a position at Stanford as an assistant professor, and that was when I started thinking of expanding my own career. Marine-Street: This seems to me like it would be a giant change for you. You’re coming from Oxford and you’re ending up in Berkeley during the middle of the 1960s and transitioning into motherhood. Just tell me a little bit about what that was like. Chu: [00:31:29] [laughter] It was overwhelming. It was overwhelming moving to the U.S. for one thing. You’d think having a common language would be sufficient to bridge any cultural differences. I remember being bewildered. For example, if you go to mail a letter in the U.K., there are these nice red post boxes which are obvious. I didn’t even know how to mail a letter. My husband was doing his PhD so I didn’t want to bother him with trivia. I remember [laughter] going to the Harvard Coop, the main store which was then in 1962 in Harvard Square and I wanted to buy a washcloth. In England they’re called flannels. I went into the store and said, “Do you have any flannels?” They looked as if I had come from another planet. Marine-Street: Yes. They’ll give you a pair of pajamas. [laughter] 27 Chu: [00:32:29] [laughter] Yes. Then there’s the contrast of the weather. We came over on a boat from Southampton to New York. Getting off the boat in New York, I had on my traditional British summer wear. I’ll never forget what I had on [laughter]--a gray woolen skirt and a gray sweater. It must have been ninety-five degrees and ninety-five percent humidity. I thought, how am I going to survive in this country. Oh, the other interesting thing. The boat it was almost dominated by a group of students from Georgia. I could not understand what they said because of the Georgian accent. Anyway, everything was overwhelming. Then to get pregnant on top of it. I mean pregnancy, as you know, is a shock to the system. Then moving across country. We actually drove across the United States. I don’t recommend doing that when you’re pregnant either. Marine-Street: You’re at Berkeley for a few years and then Sandy--does he get recruited to Stanford? Chu: [00:33:53] Yes. He was recruited as an assistant professor. We lived in a small house in South Palo Alto. One day in Science Magazine I read about William Shockley, the Nobel Laureate, seeking an assistant to help with some science teaching project. I thought, what a great way for me to get my feet wet in academia. I knew I wasn’t good enough to be on the Stanford faculty in physics, especially since I hadn’t been doing anything for two years. Anyway, I got this job with William Shockley. It took me three or four months to realize he was the crazy one and I was not the crazy one, because he had very outlandish ideas and, as you may know, was criticized for his racist views of intellect. 28 Fortunately, he had another person working for him who was an assistant professor at San Jose State. He and I agreed to switch responsibilities. I taught his class at San Jose State and he took on what I was doing for William Shockley. I was so glad to get out of that position. Marine-Street: Chu: Do you remember what you were doing exactly? [00:35:33] Trying to design methods to teach science more effectively. Essentially that’s what it boiled down to. He gave me almost no guidance. That job was a disaster for me. It turned out to be almost a disaster when I was subsequently hired at Stanford because some of the African-American faculty learned I had worked for Bill Shockley and thought I supported his racist ideas. I was taken aside by a very wonderful African-American faculty member, Jim Gibbs [James Lowell Gibbs Jr.], who asked me to I explain how I’d worked for him and could they rely on me not to be supportive of these racist ideas. It could have been a bad experience all around. Marine-Street: When you interviewed with Shockley, did he ask you any kind of crazy questions? I’ve heard that he did this with engineers. [laughter] Chu: [00:36:45] I’m amazed you’ve heard the stories, too. I vividly remember he telephoned me at our house and I was nursing my daughter who must have been then--I don’t know--six months old. No, she must have been older than that. Anyway, I was holding Anne, and Shockley immediately said, “I have a few questions for you. If you have 137 tennis players in a singles elimination tournament, how many matches would it take to produce a winner?” I mean he just wanted me to think on the spot. I wanted to say, “Could we perhaps have this discussion at a time that’s more convenient?” Anyway, I obviously 29 answered satisfactorily. It was an unexpected question in challenging circumstances. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Yes. Interesting. This led you though to San Jose State. [00:37:46] Yes. Yes. That was good. Tell me about that. [00:37:50] It was a great experience in that it was my first exposure--I’m going to discount my nine months at Harvard as a postdoc because that was an, I think, unusual circumstance. Here I was suddenly in a working class environment where many of the students had fulltime jobs. They were, for the most part, very conscientious students, hardworking, paying their way through college, circumstances that were novel to me as a Brit. What was hard was I was replicating my experience at Oxford. I was the only person in my department who was a woman. This was an interesting social dynamic divide. There was one AfricanAmerican man and one woman in the department, me. I’ve forgotten his name. We taught all the freshman physics classes. All the women came to my class and all the minority students went to his class. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: How interesting. [00:39:10] Yes. It was as if, understandably, they felt comfortable. Were there many women students? [00:39:18] Not many. The ones that were there felt comfortable in coming to my class. Marine-Street: Had you taught physics before at Oxford? 30 Chu: [00:39:26] I taught in the tutorial system, but it’s very different from standing up and teaching in front of 250 people. That was quite a challenge. Marine-Street: Did you have any sort of a philosophy that guided your teaching or approach that you used? Chu: [00:39:43] I set high standards. I tried to be fair and clear. I was very conscientious about preparing my lectures. I think I was quite popular with the students. Then it became [laughter] more challenging because I found I was pregnant again. There was a five year separation with my children. I taught until the week my son was born, and went back to teaching. Then I took the rest of the year off. I had two children. I was commuting from Palo Alto to San Jose. I had a huge teaching load, six hours of lectures and nine hours of labs a week, and no TA. [00:40:43] I had an epiphany one day driving back from San Jose State thinking I don’t want to live my life this way anymore. I came home and said to my husband I’m going to resign, and my criterion for finding a job is I can bike to work. By this time we lived on the Stanford campus. It wasn’t easy finding a job at Stanford, but six months later I landed on my first job at Stanford. Marine-Street: I want to ask you some more about that, but I want to understand a little bit about what the Stanford community was like when you came as the spouse of an assistant professor. Was there any sort of mechanism to integrate you into the Stanford community? What was that like? Chu: [00:41:31] Only through the Physics Department. There were no women on the faculty. None. I’m talking about physics now. All the socializing was done 31 with the wives. This is actually fascinating historical piece of information for Stanford. I was told under no circumstances when we had a dinner party--in those days you gave quite formal dinner parties. Under no circumstances was I to include anyone from SLAC, the Stanford Linear Accelerator [now SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory], because there’d been this huge divide in breaking up the high energy physics lab and the Physics Department and the founding of the Stanford Linear Accelerator. People didn’t talk to each other. It’s astounding. Marine-Street: Chu: No kidding. [00:42:30] Yes. It was quite fascinating. I hope you’ve interviewed Burt Richter [Burton Richter]. He must have many stories about this. Marine-Street: We do have an interview with him. I’m not sure if he talked about the dinner parties. I’ll have to go and check. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:42:44] No. I’m sure he talked about the-The divides. [00:42:47] --cultural divide where people didn’t speak to each other. Very interesting. [00:42:52] I remember vividly one dinner party when I found myself seated between two Nobel Laureates, Felix Bloch, who was the Nobel Laureate in the Physics Department at Stanford, and Emilio Segré, who was a physicist at Berkeley. It was daunting Marine-Street: Chu: Did you talk about physics? [00:43:22] Yes. In fact, [laughter] I did. I was still teaching physics at San Jose State at that point. I can’t remember what problem I gave. I mentioned that 32 my students were having a problem. It was quite an elementary physics problem, but my dinner partners were not the slightest bit interested in contributing to how I could help my students understand. It was fascinating. All I can remember was I was sort of dumbstruck sitting between two Nobel Laureates. This was my first encounter. Marine-Street: Was it pretty typical that as a faculty wife you were expected to throw these dinners or entertain visitors? Chu: [00:44:12] Yes. I remember when I first started teaching at San Jose State, one of the more established women spouses of a faculty member took me aside and she said, “You know, you’re going to raise a lot of eyebrows by working.” Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: This is a physics spouse. [00:44:38] Yes. Right. Most of the other spouses didn’t work. [00:44:43] No. I don’t think any of them worked. This was 1966. I had heard that there was a Stanford Women’s Club that many of the faculty wives belonged to. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:45:00] Yes. Were you involved in that at all? [00:45:01] I was so busy with two small children, commuting and teaching that I didn’t do much of that. I liked to play tennis but…. Marine-Street: The faculty wives didn’t visit you and welcome you with open arms to your recollection. Chu: [00:45:25] I was invited to coffee things occasionally when we first came. But once I started working I was pretty busy with other things. 33 Marine-Street: Yes, it sounds like you were. Did the children go to school at all in any of the Stanford facilities? Chu: [00:45:46] Yes. Both my kids went to Bing Nursery School which was wonderful. My grandchildren, graduates of Bing Nursery School, too. Wonderful, wonderful history. For me, it’s very nice looking back now because Peter Bing- Peter Bing was a long-term Stanford trustee--the nursery school was founded in honor of his mother. I had never any connection with Peter Bing in those days when I was a young faculty wife, but it was wonderful to know Peter later on and thank him for all the pleasure and in his mother’s memory for the Bing Nursery School. Still going strong on Stanford campus. [End of interview with Jean H. Chu, August 26, 2016, Part 1 of 2] 34 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET INTERVIEWEE: JEAN H. CHU, INTERVIEW 1 (part 2 of 2) DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 26, 2016 Marine-Street: We’re resuming after a short break. You had gotten tired of this rat race of commuting to San Jose and were looking for a job closer to home that you could bike to. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:00:40] Yes. Tell me what happens next. [00:00:44] I tried to be very proper in not using the Stanford circuit to find a job, so I patiently went through HR and filed applications. There weren’t many jobs that were appropriate. Lo and behold, after I think it was five months I saw this ad for an assistant director of the Center for Teaching and Learning, and it was working with Professor David Halliburton in the English Department. I think the appeal of David and me working together was that he was an English professor. I was a physicist by training. He was administering two grants. The primary goal of the Danforth Center for Teaching and Learning was to improve teaching and learning in Bay Area colleges and universities. The other half of the grant--they were both soft money--was from the Lillie Endowment. The Lillie Endowment’s goal was Faculty Renewal in Washington, Oregon and California. It was all 35 based out of Stanford. David and I divvied up these responsibilities. He asked me for ideas on how I could meet both the Danforth Foundation’s goals and the Lillie Endowment’s goals with programs in science. We did a couple of interdisciplinary things which were very interesting. There was an obvious dearth of women in the sciences. One of the projects that I’m most proud of as a physicist, was when I decided to try and explore means of improving the status of women in sciences and engineering. The obvious place to look was Mills College across the bay, which was an all women’s college. In 1976, we had a kick-off conference on Educating Women for Science and Engineering. I think that was the title. It brought together women faculty from Berkeley and Mills--I don’t think we had any faculty women at Stanford because there were still very few in 1976, and the ones that were in place were overwhelmed with responsibilities. [00:03:34] Anyway, we had this kick-off conference and involved women from industry and academia. It was sponsored in part by Syntex Corporation where the person then in charge of development was, I think, was a chemist. That conference gave birth to another generation of events we called Expanding Your Horizons. It was a once a year conference for seventh through twelfth grade young women and their teachers and parents, mostly mothers. It’s still going strong. Marine-Street: Chu: You’re kidding. [00:04:23] We now must be in the fifth generation of these conferences. I’m not sure who funds it at the minute, but NSF got involved and it took off like wildfire. What I don’t have any data on is what role it played in increasing the 36 number of women in the sciences and engineering, particularly on the faculty. Certainly at Stanford [laughter] it’s a far cry from when I came in 1962 when there were zero women on the physics faculty. Marine-Street: What made you think of getting this group of women together in a conference? Why did you think that was a way that this issue should be approached? Chu: [00:05:14] They were all scientists so they all brought a personal background to it. The goal was to see if we could come up with things in common that could make a difference. Everybody agreed I think that you have to start at a very early age. I mean the die is cast almost when you’re a seventh grade young girl and you got turned off from learning mathematics. That’s why we started with seventh to twelfth graders hoping it would make a difference. Marine-Street: Did anything from your early experience inform the way you approached this? You talked about your education as a child. Chu: [00:06:07] I went to an all girls’ school, and so, you know, the tumultuous teenage years of raging hormones. We were all in it together, unlike if you’re in a coed school--the segregation of the sexes. You have your first girlfriend, boyfriend, when it happens, how it happens. Should girls not come across as looking so smart? If you’re in an all girls’ environment, you’re the only students to compare each other with, and some of us needed to be leaders and be first in our class. That certainly helped develop confidence. Marine-Street: Chu: How did you find these other women to participate in this first conference? [00:06:52] At Mills I contacted someone in the Development Office, I think it was, and she introduced me to a wonderful woman, Lenore Blum, who was 37 teaching math at Mills. Lenore and I really hit it off and she knew someone-it was a wonderful ol’ girls’ network--she knew someone at the Lawrence Hall of Science, Nancy Kreinberg, and Nancy Kreinberg knew somebody else, and so we all used our networks to bring it all together. It was a wonderful event. Marine-Street: It seems to me that it might have been a little bit of a stretch for you to interpret the Danforth Foundation’s grant to improve education in colleges to get more women into the sciences. Did anybody push back at you on that, or did you have freedom? Chu: [00:07:46] No. No. I mean this wasn’t the only thing I did. In fact, the Lillie Endowment program and this Danforth program in a way were complementary because Faculty Renewal for colleges in Washington, Oregon and California mainly took place in organizing summer conferences. Of course, if the summer conferences involved the sciences, then I could bring in the ideas of underrepresentation of women in science. They were overlapping interlocking ideas. David and I did a conference was called Revolutions in Science. As a historian, you will appreciate this. It was about how revolutions can start at any stage and how you could have revolutions in science coinciding with revolutions in political thought or the humanities. They were very stimulating conferences. Anyway, David and I worked well together, but I was very conscious of the fact that the position was on two-year money. He was a tenured faculty member and I was [laughter] an untenured woman then out of a job. Coming toward the end of my second year somebody in the Stanford administration said to me you should apply for this job as assistant to President Richard 38 Lyman which is opening up. Bill Stone [William E. Stone], who had had the job was going off to be the director of the Alumni Association. I thought, well, why not. One wonderful thing about the work with David Halliburton through the Center for Teaching and Learning and the Lillie Endowment, it gave me a perspective on Stanford that was very broad. [00:10:11] For the summer conferences I had to work with the summer conference office. I had to work with the dormitories to set up housing and teaching locations. I had to learn about budgets. I had to work with the School of Humanities and Sciences because the Danforth and Lillie money went through the School of Humanities and Sciences. I had this wonderful, broad exposure to faculty outside of the Physics Department, which was what I knew best. I got called for an interview for the job with Dick Lyman and even though I felt well versed on Stanford in general and how it operated, I was totally [laughter] taken aback when someone on the search committee said to me, “So what do you do? You are assistant to the president and you get a call from an angry alumnus whose son was not admitted to Stanford. How do you handle that?” That was a question I had not thought of or how to handle it, so I sort of mumbled my way through. Anyway, I did pass that interview test because I was called in to be interviewed with Dick Lyman. I think I’d met him once socially, but it was a very formal interview. I remember toward the end of the interview he said, “I hear you’re a little feisty.” I said, “Well, that’s funny. I’ve heard that about you, too.” We immediately had a little feisty interchange. I think we temperamentally were 39 well suited to each other. He was a British labor historian by training, and I think his mother was British. I got to know his mother quite well after I’d started working for Dick. But this was a trial by fire. First of all, I was succeeding men in the job. There had never been an assistant to the president who was a woman. Fred Glover [Frederic O. Glover], who was, I think, the predecessor of Bill Stone, was rumored to have said, “That is no job for a lady.” So there I was in this job. Bill was off busy being head of the Alumni Association so he had very little time for training me on the job. The first thing I had to do, every day, was go through Dick’s mail. He had this rather fierce secretary, Evelyn Betterton, an unmarried woman who was totally devoted to Dick, incredibly devoted to her job. She would open his mail, date stamp it, put it in a folder, and there I had this pile of mail every morning and I had to decide what to do with it. [sigh]. [00:13:39] When you haven’t had exposure to major university problems, it’s hard to know how to begin tackling some of these questions. Anyway, I learned on the job. That was a toughie. The other thing I learned was the pressure of the job. There’s always the unexpected. There was an assistant provost who worked up above me in Building 10 called Ed Shaw [Edward S. Shaw]. He came into my office one day and said something like, “If you’re inbox is empty, you’re not doing a good job.” Marine-Street: Chu: [laughter] [00:14:28] Meaning, you know, I had gotten rid of problems too quickly. [laughter] Anyway, I worked incredibly hard at that job. This was 1977. I worked for Dick for three years learning as I went. He went off in 1980 to be 40 president of the Rockefeller Foundation. For three years I’d had a bird’s eye view every single day of this man who had gone through a lot at Stanford. The previous president, Pitzer [Kenneth Sanborn Pitzer] had lasted eighteen months. It was the Vietnam War crisis. Of course, I was not there with Dick at that time, but he was honed on the job. He’d been provost at Stanford so he brought a wealth of experience. I just learned by watching. I sat in on staff meetings. We used to have cabinet meetings I think it was every Monday morning. Then there were regular meetings with the vice president for development who decided what were priorities on his calendar. I had to make some of these things happen. But I just watched Dick and how he acted, how he responded in crises. I remember one day vividly. I had a problem that I needed to talk to him about, and he said, “I’m sorry. I can’t talk about that now. I’m in computer overload.” It was the first time I think I’d ever seen anybody in a job where it was just too much for a human being to deal with. It was eye-opening. Anyway, I was not surprised, although sad, that he was chosen as president of the Rockefeller Foundation. I did have a chance to go to New York with him, but it just didn’t fit in with my personal life. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: There are lot of questions I want to ask you about this. [00:16:54] Yes. Why would Fred Glover say, “This is no job for a lady?” [00:17:01] I think you take a lot of fire. He was being a protectionist gentleman. You take a lot of abuse in that job. You get angry people. In 1977 you went in the main door of Building 10 which had on it “President’s and 41 Provost Office.” I think they’ve taken it off the door now so that [laughter] any angry person can’t walk in. The first door on the left as you come in was mine. People would come in. To answer your question, Fred was trying to protect me from abuse and anger and maybe thought I wasn’t physically up to it, although I think I was [laughter] as physically up to it as he was. One day it was lunchtime. I very rarely took lunch so I was in the office. The only other person in the office was the receptionist at the front desk. She came into my office saying there’s somebody demanding to speak to the highest-ranking person in the office. I said, “Well, I guess that’s me right now.” This person came in. It was a mind-blowing experience. It was a tall person with a beard, a tight red sweater with fairly well-endowed breasts, tight jeans, and high heels and big bag. I said, “Please have a seat.” His basic complaint was that he’d been turned away from the hospital for refusing to have transsexual surgery. I mean, how do you deal with this? Nothing in my life had prepared me to deal with this kind of emergency. He had this ominous looking bag sitting on his lap. Then I said, “Well, let me see if I can get someone in the Medical School to talk to you,” or some calming words. He said, “Lady, I am homicidal. I need help fast.” I said, “Just sit here.” I went outside to the receptionist and said, “Call the police. Get them here as fast as possible.” This was just before the quad was paved. The police cars drove into the quad, drove up outside Building 10. The person turned around, saw the police car, and started running out of the quad. Of all the times I wanted a woman police officer, this was not the time. 42 It was a woman police officer and she was very smart. She said, “Don’t worry. He’ll trip on those high heels.” That’s exactly what happened. He tripped going down the steps, and the last I saw of him he was arrested and carried away. [laughter] Then I was scared. Marv Herrington [Marvin Herrington], who was chief of police or director of public safety--I think that is the euphemism--insisted on having an emergency button put under my desk for the future. So that is one anecdote [to explain what] Fred Glover [said]. Of course, maybe in Fred Glover’s day they didn’t have people wanting transsexual surgery, but I think the point he was making was the job is full of the unexpected. It’s sometimes physically threatening, and women shouldn’t be in it. [laughter] Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: That’s certainly a memorable experience. [00:20:56] Yes. It was a memorable experience. I just want to clarify. The individual had wanted transsexual surgery and the hospital-- Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:21:03] Yes. He’d been denied it. Yes. Interesting. [00:21:07] These were the early days of transsexual surgery. I was going to say, it must have been very early. [00:21:13] To answer your question about “that is no job for a lady” in another way--Dick was a wonderful, wonderful man. I learned a huge amount from watching him, but he did not suffer fools gladly. He was sometimes very harsh in the way he treated staff members. In fact, one quite senior staff 43 member said to me in private one day, “I don’t know how you can cope with working with him. He’s so demanding that he makes me dysfunctional.” I said, “Well, you know, I have the advantage of being around him all the time, and I see the ups and down. You see the pressures on people.” Fred saw both sides, the pressure you got from the unexpected, from the general public, and then the pressure you got from dealing with people who were constantly under great stress themselves. Marine-Street: Do you have an example you can think of of the kind of demanding boss that he was? Chu: [00:22:37] He would come across as short-tempered sometimes if people weren’t prepared. That’s the other thing I learned on the job [laughter], it’s the Girl Scout motto, “Be prepared”. If you want to defend the position you be sure to have done your homework. Sometimes there were staff members who hadn’t prepared as thoroughly as they might and it was a waste of his time. Marine-Street: Chu: Was this a nine to five job? [00:23:10] No. [laughter] It was not a nine to five job. In fact, I remember one day. I used to usually go into the office on Saturday morning after my tennis game. I was sitting there one day sitting in my tennis warm-up suit. Of course, you had to have a key into Building 10 at the weekend. One of the women lawyers who worked in Building 170 came in through Building 10, and she said, “Huh. So I see you’re still working at it,” or something. Then I was relatively new on the job. She said, “Let me tell you. Don’t ever expect anybody to say you’re doing a good job because it’s not going to happen.” 44 You know, again, you had to be very self-sufficient and be able to take the rough patches as they came along. Marine-Street: Chu: What types of letters did he get? What sorts of demands were made on him? [00:24:14] Oh, it was all over the map. Today I’m sure it’s incredibly different because people do such a lot of business by e-mail. These were all written, formal things. They could be alumni with a complaint. I can remember--I am not going to name the faculty member, but there was this angry alumnus saying that Professor X was a discredit to Stanford, that she had been at some event and described in detail how she was a poor representative of the university. There was that kind of problem. There were complaints from students [laughter] about everything under the sun. There was [laughter] one young man who used to come regularly to my office wanting me to support this movement among students that you should be a virgin until married. [laughter] There would be angry faculty. One day an elderly faculty came and sat in my office and saying, “When Wally [Wallace Sterling] was president”--this was Wallace Sterling who was Dick’s predecessor--”you could come in here at any time of the day and Wally would sit and chew the cud with you. And I now have to make an appointment two weeks in advance.” So you would have to placate them. Then there would be staffers. This is a story I don’t feel shy about relating. I got a telephone call from a faculty member in Engineering complaining bitterly about the laborious hiring process at Stanford. This was Hank Riggs [Henry E. “Hank” Riggs] who went on to be vice president of development and president at Harvey Mudd. This was a hard-driving, 45 forward-looking faculty member who thought Stanford’s ways were archaic. There would be community members complaining, “Why can’t we have access to Stanford foothills.” Government relations. I mean they came right, left and center, flying, flying, flying. As you can understand when you’re new, your first day on the job, you aren’t prepared for any of these assaults or how you decide to negotiate them. Marine-Street: Did you have some principles that you used to navigate your way through this job? Chu: [00:27:25] Always be fair, be courteous. As somebody who interviewed me for the job said, “This job requires grace under pressure. [laughter] Always be gracious.” Learn as much as you can about your community. The more faculty I knew, the better it was because I always had somebody to turn to for advice. That was the wonderful thing about the job. Yes, I was assaulted through Dick’s mail right, left and center, but I always had someone to turn to. There was always somebody who knew how best to navigate these problems. Of course, it was a big juggling act if you had fifty letters in a day and they all came from right, left and center. So, no, it was not a nine to five job. You asked for an example of how he was demanding. I would get a call at home on Sunday morning saying, “I need, this, this and this. Why am I doing this tomorrow? Why don’t I have the background preparation for this?” It was a tough job, but it was a wonderful job. It was incremental in my career through Stanford’s procedures. 46 Marine-Street: You not only were in charge of setting his calendar and prioritizing but interfacing with other people who provided information that he needed and making sure that they did a good job before it got filtered to him? Chu: [00:29:24] Right. Evelyn Betterton, his secretary--I think they don’t call them secretaries anymore [laughter]--but she was called secretary. Evelyn kept his calendar. She, as I said, was devoted to him and nothing was too much problem. There were these regular meetings of the vice presidents. Stanford seems to have had an exponential increase in vice presidents these days. [laughter] I notice almost everybody is assistant vice president for this or this or this. There was a vice president for business and finance. The provost was the senior vice president, the vice president for development, and then the deans of the seven schools. We used to meet regularly so I got exposed to the kind of issues that were priorities for them. The development office was very good about prioritizing for Dick --I mean, development, raising money, is a big factor in a president’s life. Marine-Street: Chu: Would you get special visitors a lot? [00:30:35] Oh, yes. [laughter] It was in Dick’s time that the Queen of England came. The Emperor of Japan came. Marine-Street: Chu: Yes. [00:30:55] Then there was a director of public events, Lois Wagner, who dealt with all the VIP visitors. They all have to be coordinated. If you were the queen or head of state coming, the security in advance is quite formidable. Marine-Street: That’s my question about this. I was thinking about these important visitors, ex-President Ford’s coming when you were Dick’s assistant, et cetera. There 47 must have been a lot of protocol surrounding this. Did protocol come under your purview or were there people you relied on to help you with some of it? Chu: [00:31:38] No. There were people I relied on. I think somebody [laughter] described me as a cog between all the big wheels. It wasn’t a very complimentary description, but I understood what he meant. You just need to make sure everything is functioning well. Marine-Street: I wanted to ask you about the students and their interactions with President Lyman. I want to back up a little bit to before you started working for him. You were at Stanford, or at least Sandy was working at Stanford and you were living nearby during the late 1960s, early 1970s, during this real time of antiwar protest and quite strife at Stanford. I wonder if you could tell me, from your perspective, how you witnessed those years. Chu: [00:32:38] Remember, I was mother of two children and working fulltime and commuting, so I wasn’t as engaged in Stanford. By 1975 when I started working at Stanford, it was all over, essentially. I remember John Schwartz, who was the general counsel, had on his desk a big rock that had been thrown through a window. There was a lot of vandalism. Windows were boarded up. The other issue I remember--there was a big move among students for South African divestment. Oh, this was actually a very funny. I came to work one morning. I used to get to work around eight o’clock. By the time I got there, there was a big ring of students arm-in-arm around Building 10. The police were there. All the people who worked in Building 10 were locked out. What to do? John Schwartz, the general counsel, after some discussion with other people, came 48 up to me and said, “It’s your job to go to the front door and say to the students, ‘My name is Jean Fetter. I work in this building. Please allow me access to my office.’” The thought was they were going to say, “No. We’re protesting, blah, blah, blah,” and they’d be arrested. I said, “Okay.” I went up to the door, repeated my words, and to my amazement, they parted and allowed me to put my key in the lock and in I went. Now I was in the building and everybody else was outside the building. [laughter] What was I supposed to do there? Of course, it was before the days of cell phones so we couldn’t communicate. Then when John Schwartz saw what had happened to me, everybody who worked in Building 10 did the same thing I did. Soon we were all in the building and the students--I don’t think any of them were arrested--but, anyway, that was the student protest about divesting from companies, corporations that did business in South Africa. Marine-Street: I found a picture in The Daily. It looks like the students actually were in the office while you were there. [shows newspaper article and picture] Chu: Marine-Street: [00:35:51] Oh, yes. They did come in and sit in the office at one point. Yes. I wondered if you could tell me about that day. This would have been in 1978. Chu: Marine-Street: [00:35:59] Let’s see. This was 1978. Do you remember that day at all? I was wondering if you could narrate it for us if you do. Chu: [00:36:15] [reading newspaper article] It went on for more than seven hours. [laughter] I told the group I thought President Lyman would be more than happy to meet with them when he returned from the East. Yes. I have a very 49 vague recollection of that story [laughter] which I suppose is indicative of [laughter] where this fell in my memories of the challenges of working at Stanford. Marine-Street: Chu: [laughter] It was just another day at the office maybe. [00:36:55] One of the other senior staff members was laughing at me afterwards because I said I didn’t think discussion could serve any constructive purpose. He said, “No point in using logic with these people. They would just laugh it off.” I don’t remember how it unfolded to tell you the truth. Marine-Street: I was wondering how they managed to all get in there. The other thing the story mentions is that you all set up a conference call so that he could talk to the students. He was in New York and there’s a picture of the students there around a conference table. Chu: [00:37:41] I only vaguely remember that. The anecdote I just told about my “name is Jean Fetter, please allow me access to my office,” that made a big impression on me because I was stuck inside the building with all these angry people outside, not knowing what to do. I’d only been on the job a year and a half then. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Your first major protest movement perhaps. [00:38:10] Yes. My first major protest movement. This is not the first time President Lyman would have encountered student protests. Chu: [00:38:18] No. No. 50 Marine-Street: In fact, many people I’ve talked to give him a lot of credit for how he dealt with the student protestors in an earlier time. I was just wondering if you had a kind of protocol at the office, or what his thought was, about how do you deal with student protestors. Chu: [00:38:38] I’ll go back to what I said earlier. You try to be fair, you try to be even-handed, polite, listen to people. That young man who regularly would come to my office about “we need to be virgins until marriage”--I can’t remember what the movement was called--there were moments when I really wanted to laugh at his earnestness, but you have to sit there and wait it out. No, we didn’t have any written protocol but I watched how Dick acted with people. When you work with somebody for quite a while and you see how they act under different circumstances, you sort of automatically mimic what they do. But you’re never prepared for certain events. Right? The guy who came in to my office, the transsexual, no protocol would have prepared me for that. I was in a state of shock. I actually shook afterwards. When he said, “Lady, I’m homicidal,” I mean I felt physically threatened by that. Marine-Street: It reminds me of something else that happened while you were working for President Lyman. A professor in the Math Department was murdered. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:40:10] Oh, yes. Karel deLeeuw. Yes. I wondered if you had any recollections of that. [00:40:14] I knew Karel. That was devastating. Absolutely devastating. There was also somebody who was murdered in the church. I think it was a graduate student wife. I don’t want to go into the details. It was gory, a gruesome murder. Campuses, especially Stanford, where the worst violence 51 you have is stealing a bicycle. We were unprepared for that. I must say I’m sympathetic on a national scale with how the president of the United States deals with these growing numbers of incidents of violence nationwide. They pop up unexpectedly. You’re never prepared for what’s going to happen. Marine-Street: It seems as though despite these threats and worries, you sort of had an open door. Chu: [00:41:19] Yes. An open door into Building 10. I haven’t walked by Building 10 in months. But I seem to remember the last time I walked by they had taken “President’s and Provost’s Office” off the door because it’s like a magnet. You know, people want to protest about something, this is the place to go. Marine-Street: Chu: What was President Lyman like when he dealt with students? [00:41:54] He was a very analytical thinker, and he was very direct. I think-tying this back to the person who said “he makes me dysfunctional when I’m around him because he’s so highly demanding and doesn’t bring out the best in me”--I think that was a reflection of the fact that he spoke his mind, which I found valuable. It’s wonderful, [laughter] especially when you see politicians today. You knew where you stood with him. Marine-Street: He decides that he’s going to go off to New York to work with the Rockefeller. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:42:41] Yes. You decide you’re not going to go. What happens next with you? [00:42:47] One of the other senior staffers who worked in Building 10 was Jerry Lieberman [Gerald Lieberman], who was made vice provost, dean of 52 graduate studies and research. He had an office upstairs from me in Building 10. Jerry and I became very good friends. We used to bike home. I always used to bike back and forth to work and so did Jerry. We used to bike along Alvarado Road together and have these nice conversations. When Dick left-Don Kennedy was appointed president. Don was very courteous and thoughtful. He came and said, “Would you like to stay on as my assistant?” I said, “Don, this is a very personal relationship. You have to have your own assistant.” So I was out of a job essentially. I think he and Jerry had talked, because Jerry came and said, “I’m taking on these new responsibilities in graduate studies and research.” They merged the office. It used to be Vice Provost of Graduate Studies and Dean of Research. I don’t remember the date when they were merged. He offered me the job as one of his Associate Deans. I was taken aback, but thrilled because I liked him. I wanted to stay working at Stanford and so I accepted. Then I moved next door, to Building 1 where I had an office upstairs with three assistant deans. Marine-Street: Chu: What types of things were you supposed to be doing in this new role? [00:44:34] [laughter] Jerry had some well-defined things, but at the end of the job description it said, “…and miscellaneous responsibilities,” which meant he could throw anything he wanted my way. The major position was to oversee the recruitment of women and minorities to graduate programs at Stanford, and that’s why I had three assistant deans working with me. One was African-American, one was Mexican-American, and one was NativeAmerican Indian. Ann Medicine, the Native-American, died subsequently. 53 Unfortunately, like many Native-Americans, she had childhood diabetes and died quite young. That was a challenging job for Ann, but because Native-American students were not always well prepared for graduate programs, especially at a place as selective as Stanford. That was a big job. I continued my interest in women in science and I took personal responsibility for the recruitment of women into science and engineering programs at Stanford. I didn’t do that single-handedly. There was someone in the Law School, for example, LaDoris Cordell, who worked with minorities and women in the Law School, someone else in the Medical School. It was a sort of oversight committee, but I took main responsibility for H&S [Humanities and Sciences] and Engineering. Then the other big responsibility, which was not part of the job when I took it, arose because of one of the problems Jerry threw my way. There was no formal graduate student grievance procedure. As you might well believe, with 8,000 graduate students at Stanford, many of them have grievances, and some of them can’t be resolved informally. So, working with Iris Brest in the general counsel’s office, I developed this graduate student grievance procedure. [laughter] My job with Dick trained me well for that because it was a variation, in a focused way, of all the things I’d seen in Building 10. Marine-Street: Let’s talk about the graduate student grievance procedure a little bit more. Do you recall what you and Iris came up with? Were there any principles that you thought should be involved in a grievance procedure? 54 Chu: [00:47:31] One of the issues that became apparent is that Graduate Student A in Department X complains to the department chairman. The department chairman makes some ruling. The student doesn’t like it so the student goes to the dean of the school. The dean makes some ruling, which could be the same as the department chair. The student doesn’t like it and goes to the provost. The provost--so you get the sense. There’s this hierarchy of appeal and there’s never any resolution. One of the things we wanted to do was sort of terminate how many times you could grieve and who had the authority to be definitive. We ruled out steps. I think it went department chairman, school dean, and then it stopped at vice provost for graduate studies and research. That was one principle. The other principle was everything had to be above board. If a student grieved about a faculty member, the faculty member was to be fully informed of the grievance. Everything was open. You couldn’t have these anonymous gripes against people for things that you couldn’t investigate. Marine-Street: Chu: Were the gripes typically related to evaluation of graduate work? [00:49:06] The ones I remember were quibbles about academic evaluation when the students felt they’d been unfairly treated. There was one terrible incident in one department in H&S where the student was mentally unstable and complained about harassment. It wasn’t an academic issue; it was harassment by the department. What it boiled down to was that the department didn’t know how to deal with somebody who was unstable. Marine-Street: Were allegations of sexual harassment treated through this grievance procedure? 55 Chu: [00:49:55] I don’t remember any. Sexual harassment became a big issue ten years later. I think there were incidents of sexual harassment, but these were academic grievances. I don’t remember ever seeing any sexual harassment issue until the early 1990s. Marine-Street: That might make sense historically. Let’s talk about the recruitment efforts for the women in science. How did you go about this? Chu: [00:50:42] A number of avenues. One was publications. I produced--I have no idea where my copy is--a booklet called Women in Science and Engineering at Stanford. I can’t remember how we limited it because it was quite expensive. I think it was if you were admitted to a department you were sent a copy of this very nice booklet which profiled women in the sciences and engineering at Stanford. That took a long time to put together. The other thing I did, and the minority deans did variations on this, too, was visits. I visited Smith, Mount Holyoke, Wellesley, you know, the traditional women’s colleges, as well as highly selective general coeducational institutions, talking about Stanford in the sciences. Not that it needs much talking up. I think women, in particular, needed encouragement to think about coming to Stanford, as did minorities. Then we coordinated with departments on how they went about recruiting. So it was a joint effort. But it’s a big job. You’re not dealing just nationally. I didn’t ever do any international travel, but some of the departments in Engineering, the whole department could be international students. Petroleum engineering, for example, many come from the Middle East. 56 Marine-Street: It seems like the departments for graduate admissions each have their own sort of different procedures. Was it like that then? Was there ever any effort to standardize it, or to at least make it more transparent? Chu: [00:52:49] Standardize. No, I don’t think we made any effort to standardize. I think the departments were all aware of the efforts that went on under Jerry Lieberman. Again, it’s communication within the university. Marine-Street: When you would meet with the different schools and go out and find promising, potential graduate students, would you then try to connect them with an individual faculty member, or just more of an awareness? Chu: [00:53:25] No. It was much more generic in its approach. And the minority deans all had their own networks, particularly the Native-American dean. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Right, where they would find out about promising students? [00:53:43] Yes. Did Jerry Lieberman’s office get into preparation of students, ones who were maybe really promising but they needed a little bit extra work to be able to handle a graduate program? Chu: [00:53:55] No. We had minority graduate student fellowships. There was a financial incentive from the dean’s office to the departments to help finance minority graduate students. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Was that money federal, do you remember, or was this internal? [00:54:19] I think it was internal. You’re really testing my memory. [laughter] Yes. I know it was a long time ago. Tell me just a little bit about what Jerry Lieberman was like. 57 Chu: [00:54:32] Jerry was the most wonderful, wise, even-handed person--I never saw him lose his cool temper. He was incredibly supportive of his staff. I was really blessed. He and Dick Lyman got on incredibly well together, but they were very different personalities. Jerry was New York born and raised. He had a wonderful loving wife, Helen, and his children he adored. He would do anything for his children. I remember [laughter] when I would go to him with some problem and he’d say, “What’s the bottom line here?” Yes. “I trust you. I know you have a problem. What’s the bottom line?” Then he would do what he could to support you to get out of it. One day I went to him. I was at my wit’s end. I won’t go into the details. I said, “Jerry, I can’t do this job any longer. It is really taking its toll on me.” Instead of berating me or saying, “Oh, come on. You can do it,” he just sat there and listened and said, “Yeah, this is a really tough assignment. I understand what you’re going through. And if it’s time for you to go, you have to do what you think is best.” Of course, then I said, “Jerry, of course, I’ll stay and help you.” We got over it. He also would have a weekly staff meeting. Let’s see, there were Pat Devaney [Patricia L. Devaney], me, Al Gelpi [Albert Gelpi], who was a faculty member in English, and Karlene Dickey, who oversaw all the graduate student applications, financial aid things. That was a huge job. We would all go for an hour once a week into Jerry’s office. He would always provide something nice to eat. I think we had a glass of wine. It was like five o’clock in the evening. We told him what had been going on in our lives that week, and he provided cheer and support. Oh, he was just 58 incredible. I can’t remember anybody, any faculty member who had a bad word to say about Jerry. He was really loved. He, of course, went on to be provost under Gerhard Casper, and continued to be helpful to me when I went on to be dean of admissions. When I had a big problem, Jerry was the first person I would think to call on. Marine-Street: Chu: Okay. [00:57:49] Wonderful. Jerry, I hope you’re listening to this. [laughter] Marine-Street: This is Natalie Marine-Street with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is August 30, 2016. I’m here again with Jean Chu, and we are performing the second part of the oral history interview. Jean, we covered a lot last time and we ended with your work with Jerry Lieberman [Gerald J. Lieberman] Chu: [00:00:55] I was associate dean of Graduate Studies and Research. Marine-Street: This would have been in the early 1980s I suppose. Chu: [00:01:04] 1980 to 1984. Yes. Marine-Street: Were there many other women in that kind of a senior level management position at Stanford? Chu: [00:01:11] Pat Devaney [Patricia L. Devaney] was an associate dean at the same time I was. There were no deans of schools who were women. That’s the senior level position. When I was assistant to Dick Lyman [Richard W. Lyman] I think I was among the senior women in the university. Sally Mahoney, who was registrar, was also sort of a leading woman. Marine-Street: Did the university at that time have any kind of programs or efforts to try to get more women into management positions? 61 Chu: [00:01:51] The short answer is not really. I was in the first class of what was called the management development program. It was fifteen or twenty people--I’m not even sure how they were selected--who were in midmanagement positions who the university had somehow identified as going on to other management positions. There was one other woman I remember, Cecilia Burciaga, who’s since died. She left Stanford and went to work elsewhere. It was people like John Ford, who was then associate vicepresident for development, who went on to be vice-president for development, Andy Doty [Andrew Doty] in public affairs, and me from the president’s office. It wasn’t specifically geared to women. Marine-Street: What kind of things did they do in the management development program that you can recall? I know it was a long time ago. Chu: [00:03:00] [laughter] There were leadership tests. I think we all had to take some kind of personality test. They gave us tasks. The one I remember vividly [laughter] was you are in a plane crash in the Mojave Desert and the plane goes down and you’re left in 120 degree heat. What do you do? There was a small group of us who were very vocal who said we would wait till it got dark and then we would march out. The other group which was a little more timid said--I perceived it as timid since I was in the aggressive group--that they would stay by the plane and wait to be rescued. The person who was leading this discussion said, “Well, of course, you should stay by the plane.” It was essentially providing a problem to a group of people and helping them come to some consensus. 62 I still laughed years later with one of the people who was in the program who said, “You dragged me kicking and screaming from that plane.” [laughter] It was that kind of leadership exercise. There was always somebody new leading the discussion. I think they met once a week. It was, as I said, not specifically geared to women. The main sustenance I got from women was this self-founded group started by Amy Blue [Amy J. Blue]. I don’t remember what her title was. She worked in Land and Buildings. Amy corralled a group of eight or ten of us to meet for lunch once a month. That group, believe it not, is still going forty years later. Marine-Street: No kidding. Chu: [00:05:03] Yes. Amy died tragically of a brain tumor. The rest of us are still going. Marine-Street: Would you describe it as a friendship group? Chu: [00:05:15] It’s a friendship formed on common experience of being women in isolated positions in management. Susan Schofield, Pat Devaney, me, Carol Marchick [Carol Marchick-Dressler], and Cecilia Burciaga were in the group. Cecilia also subsequently died unfortunately. And then there’s Margaret Ann Fidler who was in Student Affairs. I don’t think Margaret Ann was part of the original group but she joined a few years later, and there is Marlene Wine who was Don Kennedy’s [Donald Kennedy] assistant and Kathy Ku who is still working at Stanford. We take turns. We have a schedule. I’m the scheduler this year. We meet once a month for lunch or a light evening meal. It’s really wonderful. We continue to support each other, although we are all at different phases in our lives now. 63 Marine-Street: That’s great. Tell me what you mean when you said “women that were in isolated management positions.” Chu: [00:06:24] I was in the president’s office. Pat Devaney worked for the dean of research at that point. Susan Schofield worked in Humanities and Sciences. We were scattered in different units throughout the university so there was nobody within your immediate office who was a supporter. Marine-Street: You were all at a similar level in terms of hierarchy level? Chu: [00:06:51] Yes. Yes. Marine-Street: When you started in these management positions, did you feel there was a male-oriented culture in academic administration? Chu: [00:07:07] It was male-oriented by the fact that they there were all men. I don’t think it was discriminatory. I just think women had not yet moved into management positions. I mean the challenges of being a woman on the faculty in the 1970s, 1980s, the challenges were formidable. There wasn’t well-organized childcare. The societal expectations were different. They were striving to get tenure. To go into an administrative position on top of all that was almost asking too much. In a way, you know, it was hard deciding to leave physics but it turned out for the better for me because I didn’t have those stresses of tenure and doing research. And I was lucky enough to live within biking distance of my office. Marine-Street: Tell me a little bit about your decision to leave Jerry Lieberman’s office and what came next for you. Chu: [00:08:31] This came about in 1984 because the then dean of admissions, Fred Hargadon resigned his position at Stanford to work at the College Board 64 in New York. So Stanford, as usual, the president appointed a search committee of very distinguished faculty members. I think there were half a dozen of them. Three I remember from the committee partly because of questions they asked me. I don’t know whether it was Jerry who encouraged me to apply for it. Somebody did. I got into the pool and, to my amazement, was selected even though I’d never set foot in an admissions office. I think what was appealing was the fact that I had an academic background. That was atypical in the consortium of financing higher education, which was an organization of the thirty-five top institutions in the United States. One guy at Princeton who overlapped with me had a PhD in music, but we were the outliers. I think that was appealing to the faculty rather than having someone who had done an MA in education and then moved into administration. Marine-Street: As long as that admissions job interview was so memorable, what were some of the questions they asked you? Chu: [00:10:14] I have to give a little background before I [answer] this question. When you read an application--and I’m going to grossly over-simplify--the first thing you look at is the academic profile of a student, and they’re rated on a score of one to five, one being high and five being low. Similarly, since Stanford gets so many well- qualified academic students, there’s this supplementary criterion that we looked at which was extracurricular activities. It too was rated on a score of one to five, one being high and five being low. One of the faculty interviewers said to me, “Would you ever consider admitting a one/five?” It was a very leading question because what it meant 65 was [someone] focused entirely on academics and [not on] the extracurricular activities---which means art, music, drama, dance, athletics, public service, anything that you do outside of the classroom. “Would you consider admitting a one/five?” My answer was, “Yes, if you had a brilliant young scholar applying to Stanford.” I learned afterwards that behind that question was the concern of the faculty that Stanford was focused too much on the well-rounded student, not the three/three, but the one/three and the two/three, people who’d done everything, well rounded as opposed to angular or pointed students. Marine-Street: Is that the word that they used, angular or pointed? Chu: [00:11:58] Yes. The word angular was used. Marine-Street: Describe again what angular would mean. Chu: [00:12:08] If someone is very highly distinguished academically but is a nerd. They don’t do much else but would be identified as a child prodigy academically. Marine-Street: Was the angularity specifically for [certain] subjects or were there other areas? Chu: [00:12:32] I was offered the job, I accepted it, and I was immediately [laughter] bombarded with advice from faculty. I knew quite a lot of faculty from my other jobs, so they weren’t shy about giving me advice. One, a faculty member in statistics, Brad Efron [Bradley Efron], came and chewed my ear and said he wanted mathematics considered in admissions as we considered athletics. After a number of discussions, I think we agreed that we would identify 100 very talented mathematicians in the applicant pool. We’d 66 give the files to the faculty in the Math Department and the faculty would rate them like athletic recruits. Marine-Street: Interesting. Chu: [00:13:34] That made them very happy because they felt they’d been heard and they were happy to be part of a process. And it took the criticism off me that we were focused on admitting well-rounded students. Marine-Street: Do you remember the outcomes from that experiment or that new initiative? Chu: [00:14:00] There’s no equivalent of a Nobel Prize in math. There’s something called the Fields Medal, which comes much later in life. I’ve never done any tracking on whether any of those students got Fields Medals. They were in Math Olympiad competitions, but the most important thing to me was that the faculty in the Math Department felt happy that they had the material they wanted to work with, just as the coaches did. Marine-Street: Were there any other areas? Chu: [00:15:08] Yes. We broadened it to include faculty in music, art, drama and dance. We encouraged students either to come and audition in those fields, or to submit portfolios as part of their application. I was very enthusiastic about engaging faculty more in the admissions process. Marine-Street: Had there been a specific overture from faculty in the arts do you recall? How did that come about? Chu: [00:15:45] There was one faculty member in particular, Elliot Eisner, who’s in the School of Education but who was a specialist in art education who wanted more focus on art. The other faculty were very happy to go along with this idea of recruiting talented students. I was always enthused about 67 admitting a Yo-Yo Ma cellist who went to Harvard. In fact, there was a young pianist who was a transfer student from Foothill College who went on to win an international piano competition. Marine-Street: Oh, my. Chu: [00:16:35] It was thrilling to see all these students, these young talents, suddenly blossom. Marine-Street: Just to clarify, do you mean Yo-Yo Ma, the cellist, was an application that you saw, or someone like his quality? Chu: [00:16:48] No, no, no. I thought if Harvard can get a Yo-Yo Ma, why can’t Stanford have a Yo-Yo Ma. Marine-Street: A Yo-Yo Ma-like cellist. I see what you’re saying. Okay. Chu: [00:16:58] Yes. Yes. The initial push was mathematics, and then it expanded to art, music, drama, and dance. I don’t know if these programs continued. I’m very little in touch with the admissions office, as is rightly so. [laughter] It’s another generation. They should do their own thing. Marine-Street: Let’s back up a little bit. When you got this job, what was the reaction of people who knew you? Chu: [00:17:37] Oh. [laughter] That was interesting. Of course I felt incredibly honored to get the job, and along with this sense of honor was this sudden gripping of terror thinking, “Oh, my god, what am I doing? What have I let myself in for?” The day after the announcement of my position, The Daily had a cartoon of me standing in a large pair of man’s shoes. My predecessor, Fred Hargadon, was much beloved at Stanford. I would almost say a cult figure. I think the caption of the cartoon was something like “Large shoes to fill,” or 68 something. I was a little disheartened by that reaction, you know, as if I couldn’t fill it. It was enough to be the first woman in the job, and then the expectation was that I wasn’t going to be able to fill those shoes. Then a couple of days later, some women students wrote letters to The Daily complaining of the sexism of the remark, the sexism of the cartoon, and why didn’t they give me a chance to see how I could perform. That was one reaction of the students. I want to continue on this theme of students for a minute because the first couple of years in the job was very tough on a personal level. There were some reports about this angularity. Every week I got a number of invitations to go to dorms to meet with students, which I loved doing. I mean they’re the heart of the university. But I was invited to fraternities, and I very quickly figured out why. They were nervous I was going to admit just nerds, and where would their fraternities be if the university was full of nerds. My response was, “Look, why do you think being good at mathematics is mutually exclusive from being the kind of person you want in your [fraternity]? You can be very smart and [laughter] be interested in fraternal life.” I’m not sure that entirely satisfied them. That was one element of apprehension on my part. The other was there’s an annual event around Big Game time called Gaieties. Traditionally, Fred Hargadon had taken part. He had a walk-on part in Gaieties every year. The first year in the job the students were very nice and said would I join Gaieties. I said, you know, out of respect to Fred Hargadon, that was his 69 role and I wanted to relinquish it to my predecessor. A year went by and they asked me again. They said he’s been gone a year, would you come. I said Okay. I felt a little more comfortable. Okay, I’ll go. I think there were three or four performances of Gaieties. I came on the stage and somebody, I think in a slightly drunken state, shouted out from the audience, “Where’s Dean Fred?” I had to make a split second decision, to retort or to just carry on as if nothing had happened. I think I made the right decision. I just carried on as if nothing happened. [00:21:33] I walked off that stage that evening feeling as if someone had put a knife through me. It was really almost a public humiliation. That was tough. After three years or so, I was the dean, and he was gone to New York and not quite forgotten, but I was established. But it was tough dealing with that. As far as the faculty were concerned, I think I was uniformly welcomed. It was wonderful. I mean it didn’t hurt that my husband was on the faculty, so all his colleagues were happy. Marine-Street: Before we leave Fred Hargadon, what was he like? Why was he a cult figure do you think? Chu: [00:22:37] First of all, his physical appearance. He must have been six-footfive, six-foot-four, six-foot-five. I think there are some studies about height and effectiveness publicly. Your height immediately identifies you as a figure of authority. He was totally, totally committed to the job. He claimed to have read every application. Now, I know for a fact after a year on the job, it is physically impossible to read every application. I was working ninety and a hundred hours a week in the reading period. There is no way I could have 70 read every application. There was this myth that he had read the applications; I mean I did read every admitted student, but I couldn’t have read all the applications. There were these myths that were hard to dispel. He was a big athletic fan. In fact, when he left the Stanford men’s crew named a boat after him. So, yes. I think he did wonderful things for general student joie de vivre and making them feel part of Stanford. But it was a hard act to follow. Marine-Street: Did you continue participating in Gaieties after that first time? Chu: [00:24:20] I did. I participated every year after that. It was a time-consuming thing to do in November because I had to go to rehearsals. Marine-Street: What kind of things would they have you do? I mean did you play yourself? Chu: [00:24:33] Oh, no. You’ve been to Gaieties, right? Marine-Street: I have not. Chu: [00:24:37] Oh, you have not. Marine-Street: I was a graduate student, not an undergrad. [laughter] Chu: [00:24:39] Oh, okay. [laughter] I thought everybody had been to Gaieties. They’re shows that are composed by Stanford students. One year I was Glinda the Good. I rose up from the stage on a--it was a bit scary--on a platform and waving my wand. Then these little gnomes came out and I said, “What are your SAT scores?” [laughter] They built in funny things like that. One year there was a rather wild bunch writing the script. They gave me the script to prepare for rehearsal and I said, “Sorry, guys. I’m not going to say that.” It was something really risqué. I can’t remember what it was. Anyway, they laughed and said, “Oh, just testing the boundaries.” Marine-Street: Oh, that’s funny. 71 Chu: [00:25:45] That was part of the job I had not prepared for. I think Fred, to his credit, set the tone for the interaction of the dean of admissions at Stanford, which is unlike any other university. They [the deans] were known by name and welcomed. When I walked through commencement people cheered. It was a little overwhelming. Marine-Street: How did they start calling you Dean Jean? Chu: [00:26:26] Fred was Dean Fred, and I think it was lucky for me that my name actually rhymed with dean. That was very cute. Marine-Street: Did Fred have any advice for you when you took over the job? Chu: [00:26:40] The short answer--no. I think he just thought I should find my own way. I was lucky that I inherited John Bunnell who’d been his associate dean for almost all his tenure. John was incredibly experienced and was a very helpful guide to me. The first year I just decided I would inherit everything as I’d received it and follow the procedures they had. Then I started getting a little bolder and introducing changes to the process, like involving the math faculty which was unheard of. The other thing I did was I asked ten emeriti faculty if they would help us read some applications. But they found it so difficult to do. I’m quoting statistics from my tenure as dean. When you have 4,500 students with straight A transcripts, and you gave 100 of them at random to faculty, they all look good. Marine-Street: Set the stage for me a little bit. You’ve gotten this job. Where’s the office located? Tell me a little bit about the facilities. Then walk me through the process of it, how admissions worked when you took the job. 72 Chu: [00:28:13] Okay. We occupied half of the floor of the Old Union. I mean it’s now in a completely different building. The biggest part of the space was where all the files were located. In 1985 we had about seventeen thousand applications. The [administrative staff] were all women who were amazing. Three or four of them were Filipinos. Incredibly reliable hard-working people. Their job was to manually assemble each application file. You can imagine all these pieces of paper flying in from all over the world, not just from the United States. I’m going to sidetrack myself in this answer for a minute. These were called the “creds” people, the credentials people. One of the things I did in my first couple of months in the job, I role played everybody’s job to see what they had to do and how it could be improved. These four Filipino women were quite small, and their jobs in assembling the files involved pushing these incredibly heavy tubs of files around this large room and assembling them. I said, “We have to find a better way to do it.” We put a lot of money into getting files that could be electrically operated so that they had to just stand in front of a file and assemble the whole tub of rolling files. The files of individual applicants were filed alphabetically in these electrically operated containers, and every reference (or other relevant) letter needed to be added to each student’s application; this involved a lot of paper movement and essential accuracy in assembling each file. That was the credentials part of it. Then there were about twelve people who were assistant directors of admission. Their job in the fall quarter was to go and visit high schools and talk about Stanford, 73 explain the application process, and so on. We also held information sessions daily in the Old Union for visiting students and their parents. Then between January and April--that was the toughest part of the year-the non-credential staff devoted their whole time to reading, all day every day. It requires amazing discipline and concentration. My mother lived in London and I was always terrified that my mother was going to get sick in the reading period. Thank goodness, in seven years in the job she didn’t. Your personal life is annihilated. Fred had been adamant that all the reading was to be done in the twelve offices. No file was to leave the building. I said this is senseless. If you want to work at home, you check the files out, you take them home, and you bring them back in and you check them back in the next day. I think that made people’s lives much easier because they could work at home where they could be in their sweat suits. They didn’t have to dress up to come in the office. They could eat and drink whenever they wanted. I think that was a much appreciated change in the office. The other significant change I introduced, not in the first year because I didn’t know enough. Students were asked to submit a small photo of themselves. You can’t help but be affected by seeing a photo of someone. I think the tipping point for me when I raised this question was a young man who’d been in a terrible car accident and was totally disfigured. He’d been burned. You know, you couldn’t help but feel compassion. It’s bound to affect your judgment. [00:32:26] There were other examples. You know, women posing in seductive bikinis. There was one young man from New York [laughter] who 74 submitted a photo of himself in the nude throwing a discus. [laughter] You know, I think he thought it was funny. He was a very muscularly built young Olympian, but--. I had this argument with my two associate deans. They thought it was inappropriate and therefore he should not be admitted. I said, “Come on, guys. He’s a brilliant kid. It’s his sense of humor.” Anyway, we compromised. He was wait-listed and he went to Harvard. There you have it. So then I raised the question, “Why are we asking for photos?” I inherited a staff and they were all used to photos. They didn’t see anything wrong. There were a couple who thought it was questionable. I said I’m going to ask someone in Psychology. I found wonderful Al Hastorf [Albert Hastorf] who went on to be provost. I said, “Al, has there ever been any research done on the effect of appearance, i.e. in a photo, and judgment?” He said, “Yes.” He answered immediately. “Yes. It can be summarized in three words. Beautiful is good.” I said, “Okay. You just confirmed what I thought. No more photographs for Stanford.” Marine-Street: Interesting. Chu: [00:34:02] Yes. It was interesting. It took a little courage on my part to have gone through the process that I inherited and then to tweak it and make some changes. The more significant changes were the math and art, music, drama and dance. The photo was symbolic for me. Marine-Street: Were any aspects of the process computerized at that time? 75 Chu: [00:34:29] They hadn’t been, but I pushed to get it done. In the credentials area they would get sticky labels from the College Board with people’s SAT scores. The labels had to be peeled off and put in the right file. I said there must be a better way to do this. I think this was the beginning of computing in the admissions process. We got a computer-generated list of our applicants and the SATs on it and the files were automatically merged. That made the process a little easier for the credentials people. Marine-Street: Was there any kind of computer technology at all in the office in terms of when you were sorting ratings, or just keeping track of how many applications? Chu: [00:35:23] Yes. There was data entry. For example, at the end of the process I could ask for a computer printout of all the high schools in the pool and who’d applied from each high school and which ones we’d admitted. But then you had to plow through a foot high of computer output. How they manage it today with 43,000 applications is mindboggling to me. Marine-Street: Hopefully some of it is more automated. Chu: [00:36:03] Oh, yes. All the applications process now is online. One of my assistant deans went on to be dean of admission at Johns Hopkins. I went to visit him when I was living in D.C. I said, “Show me, John, how you read files.” It was on a computer screen. I said, “Gosh. You know, I like to have a pencil and my pen in my hand and scribble on our internal application form.” Marine-Street: Walk me through how you would go about reading an application. Chu: [00:36:39] Okay. The credentials people assemble all the material, which is an information sheet with basic stuff--address, family who’d attended Stanford, 76 that kind of thing. Then the next would be the student’s personal part of the application. Then the guidance counselor’s report, plus the two teacher references. Then any supplementary material. There was this file of maybe ten or twelve pieces of paper. At the front of it we had our own work card. It was a yellow card. John Bunnell, as the director of freshman admissions, would distribute twenty-five--I think it was twenty-five--files a day to read to the assistant directors and they would go through the file. They had columns on the worksheet where they made comments. First of all they had to recommend an academic rating and a nonacademic rating, the one-to-five scale I told you about. Then they also had to recommend Admit, Deny, or what we called Swim. They were given a quota as the first reader of a file of how many you could admit--it was like 20 percent--to cut down the pool. Then the process was repeated by a second reader. Marine-Street: The same applications. Chu: [00:38:18] The same applications. The second reader had the benefit of seeing the first reader’s comments. Then I and John Bunnell and my other wonderful associate dean, Parker Beverage, who went on to be dean of admissions at Colby, the three of us were the third readers on every file. (Parker was later replaced by Bill Tingley, sadly now deceased.) We assessed the first two reader’s comments, added our own comments, and we made the final call on Admit, Deny, or Swim. We also made the final call on the academic and the nonacademic rating. The Admits were relatively straightforward. Not always. The Denies were relatively straightforward. It 77 was the set in the middle, the Swims, that went back for a fourth and a fifth reading. Then we had to decide. By then we knew how many we’d admitted. Our goal was, as I remember, 2,500 to admit by April 1, and we added those Swims. They were either admitted, denied or wait-listed. There were a couple of hundred put on the wait list each year. Marine-Street: What kind of things would you write on the card? Chu: [00:39:50] You’d make some comment on academic credentials saying “Hasn’t taken any AP classes, although ten are offered in his high school.” There was one kid [laughter] who was top of his graduating class from a small school in Colorado. He was the valedictorian but there were only two in his class. [laughter] We’d say something like “Misleading to be called valedictorian in a class of two.” Some academic comment. And then a summary of the references. We’d say things like “Guidance counselor clearly doesn’t know her.” This is a comment from a guidance counselor about an applicant that I will take to my grave. “His forehead has been touched by the finger of God.” You’d say something like, “How about that for praise?” Then you’d make a summary record of why you were recommending Admit, Deny, or Swim. I think the process is quite different now. I think they read by high school. We didn’t read by high school, we read by individual. Marine-Street: Talk about that a little bit. How familiar were you with the types of high schools or the specific high schools that the applicants were coming from? Chu: [00:41:36] At Stanford, the two high schools in California are Palo Alto High School and Gunn. They’re local. Many of them have Stanford faculty 78 connections or Stanford staff connection, and they wanted to come to Stanford. Or conversely [laughter], therefore, they wanted to get away from Stanford. In the computer printout, I did quite a lot of studying of data. I wanted to know which were the biggest feeder schools. There are 26,000 high schools in the United States. You can’t know every one. I would say probably the top fifty, or hundred, you knew these produced good kids for Stanford. All the East Coast private schools--Andover, Exeter, and St. Paul’s, Groton-these very distinguished elite private schools. These were toughies in that how do you weigh that against a kid who comes from a rural high school from non-college educated parents. Yes, you have to have background information as a context. Judgment calls come into play in a subjective admissions process. It’s very different from, for example, the UC system. If you get certain SAT scores, certain grades, and the required courses and you’re in the top--what it is, I don’t know today--12 percent of your graduating class, you know you’re going to get admitted to the UC system. There’s no predictability in the Stanford process, and it’s been criticized for that, although I think it’s very rare that a high school guidance counselor would say, “Why did you admit him?” They know. Or, “Why did you admit her?” Marine-Street: Did you have any kind of firm cutoffs for GPAs or SAT scores that you wouldn’t even consider if they were below a certain [score]? Chu: [00:44:00] Not firm cutoffs, but there were probabilities. And truth in advertising--again, I don’t know if it’s still done--we used to publish an academic profile of applicants, admits, and enrolling students by SAT scores 79 and high school GPA. High school GPA can be very misleading. For an example, some schools don’t give grades so you don’t have a GPA to go on. Some high schools don’t rank students. You could see that the higher your SAT score, the higher the probability of admission. I once was talking to an alumni group and one person said, “How come you admitted this student with 500 verbal scores?” I said, “Let me give you an example of somebody who may score 500 on the verbal. A Korean student whose father is in the diplomatic corps who moved to Amsterdam, has lived in Paris, Berlin, and Brussels, and is quadrilingual, and takes the SAT. I wouldn’t do very well in those circumstances.” But he was a fascinating student. You know, that’s the wonderful thing about the subjective process. The subjective process allows subjectivity, but it’s much harder to defend than the UC system. Marine-Street: Were there certain metrics that you paid attention to? Kind of macro level metrics that you worried about as the dean of admissions? Chu: [00:45:46] This is going to segue into athletics. I’ll let you tell me when you want to move on to that subject. Marine-Street: Okay. Chu: [00:45:55] No. I mean one of the advantages of--to use the example I used before-- having portfolios in art, music, drama, and dance [is that] you attracted certain students in those disciplines. That contributes to the overall class at Stanford. I was just reading in today’s Stanford Report, and I could only think with sorrow of a typical Stanford undergraduate. A young man, twentythree year old co-terminal student. It said he died in a running accident. Then 80 it went on to give his credentials, that he was a scholar at his high school and played piano, all-state jazz bands--you know, these incredible talents come nationwide. Stanford is very fortunate in attracting such an incredible pool of people. Marine-Street: How did you know how many students you were allowed to admit? Chu: [00:47:05] Again, data analysis. [laughter] I looked at previous years, what are called yield rates. That’s the percentage of students who accept over those who were admitted. In my time, it never got above 62 percent. I’m amazed. The only person who beat us was Harvard. It was in the 70, 72 percent range. Of course, very good kids get admitted to five or six schools and they can only choose one. That affects everybody’s yield rate. Now they have the early decision process at Stanford and that ties in much more of the class. How did you know how many to admit? You knew what the previous year’s yield rate was and you started with that number in mind to produce a freshman class of 1,600 students. The one year that went astray was 1989 when the Loma Prieta earthquake hit Stanford. I think understandably, many students and their parents didn’t want their kids going to an “earthquake school.” So the yield dropped by 2 percent that year. Marine-Street: Hmmm. That’s a pretty significant number. Chu: [00:48:27] Yes. But it went up [laughter] the following year. Marine-Street: Memories are short. Chu: [00:48:33] Yes. Now I think Stanford surpasses everyone in yield rate. Marine-Street: Yield rate was something that you worried about? 81 Chu: [00:48:46] Oh, yes. Absolutely. In fact, I used to joke with students when I would visit high schools and they would talk about the anxiety of the process. I said, “Well, look. You have to look at it this way. Between January 1 and April 1, you’re the ones worried. Between April 1st and May 1st, we’re the ones who are worried. We’re offering you admission, but will you come?” That was another thing I introduced at Stanford. Fred Hargadon did not, for reasons that I don’t understand, want to have students visiting campus in any organized fashion between the time they were admitted and the time they had to send in their decision letter. We introduced ProFro Weekend. Thousands of people come now. It’s the students and their parents. I think it’s wonderful. It’s a way of giving them exposure to the institution. They can talk to students. I think one of the reasons I heard Fred didn’t like it was, you know, you get into a dorm and you talk to some student and you don’t hit it off. That affects your decision; therefore, you don’t come to Stanford. Marine-Street: Talk a little bit more about that. What made you decide to do that? Were other colleges doing it? Chu: [00:50:18] I think it’s become much more frequent now that everybody has these organized college visitation weekends. The problem is you have like a four-week window to do it. Some of the prospective freshman weekends-they’re mainly always on a weekend to avoid conflicts with school and if parents want to travel. If they do it together then students have to choose— ”Do I go to Princeton or do I go to Harvard? How do I organize my time?” I’m all for truth in advertising. You know, let people come and explore and 82 sit in on lectures and meet with other students. Stanford is such a physically enticing place that I think we have [laughter] a huge advantage. Marine-Street: Do you have any memories of how the first weekend went? Any memories of what you had planned or how it went off? Chu: [00:51:19] It was a little overwhelming because it was the first time and we didn’t know how many people would come and we didn’t know how to organize it. It was a learning process. You know, where were students to be housed? They were encouraged to bring sleeping bags and sleep on dorm floors. Then you have things you never thought about--what happens if they get their first taste of alcohol in the dorm, or the moral responsibility of this organizing group, or your first sexual experience when you’re on a ProFro Weekend. It’s not something you encourage but you have to anticipate that there will be incidents. Marine-Street: How did you plan for those? Chu: [00:52:18] [laughter] I think the first time we didn’t think of any of these. Or we thought of few of them, but it was not very well organized. I don’t remember how many students came. One very energetic member of my staff, who was himself a Stanford graduate, was in charge of the ProFro Weekend, as we called it. Then it grew like Topsy. It was great to see it. We got better at doing it. Now it’s incredibly highly organized. Marine-Street: Yes. Let’s take a break. Chu: [00:52:52] Okay. Marine-Street: You had mentioned some of the ways you evaluated applications on academic quality and extracurriculars. What did you do about character issues or personal qualities? Chu: [00:00:38] Of course, that’s a very important thing for consideration. I didn’t mention it immediately with academic and nonacademic evaluation because those are much more easily put on a scale of one to five. Personal qualities are very tough to get at and you rely on the teacher references and the guidance counselor report and in some cases, what the student reveals in his or her application. We did discuss whether we could try to evaluate a person’s qualities on some numerical scale to help us keep better track, but it’s almost impossible to do. [laughter] For example, I remember one applicant admitted to being an admirer of Adolf Hitler. Now, that’s not an academic or a nonacademic criterion fit, but it says something about personal qualities. There was an interesting experiment which is relevant to that subject. I used to have frequent conversations with the dean of students who was then Jim Lyons [James W. Lyons]. Jim was the person who saw all the honor code violations, plagiarism, incidents in the dorms in some way. One day, for 85 example, he said, “Okay, Fetter…” as he called me, “How come you admitted someone who urinates in a bowl of carrots?” Apparently this is what a student did. Anyway, after Jim’s goading me for a long time, I said, “Jim, let’s do an experiment. We’ll have a retreat with your staff and my staff. You pick out six baddies and six goodies from a particular year. I’ll pull out their applications. We’ll blank out all the names and other personal identification. Your staff will read them all and say which are the goodies and which are the baddies. And my staff will do the same.” We concluded there was no way you could predict. For example, there was one where the high school guidance counselor said, “Future state senator.” [laughter] [That student had committed] double plagiarism. Anyway, that made Jim and his staff a little more sympathetic to the job we designed, but it also gives you a sense of the challenge of assessing the qualities that are going to lead [to success]? How do you measure success? Success is measured in very different ways. Academic success is pretty straightforward, but--. Marine-Street: One of the things I’ve always wondered is why Stanford doesn’t admit people to a specific program, the Engineering School, for example. Chu: [00:04:09] Yes. I’m actually in favor of that [Stanford’s system] having gone to a university where I knew I was going to major in physics. Some schools, for example UC Berkeley, admit to the School of Engineering. I’m a firm believer that an eighteen year old does not know whether engineering is his or her destiny. I saw a number of cases at Stanford in my own freshman advisees-the ones who were quickest to declare a major in the first quarter of their 86 freshman year were the ones who most quickly changed it. [laughter] The opportunity for choice I think is wonderful. Marine-Street: Was that a value that was strongly articulated to you when you took the position in terms of this is the way that we do it at Stanford? We don’t admit to specific departments? Chu: [00:05:14] It was a given. I don’t know who articulated it. One [laughter] of the interesting things that arose in my interview for dean of admissions was that I went in with a guidebook. It was called the Committee on Undergraduate Admission and Financial Aid. It was a committee of the faculty senate. There was one clause which said, “The dean of admissions has the authority on all admits with the exception of those made by the president.” When I went [laughter] to my interview I said, “Well, what are these exceptions made by the president?” The faculty were totally dumbfounded. They’d never heard of it either. Anyway, I said, “Well, I don’t want to be taking a job under those circumstances.” After I was in the position the faculty senate voted to amend that [clause] and the president is no longer in it. Marine-Street: Chu: There’s a historical reason for that language which we’ll have to uncover. [00:06:28] Yes. Yes. I’m sure there’s a historical reason. In fact, my counterpart--I won’t name the Ivy League school--asked me, “Would the president of Stanford ever admit a basketball player?” I said, “Absolutely not. That’s my domain and I would resent any intrusion.” 87 He said he’d been away from campus and in his absence his president had admitted a basketball player. Marine-Street: Chu: Interesting. [00:07:03] I think that’s probably the historical precedent at Stanford when, in those days, that was how it was done. Marine-Street: You mean the president’s office never called you up and said, “Oh, could you pay special attention to this file?” Chu: [00:07:21] There was one occasion where I received a letter from Don Kennedy [Donald Kennedy] about an applicant. I won’t go into the details. I called Don and said, “Don, you know if I put this letter in that student’s file, the first and the second reader are going to be so influenced by having a letter from you in there that they’re going to feel obliged to recommend admit.” I said, “What I’ll do is keep the letter in my drawer and I’ll use it at my discretion.” It turned out the kid was admitted anyway so it was moot. [laughter] Don was wonderful. He was very understanding. I think he’d been under some pressure to send me a note. That was the one and only instance I remember. I was totally independent. It was a really wonderful system. Marine-Street: Chu: That’s amazing. [00:08:19] It means that when the president gets letters complaining about admissions decisions, the president can rightfully say “This person doesn’t report to me. This is not my jurisdiction. The decisions are made by the dean of admissions.” I reported to the provost. Marine-Street: Chu: You reported to the provost hierarchically. [00:08:53] To the provost. Yes. 88 Marine-Street: What kind of goals or visions did they have for you, or were you more independent? Chu: [00:09:03] It was very interesting. There was little interference from the Committee on Undergraduate Admission and Financial Aid. These were all faculty members and they weren’t intimately involved in the process, therefore, they were really strongly influenced by what I and the director of financial aid, Bob Huff [Robert P. Huff], would say to them. They didn’t interfere. Marine-Street: Chu: Sounds like you had quite a lot of power. [00:09:42] I didn’t look at it that way. I don’t like to look at it that way [laugher] because, you know, I was responsible to people. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: But a lot of authority. I mean a lot of independent authority. [00:09:54] I had a lot of authority. Yes. Yes. All right. You’ve gone through all of this rigmarole about figuring out who you’re going to admit. Tell me a little bit about sending out the letters and what that time of year was like. Chu: [00:10:09] Totally overwhelming. First of all, I was physically and emotionally drained after twelve weeks of reading files. Then I decided I wanted to personally sign every admit letter. That was 2,600 admit letters. Since I played tennis, I wore my tennis elbow thing for protection because I would sign my name and then I’d say something personal, like, “Natalie, terrific.” I had a number of adjectives. “Natalie, great” or “Natalie, excellent.” Some students told me afterwards they’d get the letter and go like this [makes a rubbing gesture to see if it was really ink] to make sure it wasn’t laser printed. 89 [laughter] “Did she really sign it?” Yes, I really signed it. One year I was so amused--I got a telephone call from a student saying, “Thank you, Dean Fetter, for admitting me. I had a question. At the bottom of my letter you said, ‘Thomas, terrific.’ What does that exactly refer to?” [laughter] I said, “Well, Thomas, you know, generically terrific.” [laughter] Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, funny. [00:11:32] It’s funny how people take it literally. That was one challenge. After being physically and mentally exhausted, I had to go through this physical act of signing the letters. Then there was this great ceremony of delivering them to the post office. Then two days later, the fallout. I got calls from guidance counselors, principals, parents, alumni, faculty. One of the most memorable was [when] my secretary came into my office and said, “Mrs. T”-- I remember the name--”is there outside in the lobby with her daughter who was not admitted and she refuses to leave until you meet with her.” I said, “Well, better get it over and done with.” She came in and I had Jacqueline (I’ll call her), the daughter’s file in front of me, and of course, the mother wanted gory blow-by-blow detail of why she wasn’t admitted. The poor kid was sitting there. There were certain things I couldn’t reveal. I mean she had an excellent academic record, but there were certain things in the reference letters that I could not reveal, so I had to dance around it. The best way to deal with it is to try and put it in context and say, “Look, we had 17,000 applications and 4,500 straight A students. You were good. But in that field, there was nothing you could do about the competition.” Anyway, the mother stormed out. She said, “She’s 90 going to Berkeley and she’ll apply for transfer admission,” which is exactly what she did and she was admitted. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: She was? [00:13:29] Yes. Oh, interesting. [00:13:31] I haven’t talked about transfer admissions. Let’s see. When was the deadline? I think March, April. It was soon after the freshman decisions. We got about twelve hundred transfer applicants. Many of them had applied as freshmen, so we kept the files. I had the benefit of a transfer file and a freshman application file. That mother-daughter visit was one kind of fallout. Then [there were] guidance counselors. I was visiting a friend in Minnesota and we were in an art museum sitting down having lunch. This was after the admissions process was over. I was sitting there having lunch and a woman [who was a guidance counselor] came tearing up to me and said. “How dare you not admit--” and she reeled off the name of the student. “I’ll never trust the Stanford admissions process again.” [laughter] My friend was absolutely dumbstruck. I said [laughter], “You never know where you’re going to be, sitting in an art museum having lunch--.” Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, my goodness. [00:14:51] The toughies were faculty. There are a couple of Stanford faculty who will never speak to me again for not admitting their kids. Marine-Street: Chu: What was your strategy for dealing with all of these unhappy people? [00:15:09] Try and do your best to explain. You know, there’s a limit to how effective that can be. It’s a painful process for a parent to go through. In 91 many cases, [it’s] the first time the son or daughter has [not] been rewarded. The other thing I tried to do was to help them put it in perspective. I’d say, where has he/she been admitted, and it’s a wonderful school, and it may turn out to be a much better match. Stanford is not for everyone. This is a large research university, but again, it falls on deaf ears for the most part. All you can do is your best. Marine-Street: Chu: Did you ever reverse a decision? [00:16:04] Only a reverse from accepting to not accepting. This was an interesting case. After the admissions letters went out and people had accepted, they were contacted by various groups, clubs on campus who thought they would be interested in joining. This young man--I think he wrote a letter--said, “Why am I getting all this literature from the Black Student Union?” I had his file in front of me. There was certainly one phone call that took place. I don’t remember the order of events. I said, “Well, because you self-identified as African-American.” He said, “You mean, I was only admitted”--I mean this was sort of blackmailing--”I was only admitted because I was African-American?” I said, “No. You self-identified as African-American.” He said, “Well, I’m not.” I said, “Well, that’s misrepresentation and that is grounds for withdrawal of your application.” I looked into it further and he’d misrepresented himself on taking the SATs, too. He claimed he was African-American and he was actually a 92 Caucasian student. We withdrew his offer of admission. Then I had a moral dilemma, should I let my colleagues at other institutions know. I don’t remember what I did with that one. There are all these terrible moral dilemmas that came up. Marine-Street: I was wondering when you had all these moral dilemmas it seems like they would just keep you up at night. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:17:59] Yes. How did you deal with this kind of pressure and what grounded you? [00:18:03] That’s a very good question. It reminds me of something that sustained me through this job. Sandra Day O’Connor was a Stanford law graduate and in fact, a Stanford undergraduate, and then, of course, she went to serve on the Supreme Court. I read an interview of hers one day. Somebody asked her “How can you manage to go to sleep at night [when] you have to make all these terrible decisions?” She said, “You make the best decision you can and you move on.” Otherwise you would become dysfunctional. You know, the best decision you can. You can’t always claim it was right--whatever right means, whatever right is. [laughter] Marine-Street: Chu: Did the fervor die down relatively quickly after the letters went out? [00:19:01] It was probably a good month. Then [there were the] instances after the event, like being in that art gallery in Minneapolis or wherever it was. It was Minneapolis, I think. That guidance counselor attack came out of the blue. [laughter] 93 Marine-Street: I know you must have had a lot of correspondence from disappointed people as well, and some of it not very nice. Did you answer every letter? Chu: Marine-Street: [00:19:34] I tried to. Did you ever just think, “Why am I answering all these nasty letters? Do I owe these people an explanation?” Chu: [00:19:43] I think it was for me a matter of principle. You know, we did the best we could. They were very, very difficult decision to make, and you try and help people see what the circumstances are. Some heart-rending cases. There was more than one case of a student we admitted with a terminal illness. Really tragic. Tragic circumstances. Marine-Street: Chu: Would you talk as a team when you made the decisions? [00:20:33] I only remember one where I would do the process differently, although I don’t know how I’d handle it with 44,000 applications. I think there is some benefit of a team approach. But ultimately the responsibility was mine and I thought I had to make the decision. I was the one who signed the letters. I didn’t sign all the denial letters. Marine-Street: How did it work? You’re evaluating people on their individual qualities and their grades--what kind of attention was given to what the whole body of a class looked like? How did you manage that? Chu: [00:21:28] One thing I did have a horror of--what if we admitted only white males who wanted to major in engineering? Fortunately it never worked out that way. I was very happily surprised. Without any social engineering of any kind, the class turned out to be almost half and half men and women. Yes. I 94 think it’s now slightly more women than men, but I don’t keep up with the data on those fronts anymore. Marine-Street: What about, “Oh, we haven’t admitted anybody who’s interested in dance this year, or anybody who’s interested in psychology?” Chu: [00:22:18] No. I mean we’re going to talk about athletics in depth. That’s the only situation. Apart from--as I mentioned earlier--the math, music, art, drama, and dance. The other thing I haven’t mentioned in terms of diversity is that Stanford is truly a need-blind admissions process. We’re fortunate in being an institution that is so well endowed that it can genuinely afford to make decisions need-blind. I don’t know if it’s changed. When I had a conversation with the current dean about eighteen month ago, it hadn’t changed. The only exception to that rule was international students. The director of financial aid was given a pot of money--I think it was $400,000--for international students, because if you admit one impoverished student from--let me choose a country--Pakistan--you could almost wipe yourself out. Two, three impoverished students from Pakistan. We admitted the students and then the names were handed to Bob Huff, who was then director of financial aid. I was very happy that we were two separate offices because I could genuinely say [when asked about aid] “I don’t know anything about the details of the financial aid package.” Of course you could guess if both parents were MDs or both parents were venture capitalists-that’s an unlikely scenario--but [laughter] that they wouldn’t need much financial aid. Of course, as you well know, socioeconomic status is correlated with academic achievement, particularly SAT scores. 95 Marine-Street: Chu: No kind of master social plan that you had? [00:24:37] No. No. Now, in terms of diversity, we made every effort to seek out the best minority students nationwide. There were three targeted groups, Native-Americans, which was the toughest because it’s such a small set, African-Americans, and Mexican-Americans. There was one undergraduate who argued with me till I was blue in the face trying to give counterarguments as to why Native-Hawaiian students were not a targeted group because he was Native-Hawaiian. Then you could argue why AsianAmericans in general aren’t a special targeted group. This latter presented a fascinating case. My second year the allegation was made by a Stanford undergraduate that Stanford had an upper limit on the number of Asian-Americans admitted to the freshman class. He had statistics that were compelling. It was 7 percent. I said, “Jeff (the name of the student), that’s a very serious allegation. We will look into it.” The provost appointed a faculty committee to review any bias in the admissions process against Asian-Americans, chaired by Professor Jeff Wine. It turned out there were two factors that played a role. Number one, athletics. In those days, very few Asian-Americans were recruited athletes. It’s changed. [laughter] Second was the alumni legacy tip. Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, interesting. [00:26:34] Since there had been very few Asian-Americans, there were very few legacies. Jeff Wine, the faculty member in Psychology who chaired this committee said, “Jean, even before we give you the results of our investigation, I can tell you the fact that we’re looking into it is going to 96 influence this year’s class because your unconscious bias will be conscious.” When I started as dean in 1984, the freshman class was 7 percent AsianAmerican. When I left it was 24 percent. Marine-Street: Chu: That’s a big difference. [00:27:17] Harvard and I think Princeton are currently undergoing investigations for exactly the same charge. This is a terrible generalization, but in this case I think it’s true. Since I’m married to an Asian-American now I can say that the role of education in Asian-American families is so dominant that these kids are often among the very best applicants academically. I remember visiting high schools in Southern California. I think I visited eight high schools in three days. Every valedictorian was Asian-American. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Interesting. [00:28:04] Yes. Fascinating. What do you think changed during those years as a result of the investigation? Did you make any conscious changes to your policy? Chu: [00:28:13] We brought in a faculty member--I think it varied from year to year which department they came in from--to talk to us about unconscious bias. It was a generic thing. My bias was against cheerleaders. Right? [laughter] I grew up in England and there wasn’t such a thing as cheerleaders and I couldn’t imagine that a cheerleader would ever get a PhD in nuclear physics, for example. I mean it’s an absolutely ridiculous kind of bias. Everybody has some. And it goes back to the use of photographs. When you see a photograph of somebody, like it or not, you have some bias about it. What did we do about the three groups that we targeted? There were three assistant 97 deans, each of those ethnicities, and we used every means possible to attract the best students from those cultures. Marine-Street: Chu: Can you give me some examples of what kind of things you would do? [00:29:35] From the College Board, which does the standardized testing, you can purchase minority lists, so we would request lists with scores above 600. I don’t remember what the cutoff was. Then we would write individual letters to each of those students. I had a very painful example of a challenge in this scenario. The wonderful first Mexican-American dean I hired, Chris Ponce, I promoted to be the sort of general manager of the office, you know, all the things that you need in an office--HR and payroll, that kind of stuff. That left me without the Mexican- American who was responsible for recruitment and attraction efforts. I had a little search committee, and I was not happy with the candidates they presented and I didn’t immediately make an appointment. You’d have thought hell had broken loose. I was summoned before the MexicanAmerican community to meet in El Centro Chicano, which was their central office space in the Old Union. It was horrible. It was a night meeting and the room was packed. There must have been 150 people there. You’d think that I hadn’t shown any interest, any effort. I felt as if the whole universe in that room was against me. I tried to defend myself and said, you know, “Look. The results speak for themselves. Look at the people we have at Stanford now as a consequence of these efforts.” Anyway, I said, “I’m not willing to hire somebody that I don’t think can do the job well.” That was my defense, 98 which I thought was a reasonable defense. They felt they didn’t have anybody to represent them in admissions. Marine-Street: It was important that the person actually be Mexican-American themselves? Chu: [00:31:52] I think so. Yes. I think to the Mexican-American community that was very important. I said, “Look, I seek your help. Help me find somebody.” Anyway, we did eventually appoint somebody and the furor died down. Marine-Street: You would purchase these lists and send letters. Did the assistant deans go and visit students as well? Chu: [00:32:14] They visited, yes. They had responsibility for coordinating efforts. I tried to visit maybe fifty schools a year myself. I mean these visitations are very time-consuming. You have to fly to Place X, rent a car, find your way around to four different high schools. Anyway, I was visiting a high school in Forth Worth, Texas. The guidance counselor said, “You know, I’m amazed your football coaches haven’t gone after Tom,” and he gave me the guy’s name. A young African-American. He said, “He’s very smart. He’s a great football player. He’d be a great catch.” I came back and gave the name to one of the coaches, and lo and behold, he was admitted to Stanford. We all tried to contribute in different ways. Marine-Street: What kind of directives did the university have for you in terms of diversity? I know there was a big increase during the time that you were dean in the percentage of [minority] students. Chu: [00:33:35] Again, the guidelines for the dean of admissions are set by the Committee on Undergraduate Admission and Financial Aid. They were the 99 ones, for example, who determined that there should be a cap on the amount of financial aid given to international students. They also determined the targeted groups. Marine-Street: How frequent was your interaction with that committee? How did that interaction occur? Chu: [00:34:05] We met maybe once a month. You know, any big committee assignment for a faculty member, you have to be extraordinarily devoted to really dig in the trenches [laughter] with the troops because they have their own job. What it usually amounted to is me making some presentation, Bob Huff making some presentation, and them asking some questions. Every year I gave a report to the Faculty Senate, and every year I gave a report to the Board of Trustees. That kept me on my toes. Marine-Street: Were there certain things that they were very interested in, those different bodies? Chu: [00:34:54] Trustees were interested in yield rate. Why wasn’t the yield rate higher? [laughter] I had a ready answer for that. I said, “You know, I could make the yield rate 100 percent, but the faculty just would not like the class we admitted.” There are tradeoffs here. You want to admit the very best students, and the very best students are going to have lots of offers. Marine-Street: Was there a small group of colleges that were the main benchmarks that you measured yourself against? Chu: [00:35:32] Oh, yes. Harvard, Princeton, and Yale. MIT. We all got to know each other very well. I’m amazed. Bill Fitzsimmons [William Fitzsimmons], who was the dean at Harvard when I was dean at Stanford is still in the job. 100 He was an ice hockey player at Harvard. We all were very good friends. I mean it was friendly competition. My counterpart at MIT, we laughed every year because we were big competitors for the Asian-American applicants. We garnered the biggest set of Asian-Americans, MIT and Stanford, because they were often prospective science and engineering majors. Marine-Street: Chu: Did Stanford’s process differ a lot from those other schools? [00:36:27] I think it did when I was dean in the way we read. They read by committee and they used alumni in the process, and Stanford didn’t. It does now I think. You know, Rick Shaw [Richard Shaw], who’s the current dean, was the dean at Yale. When I first knew him he was an assistant dean at UC Berkeley. Then he migrated eastward and went to Yale and then came back to Stanford. I think people bring what they think works best. Marine-Street: Chu: What do you mean they read by committee? [00:37:14] They read by region. There would be one director in the office who was responsible for Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island. I don’t know what their geographical distribution was. There was a group that read all the applicants from that school or from that area, and then they were all filtered--I don’t know how they did it--each area was prorated on how many kids they could admit. Then that was all fed to the dean. Marine-Street: Chu: They were similar in terms of the kind of criteria? [00:37:51] Oh, yes. There are interesting games [laughter] places play. I met a young woman a couple of years ago who was admitted to Stanford and I said-we knew her through a personal friend--”So where else did you apply?” She was interested in Duke, but she didn’t get admitted. She was wait-listed at 101 Duke. I was stunned. I thought, she was admitted to Stanford and she was wait-listed at Duke? Stanford, in general, was more competitive than Duke. I said, “Hmmm. I’m surprised at that.” She said, “Oh, I think I know why it happened.” Someone from Duke called. She was in a private school in New England. “Someone called my guidance counselor and asked, ‘What was my first choice?’” Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, interesting. [00:38:58] And the caller was told that her first choice--I mean this is verging on unethical behavior to my mind--the guidance counselor said her first choice was Stanford. Duke knew they would lose her to Stanford so they don’t admit. You know, they’re worried about their yield rate because the yield rate is also factored in U.S. News & World Report rankings of colleges. Marine-Street: I always wondered if as you were reading you were saying, “Oh, no, this one sounds like a Yale student—” Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:39:33] [laughter] Absolutely not. “--this one’s a sure Harvard one.” [00:39:35] Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Let me speak for myself. I can’t get in the minds of all the other people who read files when I was dean. Marine-Street: Let’s see. I wanted to ask you just a little bit about the number of applications. It strikes me that your students get better if you have more students to pick from. What kind of efforts were there to in general increase the number of applications, or was that something that you were kind of trying consciously to do? 102 Chu: [00:40:26] Certainly not consciously increase the applicant pool. I think it’s Stanford’s reputation, in general, that has increased the applicant pool even if the admissions people never set foot off Stanford campus. The fact that there are so many Nobel Prizes at Stanford, the athletic teams always win the Directors Cup, we had thirty-nine people this year in the Olympic games. It’s like a small country. Then there’s Katie Ledecky [Kathleen “Katie” Ledecky] coming to Stanford as a freshman this fall with, what, five Olympic medals? Absolutely astounding. You know, people read, they watch the Olympics. They see Katie Ledecky. Heck, you couldn’t get better advertising. She’s such a wonderfully composed, mature young woman. It’s great. It’s absolutely great. No, we didn’t consciously do it. I just think Stanford University, in general, is a star that’s rising. In the 1950s, the admit rate at Stanford was 50 percent. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Wow. [00:41:53] This year it was 5 percent. Quite a difference. [00:41:59] Yes. Yes. [00:42:00] I don’t think I necessarily agree with the hypothesis that the more applicants the higher the quality. I only can talk about numbers I know. Even with 17,500 students, you have 4,500 straight A students. You can’t admit 4,500, you only admit 2,600. I think they admit even less now because the yield rate is so high. 103 Marine-Street: I just wanted to ask you a question about your staff. What kind of qualities did you look for when you were selecting people to work in admissions? Chu: [00:42:41] Good question. Fred Hargadon traditionally hired people straight out of Stanford, Stanford graduates. They worked them to death for two years and then they moved on. I wanted some continuity. For continuity, I think one of the essentials was maturity, good judgment, maturity in both age and wisdom, but also academic maturity so that you could make decisions about young people. I hired four people with PhDs. And interestingly enough, another one with a JD, and he was working in a law firm in Chicago. I said, “You know, you’re going to cut your salary in half by taking this job.” [laughter] He said, “I don’t care. I hate being a lawyer. It was a terrible mistake.” He’s now a general counsel in the development office. Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, interesting. [00:44:07] Lots of people move from admissions to development, or some other kind of academic discipline. Anyway, I think academics and maturity and judgment, people whose judgment I could trust. I hired the first Jewish admissions director I’d heard of in the admissions office. He was a young-well, he wasn’t so young. He was also a Stanford PhD. Actually, there was a woman who came in roughly the same time who was also Jewish. You know, there’d been this incredible debate nationwide in the 1940s and 1950s about discrimination, about a cap being put on Jewish admissions. The president of Yale actually said--it’s amazing he wasn’t sued for it--in the late 1940s, early 1950s, “We can’t have too many Jewish students at Yale.” Anyway, Jon was 104 very smart, but he had a rough edge to him. His heart and soul were in this job. It did cause some tension because it wasn’t the easiest mix. The personal qualities were not probably the best mix for the office, but I trusted his judgment. Marine-Street: How did you and your team decide on these essay questions? I just want to read you some. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:45:53] Oh. Essay questions? Yes. [00:45:54] We used to have a retreat every year after the admissions decisions had gone out. One year we went to Pajaro Dunes, another year we went up to Mendocino. We did all our own cooking. It was very low-cost but very stimulating kind of gathering. We would talk about the essay questions for next year. They’re not easy to come up with, essay questions. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Everyone would just sort of throw out some ideas? [00:46:26] Yes. Do you have a favorite that you remember? [00:46:36] Do I have a favorite? I found some here that might refresh your memory. “Whom would you like to spend a day with and why?” Chu: Marine-Street: [00:46:45] Yes. “If you could authorize a new holiday, what would it be and why?” “If you were to write a book, on what theme or subject would it be based and why?” “Drawing on some personal experience, write a fable.” “If you could change 105 something in your life, what would it be and why?” Those are a few that I have. Chu: [00:47:02] They’re all good questions. We did debate a lot. The essay is very revealing, very poignant. It was almost as if when the students wrote, they dissociated themselves from the reader and they just let it all pour out. Some of the essays were heartrending. Absolutely heartrending. Marine-Street: Chu: Do you have any that have stuck with you over the years? [00:47:43] One from a young, Korean male who talked about how he never got any love from his father. Heartrending. They’re very personal. I mentioned the one who was the admirer of Adolf Hitler. Maybe it was the answer to, “If you could spend a day with anyone, who would it be?” [laughter] Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Oh, my. [00:48:18] That was quite a showstopper. We talked about some of the challenges and tensions. I wonder if there are any that we haven’t touched on, whether they be Board of Trustees children, or legacies. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:48:45] We haven’t talked about legacies. Oh, let’s talk about that then. [00:48:50] The applicant pool at Stanford, in my day, was about 5 percent legacies, so it wasn’t very high. The admit rate for legacies was roughly twice that of the overall applicant pool. I mean not surprisingly because if you have well-educated parents you’ve had a lot of advantages which prepare you well for selective college admissions. Legacy tips, as they’re called. It’s all other 106 things being equal, if your mother or father attended Stanford and you were in the Swim category, then it would tip you up, if there was room, into the Admit category. It’s been much criticized as being not legal, unfair. You know, it’s the Matthew effect. Them that has gets. I must admit, I had some ambivalence about the legacy. I could defend it because it helps build the Stanford family. Now--let’s go back to the AsianAmerican example. The fact that there weren’t many Asian-Americans then precluded the fact that they could benefit from the legacy tip. Marine-Street: Did the development office kind of play a role in this, too? Was there extra pressure if it was somebody who had been a notable contributor? Chu: [00:50:38] Oh, well, let me give praise to the development office. We shared with them an applicant list. John Ford was vice-president for development when I was dean of admissions. I never felt any pressure from him. I would meet with him and we would discuss sensitive cases, and he was completely understanding. I had one horrible, horrible case where the grandson of the former chairman of the Board of Trustees was not admitted. I agonized over that situation. His father was an alum, his grandfather had been chairman of the board. Fortunately I was not there, but I was told that when the young man was at his grandfather’s memorial service in Stanford Chapel he was still brooding about it. He applied from a very prestigious private school. He wasn’t at the bottom of his class, but he was close to the bottom. You know, what message does that give to other young students in that school? It would be obvious why he was admitted. After I stepped down I was interviewed by 107 a radio station in San Francisco. It was a live interview. It was the year Chelsea Clinton was applying to Stanford. The interviewer cavalierly threw out, “Well, of course, you would automatically admit Chelsea Clinton.” [laughter] I didn’t want to go into all the gory details of the selection process, and I didn’t want to come out and say, “Well, of course, she would or-obviously--wouldn’t have been admitted.” I said something diplomatic. “Students have to earn a place and--” Marine-Street: How did that work with VIP children? Would they interface with your office if they were coming to visit the school or anything like that? Chu: [00:53:06] I once walked through my office when there was a senator sitting there with his daughter. I just acknowledged his presence and said thank you for coming, but that was about it. The chair of the Board of Trustees’ grandson, that was a really tough situation for me. Marine-Street: Chu: Why did you decide to leave this job? [00:53:41] [laughter] It was a wonderful job. I enjoyed it thoroughly. I didn’t enjoy every minute of it. It was incredibly challenging. It was incredibly rewarding. At the end of seven years I was absolutely exhausted. In fact, I decided after six years I wanted to step down and I went to Jim Rosse [James Rosse], who was then my provost, and said, “Jim, I need to resign at the end of this year.” He said, “Oh, you can’t resign this year. I have too many deans resigning this year.” He said, “Put it off for a year.” I said, “Okay. I’ll do one more year.” 108 You know, you need a lot of energy for that job. My daughter had already enrolled in college. She was admitted to Stanford by Fred Hargadon but she chose to go East. My son was admitted by me. That was a tough problem for me. I was upfront with my staff right at the beginning of the year. I said, “Andrew is applying this year. I’ve tried to dissuade him. He shouldn’t apply. He insists Stanford’s a wonderful place. He’s going to apply. I do not want to see the application. John Bunnell, poor guy, he’s the one dealing with it.” I did sign his admit letter. Marine-Street: Chu: Did he attend Stanford? [00:55:14] He went to Princeton. I said, “Andrew, look. Please don’t apply.” He was a very good student. He was a triple-sport athlete. I knew he was going to get in. His father was on the faculty. I said, “Your friends are going to say the only reason you got admitted is because your mother was dean of admissions. You don’t want people to say that about you.” He said, “I don’t care. I want to apply to Stanford.” Anyway, it’s funny, he didn’t come in the end. That situation was rather awkward. Marine-Street: Chu: Yes, I’ll say. [00:55:56] I had a number of awkward situations where I was dealing with the children of very good friends of mine, some of whom were admitted and some of whom were not admitted. That makes for awkward social circumstances. Marine-Street: Yes, I’ll say. 109 Chu: [00:56:16] Anyway, why did I resign? I was exhausted. There were two national meetings of admissions deans a year, one called NACAC, National Association of College Admissions Counselors, and the other, the College Board. I was often asked to be a panel on things like women in the admissions profession. I was very frank to young women. I said if I tried this job with two small kids, I don’t think I could have done it. I mean the demands, the physical and emotional demands, were so enormous. You had to travel a lot. I thought that was a very disheartening message to give to young women. I said, you know, you want the truth, or [laughter] do you want me to tell you a lie and then you tackle it and you find you can’t do it. I said I couldn’t have done it. Marine-Street: Chu: Why did you decide to write a book? [00:57:32] I didn’t know what I was going to do. It’s funny how life unfolds. I didn’t know what I was going to do after I stepped down, and so I had a nice chat with the dean in education. I said, “Mike, I think I’d like to write a book about my experiences, but I need somewhere to be housed. Can you house me in the School of Ed?” He was very nice and said, “Yes, you can be a lecturer in the School of Ed.” I think I’d been in my office typing away for about six weeks and I got a call from Jim Gaither [James C. Gaither], who was chairman of the Board of Trustees at Stanford. Jim said, “Can I come and chat with you one day this week?” I said, “Sure.” 110 He didn’t say what it was about and I didn’t ask. When I hung up I thought, what the heck could he be wanting to talk to me about. Anyway, so Jim comes, a very persuasive guy [laughter], and said, “I’d like you to help run the presidential search committee. I want you to be the executive vice chair.” I said, “Jim, I’m on sabbatical leave.” He said, “We can fix that.” That’s all he said. “We can fix that.” What he meant by “We can fix that” wasn’t entirely clear at the time. I thought, well this is an exciting opportunity and it’s going to be short lived. We were very fast on that search. I think it was over in five months. Gerhard Casper was selected as president and I went back to writing my book. Marine-Street: Did you feel there was a market for the book? Why did you feel like you needed to write a book? Chu: [00:59:30] There would have been a market for the book I didn’t write, which was how you get into a selective school, or how do you make yourself successful in applying to a selective school. I mean I followed the advice that I think all English professors give to students writing about anything. You have to write about what you know. Even though I knew the national scene, my heart was really in Stanford. I decided to write about my experiences at Stanford. I tried to find a publisher. I didn’t immediately approach Stanford Press, but I tried to find a publisher nationally and they all said the same thing, “Very interesting topic, but make it general rather than about Stanford.” Anyway, then I had lunch with the director of the Stanford Press 111 and told him I was writing this book, and he said, “Of course we’ll take it. Of course we’ll take it.” That was how I finished up at Stanford. Marine-Street: One last question for this session. As you look back on all the students that you admitted, do you have any favorite sort of admissions success stories, or exhilarating moments? Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [01:00:45] Oh. Do you watch the Rachel Maddow Show? No. [01:00:50] You should watch it on MSNBC. Rachel Maddow. She’s cited in all the newspaper reports as the most intelligent person in public news. Rachel Maddow was one of my admits. She went on to be a Rhodes Scholar. Cory Booker, senator from New Jersey, went on to be a Rhodes Scholar. He was a football player at Stanford. That’s a wonderful story. The co-founder of LinkedIn, Reid Hoffman. Peter Thiel, the conservative entrepreneur. Peter Thiel was not my favorite undergraduate because he was very conservative and wrote in the Stanford Review and was often critical about minority admissions and one thing or another. Anyway, that’s five I think I gave you right there. I wouldn’t say they’re my favorite admits. They’re people I still hear about today. Cory I got to know reasonably well when we were in Washington D.C. I have a lovely story about Janet Evans, the Olympic gold medal swimmer. When I was visiting high schools kids used to ask me things like, “Well, what’s it like being a Janet Evans at Stanford?” I said, “Well, let me tell you the story.” Janet used to work out with the men’s swim team, or some of the men swimmers. She went into a dorm one 112 day and knocked on the door and--I can’t remember the guy’s name that she was working out with. She said, “Is Jack here?” His roommate said, “No, I think he’s at swim practice.” She said, “Oh, just tell him Janet came by.” The roommate had no idea who she was. She was an Olympic gold medalist, Stanford swimmer. You know, they all merge in this giant pool of talent that’s here. Marine-Street: Chu: Any other thoughts on admissions before we call it quits for today? [01:03:00] I’m sure I will retroactively, but I think I’ve exhausted you and probably exhausted myself with this. Marine-Street: Okay. Marine-Street: This is Natalie Marine-Street with the Stanford Historical Society Oral History Program. Today is September 2, 2016. This is the third part of our oral history interview undertaken as a part of the Stanford Staff Oral History Project with Jean Chu. Okay, Jean, so when we concluded our last session, we were talking about your time on the admissions committee. You told me that you were happily on your sabbatical when you received an unexpected phone call summoning you back to duty on the presidential search committee. Let’s start by asking you to tell us why in the heck you decided to serve on that committee. Chu: [00:01:13] [laughter] Oh, that one is a relatively easy answer. Yes, I was on sabbatical in the School of Ed and trying to recover from seven years as dean of undergraduate admissions. I should actually make a minor correction. I wasn’t on an admissions committee. There wasn’t a committee. I was dean of undergraduate admissions. One other minor correction. I was dean of undergraduate admissions as Jean Fetter. That was my name in a previous marriage so I’m Jean Fetter and Jean Chu. Okay. 115 I’m sitting in my office in the School of Ed. I get a phone call from wonderful persuasive [laughter] dog-with-a-bone Jim Gaither [James Gaither] who was chairman of the board of trustees. Jim says, “I’d like to come and talk to you about something.” We set up a date and I think, what the heck is Jim wanting to talk to me about? He comes into my office and tells me that he’s appointing the committee for the search for the successor to Don Kennedy [Donald Kennedy], and would I be the executive vice-chair of that search committee. My first reaction was, “Jim, I’m on sabbatical leave.” He said, “Oh, I know. We can fix that.” He never mentioned that again. It was fixed but not by Jim. [laughter] Why did I do it? Number one, Jim is a very persuasive person. When Jim wants something done, you do it. Number two, that was a very important committee. I’d worked at Stanford since 1975. Even though I’m not a Stanford alum, I was incredibly loyal and felt a sense of responsibility to the institution. I wanted to see its good works continue. This was a very important committee so I said yes. I learned something incredibly important from Jim in the course of this committee. He said something about, “Let’s set some ground rules.” He said, “One, don’t ever tell me it can’t be done.” Okay. Got that. [laughter] That was a wonderful way of approaching this incredible assignment. It was an unbelievable committee. There were six faculty and six trustees. The faculty, Condoleezza Rice, John Shoven, Jim Sheehan [James J. Sheehan] from History, Joe Goodman [Joseph W. Goodman] from Engineering, Saul Rosenberg from the Medical School, and Steve Chu from Physics, who subsequently I married. That’s 116 another story. Those were the six faculty. They were all, I think, highly recommended by their colleagues. Jim had done a lot of groundwork in choosing them. Jim Sheehan was a wonderful co-chair with John Lillie, a formidable Stanford trustee. I won’t go through the six trustee members because I’m not sure I can remember all their names, except for Peter Bing, another incredibly devoted trustee and alum. The assignment was interesting. First of all there was a debate within the committee about whether the committee’s role was to recommend a person or a list of people to the board of trustees. This was debated so we sort of left it in limbo to see how things would unfold. As it turned out, it was a unanimous decision. We passed on one name--Gerhard Casper. This was before the days of Skyping and video conferencing and so on, so it was a huge time commitment. We met at least once every two weeks. The first assignment was determining what the criteria were. This was interesting for me, having come from dean of admissions. [laughter] Now we were picking a class of one, but we had to have some well-defined criteria about what we were looking for. [00:06:26] One of my assignments was to call and benefit from the wisdom of half a dozen institutions comparable to Stanford that had just completed presidential searches. For example, Yale had just completed a presidential search. That was very revealing. One of the common themes was that there are just a handful of people in the United States who can do this job for Stanford. That was very interesting. Another discussion was whether we should we poll alumni. I thought, who’s going to answer all these letters 117 from all these alumni? That was me. [laughter] It was before the days of email, so it all came in on paper. I think there were some phone calls, too. Amazingly we started in October of 1991. By March of 1992, we had our person. Relatively speaking, that’s fast for a presidential search. Marine-Street: Chu: Yes. [00:07:57] Again, parallels with admission. The rumor mill. I got calls from people well placed in other institutions saying, could you confirm that so-andso is a candidate for this position, and we’d never even heard of this person. It was the rumor mill. All I could say was I’m sorry, I can neither confirm nor deny that this person is a candidate. Somebody may have put A up to call B to call C and thereby promote this person’s name. It was fascinating how it worked. We had a very interesting session with the director of communication at Stanford, Terry Shepard, who early on impressed upon the committee the importance of confidentiality. All it took was one leak outside the committee and your case was blown. He told us some stories--or maybe I got this from Harvard--when the Harvard search was going on students from the Harvard Crimson would camp outside the Harvard Club in New York waiting to see who was coming in. It’s amazing what people will do to get information. I felt I was a member of the CIA or something, keeping all these closely guarded secrets. Marine-Street: If there was only a small group of people who were qualified for this position, how were those connections made? Did they answer an advertisement, or did members of your committee reach out to them? 118 Chu: [00:10:04] I don’t think any of them came from advertising. One interesting debate was whether we should hire an outside search firm. [laughter] I think opinion was almost evenly divided. The faculty said no and the trustees, who were business- oriented people, said yes. We hired Heidrick & Struggles. With all due respect to them, I don’t think they produced any useful information. The information comes from collegial connections. It wasn’t unanimously agreed that the person had to be an academic or in an academic position, but it had to be somebody who was appointable to the Stanford faculty which meant, almost by elimination, it was going to be somebody from a university background. We didn’t get any names outside the United States. The six faculty on the committee had connections everywhere and could immediately find out whether a lead was worth pursuing or not. It was amazing the way it worked. I can’t tell you the anecdotes that I have in my head because it would violate the confidentiality of the process, which is still impressed upon me nearly thirty years later. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Do you recall about how many candidates you considered for the position? [00:11:55] It was a handful. Did you fly to meet them or did they come here to Stanford? [00:12:02] We learned from the Harvard Crimson experience. We did some interviews in LA. We didn’t interview anybody on campus. It was always outside of Stanford so that there would be no question of starting rumors. Marine-Street: This was in the wake of one of Stanford’s scandals, the indirect cost controversy. Chu: [00:12:32] Yes. 119 Marine-Street: Chu: I wondered how that weighed on the mind of your group. [00:12:38] I think if you asked each of the faculty members each would give you a slightly different answer to that. Certainly it was a consideration. My personal view is that it is unfortunate that Don Kennedy’s tenure was clouded by that at the end because I think he was a wonderful president for Stanford and did enormously good things. Marine-Street: Were there particular things that your group made a priority in a candidate that you recall? Chu: [00:13:26] It had to be a person who was Stanford faculty caliber. That’s quite a high bar to pass. It had to be a person who’d had experience, managerial experience in a complex organization. Stanford has a medical school, a business school, a law school, an engineering school, is not a trivial management assignment. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: Had you ever met Casper before? [00:14:13] No. Not personally. What was it about him that impressed the committee? [00:14:21] First of all, he met all the criteria that we had agreed upon. His experience as provost at Chicago and dean of the law school at Chicago were wonderful qualifications for the job. He was much loved at Chicago. That’s where our underground information [was useful.] [laughter] Marine-Street: Chu: What was his personality like? [00:14:52] That’s an interesting question. As you know, he’s German. It was a particularly interesting personal connection for me because we were born in the same month in the same year. I was in the UK and he was in Hamburg. I 120 think. He grew up in Hamburg. Our countries were at war. We both brought a perspective of being World War II children. I think Gerhard, like many Germans, has this underlying guilt about the way Germany treated Jews during the Second World War. It was the personal connection for me going on to be his assistant, when we were essentially the same age coming from such different cultures. We both had imported accents. His English is perfect, better than mine I would say, but he has quite a strong German accent. Marine-Street: Chu: Did you ever talk about the war with him? [00:16:24] Not in detail. We always had so much else to talk about. We’re jumping over a little chasm here in that after he was appointed he asked me to be his assistant. I mean he was new to Stanford. It is, as I think Marc Tessier-Lavigne is already aware, a huge challenge coming in when you haven’t been surrounded by the Stanford environment for a while. I think Gerhard had one colleague at Stanford he knew, Jerry Gunter in the Law School. I was recommended to him as someone who knew the Stanford scene very well and could help in the transition. I actually flew at his invitation to Chicago for the day and after a few preliminaries in the conversation he said, “Now, well, let’s pretend I’ve offered you the job and you’ve accepted the job. Now, let’s carry on the conversation.” That’s how it went from there. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Let’s go back to the committee for just one more question. [00:18:05] Yes. I’ve read a comment I think you made that it was the best committee that you’ve ever worked on. 121 Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:18:12] Yes. What was it about that committee? [00:18:16] First of all, the caliber of the people. I mean Condi Rice and Steve Chu went on to be cabinet members. Different parties but cabinet members. John Shoven went on to be dean of Humanities and Sciences. Joe Goodman and Saul Rosenberg, even though they weren’t deans, were preeminent in their fields. Jim Sheehan is a noted historian and had a wonderful sense of diplomacy about him. He could ask piercing questions without offending, which is an art. The trustee John Lillie, who was the co-chair with Jim Sheehan, had led the Gap, I think it was, out of some business problems. Jim Gaither had very successfully chosen people with personalities that were almost destined to succeed together because they were all very understanding, experienced, accommodating people and they wanted to work together. I was a non-voting member of the committee. It was my job to sit in and take notes--it was rather tedious assignment--take notes on everything and then present them with a summary before the next meeting. I did speak up in the committee, it’s just I didn’t have a vote. It was Jim Gaither and John Lillie who said to me, “Don’t ever tell us it can’t be done.” Marine-Street: [laughter] Then you decided to take the job working as Gerhard’s assistant. What did that entail? Chu: [00:20:39] It was a very interesting contrast to working with Dick Lyman. With Dick Lyman I was new to the job and it was a trial by fire. I learned on the job. I had very generic responsibilities. As I mentioned in the last interview, my first assignment every day was to read his mail and decide how 122 to handle it. Gerhard, to his great credit, recognized I had been a dean, and a dean has a lot of authority and autonomy. An “assistant to” is a rather different role, and he could understand that I didn’t want to go back to being the small cog between big wheels. He gave me a number of responsibilities that I had not had with Dick Lyman. For example, the ombudsperson reported to me instead of reporting to the president. The director of public events, Lois Wagner, was asked to report to me. I had a number of direct reports, which, for me, made the job very interesting. Frankly, I think it wasn’t ideal for Gerhard. The responsibilities as assistant to the president are so significant that I felt sometimes I wasn’t doing him justice because of those direct reports. Marine-Street: Chu: You were managing all these other functions? [00:22:38] Yes. Sally Dickson was director of Cultural Diversity--that’s not quite right--but she also reported to me. It was hard for them. In a way it was like a demotion. Instead of reporting to the president they had to report to the assistant to the president. On the other hand, Gerhard didn’t want a large number of direct reports. It was a tricky balance for me to pull off. When I decided to resign from that position--there were a number of reasons I could come to in a minute,--I recommended to Gerhard that when he replaced me he go back to the Dick Lyman model so that the person in the assistant job wasn’t distracted by all these other rather significant responsibilities. Marine-Street: Chu: Sounds like they maybe needed two people. [00:23:44] Yes. I juggled it. 123 Marine-Street: What were some of the main issues that he had to deal with during his presidency? Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:23:58] The UCSF/Stanford merger was a biggie. The hospital merger with UCSF. [00:24:05] The hospital merger came about after much machination and thrashing about. Fortunately I was not involved in that one. He had [laughter] an immediate political problem in that he had appointed a faculty search committee for the job of provost, and then he appointed Condoleezza Rice who was not the recommendation of the search committee. Marine-Street: Chu: Marine-Street: Oh, that’s interesting. Any idea why he did that? [00:24:46] He thought she would be great on the job. It’s curious to me that so many of the people in his inner circle were the people who were on the presidential search committee. You, Condi, and then Jim Sheehan headed up the committee on undergraduate education. Chu: [00:25:01] Yes. As I said, to my knowledge the only person he knew at Stanford was Jerry Gunter in the Law School. He knew Jim Gaither had chosen wisely in the people on the search committee, so he felt comfortable with them. He was also very conscious about the role that women and minorities should play at Stanford. Condi was well known and respected. I think it took courage to do what he did. Marine-Street: Chu: Was there any blowback from the committee that you know of? [00:26:01] They were loyal troops [laughter] but I think there was understandably some disgruntlement. 124 Marine-Street: Interesting. I imagine that does take guts to do that as one of your early decisions as president. Chu: [00:26:18] He first appointed Jerry Lieberman as provost. A wonderful choice. As I mentioned earlier in another interview, Jerry was a tower of strength for me, and I think for many other faculty. Jerry was stricken with Lou Gehrig’s Disease. Absolutely tragic, tragic end to a life. May none of us go that way. It was painful to watch him decline. It soon became obvious he couldn’t continue in that job. That’s when Condi was appointed. Marine-Street: Chu: Did you interact much with her in your role? [00:27:08] Yes, I did. We were all in Building 10 on the ground floor, and her office was two over from mine. There are a lot of overlapping responsibilities with the president and the provost. Basically the provost is internal and the president is external, but that’s a much too simplistic analysis of their roles. Marine-Street: This was a time when there was a lot of budget cutting as well at the university. Chu: Marine-Street: Chu: [00:28:02] Yes. Yes. Can you talk a little bit about that? [00:28:06] It was painful. I mean any budget cutting is painful. I think Condi was respected for the way she handled it. She had a great team. Tim Warner [Timothy Warner], an experienced budget person under Ray Bacchetti [Raymond Bacchetti], was a key player in helping Condi address this issue. Not an easy thing to do. When you hear of Stanford’s fundraising prowess these days, it’s hard to imagine there were ever any budget problems, but there were. 125 Marine-Street: Were there people, like different faculty members, storming into the office to complain about budget cuts, or was it at a greater distance than that? How personal did it feel to you? Chu: [00:29:09] There were some angry faculty. Yes. I mean a lot of it was discussed and thrashed out in the Faculty Senate. I did not attend senate meetings but I heard about them. Marine-Street: Chu: Any particularly memorable projects that you worked on during this time? [00:29:40] There was one. I’m not saying I worked on it, but there were some unfortunate fallouts with the budget cutting. There was a big to-do with a senior Chicana staff member, Cecilia Burciaga, who worked in student affairs at that time, and whose position was cut. That gave rise to a number of protests from the Chicano students. Whether it’s South African divestment or the Black Student Union, which Dick Lyman had to deal with, or the Chicano incident when I didn’t appoint a Chicano staff member on the first pass because I didn’t find someone I thought was qualified for the job. These are very sensitive points within the community. Marine-Street: Chu: You worked on that job until about 1997, I think? Is that right? [00:31:03] Yes. In 1995, I was diagnosed with breast cancer. Gerhard was wonderfully understanding. It’s a devastating diagnosis to get. I had to have surgery and radiation therapy. I think I had a week off for the surgery. Then, during the radiation therapy I went every afternoon at 4:00 for thirty days. It took its toll on me and at the end of that, even though my prognosis was good, I said “Hello, Jim Gaither. It’s time for my sabbatical leave”--which I hadn’t had in 1991 to 1992 because of the presidential search. I said to 126 Gerhard, “If it’s okay with you, I’d now like to resume my aborted sabbatical leave.” He was wonderful and said, “Yes, we should arrange that.” They had a little search committee for my successor and I stepped down. As it turned out, it was wonderful timing for me. Marine-Street: Let me ask you one more question. You served in this role for both Lyman and Gerhard and you also knew Don Kennedy quite well. I was wondering if you might just comment on what were the differences between those three and some of the main differences in their approaches? Chu: [00:32:47] Let me start with the obvious similarity. I think they were all wonderful, wonderful leaders at their time. Differences. They were completely different personalities. Dick was the serious scholar, not as comfortable socially as Don was. Don was a serious scholar but he’s very gregarious, high energy, standing on the sidelines at football games, hail fellow well met. Don was popular in a way that I think you would not call Dick. Dick was highly respected and admired but popular is probably not a word I would use to characterize him. Gerhard was somewhere in between the two. He was much more sociable than Dick but not as sociable as Don. [laughter] Marine-Street: Were there different kind of keys to successfully working with Gerhard versus Dick? Chu: [00:34:15] I think when you’re in the “assistant to” position you’re the one who has to adjust. You can’t object to the way that your boss is. [laughter] That’s a given. I tried to do the very best I could in the jobs for all of them 127 and be as conscientious and helpful as I could to them. You do adjust to the personalities. I think I had something in common with all of them. Fundamentally I’m a serious person underneath, and therefore, I got on very well with Dick. I found him a hard task-master, but I really admired him. Don I admired because we both, you know, we let it hang out and we particularly loved to interact with students. Gerhard, as I said, was somewhere in between them, although completely different styles. Marine-Street: You mentioned that when you left this was kind of a good time for you to leave active service at Stanford. Tell me what happens next. Chu: [00:35:49] Gerhard asked me to come back and do a couple of consulting type jobs. One was working at the Institute for International Studies on an Asia Pacific Scholars program. It’s funny. After I had “retired,” I almost felt resentful that I didn’t have my time to myself again. I wasn’t entirely happy doing that. But why it was the good time for me was Steve Chu, my husband-we had started a relationship after the presidential search in 1992--had been rumored for years to be a candidate for the Nobel Prize in physics. Lo and behold, in 1997, that came about. I was so grateful that I didn’t have a job because the Nobel Prize is an overwhelming acknowledgement of your academic achievement. It was staggering. In fact, I took the call. It wasn’t from Stockholm. That’s how it’s officially supposed to happen. Anyway, the phone rang. It was on my side of the bed. They said would I confirm that Steve Chu was a co-winner of the Nobel Prize in physics. I said, “I don’t think he’s heard officially.” I think it was the Stanford News Service. They said, “Oh.” That day was so tumultuous 128 that it’s hard to get the train of events, except Steve never got the call from Sweden because Stanford had just changed its area code from like a (415) to (650), and the Swedes had the wrong area code so they never got through to him. Then from 4:30 a.m. to 7:00 a.m., we were getting all these calls from the press saying could he comment on getting the Nobel Prize. Then some television station wanted to come down and film us outside our house. We lived on Alvarado Row on campus. They wanted to come and film us at 7:30 a.m. In addition to the television programs arriving at our house, the Stanford News Service arranged all sorts of press conferences. Because Steve’s parents were born in mainland China, the Chinese immediately claimed him as a Chinese Nobel Laureate and there were apparently seventy press calls from Chinese news agencies. The news service had to arrange a special press conference for the Chinese press alone. Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, my. [00:39:20] Yes. Anyway, that was the beginning. The Nobel Prize in physics is always announced in October, which it was. You know, you read in the paper X got the Nobel Prize in physics or in chemistry or whatever, and then you forget about it. For us, this was the beginning of the unfolding of the process. The prizes are actually awarded, as it happens, on my birthday, December 10th. We had to fly to Stockholm. You’re allowed to take fifteen people with you, which is not an easy assignment when you have Steve’s mother and father. That’s two. His two brothers. That’s another two. Their wives and kids, and his kids. Steve had two children from another marriage. Winnowing 129 it down to fifteen people is hard. We all arrived in Stockholm and the Swedes [laughter] gave one nonstop party. The Nobel Prize ceremonies are in the afternoon of December the 10th when the king actually formally hands over the medal. You bow to the king, you bow to the Royal Academy of Science, and then you bow to the audience. Then that’s followed by a small banquet of 1,300 people, a banquet so elaborate that they have a book with the seating charts. Marine-Street: Chu: Oh, my. [00:40:58] All the Nobel Laureates are at the main table with the king and the queen and the other members of the royal family. Then there’s music and dancing. It’s all formal. Men are in white tie and tails, women in evening dress. Then the next day is a little more of the same except it’s dinner for 100 people at the Royal Palace. Following that the laureates are sent out to Gothenburg, Malmo, all the main Swedish towns to give lectures. By the time we got on the plane to come back to the United States we were absolutely exhausted. It was thrilling, an absolutely thrilling experience, but exhausting. It doesn’t stop. It never stops. Marine-Street: Chu: What do you mean it never stops? [00:41:59] Once you’ve got a Nobel Prize you are on everybody’s list to do things right, left, and center all over the world. The only place I think we haven’t been is Africa. But we’ve been everywhere else and still continue to travel like that. I was very happy I’d retired from my position. Marine-Street: Did you help Steve with the arrangements of any of that, or any of the speech writing or anything? 130 Chu: [00:42:32] The Swedish protocol is unbelievable. I was sent a letter telling me exactly what to wear. I had to bring three different evening dresses--for the dinner with the Karolinska Institute, for the dinner for the Nobel Prize, and for the dinner at the Royal Palace, all of them formal dress. I had my own things to worry about. [laughter] Steve was taken care of. They assign someone high in the diplomatic corps to each Nobel Laureate. The arrangements are impeccable. It’s like the Super Bowl in Sweden for the Nobel Prize ceremonies. It’s just incredible. Each Nobel Laureate is assigned a black limousine which waits outside the Grand Hotel. The cars came in alphabetical order of Laureates, so Chu came first. I was told I was never to open or shut the door. Somebody opened it and closed it and I got in. One Nobel Laureate told me that after a week of this in Sweden--somebody opening his car, shutting the car, driving him somewhere--when he got back to his house in the U.S. and had to go to work, he went to his car in the driveway and got in the back seat-- Marine-Street: Chu: [laughter] That’s funny. [00:44:20] --because he was so used to being taken care of. [laughter] Anyway, maybe I could conclude by saying the Nobel ceremony was a wonderful and fitting closure to my time at Stanford. Marine-Street: Chu: Good place to end. Thank you very much. [00:44:39] You’re very welcome...