 Torre: This is Alicia Torre with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History program. I am here today, November 15th, 2016, at the Oakland, California home of Stanford University’s Jane Collier, emerita professor of cultural and social anthropology. We are conducting this interview as part of the Stanford Pioneering Women Oral History Project. To start out, Jane, can you tell me a little about your parents, their occupations, and your upbringing? Collier: My family is from South Carolina. My father was one of ten children. At the end of the war, I guess he wanted to join the Foreign Service. I was born in Charleston in 1940. I have an older brother who was born in 1937. And so that family of four. My father wanted to join the Foreign Service. I’m not sure--on some kind of temporary basis in 1944, before the war ended--he was sent to the Canary Islands because the Canaries were apparently a stopping off point for American soldiers going back and forth to Africa. In 1944, we moved to the Canary Islands. My parents, my brother, and my grandmother, who was widowed, my mother’s mother, came with us. 15 And we lived first on the island of Grand Canaria in the city of Las Palmas. I was four years old. I think there I was put into a preschool. We were there from 1944 to 1946. I guess in 1945 we moved to the island of Tenerife so that we were on two different islands. [00:02:13] My brother and I were put into Spanish school. It was a school run by nuns. So apparently according to my mother both my brother and I spoke Spanish to one another. [laughs] Then in 1946, my father went home to take the Foreign Service exam, leaving my mother, my grandmother, and the two little kids at home in the Canary Islands in 1946. And my mother had to get us home from the Canaries in 1946. I guess we had to go through Spain since the Canaries belonged to Spain. And Spain, of course, was a mess in 1946. Well, all of Europe was a mess in 1946. And the Spanish train system didn’t hook up with the French train system. [laughs] We were supposed to fly out of Paris to fly home. [00:03:08] We ended up in Paris, and my poor mother had no money, no nothing. And the flights were problematic. But apparently the embassy in Paris got first my grandmother and my brother on a flight home from Paris to New York. My mother and I were stuck with no money, no food, no clothes [laughs] in Paris for apparently another couple of days and then finally got the plane home. In those days it was the Pan-Am 12-hour flight. I was six years old. My mother remembers that I rolled a can of Klim, which was that powdered milk which was what we ate, down the aisle. It was open. [laughs] Apparently down the aisle of this poor plane. We made it back. 16 [00:03:57] Between my father’s postings we would go to South Carolina and stay with--actually, my mother had a dear friend in South Carolina in Charleston. So there we would stay. My father passed the Foreign Service exam and entered the Foreign Service formally. He was sent to Medellín, Colombia. I don’t know why they had a consulate in Medellín, Colombia because Bogotá is the capital of Colombia. But in Medellín was 1946 to 1948. I don’t think I had learned how to read. My parents were actually quite worried about me because I seemed to be backward. They put me in a school that was in English, and I learned to read very fast. After that, I was a great reader and I basically read [laughs] and read and read all through my childhood. [00:04:57] After Medellín in 1948 my father was transferred to Antwerp, Belgium. Again, there was a consulate in Antwerp, I guess because it was a very busy port, even though Brussels is the capital of Belgium. We moved to Belgium in 1948. I was put into a French school--dumped into [laughs] French school, where they put me in third grade. At the end of the school year there in this College Marie Jose, it was called, their graduation ceremony was called distribucion de pris, the distribution of prizes, where they lined up all the little girls at the girls’ school--all the little girls on the basis of their grades. I was, of course, at the end of the line. [laughs] The two people below me failed the class. I passed it. But [laughs] the others failed. [00:06:05] We were there for three years. By the end of those three years I was basically bilingual in French and did okay. 17 Torre: Your parents must have valued language that they put you into the native language schools rather than into English. Collier: There weren’t any English schools. Torre: Not a choice. Collier: Not a choice. My brother was also in a French school. Both of us were in French-speaking schools. In 1951, we came back to the United States. My father got sent to the University of Chicago to study economics so that he could be part of the economics section of the embassies and so on. He went to the University of Chicago for a year, and my brother and I were put in the Laboratory School in Chicago. [00:07:09] In Belgium I did the third, fourth, and fifth grade. But when I came to Chicago, they put me in the seventh grade. They gave me an IQ test which consisted of all of these cultural questions like, “How many men on a baseball team?” I hadn’t a clue since I’d [laugh] never played baseball. That year in Chicago was actually quite hard because in the Foreign Service there’s extra money, and you get to have a nice house and a servant and so on. In Chicago, all of that extra money goes away. And my family was always relatively poor. They would go into debt every time they had to move because of the moving expenses. We lived in this miserable apartment where I had to share a room with my grandmother in South Chicago. My grandmother was assaulted outside our front door. The South side of Chicago is a very bad neighborhood. 18 [00:08:12] I was barely allowed outside and things. So that was a very difficult year. That was actually the first time I ever saw television because we had never had television before. After Chicago he was sent to Washington, DC, for two years in the State Department. I did eighth and ninth grades. We lived in Arlington, Virginia. I was in an Arlington, Virginia high school. I don’t remember very much about it, but it was basically fine and English. Then he was sent to Ecuador, which must have been 1954 or 1955, to Quito, Ecuador. [00:09:07] In Quito, they first put me into what was called the Ecuadorian American School, which was basically Ecuadorian and in Spanish. I couldn’t take it because my experience was that everybody cheated because [laughs] they would copy off each other’s papers. The homework that was due, one person would do it, and everybody else would copy it. It was the sort of cultural way of doing things, but I couldn’t take it. Torre: Very cooperative but not competitive. Collier: [laughs] Yes. Torre: Different culture. Collier: Different culture. My parents then put me into a school that was run for the children of American missionaries, Evangelical missionaries. It was a boarding school for the children of missionaries who were working in Peru and Ecuador and Colombia. [00:10:05] Actually, it was wonderful for me. I had a wonderful high school. I did ninth, tenth--no. I did tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grades there. Because I came in in the middle of the year, I had to make up all the 19 beginning of work, the tenth grade. Actually, I loved it. I got some help, but I loved studying on my own. Even though I never got “saved,” which meant that my principal would not write me recommendations when I applied to college, [laughs] most of the Evangelicals were lovely people. There was no drinking, no smoking, no dancing, no movies. [00:11:00] It was a basically very good experience for me. I got a good education. It was what enabled me to go to college in the US. Torre: Was that a girls’ school? Collier: No. Torre: It was co-ed. Collier: A co-ed school. Torre: Did you board, or were you a day student? Collier: I was a day student because it was in Quito. There were a few day students. There were some other kids from the embassy there. But most of them were the children of Evangelical missionaries. Torre: So tell me. What were your parents’ and, importantly, your grandmother’s expectation for you and your brother? What were their attitudes towards marriage and motherhood and women working? Collier: [laughs] When we were living in Belgium, I have this memory--my grandmother was living with us then--that my brother and I were with her. And we asked her what would we be when we grew up. [00:12:03] She told my brother that he was going to be a great doctor like her dead husband had been a doctor, and that he was going to do 20 wonderful work as a doctor. I said, “What I am going to be?” My grandmother said, “You’re going to make some man very, very happy.” [laughs] But that was my grandmother, who was that generation. My mother, and particularly when we were in Quito and I was in high school, was always very strongly, “You have to have a life that’s more than taking care of little children.” I think for my mother it had been very important to be in the Foreign Service because she always had a role to play. A lot of it was hosting parties and so on but also sort of joining the organizations of women in these countries. She always made a great effort to learn about the countries, to learn languages, to sort of keep herself intellectually alive. [00:13:08] Many women of her generation that came of age in the post war had a really hard time--the women that Betty Friedan wrote about. My mother avoided that by being really very active and participating in the life of the Foreign Service. When she was in Washington, she in fact worked for the Foreign Service magazine and stuff like that. My mother was a different generation. My mother was, “Yes, get married and have children, but don’t let that be your whole life.” That was my mother. Actually, all through high school my mother was very much sort of encouraging me to read and so on. Torre: Who did you admire as a youngster? Did you have any female role models that had careers? Collier: [00:14:07] No. [laughs] No, no, no. Torre: Did you have any figures you admired in literature or history? 21 Collier: No. I wanted to be a scientist, but one of my big problems was when I moved to Ecuador, I guess I’d had first year algebra in ninth grade. In tenth grade I got geometry, and I desperately wanted to go on in math because I loved math. But there wasn’t any second-year algebra course. I tried to teach myself second-year algebra, but I got stuck. And nobody could help me, so I had to drop math. That was sad. I had wanted to be into science and was sorry not to go on in math because I had always loved math. [00:15:06] The thing I did read when I was there was--that’s what got me interested in archeology. I was reading books about--I guess because my history course had had early history, and I fell in love with Sumer and Ur and the Hittites and all of that kind of stuff. Torre: This is when you were in Belgium? Collier: No. This was when I was in high school. Torre: When you were at the Evangelical-Collier: Evangelical high school. Torre: Missionary school Collier: Missionary school. Yes. Torre: Were there particular teachers there that helped that interest? Or was it just that you on your own had started to read? Collier: In a sense I did have a wonderful teacher, who was the high school teacher. My class was five people. [laughs] Our high school was what? Maybe thirty or forty with all of the classes. [00:16:03] We did have a wonderful teacher. As I told you, I had to come in in the tenth grade halfway through class. World history was what 22 they were supposed to be doing. I had to do the beginning of world history on my own, and that was when I started all this interest in early civilizations. The teacher must have encouraged me. He was called Mr. Prentice. He was a very good person. Actually, he left [laughs] the Evangelical Church shortly after I graduated, I think. Truly, I met some wonderful Evangelicals, too. Although, at the end, the principal of the school was somebody who was one of those Evangelicals who knew what God thought on every single subject and told you. He was the one who would not write recommendations for me because I had not been “Saved.” Torre: [00:17:00] Some high school principals do run to be very sure of things. Collier: [laughs] Yes. Torre: [laughs] Collier: And this one had a direct line to God. [laughs] Torre: [laughs] Were you ever in trouble or called into the dean’s office because of not being religious? Collier: I wasn’t called into the dean’s office. No. I don’t know if I had told you this before. The one sort of really bad experience was in tenth grade when I was new there. I did sort of really want to be “Saved.” Everybody else had been saved. But I couldn’t ever quite bring myself to it. They had a “revival meeting,” in quotes there, where for a week somebody would come and sort of preach hellfire and damnation and what would happen to you if you hadn’t accepted God and so on. At the end of the week, the minister who was doing it sort of had us all on our knees and praying and then sort of announced: [00:18:04] “Now, those of you who would like to be saved, 23 stand up and come forward.” There was a sort of a rustle, rustle, rustle. Some people got up and came forward. The rest of us stayed kneeling. Then the minister, who welcomed these people, and then he said, “Now, those of you who have been saved, stand up.” There was a huge rustle, rustle, rustle. Lots of people stood up. Then he said, “Now that we’re all standing, let’s sing a hymn.” I was the only person in that room who had to stand up. [laughs] Torre: Did any of your classmates comment on that? Or was it just you who felt it? Collier: It was just me who felt it. No, actually, my classmates were really very nice to me. But that was a pretty traumatic moment for me. [laughs] Torre: If you had stood up just to keep your cover as it were, would you have felt like a terrible hypocrite internally? Or also would you have felt bad to your family, who were not Evangelicals? What kept you on your knees when some people would just-Collier: [00:19:15] I was a total, little innocent. I did what I was told. [laughs] Torre: [laughs] Well, listening to those experiences, it seems to me that you got used at different times in your life to being the different person. That may have stood you well in being an early female professor, that you were used to being different than the rest of the people around you. Collier: That’s an interesting thought. I hadn’t thought about it that way. But that’s certainly true, because in Belgium I was much the largest child. Because of course, all my little classmates had suffered through the war in Belgium and the hunger. And I was also an American and a well-fed American, so I was much bigger than any of the little kids in my class in Belgium. 24 Torre: [00:20:11] Do you feel good about being bigger? Or did you feel embarrassed? Collier: No. It was terrible. I couldn’t play jump rope with them because their jump ropes wouldn’t fit me. [laughs] Yes. No, no. It was hard in that kind of way being the biggest one around. Torre: When you came back to Chicago, of course, you didn’t know popular culture. Collier: Didn’t know popular culture. That was also true for our stay in Washington. In Washington, my family didn’t have a television. Everybody else had television. I would babysit to go watch television. But when all of my classmates talked about what they were seeing on television, I couldn’t participate. So you’re right. I was always sort of the odd person out in those kinds of things. Torre: And did that bother you then? Or was it just something you’d gotten used to because of moving around, and that’s sort of what life was like when you were a State Department child? Collier: [00:21:04] I don’t remember being unhappy or anything. I always had one or two friends, and I always had books. So I don’t remember being unhappy. Torre: Tell me about your growing interest in archaeology. Here you were in Ecuador. Did you go see ruins? Collier: No. I actually don’t remember seeing any ruins [laughs] in Ecuador, even though there must have been some Inca ruins running around. What I was really interested in then was those early civilizations kind of thing, which were all, of course, European. What it did mean-- 25 Torre: [phone rings; interruption] You were saying that you were interested in the early European--Mesopotamian. Collier: Yes. Civilizations. Yes. I should tell you, my brother wasn’t with us in Ecuador, nor was my grandmother. My grandmother went back to live in Charleston. My brother, after the time in the Lab School in Chicago, they sent him to prep school at Lawrenceville. Then he went on to Princeton. My brother wasn’t with us, so I was the only child. After Chicago, actually, both in Washington, DC. and then in Ecuador I was sort of the only child. And my grandmother was no longer with us. Torre: [00:23:05] Now, I am curious about that. The boy got sent to boarding school in the States, and you were kept with your parents. Collier: Yes. Torre: Is that because they were more concerned about his education or more protective of you physically as a girl? Or just because they wanted you with them? They didn’t want to be alone? Collier: [laughs] No. My experience was always that the boy was going to have the career, and he did the education and so on. It was nice for me to have things, but it was very clear that my brother was the one who was going to have to have the education. Actually, all through my childhood when we were in Colombia, there was only money enough to give one child music lessons. So my brother got the piano lessons. [laughs] Torre: [00:23:59] Well, did that inspire jealousy? Or did what he was doing inspire you to want to do the same things? You went to an Ivy League school; he went to Princeton. 26 Collier: Yes. Torre: So how did it work for you? Were you jealous of him? Collier: I don’t remember just jealousy, but I desperately wanted to be a boy. We were a southern family, and my father was very concerned about manners. My brother was taught to leap to his feet any time a woman entered the room kind of thing. So [laughs] I started leaping to my feet whenever a woman entered the room. And, oh boy, did I get told to sit back down again. [laughs] Those kinds of experiences taught me that I was a girl. Torre: How old were you when you were leaping to your feet? Collier: This was in Belgium. Torre: So you were elementary school at that time. Collier: Yes. Elementary school. And I was reading mysteries, so I’d sort of creep around spying on people and things, again sort of wanting to get out of my [laughs] humdrum life of being a girl. Torre: [00:25:11] Were there differences between your father and your mother in this regard? Your mother, you said, encouraged you to a life of the mind. Collier: Yes. Yes. Torre: Which is different than having a career. Collier: Which is different than having a career, yes. Torre: But still, was she more concerned about that than your father? Or was that equal? Collier: I don’t think so. At that time the only careers open to women were teaching, nursing, and secretary. Basically that’s what there was. When my mother had worked for the Foreign Service magazine, she’d been, quote, 27 unquote, “basically a secretary,” although I think she did a major part of the editing, as well, kind of thing. [00:26:00] And indeed, when I was in--well, actually, they had both my brother and me learn typing. But I took shorthand, for example, in my school. So I was in typing and shorthand. Torre: When you came to apply to college, which colleges did you apply to? How did you end up at Radcliffe? Collier: Well, I was always this sort of little brainiac reader. They asked my brother about colleges. My brother was the one who suggested Radcliffe. I applied to Radcliffe, Brown--well, Pembrooke, and [laughs] Swarthmore. I did not get into Swarthmore. But I got into Pembrooke and Radcliffe. Then he suggested Radcliffe. Torre: What was your parents’ attitude to that? Collier: There was no doubt that I was going to go to college. Torre: How did you finance college? Collier: [00:27:00] I had a small scholarship. I think I had it all four years. I think my parents must have saved. It wasn’t really until late in life that I think my parents finally got out of debt and then started having more money than they were spending. Because when they died we had a small inheritance. I actually honestly don’t know. [laughs] Torre: Well, there was support there for your college endeavors. Collier: Yes. Oh, yes. Yes. Torre: Well, tell me how you came to major in anthropology. 28 Collier: Well, I went to Radcliffe, and I wanted to be an archaeologist. The department at Harvard was very much into Mayan archaeology, and I really wanted to be a Mayan archaeologist. Well, I got told fairly fast that women were stuck in the laboratory. You couldn’t really do anything but be in the laboratory if you were a woman. [00:28:10] And also that a woman couldn’t be an archaeologist because you couldn’t lead a dig because no man would work under you. But I tried, and indeed, my first summer I got on an archaeology project in Georgia that was digging one of those mounds that was going to be buried by the Chattahoochee River. I loved that. I thought that was fun. But it was pretty clear. [laughs] Torre: You mentioned to me that in your first semester you took a class that was very important to you, the “Peoples and Culture of South America.” Collier: Yes. Torre: Please tell me about that. Collier: It was a class that was an upper-level course. It was not an introductory course. And I had begged to get into it because I had, of course, the background coming from Quito, Ecuador. [00:29:03] It was taught by two professors, Gordon Willey, who was a very famous archaeologist and who did mostly Maya but also in Peru and so on, and Evon Z. Vogt, who was a cultural anthropologist who taught about the sort of cultures and the peoples of the cultural side of South America. It was a full semester course, I think. It was mostly graduate students. And because I was so afraid of failing the midterm exam, I studied and studied 29 and studied [laughs] and got the best grade in the class on the midterm exam, which sort of then brought me to the attention of my professors. I think I remember that as freshman year, but maybe it must have been sophomore year. I honestly don’t know. Anyway, it brought me to the attention of Professor Vogt, who then became my mentor professor and who was very important to my whole career. Torre: [00:30:11] Tell me something more about him then and your relationship with him. Was it unusual--well, of course he was teaching at Radcliffe, so he was teaching women. Collier: Well, I don’t know if you know about Radcliffe, but Radcliffe was basically [laughs]--you took all your classes at Harvard. Torre: I think you did mention that to me. And I’m sorry. Then that changes the question a little bit. He was very impressed with you and became your mentor. Was it unusual for him to mentor women students especially? Collier: I don’t think so. Anthropology has long had sort of important women, like Margaret Mead and then Cora Du Bois, whose was the one female professor at Harvard. She was actually the Radcliffe Stone Professor of Anthropology. [laughs] [00:31:06] It was a Harvard teaching position. So in that sense there had been women anthropologists, even though they had usually not been on the tenure line faculty. Often they had been rich women who had money and been able to do research and go places. So there was that tradition of women in anthropology. Again, I didn’t feel any discriminations through 30 college because of being a woman, except for that archaeology--yes, except in archaeology. [laughs] Torre: So that’s part of why you were welcomed in anthropology. Collier: Yes. Torre: It was similar and-Collier: Cultural. Yes. Torre: So you proceeded. Collier: [00:31:52] Yes. In my sophomore year, a new program started up, financed by I think the Carnegie Foundation, to be able to take undergraduates to do cultural anthropology field research. And it was for three universities. It was Cornell, Harvard, and Columbia. Each of them would be able to take six students to do a summer of fieldwork in--I think it was Ecuador if it was Columbia. I’ve forgotten where the three of them were. But Professor Vogt’s work was in Chiapas in southern Mexico. He was able to recruit six students to go on that. I applied to go, and because of my [laughs] stellar work in that course I got chosen to be one of the students to go. George, who was a year behind me but had taken the seminar--a freshman seminar in anthropology--was also chosen to be one of the students to go on this summer field project. Torre: [00:33:09] That worked out perfectly. Collier: It worked out perfectly. Yes. [laughs] Torre: So tell me. I would guess that your language skills would have also made you ideal. But perhaps not if the language you’re--this was not Spanish, anyway. 31 Collier: Well, obviously you needed Spanish as the sort of intermediary language. So that made well of that, too. Yes. I did have Spanish. Torre: You mentioned before to me that the visiting Chilean professor, Munro-Collier: Edmondson. Torre: Edmondson was important to you. Tell me about him. Collier: That wasn’t until actually much later. Torre: Okay. Then let’s come back to that. Collier: Let’s come back to that. Torre: Excuse me, Jane. Collier: Yes. Torre: So actually, I do have down here that I would very much like to know about the Harvard Chiapas project and its influence on you. What was the focus of your early research? Collier: [00:34:02] We were taken down for that sort of first summer. Because they mixed up students from the three universities, I think we had three from Harvard. There was one other woman, but she was from Columbia. I think we had one person from Cornell. There were only two women and four men [who] went down. Actually, before we went down, at least those of us at Harvard had a seminar that sort of prepared us and taught us enough of the [Maya] language so that we would be able to write it down and distinguish between words and could catch the sounds and write it. That was very important. So we came down with that kind of preparation. Because there were just two women, and Professor Vogt didn’t think we should live out with Indian families--it would be unsafe or I don’t 32 know what. Anyway, he put me together with this woman who was from Columbia [Peggy Reeves Sanday]. [00:35:06] She was a senior and vastly more sophisticated than I was. [laughs] We did not hit it off, to put it mildly. He put us out in the town right on the edge of the city, where the project was sort of headquartered. I was living in a house with basically a sort of poor Mexican family who called me Doña Juanita and would do everything for me. It went against my egalitarian principles. Also, as I say, I didn’t get along with the woman I was living with. I’m not sure what affected it, but my professor halfway through the summer said I could move out to live with an Indian family. This was an Indian family that sort of owed my professor. He had worked with them, and they had important ties. [00:36:05] They did not particularly want me. [laughs] Anyway, he put me out with them. Torre: Do you mean they would’ve preferred a boy to be there? Collier: No. I think they would not have preferred anybody to live--the community of Zinatancan was a very closed and very suspicious community. So the professor had come in knowing the political leaders. But clearly this political leader’s family were not thrilled to have somebody that all their neighbors would gossip about and everything. I was put out to live with this Indian family. There were about twelve people living in a house about maybe a third the size of this room. In those days, there were these lovely little square houses with these huge, high, thatched roofs. 33 [00:36:57] They would live in sort of compounds. This compound had two or three houses. Anyway, they put me to live in a house where somebody had died and therefore nobody wanted to live in. [laughs] So I set my cot up in there. But they would send somebody down to sleep with me there. So it was a household that had sort of two married couples in it and one couple that had just been married. Then I guess--ooh, that’s terrible. I’m forgetting who all was in there. Anyway, the main household had a whole bunch of people, and I would spend my time with the women. I guess that first summer what I did was I tried to take notes on what the women were doing and looking at the sort of power relationships among women. Because actually, within the household there was an unmarried daughter who ran the household. [00:37:56] But the woman who was married to the oldest brother, even though she had less power within the household, was the person who would answer when strangers approached or somebody approached. So she was treated as the head of the females of the household, even though in fact within the household she had much less power. Anyway, I was sort of looking at that and what women did. I was 19 years old. Did I tell you the story of how I was a sort of total failure as a woman? [laughs] They took me to go get water at the water hole, and you brought water back in these big jars. Well, I slipped and fell and broke the water jar. [laughs] Then one of the women’s work was to have sheep that they would shear and weave the [wool]. We went out to watch the sheep. 34 But I scared the sheep, and they had to spend the whole rest of the day rounding up the sheep [laughs] that I had scared. [00:39:02] Then they were trying to teach me to make tortillas. They would make them [claps] patting them on their hands. I tried, and they would feed mine to the dogs because they were sort of terrible. I remember one time sitting just kind of miserably by myself. I could look, and a 45minute-long walk away you could see the Pan-American Highway where it wound around the mountain. I looked up there and said, “I know how to drive a car.” [laughs] I thought how low I had sunk when my one accomplishment in life is knowing how to drive a car. [laughs] [I later] laughed about how these people knew why I was nineteen and unmarried because, of course, their girls got married at sixteen. Anyway, just at the end of the summer I moved to live with another Indian family who were very welcoming in a different community, a much more open community than the one I had originally been in. [00:40:06] That was really lots of fun. Then I really enjoyed being with the women. A 13-year-old girl was trying to teach me how to weave and spent all her time untying the knots I created. Anyway, [laughs] but I remember that as sort of warm and fun. Those people have remained friends for the rest of my life. Torre: I was going to ask what the advantages and disadvantage of being a woman anthropologist versus a man anthropologist in those--there must be some advantages. 35 Collier: [laughs] Oh, it was a huge advantage in that the poor men had to drink because a lot of the culture is--whenever [someone] makes a request of somebody, they bring liquor. You have to consume the liquor. If you’re a woman, you didn’t have to drink. But poor George spent a lot of his first summer down there, which was the summer I was there, either drunk or trying to throw up all the [laughs] liquor that he had to drink. Torre: [00:41:06] It doesn’t sound like that attractive of a boyfriend, actually. Collier: [laughs] Torre: So were you just friends that summer? Or did you hatch a romantic interest right away? Collier: There was a little of both. George, one time he was at another community about two or two and a half hours’ walk away. He walked over to be with me or to see me. The other story I tell is because I was living out with this family that didn’t particularly want me, I’d have to stay for four or five days at a time and then go back into town and take a bath and things. But I would take out a little bag of cookies to console myself when I was alone at night [laughs] and have myself a cookie because all that this family fed me were beans and tortillas--so a bowl of beans and a bunch of tortillas to go with it. But they were sometimes cold. Morning, noon, and night. So I had my little bag of cookies. George walked two hours over the mountains and came and visited me. I offered him a cookie, and he ate the whole bag. [laughs] So I never let him forget that one. Torre: Well, you let him eat the whole bag. Collier: [laughs] 36 Torre: So that was the first summer. Collier: That was the first summer. Torre: But you went back to Chiapas repeatedly. Collier: Yes. Repeatedly. That was the summer of 1960. The nice thing about Professor Vogt was that he required you to write a paper on what you’d done. So that was the summer that I wrote the paper on women’s division of labor within this household. [00:42:58] Then the second summer of 1961, that was when I started a project to interview about courtship customs. That was [after] my junior year. That interviewing on courtship customs became my senior honors thesis. Torre: I have noticed from your publications that you fairly quickly developed an interest in law. I’m not going to say it correctly. Zinacantan law? Collier: Yes. Torre: Did that only come after you had graduated? Or did that interest start during these summers? Collier: It came basically after I graduated. [Before] I did the courtship study that became my senior honors thesis--I talk about sort of Professor Vogt being my mentor and all. He was the one who praised my honors thesis and made it so that I graduated from Radcliffe with a summa. Torre: [00:44:15] So what were his expectations for you? What did he want you to go do? Collier: [laughs] He was wonderful in that sense. He encouraged people to do their own projects. He wasn’t one of these professors who wanted you to work 37 on what he wanted to work on. He was very interested in religion and then later on into astronomy, Maya astronomy and stuff. He let other people do what interested them. He was really quite wonderful that way. He really helped you. All during the summers, too, he would have gatherings where we would share our research. I got into doing collaborative research very early on. [00:45:00] We learned in that project--we’d make three copies of our field notes. One of them was for us. One of them was to give to him. And one of them was to mail home to our parents so that if anything happened there would be a copy back home, and also our parents would get something from us. [laughs] That sort of thing of making three copies of field notes was something I did the rest of my life. Then we also shared the field notes with each other and talked about it. There were a bunch of us-he always had a graduate student down there, as well. The people who were graduate students in our early years have remained dear friends through life. Torre: What I meant, though, was here you were in college from 1958 to 1962. Collier: Yes. Torre: Did he expect you to go get a PhD? Was he encouraging you to look at graduate programs? Collier: [00:45:59] Yes. I think there was always a sense that I would go on to graduate study. They did have women in the graduate program in Anthropology and Social Relations. Yes. Torre: What were the expectations generally at Radcliffe amongst your classmates as to their future lives? 38 Collier: Oh, you were groomed up to be good hostesses and then [laughs] good wives to important men. Torre: Was that the message you also got from other professors and administrators? Or was it just so well understood? Collier: I guess it was just well understood. That was the 1950s. Torre: Okay. So you graduated from college. You marry George in 1962. Collier: Yes. Torre: [00:46:59] You had two children by 1965. Collier: Yes. Torre: Which is well before the women’s movement blossomed. Collier: Yes. Torre: So at the time you were getting married and having small children, I would like to know what your expectations were for marriage, motherhood, and work. How were you thinking about it then? 1962 to 1965. Collier: Well, George and I got married in 1962. Actually, our wedding was the day before the Radcliffe graduation. One of the things I always thought was terribly unfair was that because I was, quote, unquote, “married” on the day which I graduated, my diploma reads Collier as my last name. And I thought that was terribly unfair to my poor father, who’d had to pay for the education. [laughs] But that’s what you did back then. So George and I went off that summer to Mexico. [00:48:00] Because he was a year behind me, he still had courses [to finish]. That summer in Mexico, Professor Vogt started using George as his person to run field programs. George probably had responsibilities and stuff 39 like that. Anyway, we were down there. This was our third summer down there. Because Chiapas had lots of Indian groups, there was a whole group from the University of Chicago that had a bunch of graduate students down there that we all knew. At the end of the summer as people were leaving there was a woman who had been an ex-pat who’d been very involved with anthropologists who died. Her name was Bobbie Montague. [00:49:01] What had happened was a very famous Maya archaeologist was coming to visit. Because George and--Professor Vogt was not there--George and I were living in the main house. So George and I invited him and a bunch of other people to have cocktails. So we had the sort of cocktails. Then other people left or something, and we had this guy on to dinner. I’ve forgotten exactly how, but anyway, this woman, Bobbie Montague, who was living very close by the Harvard Ranch--because Harvard had rented a whole, big ranch--she went home and collapsed and died right away. So she had died, and she just had cocktails at our place. [00:50:00] A Mexican friend later told us that if they hadn’t done an autopsy and found that she’d died of a massive heart attack, we would’ve been in jail because they would’ve assumed we had poisoned her. Anyway, most of the other anthropologists who were down there for the summer had left or were about to leave. George and I felt we couldn’t leave because, actually, Bobbie Montague died in the house of a guy who was a graduate student from Chicago. 40 So we felt we had to stand by them and stay down. We stayed down through the sort of arrangements to ship Bobbie Montague’s body back and so on. That meant we had to get back to the States really fast. So [laughs] we had this incredible sort of fast drive up through Mexico. We went to George’s parents in New Mexico. [00:51:00] But that’s why we had an accidental baby the following year, [laughs] we were under all this incredible stress. Anyway, we did get back to Harvard, and George did his half-year undergraduate work. By that time I was pregnant. So in December we went-Torre: So you were not working at that point? Collier: No. I wasn’t working at that point. I may have been working as a research assistant, I think. Both George and I did a lot of research assistant work. In fact, when we got married, both of us had an economic cushion because we had-Torre: All of this work in Chiapas and the research assistants were paid. They were not unpaid internships. Collier: No. The Chiapas work basically paid your expenses. But we did sort of research work when we were at Harvard, so that money all went into the pot, as it were. [00:52:03] I probably continued that kind of research assistant stuff for people. Actually, just to go back, when I was interested in archaeology in my early time at Radcliffe, again, I both had a little scholarship and I also did work. I was working at Peabody Museum repairing pots, archaeological 41 pots. This was wonderful, like a puzzle. Because you have to put these pot pieces back together. I loved that job. That was really fun. All the way through I had these kind of jobs that brought in a little bit of money and helped pay for college and things. Anyway, back to December of 1962. George finished up his coursework, and we went back to Chiapas for the spring and that summer. And we had applied for Fulbright fellowships, both of us. [00:53:08] We got the Fulbright fellowships, so that meant we were going to Spain in the fall of 1963. Torre: Now, you had separate Fulbrights, is that right? Collier: Yes. We had separate Fulbrights. Yes. Torre: So was your research in Spain on different issues? In the same place but not the same research? Not the same topic. Collier: I’ve forgotten how we wrote it up. It was basically to do a comparison between the small community in Mexico, mountain, 300 people, agricultural--and a small mountain community of 300 agricultural people in Spain. I’ve forgotten. I don’t remember exactly how we wrote it up. I don’t remember what you had to do for a Fulbright then because it may just have been to kind of study and stuff. [00:54:00] We were associated with the University of Sevilla. We both had those fellowships and went to Spain. Maybe if I could stop for a little bit? Torre: Yes. [break] 42 Collier: [laughs] Okay. Let me tell you about having a baby in Mexico. Because as I said, George and I went down. Through the spring and summer of 1963 we were in Mexico. Of course, I was pregnant in the spring. The baby was born in June. I actually went to Mexico City to have the baby because there were no incubators south of Mexico City. George’s older brother and his wife had had a child in Oaxaca who died because there was no care. So I went to Mexico City and [laughs] lived with a Foreign Service friend of my parents in Mexico City and went and had the baby at the, I guess, Mexican-American hospital in Mexico City. George came up when the baby was actually born. Then we went back down to Chiapas. [00:55:01] My parents at this time were again in the Foreign Service. After Ecuador my father did some more time in Washington. Then he went to the embassy in Lima, Peru. In case I don’t mention it, [my parents] ended up in Spain at the end of the time George and I were there. So my parents were not at my wedding because they were in Peru and of course didn’t have the money to return for my wedding and didn’t see the baby until he was about nine or ten months old. I carried the baby back to Chiapas. And Professor Vogt’s wife, Nan Vogt, who was always a very important part of all of the research in Chiapas because she kept us all together and was a very important part of giving the group spirit--Nan Vogt was the one who taught me how to take care of a baby. 43 Torre: [00:56:02] I am curious if your status went up in Chiapas now that you had a child. As a woman with a child, did you have access to different information than before? Collier: Not that I recall, actually. I don’t remember what I was researching that summer, if I was. I do have [laughs] a memory of being seven months pregnant and sort of very large. We were out at a festival in the Indian community. It was dry season. There was dust. Poor George had to drink as I mentioned--and drank and drank and drank. So he sort of says, “I’m tired. I want to go to sleep.” So he lay down beside me on the dirt. I, like a good Indian woman, sat kneeling beside him watching over my husband. A whole bunch of women came up to me and would say, “He’s drunk, isn’t he?” [laughs] I’d say, “Yes, he’s drunk.” [00:57:00] Then they’d say, “Does he beat you?” [laughs] It took me a long time to realize that there wasn’t, in fact, actually a lot of wife beating. Because it was a system where Indian women had to go live with their husbands’ families when they married, the only reason you could give to go running home to your own parents was that you had been beaten. While there was, in fact, real wife beating, there was also--this was a woman’s one excuse to be able to go back and stay with her family and have her family sort of sanction her husband to get him to shape up and so on. So it was this complicated thing. Sort of the women sharing of, “Did he beat you?” Going on to Spain, George and I, with a three-month-old baby, took off for Spain. 44 Torre: How did you balance having a small child and doing research? How did you and George handle all that in Spain? Collier: [00:58:00] Well, George is a wonderful father. He always did a lot of the childcare. Also, little tiny babies--he was basically breastfeeding, didn’t eat anything except that. We arrived in Spain, and we [lived] in this little village and got a woman to work for us to help take care of the baby. She was wonderful. Then it turns out that Spaniards love babies. [laughs] As soon as the little girls got out of school at 4:00--at what? 2:00 in the afternoon, some little girl would come by and pick up the baby. And I wouldn’t see him again until I had to change him or he wanted food. Having a baby in Spain was very, very easy in that kind of thing. Torre: Tell me again about Professor Munro Edmondson. Because you--when did you first meet him? Torre: [00:59:00] Well, it was probably still a while later because after the year in Spain, in the summer of 1964, we came back and went back to Chiapas. Then George went into graduate school. George was in graduate school for two years doing his coursework in the Department of Social Relations at Harvard. I had wanted to go to graduate school, but they changed it so that you could not go part-time. I had a baby. Actually, that was a real disappointment. Because our president was Mary Bunting at Radcliffe. She was a career woman and always interested in women having careers. Yet it was under her that this policy got started that made it impossible for women with children [to attend graduate school]. There was also, of course, as you 45 probably know, at that time a lot of stuff about, “Oh, if a woman has children, she’s not going to go on to have a job and do anything.” [01:00:00] I was out of the work force for two years that George was doing his coursework. I got pregnant again that summer, I guess. Because Lucy was born in 1965. Torre: So that’s 1964 to 1966. Collier: Yes. Torre: You were just living in Cambridge. Collier: Cambridge. Yes. Well, the first year with a one-year-old and pregnant and sort of oblivious. The second year [laughs] we had a two-year-old and a baby and I was going nuts. [laughs] Then you asked me about Munro Edmondson. Yes. That was the time I decided I really had to go back to graduate school. Munro Edmondson was there at Harvard that year, and I got to know him. He’s a Maya scholar. That’s what made it--well, two things. Living in Boston with two little kids who had to get in and out of snowsuits was getting really hard. [01:01:01] Then it looked like Tulane was a wonderful place to do Mesoamerica and Maya work. I applied to Tulane. Torre: Was it chance that you met him? Or did you do research work for him? Or did you hunt him out in desperation? Collier: No, no, no. George got to know him. So it became clear that Tulane was a place possible to go. 46 Torre: That actually is a question that I had, which is how did you and George support each other’s careers--it sounds like you deferred your needs while he did coursework. Collier: Yes. Torre: He looked out for you-Collier: Yes. Torre: Tell me more about how you supported each other in this mutual work? Collier: Well, the two years that he was doing graduate work at Harvard, as I said, the first year I was kind of oblivious with pregnancy hormones. And the second year was going nuts. Actually, both years I did research work for professors. So I always did something to earn a little bit of money, but basically I stayed home those years and took care of the kids. [01:02:08] Then when George finished his two years and I got into graduate school at Tulane, we moved to New Orleans [after spending a year in Chiapas]. We had a two-year-old and a four-year-old. George was writing his dissertation, so he basically stayed home and took care of--the kids were in nursery school and stuff. But he did a lot of the childcare that year and actually the two years that I--his first year in New Orleans he was writing his dissertation. Then the second year he had a fellowship too, a post-doc. So he did a lot of the childcare during the two years that I did coursework at Tulane. Torre: Tell me. When did you first become aware of the women’s movement? And do you remember any feminist works or feminist leaders that you read in the mid-1960s? 47 Collier: No. [laughs] Torre: [01:03:09] So when did you first become aware of the women’s movement? Collier: I don’t think it was till that 1971 when we were all those graduate students and wives at Stanford. Torre: Okay. Hold that for a minute. Collier: Yes. Torre: But it was later then? Collier: It was later then. Yes. Torre: So just hold that thought for a minute until we get to Stanford. Did you research in Spain and Chiapas regarding women and their roles in the society, did that affect your thinking about male and female social roles in the US at that time? Collier: Not that I remember. Yes. No. [laughs] Torre: Okay. I think that’s important. Collier: [01:03:58] Yes. Then I guess what I should say is actually between George finishing his two years of coursework at Harvard and before we moved to New Orleans, we spent a full year in Mexico doing research. He was doing the research for his dissertation. Actually, that’s when I did the research for my dissertation. I think it must’ve been during the year before that when George was in his second year of graduate study at Harvard that with Professor Vogt I worked out what I was going to do my dissertation research on. That’s when I got interested in law. Because so many areas of Zinacanteco culture had been covered by other people--[because of] so many researchers down there--he sort of mentioned that “I think law was 48 one of the things that nobody had [yet] done.” I think it must have been that year, it was the second year of George’s graduate work--when I had a one-year-old and a three-year-old that I did basically the library research, the background for my dissertation, what was done in the anthropology of law. [01:05:13] I had a lot of help because Professor Laura Nader at Berkeley had been a graduate student at Harvard. Her area was law. So even though she had moved to Berkeley, she sent me reading lists and things like that. She was a very big help to me in preparing to then go to Chiapas to do work on law. After George’s two years of coursework and my two years of staying home with babies, [laughs] we moved to Chiapas for a year and again had servants and so on. So I was really able to do heavy research. That’s when I did the research for my dissertation. Torre: [01:05:58] You mentioned library research and background reading. Collier: Yes. Torre: But you were also doing field research in law. Were you not? Collier: That was afterwards when we got to Chiapas. Torre: So were you accepted as a woman inquiring on that topic, which perhaps men were involved with rather than women? Collier: Oh, totally men were involved with. [laughs] Torre: So I’m asking was that easy for you to be invited into men’s councils and observe conflicts being resolved? How did that go? Collier: No. Because the Harvard project had been well ensconced down there, and Harvard had developed a system of paying men for what they would have made in a day wage if they came and were interviewed by us. There is a 49 whole controversy in anthropology over whether you should pay people or not. But Harvard did develop this thing [where] if they were going to spend a day answering our questions, we paid them what they would have made. Torre: [01:07:04] You didn’t pay them more. You just defrayed their opportunity cost. Collier: Yes. [laughs] [I think we paid them a little bit more. We were always also soft touches for loans]. [laughs] There was a whole tradition of and a group of men who’d been political leaders and stuff--because that’s who Professor Vogt had worked with and so on--who were willing to be interviewed. So most of my research was based on interviews with people who had--the presidente of the community was the guy who settled cases. So I got to interview three or four past presidentes about cases. That was the major part of the research. I did go out and try and sit in the court a few times. It was fairly uncomfortable in the sense that it was a masculine world. Most of my research was done on this interviewing basis. Torre: [01:08:01] Then of course by that time you had returned to that community for five years. Collier: Yes. Torre: And had a status that was quite different than your first summer. Collier: Yes. Oh, yes. No. I was no longer the [laughs]-Torre: Okay. So I think that now we’re ready to come to Stanford. Collier: Stanford. Okay. Torre: Is that right? Collier: That’s right. Yes. 50 Torre: Good? Okay. So first, just tell me how you and George happened to come to Stanford. How did George get hired here? Collier: The “old boy” network. Those were still the days when if an assistant professor was needed at Stanford, the department wrote to Harvard to Yale and so on and said, “Who do you have who would fill this role?” I think George had about two or three offers, but it came in through the old boy network. He decided on Stanford. Torre: Was that a family decision or related simply to the opportunity? Collier: [01:09:00] I didn’t have any basis for making any decisions. It was really what he wanted to do. Yes. Torre: At that time what was your expectation and what was George’s expectation about your future work or research? Collier: It’s hard to say. There was always the sense that I would have a career in anthropology as a researcher and so on. Indeed, I was very successful at getting fellowships. I went through graduate school on a National Science Foundation fellowship. Then later when I came to Stanford I had a National Institutes of Mental Health post-doctoral fellowship. So actually both George and I got through graduate school and everything on government fellowships, which were generous and supported us for those years. When both of us had a fellowship, we could live fairly reasonably. [laughs] Torre: [01:10:05] Well, was your expectation that you would be able to do research and publish and get fellowships but were unlikely to get an appointment? 51 Did you even think about it or talk about it in the busy life you were leading? Collier: Again, I have no recollection of thinking about whether it would be possible to be a professor. Tulane actually did have women professors. But again, I sort of went with the flow. I was still working on my degree kind of thing. Torre: This is a question that’s just popping into my mind now. Given that it was so hard for married women to be appointed. Collier: Yes. Torre: [01:10:58] There were a few spinsters who had careers in academics but few of them. Collier: Yes. Torre: I’m wondering whether the field of anthropology was more welcoming in part because men who wished to do anthropology on family institutions really did not have access to the women’s world unless they had a wife or a female researcher. Collier: Yes. Torre: Do you think that at all affected the openness of anthropology departments to women students? Collier: Again, I don’t know. I sound terrible, but I wasn’t thinking about these things [laughs] back then. I had the support of Professor Vogt. I had a good life. I had things that I was interested in, and I did them. I don’t know that I thought about the future so much. [laughs] Torre: Jane, I can’t imagine how with two children under four and a thesis to write and probably some meals to cook somewhere in there -- 52 Collier: [01:12:04] Yes. No, I was the cook those years. Torre: How you had five minutes to think about anything not immediately necessary. Collier: Oh. [laughs] Torre: [laughs] Collier: Well, as I said, at Tulane , George took care of the children a lot. Then when we moved to Stanford, that first year I wrote my dissertation. But the little one was four years old, and she was in nursery school virtually all day. The older one was in the Palo Alto schools. He would get out at 2:00, so I’d pick him up at 2:00. Actually, we’d go up to the park above Palo Alto because we were living in Palo Alto. We’d walk--David and I would walk for a couple of hours. And then we’d come back and pick up Lucy and bring her home. I had basically all morning to write. Torre: Sounds like a good life. Collier: [laughs] Torre: [01:13:00] So tell me about the composition of Stanford’s Anthropology Department at that time when you arrived in 1969. And what were the prominent fields of research? Collier: Oh. Oh, dear. Torre: Well, I understand that there was a lot of linguistic anthropology at the time. Collier: Well, Joe Greenberg was there. And Joe Greenberg was a very famous linguist, yes. Torre: And mathematical anthropology. Collier: Oh, that’s true. Okay. [laughs] 53 Torre: But I’m thinking also of the people that seemed prominent or the composition in terms of women or men. Anything that comes to mind. Collier: Oh. Well, obviously it was all men. George Spindler was there and his wife, Louise, who was very important, was the lecturer--and they would teach together. But Louise was just a--quote, “just a lecturer.” [01:13:59] There was another woman called Peggy Golde who was in another department. I’ve forgotten what department she was in. But she was on the professor line. And she had a part-time appointment. Again, the vision was that women could only be part-time. She wasn’t a real member of the Anthropology Department. Torre: They could only be part-time because they had spouses who were in the department or--? Collier: Oh, no, no, no. I don’t even think she was married. I think she was in another department and therefore had a courtesy appointment, one of those kinds of things. Torre: Oh, you mean she was in a different department and had taught one class in anthropology? Collier: Yes. That kind of thing. Yes. Torre: So part-time in two departments. Collier: Yes. Torre: And not tenure track in either? Or? Collier: I honestly don’t know. I think she was maybe tenure track. But again, I’m not certain. But there were no women on the tenure line faculty in Anthropology itself. Yes. 54 Torre: [01:14:59]I understand that Louise Spindler really co-researched and copublished with her husband but was appointed year after year after year as a lecturer. Collier: Yes. Lecturer. [laughs] Torre: Is that correct? Collier: I think that’s correct. Yes. Torre: [laughs] Yes. And in a very short time, there were three couples--you and the Rosaldos and the Spindlers--that all taught in Anthropology. That was new. Can you explain when you started teaching at Stanford and what your official role was in the beginning? Collier: Well, the first year I was at Stanford, like I said, I wrote my dissertation. I applied for a post-doctoral fellowship to do work on law--anthropology and law. The next two years I had a two-year post-doctoral fellowship. Torre: [01:16:01] This is 1970 to 1972. Collier: Yes. In that year of 1971, I guess, 1970-1971 I taught, I think, an undergraduate seminar on anthropology of law or something like that as a post-doctoral fellow. That year of 1971-1972 I may have done that kind of teaching. That was the year--because there were women graduate students in anthropology--and that was the year when Shelly and Renato (Rosaldo) first came to Stanford, as well. Renato also got hired through the “old boy” network and came to Stanford, bringing Shelly with him. Shelly was writing her dissertation for Harvard then. That was the year when there was Shelly and I as sort of faculty spouses who had background in anthropology. 55 [01:16:59] You should know we knew Shelly and Renato because they were part of the Harvard Chiapas project for a period. But there were also four women graduate students [at Stanford]. It was really through Shelly. Shelly came to Stanford having participated in the sort of feminist movement in Massachusetts in “bread and roses” or whatever that sort of-anyway, they had consciousness raising groups and things like that. She had been part of that, and she brought that with her to Stanford. She must’ve been a major part of then organizing that sort of collective where the four woman graduate students and Shelly and I would meet and decided to develop a course on women in cross-cultural perspective, to look at what in fact the anthropological record had to say about what women were doing. Torre: So that group was a group of women, but it was not a consciousness-raising group. It was focused on-Collier: [01:18:00] Focused on reading ethnographies and trying to figure out what women were in fact doing. Torre: Did it start out with that focus? Or did it just emerge out of your getting together as the women in the department? Collier: Oh, it started with that focus. Yes. Because anthropology at the time was very much of the idea that because women were so preoccupied with raising children [laughs] and taking care of houses, cooking, and the laundry and things that they didn’t have time to--they left the economy and the polity to men. Anthropologists had studied the economics and the politics and the religion. So basically this was a group of women who decided to get 56 together and say, “Hey, wait a minute. What in fact have women been doing around the world?” [laughs] Torre: But all of you were in Anthropology. Collier: All of us were in Anthropology. Torre: You were all cultural anthropologists. Collier: There’s only cultural anthropology [at Stanford] except for Joe Greenberg as a linguist. And I think they had a couple of archaeologists. Torre: [01:19:04] So what I think Michelle Rosaldo referred to as the Stanford women’s teaching collective in 1970 to 1971, that was at the time just anthropologists developing the course that you then went on to co-teach with Shelly. Collier: Yes. Well, we all taught it, I think, that first year. I think the whole collective got together and taught a course. It must’ve been maybe in spring quarter of 1971 or something. Torre: It was an undergraduate course? Collier: It was an undergraduate course. Yes. Torre: So what kind of students did you have? Were they all women? Were they across the board? Collier: I think they must’ve been all women. I’ve truly, totally forgotten. [laughs] Torre: It’s only forty-five years ago. You can be forgiven, Jane, for forgetting. Collier: No. Torre: You were teaching your post-doc fellowship course related to your field of anthropology of law. Collier: Yes. Torre: [01:20:04] Then you with others were teaching this course. 57 Collier: Yes. Torre: How were you being paid? As a lecturer? Or was Stanford just happy to accept your free work? Or? Collier: I think so. Again, I don’t remember. I was on a post-doc, so I don’t think I could have other kinds of money. Torre: Was Shelly also on a post-doc at that point? You said had been writing her dissertation. Collier: She was writing her dissertation. Yes. I think she was probably on a National Science Foundation fellowship, which was how I wrote my dissertation when I first came. Yes. Torre: So initially you actually didn’t even have an official role with Stanford as opposed to with a post-doc. Collier: No. Torre: Tell me about Benjamin Paul’s influence on the direction of the department and opportunities for women. Collier: Well, he’s obviously the reason that Shelly and I got hired. He was a cultural anthropologist who’d done work in Guatemala and has chaired the department and was always very interested in sort of building up the department. [01:21:15] Basically he has a wonderful wife, Lois Paul, who is an artist, but as you were talking about, wives of anthropologists did a lot of [laughs] the sort of field work, too. So she had done work on midwives and so on in Guatemala. Actually, she has an article in that [Woman, Culture and Society] book on midwives. Well, money for affirmative action came along, and Anthropology was given money for one FTE [full time equivalent], one 58 full-time appointment. Ben Paul took the money and divided it between Shelly and me. [01:22:03] Actually, it was sort of between the couples. We were each offered a half-time appointment. And Renato and Shelly, because Renato had just started teaching, too, and they had no children, decided they would split it three-quarters and three-quarters. So the time and a half, Renato’s position, and Shelly’s half. And split it three-quarters, three-quarters. George, because he’d already been teaching for two years and had the salary increments that came with that, he kept [his FTE]. I stayed half time. So we divided it. He kept a full-time, and I had a half-time appointment. Torre: Was the teaching load half time truly? Collier: Oh, yes. The teaching load was half time. Actually, again, I’m less certain how it all had worked out. Ben Paul arranged for me to teach one of the courses in the Law School. I guess the other one must’ve been in Anthropology. [01:23:04] I taught for three years in the Law School. It was not a very good experience for me and I don’t think for most of my students. The first year that I taught an anthropology of law course I had about thirty students or something like that. I was young and didn’t know much about teaching. I didn’t do the work of trying to figure out what on earth they really wanted. I taught about what anthropologists were interested in in anthropology of law, which had a lot to do with debates about how you understood law in other societies and what was law and all of this kind of stuff. And was there something called “law” that every society had? And all 59 of these kinds of anthropological debates. When I was near the end of the course, a young man stood up in the class and said, “You have taught me nothing I cared to learn.” [laughs] So that was sort of pretty, pretty horrible. I was devastated. [01:24:02] I talked with Barbara Babcock, who was teaching in the Law School and sort of said, “What can I do?” She said, “The law students are used to being told authoritarian. You’re supposed to--the professor knows what the answer is, and you use the Socratic method and pull it out of them. But you know what the answer is.” I kept saying, “But the whole thing about anthropology is it’s all about questions and [laughs] not about answers.” My career as an authoritarian law teacher was nonexistent. Then the third year I was teaching in the Law School I had about maybe ten students in a seminar. And these were people who were really, genuinely interested in what other societies looked like. So actually that year I had a wonderful course and a great time. But because I was teaching so few students, the law school decided that I was not worth it. They were probably right. I did all my teaching in Anthropology after that. Torre: I note that in 1972 that was the first time that there was a female professor hired in the Law School. Collier: Oh, really? Which was Barbara Babcock. Torre: I don’t know whether she was hired there or like you seconded from somewhere else. But the chronology states that the first Law School professor that was a woman was in 1972. Collier: Yes. 60 Torre: That does explain some things, anyway. If you know, I would like to know whether the funding for that full-time equivalent that was split between the Rosaldos and the Colliers, was that Stanford money? Or was that money that they received from some other source as part of affirmative action? Were they going out of their general fund to give those funds to Anthropology? Collier: [01:26:09] I think so. Al Hastorf was wonderful about trying to encourage affirmative action. Torre: Was he a dean? Collier: He was a dean, yes. Torre: A dean of the social sciences? [Editor: Albert Hastorf was dean of the School of Humanities & Sciences from 1970 to 1973] Collier: I think so, yes. Torre: Okay. So how was the rest of the Anthropology Department, how did they look upon this action by Benjamin Paul? Was it just taken for granted as a natural thing or--? Collier: As far as I know, people were very nice to us. Torre: It wasn’t offered to Louise Spindler. Collier: [laughs] No. Torre: [laughs] Do you think the Spindlers indicated they didn’t need this after so many years? Collier: [01:27:02] I honestly don’t know. George Spindler’s main appointment was in the School of Education. Yes. 61 Torre: Okay. I have read that there had at the end of the 1960s been a sort of perhaps informal nepotism rule that one could not have a spouse teaching in the same department. Do you remember whether that was set aside or discussed? Collier: It was discussed. Again, George would be better at all of this than me. When they investigated, they found that there was not in fact a rule. [laughs] They did investigate, yes, because people thought there was a nepotism rule. When they went to look for it, it didn’t exist. Torre: So this informal understanding that had been used to stop certain things in fact didn’t exist. Collier: [01:28:01] Yes. Yes. Torre: Lastly here, you mentioned to me once before that there was federal funding in foundation support from you mentioned the National Institute of Mental Health and that there was language support for area studies. I would just like to know about the funding that became available nationally and what its goal was and how it affected opportunities in the social sciences and anthropology at that time in the late 1960s. To the extent you can tell me. Collier: I don’t know for sure. But certainly our experience was that there was money available. They were funding the social sciences. The National Institutes of Mental Health was, again, interested in cultural differences as that obviously affects people’s mental health, what they’re doing. [01:29:01] As I say, my experience was that there was money for the social sciences. 62 Torre: How nice. [laughs] Collier: How nice. I know. It all went away. Yes. Torre: So now let me ask you a few things about Stanford at that time. Just to mention for the record, there was tremendous political turmoil going on at Stanford when you arrived. In 1969 there were anti-war demonstrations. There were counter demonstrations. Protestors disrupted trustee meetings. Buildings were occupied. Collier: Yes. Torre: There was protest against the classified research that was being funded, ROTC, SRI. You were very busy at that time, but did any of this affect your life? Were you involved with students who had concerns? Collier: [01:29:58] Not that I remember. I was busy leading my own life. Torre: Of course, in 1970 there was the bombing of Cambodia and a great deal of uproar about that. Associate professor Bruce Franklin encouraged students to shut down the most obvious machinery of war. Then following the takeover of the Computation Center, he was suspended and later fired in 1973. Were people in the Anthropology Department concerned about what had happened to him? Concerned about what was happening on campus? Do you remember any debates? Collier: I don’t. I know George got sort of interested, because at one point people were saying, “Is Stanford enforcing all of these ridiculous laws like you’re not allowed to cut the flowers?” And lots of things. [laughs] [01:31:05] I remember some of that kind of talk. That was when the academic freedom committee got started to try and think about how would 63 you define academic freedom. What is academic freedom? Obviously there’s an enormous difference between trashing the computer center and doing research that might be unpopular or something. So trying to draw the lines a bit. George participated in the committee on that. That was, as a wife, again, peripheral to--that was what I knew about it. It took me a long time to turn against the Vietnam War. I was a child of government. So I kept thinking the government was doing the right thing until it became very clear that the government was [laughs] not doing the right thing. Again, I was very much on the peripheries. Torre: [01:32:07] Okay. I want to go back, then, to what happened in the beginning of the 1970s with the teaching collective and going on from there to talk about CROW and feminist studies and your involvement with anything. So I have a set of questions on these issues. First to start again, in 1970 and 1971 it’s really specifically the Anthropology Department. Collier: Yes. Torre: You told me that this all culminated in the course that a lot of people were involved in and supporting. I believe you went on to teach this class with Shelly Rosaldo for many years after that. Collier: Yes. Virtually every year. Yes. Torre: “Women in Cross Cultural Perspective.” Collier: Yes. Torre: [01:33:02] Were there other things that grew out of that collective other than that course? 64 Collier: Obviously, the book, Woman, Culture, and Society. There was the whole putting together of the book that I was again somewhat peripherally involved in because Shelly and Louise Lamphere were the two editors. I wrote an article and participated. Torre: Forgive me. But was Louise Lamphere here at Stanford? Collier: No. She was again somebody who’d been at Harvard with Shelly. She taught in New Mexico, I think. Basically her career’s been in New Mexico. Torre: Okay. Collier: [01:33:58] It was a national movement in anthropology among feminist anthropologists. Shelly brought a lot of contacts with her from her years at Harvard because I had been away from Harvard for a long time. But she was part of that whole Massachusetts group. Then there were a bunch of them out here with Berkeley, as well. It became this bicoastal thing of feminist scholars who would get together--well, the feminist anthropologists who would get together. Torre: You just used the term feminist anthropologist. And it was the first time you’ve used that phrasing. I’m wondering when this group of anthropologists first started thinking of themselves that way. Was that right in 1970, 1971? Or did that take time? Collier: Certainly was for me. It was certainly for me. Presumably Shelly, because of the group in Massachusetts, had been part of it before--of feminist scholars. Torre: Myra Strober says that you and Shelly Rosaldo changed the field of anthropology. Collier: [01:35:02] [laughs] Oh, that’s very kind of her. 65 Torre: That was her statement. I would love to hear you talk more on how your approach to the study of gender roles and kinship theory was different from previous anthropological work. Collier: Previous anthropological work had assumed that men did politics, economics, and religion basically, and that women stayed home and took care of the children. So just sort of having an anthropology that said, “No, women were doing all kinds of things,” and then trying to look at how even women, quote, unquote, “being at home” had a whole lot of effect on what kind of power men could achieve and so on. [01:35:54]A lot of anthropology, because it was supposed to focus on non-Western, quote, unquote, “primitive” societies and in societies that don’t have state governments, the political anthropology of the day saw politics as being based on kinship systems. But obviously if you’re going to have a polity based on kinship systems, that means that women have to be in there, even though a lot of it was done as lineages of men kind of thing. Even matrilineal societies were seen as a man to his sister’s son kind of thing. So once you start putting the sisters back in and saying, “Hey, wait a minute. What do sisters have to think about this?” Or in patrilineal societies like in Chiapas where I was, “What are women’s roles in this?” All of a sudden what you realize is that women played an enormously important role. [01:36:54] Just to, again, give an example, in Zinacantan, at that point in history, there was a lot of land available. What determined how much 66 corn a man could produce had to do with how many men he could get working for and contributing to his granary. So it was really control of the labor that you wanted. They had a whole system of marriage with bridewealth where a young man, in order to get married, had to give these lavish gifts of food and liquor and so on to the bride’s family over a twoyear period. A young man had no way to get this [laughs] unless his elders helped him. So the young couples would marry and be terribly in debt and have to live with the man’s family and work for them. Usually they worked for the husband’s family until they had two or three children who ate more than the parents could produce. [01:38:01] But because men became really important by helping various young men marry and building up a big labor force that would enable you to farm more land, to have more corn, to be able to put on more ceremonies and so on--what was women’s role in this? I had done my work on courtship and marriage. I talked about wife beating as being the way a woman justified being able to run home to her parents. When you really started to look at what women did and what women’s interests were, often women’s interests were to get out from under the mother-in-law and all of this. [laughs] So you’d get women running home to their parents. Also, it was in the interests of her father to keep her and keep her husband there. So women were crucial to older men’s ability to build up these big households. 67 [01:38:59] All of a sudden that’s, in a sense, what a lot of us brought to anthropology--looking at women as much more kind of actors in the world, who had interests and were doing things that affected outcomes, even if you, quote, unquote, saw them as “staying home with the children.” Although, again, we looked at lots of places where women basically ran the economy and the markets. They were the farmers and et cetera, et cetera. In that sense, I think my generation brought a lot of change to anthropology. It was the sense--although, again, it’s really hard to change a field to looking at women and men as both actors in the world, rather than just men as actors and women as staying and taking care of the children. Torre: [01:39:59] What I’m hearing here, partly, is simply that previous anthropologists, largely men, had brought their own prejudices to the situation. Collier: Yes. Torre: And that as more women entered the field, they simply looked at what was actually happening and spent more time documenting that. How were your theories treated in the department at Stanford? Collier: I remember just the thing about our department at Stanford was sort of it was Shelly and me. George and Renato were obviously on our side. Then people like Don Donham came, who was interested in Marxism, and Bridget O’Laughlin, who was interested in Marxism. Because the other thing that came in was questions about gender equality and inequality. [01:41:00] Maybe one of the important things to say is that out of our collective at Stanford, if you look at the book, Woman, Culture, and Society, 68 what it argues is that even though in lots of places women have a lot of power, we couldn’t find any society where they enjoyed the kind of authority that men had, the kind of sense that they had the right to tell other people what to do, that they had the right to be--they may be able to have done it, but that they always--. There’s that quote from Margaret Mead that whatever men did, even if it meant hunting hummingbirds, that everybody thought that was the most wonderful thing in the world to do. So that’s what we kind of thought here. On the East Coast, the women feminist anthropology collective centered in New York thought [that they were truly egalitarian societies]. They were much more Marxist and much more doctrinaire Marxists. Nobody ever seriously took the idea that there had been matriarchies. [01:42:03] But they did think that there had been egalitarian societies, whereas we on the West Coast thought that while there were places where men and women were fairly equal, that if men hunted hummingbirds even women thought that was the most wonderful thing. And even if [women] hunted a hummingbird, people just ate the hummingbird, and that was that, as opposed to celebrating it. [laughs] Torre: Okay. Did you consider yourself a Marxist? Collier: Yes. George told me you asked that question. Yes. Torre: And what did it mean then? Because I have read things that do not indicate that there was a uniform definition. Collier: Of Marxism. [laughs] Torre: [laughs] Of a Marxist anthropologist. So it seems to have actually a lot of latitude in what that might mean. I ask the question because Shelly was 69 identified as a Marxist anthropologist in one of the things I was reading. That’s why I asked about it. Collier: [01:43:07]Yes. No, I certainly consider myself--yes. Well, Bridget O’Laughlin came to us at Stanford. Again, I don’t remember exactly what year Bridget was hired. Torre: I think it was 1974 maybe. Collier: 1974? Okay. Bridget was trained at Yale but had also studied in France, where there was a very active Marxist anthropology. She wrote Marxism. The whole thing about Marxism was it hadn’t been taught in this country. When I was in college, we got to read The Communist Manifesto. We were told it was all wrong and so forget the whole thing. [laughs] Then [what would have] gone under the name of Marxist anthropology [in the US] was sort of mindless economic determinism kind of stuff. Once you started learning about French Marxists and the European Marxist traditions, these provided a much more complex set of interests and of how inequality works. [01:44:05] That’s really what we were doing with feminist anthropology, was sort of trying to understand the nature of inequality and what kept it in place and why did women go along with it, actually. Actually, through the 1970s, anthropology was going through this, again, destruction because of the Vietnam War. The anthropology that was taught in the 1950s and early 1960s was very much focused on the idea that social systems were in balance and equilibrium and that [societies] were 70 good for people. Obviously, people do benefit if they have [laughs] a social system that works. [01:45:04] Through the 1970s, there became a whole questioning of anthropology’s role in colonialism and in suppressing people and writing books that enabled British colonial officials to manage African societies and stuff. But also the whole ferment that came out of the opposition to the Vietnam War sort of questioned that, “Hey, maybe social systems aren’t so good for everybody. Maybe some people do a whole lot better in social systems than other people.” In a sense, the whole field of anthropology changed from seeing customs as being what they were because they served some useful social purpose and benefited everybody, to maybe some customs were there because they benefitted some people a whole lot more than they benefitted other people. [laughs] [01:46:03] So that was really a major switch in anthropology. Torre: Seeing everything through the lens of exploitation. Collier: Yes. Torre: A word that became very popular. Collier: Yes. Although, I guess I never thought about it as exploitation. I was more interested in inequality--and actually, what basically my shtick has been--I hate the term equality. What I would really like is a vocabulary to be able to talk about varieties of inequalities. Obviously there are inequalities that we approve of like parents and children. There are inequalities that we think are good and right. Then there are inequalities that we don’t think [are just]. 71 And it’s a whole spectrum. But we only have this vocabulary of unequal and equal. [01:46:58] I’ve always tried to fight--well, my book was trying to understand different ways of organizing inequality. We’re always going to have inequalities. But how are they organized? How are they perpetuated? [laughs] Indeed, some of them are much worse than others. How do we think about it? We need a vocabulary to be able to make finer moral distinctions than we have. Anyway, so that’s where I’m coming from. Torre: But what you’re saying is that that was a movement nationally. Collier: Movement nationally. Yes. Torre: In anthropology. So in terms of having that focus of interest among social cultural anthropologists, that viewpoint became quite accepted. Collier: Yes. And feminism fit right in. Yes. Torre: And feminism fit right in. Collier: Yes. Torre: Well, can you tell me about the interplay of these new theories in anthropology or in the developing field of what became feminist studies and the practical situation of female professors at Stanford? Did you discuss inequities in pay and benefits? Did you strategize together? Collier: [01:48:11] No. I don’t remember that being discussed. [laughs] I was half time, and I wasn’t getting any benefits. But again, it was George who fought for all of that. George did the financial side of our family. I guess you had to be three-quarters time or something to get benefits. I was half. Torre: Do you mean that Shelly Rosaldo got benefits? 72 Collier: Yes, I think so. Yes. Because she was three-quarters. But I did not because I was only half time. Torre: Is that the reason? Or is it because you were a woman? Collier: No, no, no. It was because of the half time. Yes. Stanford did not [give benefits to half-time employees] because I guess they had various part-time people through the staff and everything, they did not want to change their benefits policy. Because it cost a lot more money than just me. [laughs] But I think they finally did. So you got proportional benefits. So I did--at the end--get benefits. I remember--well, no. I guess I don’t know what position Artie Bienenstock had. But I guess we were talking--George, again, sort of fighting for more pay and stuff like that. And Artie was saying, “Jane, don’t worry. If something happens to George, we’ll take care of you.” [laughs] Torre: Who was that again? Collier: Artie Bienenstock. [laughs] There was that thing going on at Stanford. Even all through my career there was--when it came to handing out pay raises, it was justified as men had families to support whereas a woman like me, I had a husband who was supporting me. I didn’t need the pay raise. Whereas [a raise] mattered a whole lot to this man who had children. Torre: What year was that being said? Collier: Oh, this was all the way on through. Torre: Through when? Through the 1970s? Collier: Through the 1980s into the 1990s. Yes. Torre: Really? 73 Collier: Yes. Torre: I can remember that being said, but not in the 1990s. [laughs] Collier: [laughs] Yes. Torre: Interesting. Collier: No. I guess I was just-Torre: When you say you didn’t get benefits, are you thinking of medical benefits or pension benefits or--? Collier: Yes. Those were the sort of benefits package that faculty got, yes. Torre: All of it? So what ultimately you got was that at 50 percent it was a pro-rata. Collier: Again, you’d have to ask George. I’m terrible because he’s the one who negotiated all this. I was so grateful just to have a job and be able to have an intellectual life. Torre: [01:51:02] I do understand that. How did your political concerns direct your research? And how did your research inform your political views? I shouldn’t say direct, but what was the interplay of those? Collier: I never thought of myself as a very political person. My research was interested in inequality. I guess I’d always been a Democrat. Feminism, I don’t know if you remember, but there were debates between liberal feminists and Marxist feminists, and more radical [queer] feminists, and they were going into critiques of liberalism. I really did do a lot of the participation in critiques of liberalism, the sort of, “Do we really just want to make women like men? Or do we want to change the world?” 74 [01:52:03] In which caring and compassion get [laughs] paid for, and so the recognition that childcare and caring for the environment have economic values as opposed to cutting down all the trees. Torre: So given that, you saw yourself more on the Marxist end? Collier: More on the Marxist side. Yes. Torre: Okay. I noticed in looking through some of your files on classes that the name of the class that you started teaching with Michelle Rosaldo actually changed over the 1970s. It changed from “Women in Cross Cultural Perspective” to, in 1978, “Sex Roles in Cross Cultural Perspective” and then I think later to “Sex Roles and Society.” Collier: Yes. Torre: [01:52:58] I was curious about that. Why the name changed and whether the people who took the course perhaps changed over the decade, as well? Did more men take the course in 1980 than in 1970? Collier: I don’t remember the students. I genuinely don’t remember. It had a lot to do--we always had women taking it, and whether men took it or not had to do with whether it filled a distribution requirement. That change of name reflects--it started out as “Women in Cross Cultural Perspective” because that whole collective was trying to figure out what on earth women did. The first courses were really focused on saying, “Hey. Look. In this place there are queens. In this place women run the economy.” That kind of thing. As we went along, what we realized was that we were also looking at men as well, that men were often unequal, [laughs] particularly young men often were unequal in the world. 75 [01:54:04] Old women often got very powerful. So again, trying to look at both men and women, recognizing that men have a gender as well. So trying to look at masculinity as well as femininity. So that’s why that changed into “sex roles” as being much more about [the fact] that men are part of the equation, too. Although, it did start out as that focus on, “Hey, we don’t know what women do. Let’s find out.” Torre: The Center for Research on Women, often called CROW, was founded in 1974, also the same year that the book was published on Woman, Culture and Society. What was your involvement with CROW in the 1970s? Collier: [01:54:56] That was the meeting place for women from across the disciplines. It was a really wonderful space because what it sponsored was women from different disciplines talking about what feminism meant in their disciplines and what they were bringing to it. That was just really exciting and forged bonds across departments. With English I have a lifelong friendship with Ann Mellor. And Diane Middlebrook was there. Then from Psychology, Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklin. Just people coming together from different disciplines then talking about what feminism and a focus on women had meant to their fields. It was really an intellectually exciting place. It also had a lecture series. Again, they would have different ones of us give lectures and stuff. Torre: [01:56:07] Did the center grow out of the work of the collaborative in anthropology at all? Or was it just an independent activity that you then got swept up into? 76 Collier: As I recall, the latter. But I don’t know. Shelly may have been really important in it. Again, Shelly didn’t have her children till later. [laughs] So Shelly was much more active. Shelly also had all those really deep connections to women in New York and Harvard and also in Berkeley in a way that I didn’t have. I was much more home bound. Yes. Torre: How was the focus of CROW different from Feminist Studies? Collier: CROW was focused on research. Then CROW, because it became a--what are they? An institute or something or other--needed funding. So they would try to involve wealthy women from the region to contribute money. CROW focused more and more on bringing in research scholars and doing research and then trying to raise money from wealthy donors and that kind of thing. Feminist Studies then went on to develop a teaching program. So there really was that kind of split in institutional space. Also then Feminist Studies became more and more radical. CROW had become more and more sort of mainstream because of the donor base. Torre: So Feminist Studies became an interdisciplinary major in 1981. Collier: Yes. Torre: [01:58:02] Clearly there must have been some advocacy on that subject starting earlier than that. Were the people who were initially involved with CROW also people who were advocating for an interdisciplinary Feminist Studies? Collier: Yes. Torre: And what was your involvement with that? 77 Collier: Again, I was much more on the periphery. Shelly was very deeply involved in all that. I didn’t get tenure until 1981. So I was busy trying to write. Shelly was, too, obviously, since she got tenure earlier than that. She was very much more active in that kind of stuff than I was. Torre: You were fifty percent. Shelly was seventy-five percent. I noticed that George came up for tenure after the normal six years. Collier: Yes. Torre: Which was fairly typical at that time. How many years did it take Shelly to get tenure? And did that relate to the seventy-five percent or not? Collier: [01:59:09] I think it did to some extent. But then Shelly was also becoming a superstar in anthropology. Fields have stars, and Shelly was clearly on the trajectory to become a star. She was nationally known. She came up for tenure early, and she had the credentials to be [laughs] somebody that would obviously get tenure. Torre: I’m going to back up a little bit in time before we go on to 1981. In 1973, ten women were elected to the 53-member faculty senate. Previously there had only been two women. Then in 1974 you were elected to the senate academic council. You were very busy at the time. Why did you take that on? What was it like? Collier: [02:00:02] Again, I don’t have a lot of memories. It met, what, every other week or something on Thursday afternoons or something. I would go. It was interesting. The two issues that I remember that came up--one was the Reagan Library. Remember Reagan was sort of-Torre: That was a bit later. That was in the 1980s. 78 Collier: Was it? Oh. Because I sort of remember being on the faculty senate then. Torre: I’m sure that that was a big issue later. It’s not in the 1970s. Collier: Okay. Well, then the other issue would have been in the 1980s, too, which was the sort of redoing Western Civ. Torre: Right. That’s actually quite late. That’s 1988. Let’s hold that to next time. Collier: Next time. [laughs] Okay. Torre: Well, how-Collier: But those are the two things I remember [laughs] from the senate. Torre: [02:00:58] Not speaking of specific issues because not every year has a big issue, but how were women regarded on the committees? Did you face any stereotypes? Collier: Again, not that I remember. But I am basically a quiet, shy person. I probably behaved like the stereotypical woman. I wasn’t fighting anything. [laughs] Torre: I had read other women say that at that time that there was a widespread view that women were not good at committee work, and that was a stereotype. But it may not have affected you. Collier: The committees that I was involved in that I really cared about were SWOPSI. Then I was involved a lot in CROW. [02:01:59] I was also on the committee that approved the--I’ve forgotten what they were called. They were faculty-initiated courses or people who wanted to initiate a special course. I’ve forgotten what the thing was called. Those were things I cared about and did. I wasn’t on any of the 79 main committees until I got on the [Committee on Committees], which I found was a total bore. [laughs] Torre: Well, the reason I asked is you said you were enormously busy, understandably, and that you weren’t especially political. But you put yourself in this early environment in 1974. So I wondered whether you were talked into it by other women or whether you thought-Collier: Don’t remember. Torre: Don’t remember. Collier: Don’t remember. Torre: [laughs] Okay. We’ll leave that. Collier: Yes. Torre: [02:03:02] I read a 1977 interview of Stanford professional couples. One professor worried that part-time work would undoubtedly result in exploitation since the person would work more than half-time, and especially was saying this with regard to research. So I would like to know more about your teaching load and whether you were exploited. You’ve talked a bit about the benefits and how that changed. Did people lean on you for more committee work and more teaching than really was a half-time load? Collier: Yes. No, no. But I knew that. That was what one expected. One was grateful to have the opportunity. [laughs] Torre: I do understand. [laughs] So describe your progress toward tenure. I believe you got that in 1981. Collier: Yes. 80 Torre: [02:04:01] That’s about ten years after you had started teaching classes at Stanford and nine years after you were a half-time professor. Tell me why it took that period of time. Collier: Basically the tenure clock was very slow because I was half time. If the normal time was six years, it was assumed to be twelve years kind of thing. Torre: So we should really think of this as coming faster? Collier: [laughs] Sooner than half time, yes. Torre: [laughs] There were other people who had half-time appointments. You spoke of Shelly. But there were other people in other departments perhaps. Do you know whether that path was typical for women? Collier: I honestly don’t know of anybody else who had a half-time appointment. Torre: I see. Do you know whether other women faced longer tenure track time periods than six years? Collier: [02:05:05] I honestly don’t know. I really don’t know. Torre: At that time, were all of the male colleagues getting tenure at the six-year point? Collier: Or coming up for tenure? I think so. Yes. I think it was on the regular schedule. Yes. Torre: So Renato was a three-quarter time appointment, which--splitting it with Shelly. Did he come up for tenure in six years? Collier: I honestly don’t--again, I’m terrible on this stuff. No, I don’t know all this stuff. Torre: It’s a question about a different professor. I don’t know that you--forgive me for asking. 81 Collier: I know Renato came up after George, but I think it was again on that sixyear kind of time period. Torre: Well, he came later than George. Collier: He came later than George. Yes. Torre: [02:05:57] Do you think that your active involvement with CROW and Feminist Studies--what became the Feminist Studies major, did your involvement in establishing that help you receive tenure? Or was it a neutral? Collier: I think basically pretty neutral. Getting tenure at Stanford has always been [based on research]. You can’t have awful teaching reviews but if you’re a rave teacher, maybe it helps, but not all that much. My teaching reviews were never rave, but they were always just sort of decent. It was really research that counted. Research was what mattered. [laughs] Research and a national reputation were what mattered. Yes. Torre: You have published considerably. I understand that Estelle Freedman, a historian who helped co-found the Feminist Studies [program], experienced a very contentious tenure fight. Collier: Oh, did she. Yes. Torre: [02:07:03] In 1983. This is slightly jumping ahead, but it’s a related topic. Are you more familiar with what she went through? Collier: Yes. Torre: Tell me about that. Collier: Oh. Because Estelle, her research was basically feminist women’s history. The History Department, I think, was a lot more hide bound than 82 Anthropology. Actually, she got denied tenure. A bunch of us--I think I-even had a “Tenure Estelle Freedman” t-shirt at one point. A bunch of us [laughs] were concerned. As I understood it, it came to light in an e-mail in which a male professor had said, “We can’t have women’s history. We can’t tenure this person.” [laughs] So then Stanford realized that they’d be facing kind of major lawsuits, and Estelle had a national reputation as a major feminist scholar and so on. [02:08:06] They gave her tenure. But it was really that. It was a backlash against women’s history. Because in history, political and economic history and history of wars and stuff had always been the major thing. Women’s history was way down, and a lot of men looked down on it. Torre: So it was people above the department at the dean and president level that overrode the [decision]. Collier: I think so. Yes. Torre: Or did they ask it to be revisited, and the History Department reversed itself? Collier: I honestly don’t remember what finally led to tenure, but I remember there was a major movement of, as I said, “Tenure Estelle Freedman” t-shirts and things. [laughs] Torre: Well, you mentioned there that you thought the History Department was more hide bound than Anthropology. The Anthropology Department, later on and in the 1980s, certainly went out and recruited a lot of minority students and minority faculty-Collier: Yes. 83 Torre: [02:09:12]--at least in comparison to the rest of the school of social sciences. Collier: Yes. It did. Torre: So did the Anthropology Department always feel welcoming to you? Or was there a shift in the culture over the 1970s? Collier: The divide in Anthropology was really between people who were trained in the 1950s and [those trained in the 60s and beyond]. After World War II, [because of] the GI Bill, a lot of the men got to go to college and then on to graduate studies in anthropology. It was that anthropology that was focused on seeing societies as functioning wholes and that if there was a custom, it was good for society. Sort of perpetuating society. [02:10:05] Conflict was bad and so on. So the divide in [cultural] anthropology is [between] the people trained then who were trying to look at societies as consensus and good and the people who came of age in the 1970s when there was a lot of questioning of anthropology, its role in colonialism, sort of starting to look at inequality, and so on. So that’s been the major divide within cultural anthropology. In some places it was extremely painful. At Harvard there was just a major horrible experience with graduate students against the faculty, with the graduate students criticizing the faculty for their involvement in exploitation [laughs] and all of this kind of--you can imagine what it was like. [02:10:54] Fortunately George and I got out of Harvard before that. We managed to switch over into the new anthropology of looking at conflict and thinking about societies as being, “Hey, maybe they’re better 84 for some people [laughs] than they are for other folks.” And do it--and also look at history because anthropology didn’t look at history [back then]. It looked at societies as functioning wholes now. But the focus on inequality started as, “Hey, wait a minute. When did this custom come in? Who [did it benefit]? What’s the history of how did it start?” George and I managed to make a lot of that transition and keep our good relations with senior faculty, whereas the generation maybe four years younger than us--Professor Vogt’s students who would--he really broke with them. It was horrible conflict. That’s the divide within cultural anthropology. Torre: [02:11:56] Thank you for explaining that. Can you tell me--again thinking of 1969 to early 1980s, not going on to the later 1980s for a moment, but can you tell me how affirmative action developed and changed in that period as you experienced it in your department and with CROW? Collier: I guess my experience was that Anthropology was very much for affirmative action and really was for trying to get diversity into the department and really was trying to bring in students, to train students from diverse backgrounds. That commitment of Anthropology focuses on cultural diversity [laughs]. Torre: [02:12:59] So in terms of the faculty and administrative attitudes to feminism and to feminist studies, how did that change from 1970 to the early 1980s? 85 Collier: Again, I experienced that we received a lot of support. Ben Paul was the chair of Anthropology for a long time. He was incredibly supportive of the women faculty. Torre: Then in terms of the students, that’s a twelve-year period. The people you were teaching in 1971 were coming to a very new field. By 1981 a little bit different. How did the students respond to your classes and topics? Collier: No, it is interesting because at the beginning we were getting all of these women who were sort of--feminist consciousness was awakened, and they were interested. [02:14:00] For two or three years we had students who were really with us. There was a year when Shelly went away and I was teaching the course. All of a sudden I ended up with a bunch of women who wanted to be wives and mothers. [laughs] It was one of the most horrible courses I ever taught. The agonizing thing when you realize that your students are not with you, and they do not want to hear what you have to say. After that it was really interesting. I changed my teaching style a lot to try and figure out where the class was and what they wanted and what they thought--because often I did have to tell them things they didn’t want to know. I think it’s still true that while you’re in college you have a lot of equality as a woman. But if you dare to have a baby, things tend to change. It’s hard for a woman to--you really are often one man away from poverty and destitution. [02:15:05] They don’t want to hear that, of course. Trying to find a way to bring people with me, to bring students with me to where they could 86 understand that this is the reality, but doesn’t have to be their reality. You better know this reality so you can learn to deal with it. I changed my teaching style a lot, to opening up classrooms to questions, to trying to sponsor discussions, to really trying to gauge where they were coming from before I knew what I wanted to teach them. But I often had to get there in circuitous ways of trying to make sure that they were along with me and following the path and so they understood where it was coming from. Torre: It sounds like you wanted to bring the topics of inequality in the societies you were looking at back home to them. Collier: [02:16:02] Oh, yes. Torre: It was always related to the US experience, as well. Collier: Yes. Torre: Why don’t we stop here for now? Collier: Okay. All right. [End of Part 1 of 2, interview with Jane Collier, November 15, 2016] 87 88 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT PIONEERING WOMEN ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: JANE COLLIER INTERVIEWER: DINA ASFAHA DATE OF INTERVIEW: JULY 21, 2017 Asfaha: This is Dina Asfaha with the Stanford Historical Society’s oral history program. I am here today, July 21st, 2017, at the Oakland, California home of Stanford University’s Jane Collier, Emerita Professor of Cultural and Social Anthropology. We are conducting this interview as part of the Stanford Pioneering Women Oral History Project. Okay, Dr. Collier, I want to start off with going back to the 1970s. I wanted to ask you, did developments in affirmative action and the women’s movement intersect with your research and teaching? I know you were able to collaborate with other women scholars such as Shelly Rosaldo, June Starr, Sylvia Yanagisako, and you participated in the Stanford Women’s Teaching Collective in 1970. [00:01:00] Can you talk a little bit about how those events surrounding women’s issues affected how you crafted the syllabus for your “Women and Cross-Cultural Perspectives” course? Collier: Actually, the Women and Cross-Cultural Perspective course was when I was--it must have been in 1971. And Shelly Rosaldo and I were both at 89 Stanford as either post-docs or writing dissertations. We both had PhDs. And there were several women graduate students, Julia Howell, Ellen Lewin, [also Kim Kramer and Janet Fjellman], you know it’s in the book, Women, Culture, and Society. But anyway, all of us were realizing, again, stimulated by the women’s movement, that anthropology at that time [ignored women], there was a book that had been written that everybody was reading--Robin Fox’s Kinship and Marriage: An Anthropological Perspective [1967]. [00:02:00] Fox’s whole story about kinship was that the women basically stayed home and took care of the children, did the cooking and washed the clothes while the men did everything else. Obviously, we were women in anthropology, and we decided it made sense to look at what in fact women were doing. So this group of us--I think there were six or eight of us--got together. I don’t know how often, once a week or something like that. We divided up and read ethnographies and really talked about what women were in fact doing. We found they were doing] all kinds of things like queens in Africa, women who ran markets, women who did [the farming]. What came out of that was then the sort of planning for a group-taught course. I think maybe that course was in fact taught in 1971. [00:02:57] And maybe we were also meeting with some other women at our stage of career, you know, as graduate students or living in the area, like Nancy Chodorow, who was at Berkeley and things like that. So again, I’m unclear on the details, but there were a group of us and we were talking 90 to people in Berkeley and were meeting. And what came out of our Stanford group was the sense that while we could look at, see that women were doing all kinds of things, that it always seemed that men got the prestige, that whatever was the most prestigious thing to do in the world, it was men that did it. Even though it looked like there were societies where women basically had enormous amounts of power and would be pretty egalitarian, when it came to prestige and authority--the power and ability to get things done--men always were credited with having the prestige. [00:04:03] There was that wonderful quote from Margaret Mead that’s in the front of Women, Culture, and Society about whatever men did, be it hunting hummingbirds, that it was the most prestigious thing to do in society. So we built a course that basically--I’m sure the syllabi are still around because I think they got turned into the Stanford archives. I don’t remember the course now, but I think it was organized by areas of the world and talking about what women did, but then with the sort of final conclusion that, “Look, women do all of these kinds of things. You can’t just say they took care of babies and the cooking.” But wherever you looked, men seemed to have prestige. And why was that? How do we think about that? And so that was the basis of the Women, Culture and Society book. [00:04:58] Actually, Ben Paul’s wife, Lois Paul, was part of that group too. So there were a bunch of us all talking. And that was the issue; what started it was [the question], “What in fact are women really doing?” Do we know? What do we [as anthropologists] know about what women do? So we 91 put together the course. And then Shelly Rosaldo, along with Louise Lamphere, organized the book, collected the essays for the book. And the book came out. And virtually at the same time, but maybe a year later, Reyna Rapp and some of the people in New York were also doing the same kind of thing, but were very much more influenced by Marxism than we. They had argued very strongly that there had been egalitarian societies in the past or even now. [00:05:57] Nobody that I know of ever argued that there had been a quote, unquote, “matriarchy a la Engels.” But they did sort of say that we [at Stanford] were wrong. So there was this sort of debate between Stanford and New York. Stanford, Berkeley, West Coast versus East Coast-on whether there ever had been truly egalitarian societies or whether in every society whatever was prestigious to do, men seemed to be able to do it as opposed to women. That was kind of fun and that went on for quite a while. But the course was basically established then as this collective that taught it. Shelly and me and some graduate students. And we taught the course, and then Shelly and I, when we got appointed to the faculty, kept on teaching it together. When one of us was away, the other would teach it. [00:07:02] So you were asking how the course came to be; that’s how the course came to be. And over time we changed it. I guess it started off being called “Women in Cross-Cultural Perspective.” Then eventually we changed it to “Sex Roles and Society” and taught it for many years. So that’s kind of that story. 92 At the same time that all this was going on in Anthropology, which was really fun and exciting, the whole university [was changing], they were getting wonderful people in English and Psychology and so on. There were those meetings that turned eventually into the Center for Research on Women [CROW]. I’m not sure how often we met. Looking back at my calendars it looks like a fair amount. But people would talk from different disciplines as to what was going on in their discipline. [00:07:54] So we would hear from Psychology, Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklin, and then History, Estelle [Estelle Freedman] came in at some point in there and talked about women’s history. Literature, we had wonderful people; Anne Mellor and Diane Middlebrook and all in English. So it was really exciting across the disciplines as well, a very exciting time to be here. Asfaha: Absolutely. What was it like to be engaged in these conversations about gender and women’s rights at this time in the classroom with a group of students, with these young people, while the sort of sociopolitical fabric of the United States was undergoing a major change? Was there a lot of tension in the classroom between your male and female students for example? Collier: [00:08:58] Well, we didn’t have very many male students obviously, when it was called “Women in Cross-Cultural Perspective.” Asfaha: That’s interesting. Collier: Or even in Feminist Studies classes. We did have a few, but not very many. Mostly it was good because the people who came were the women who 93 wanted to know. Although there was one year when I taught it and somehow I got off on the wrong foot, and I ended up with a classroom full of women who wanted to be just like mother and stay home. And that was a disaster. And I’m not entirely sure of the dynamics that led to that or how I managed to antagonize the class. But that was one of my worst teaching experiences and after that I got much better at figuring out where students were coming from. Because my teaching philosophy had always been to try and--well, one has to learn a lot about teaching, because nobody teaches you. [00:10:00] I learned it was really important to try and figure out where [the students] were, to sort of start slowly and lead them step-by-step to where I wanted to go, as opposed to telling them what I wanted them to know before I knew where they were coming from and, therefore, what I would have to overcome. So that was there. And then as time went on and the Human Biology Program got established, I guess my biggest problem was people who had been to Human Biology courses and learned about what they thought were the physical and mental differences between males and females. And so they came. They would come to the class and sort of make pronouncements about women being inherently more maternal and all this kind of stuff. Of course, obviously, I was teaching that those ideas were totally cultural. [00:11:00] It’s very funny, I always talk about how I spent most of my career fighting against biological determinism. But, as in later years creationism came in, I find myself defending evolution [laughter]. And so 94 while I deeply do believe in evolution and do believe that there are biological differences, biology doesn’t determine the culture; it’s really the culture that determines. At least for me and for Shelly. What we wrote about really was that the culture in which we live determines which aspects of your biology are going to make a difference. So it determines how people interpret biology and therefore warrants possibilities. Anyway, that was kind of the women’s situation. Asfaha: [00:11:52] And in that class or that quarter where you had a majority of young women maybe whose ideas about womanhood and motherhood were a little bit more narrow, do you feel as though after taking your class they were able to expand their ideas there? Collier: Sometimes you have classes that just don’t go, and that one did not go. I guess my memory is in the early years, except for that time, we pretty much had students who wanted to learn this stuff and were fun to teach. And then as time went on and the women’s movement had taken hold, and they were still teaching gender and society and stuff like that, the women who came in thought, or in their own experience, they had never had any restrictions. [00:12:57] And so when teaching, we tried to teach them that--I guess this was in Feminist Studies 101, I would have a fellow faculty member come in who was a single mother. And she talked about how on her Stanford salary as an assistant professor she could not pay the rent, child care, and eat; she could only do two of those three. The students did not want to hear that because they had bought the message that if you’re a woman you can do anything. [I was] really trying to teach them that having 95 children puts women, in our society anyway--and in fact virtually, this is one of the very few societies where having children is bad for women--it puts them in a much more vulnerable position. [00:13:55] In fact, again, for anthropology, in most societies in the world, it’s through having children that women gain power. In our society women’s power goes down considerably if they have children. Asfaha: And so on that note, can you talk a little bit about what it was like balancing work and family while on the tenure track? So your children were a little bit older at this point, and so you were a lot more deeply entrenched and I guess had more time to focus on your career--or maybe you didn’t. Can you talk a little bit more about that? Collier: When I got offered the tenure track position, the dean’s office was offering tenure track positions for hiring women and minorities. [00:14:58] So what Ben Paul, the chair of our department, did was he got one full-time position and he divided it between Shelly and me. So Renato and Shelly--Renato having come much later and they not having children yet, divided their oneand-a-half times. They divided one-and-a-half between them--each three quarters, yes. George and I, because George had already been teaching for I guess three years or something, if he had to go down a quarter time, it would have been a big cut in his salary. So he stayed full-time, and I stayed half-time. I was working half-time, and that made me feel free that I could go home when my kids got home from school. [00:15:53] Also we were living in the Stanford ghetto, and that was a wonderful place for bringing up children. Very safe. They could walk to 96 school, bicycle to school. They were safe. I could come home and be with them, and they could play outside. So the kinds of trouble that people have with children and working I didn’t really have. Asfaha: Moving on from there, in 1974 you were elected to the senate. Can you talk a little bit about what it was like to enter a new space and on campus as a different type of influence and what your role was there and whether being a woman affected your say or how you were able to create or implement any new policies? Collier: [00:17:00] I can’t tell you. I don’t remember anything about that. [Laughter] I remember going and sitting through the faculty senate. I was only [on it] twice I think. As I told you, I don’t remember what came up when. But I was on the senate when there was the debate about changing from “Western Civilization” to “Cultures, Ideas, and Values.” My experience of that--which got portrayed in the newspapers as, “Stanford is killing Shakespeare and Dante” and things--my experience of that was that it was, again, basically a generational shift, that the people who had founded the Western Civ [curriculum] were the senior people in English and History and so on. They grew up with the idea of great books. But the younger people coming in in those fields were growing up in a culture where both English and history were trying to look at the wider contexts in which works were set. The younger people objected to teaching Dante and Shakespeare separate from each other. They wanted to teach texts as much more embedded in history and other texts. So that was my experience of what it was, that it was basically this kind of generational fight. It was also students 97 who objected to being taught Western Civilization. They wanted more of the rest of the ideas of the world, what had come out of Asia and Africa. So the “Culture, Ideas and Values” track was very much built around trying to incorporate a much wider sense of the world than just Greece and Rome and Europe and the US, the great books. [00:19:09] As I say, my experience was that the younger English professors and the younger history professors did not like teaching books out of their historical and social contexts. So that was what I thought happened. Asfaha: And do you feel that the Anthropology Department had a strong opinion on where this debate or curriculum would go? Collier: Of course we did, yes. Anthropology set up a series called--I forget what it was called. But anyway, it was a series of three courses. And the first one was called “Origins,” which looked at origin stories. It put the Gilgamesh epic and the Christian epic and African epics and Navajo epics, about the creation of the world--and also Darwinism. It talked about creation and the ideas about how things got created. So you could teach great books. You could teach the Bible, you could teach Darwin and so on, but you were teaching about how they were all talking about the origins of things. And then I guess the second one was called “Encounters.” And so the first part “Origins” looked at “ancient” history up through feudalism and stuff like that. And then the second course, the “Encounters” took up from the 16th century on through. “Encounters” was about the European encounters with other cultures and other cultures’ encounters with each 98 other. So it gave a global sense of history and where works fit into these encounters between different cultures and so on. [00:21:00] Then the last part of it was called “Identities,” which Sylvia [Sylvia Yanagisako] and I taught for years. And that took again basically from the Enlightenment on and talked about how we think about identities of nations, of people, and these kinds of things. It was a fantastic course sequence and apparently it was very popular. There was a lot of backlash against anthropologists teaching what had once been Western Civ on the grounds that anthropologists had no values--we were cultural relativists and so we don’t believe in anything. Which of course is a total misconception, but anyway. Asfaha: Absolutely. [Laughter] Collier: Yes. But you can imagine, you know the press and some of the more conservative people were against that. [00:21:57] The other thing about “Culture, Ideas, and Values” was that it was always supposed to incorporate looking at race, class, and gender--I guess as sort of things that cut across everything. And again, what our experience was was that Stanford has a lot of very wealthy students that come from wealthy families, and a bunch of them did not want their kids being faced with race, class, and gender--inequality. They wanted them to learn Shakespeare and Dante and become civilized that way. So we were getting some backlash from that. Although, as I say, students apparently loved the anthropology sequence, or they liked it better than they liked a lot of the other ones. 99 Asfaha: [00:22:51] Moving on from there, I was actually a little bit interested to hear, you said that one of the challenges of going from Western Civ to Cultures, Ideas, and Values was the pressure from parents of kids I guess sort of the elite and them wanting their children to learn about the “classics” of Western Civilization. What was it like to be an ambassador to the university as someone on the senate and how did you approach or quell these worries of the parents? Collier: That actually came up later I think, after “Culture, Ideas, and Values” had been going on a while. And I don’t remember that I had much say in the switchover. Obviously I had my loyalties, which was with the younger faculty, of which I was one. You know, that’s who we were. It was the younger faculty. [00:24:04] But it was really after “Culture, Ideas, and Values” had been going for several years that the university seemed to be getting more conservative. Asfaha: So in 1981 you were granted tenure for your time here at Stanford. But just after being given tenure came the case of Steven Mosher, who was a Stanford graduate student in anthropology conducting field research in rural China. Right after you had gotten tenure, you headed a departmental committee that investigated whether Steven Mosher had engaged in illegal and unethical conduct wherein he endangered his research subjects. And eventually the department voted unanimously to expel Mosher from the university in 1983. So I am interested to hear a little bit about what your 100 thoughts were upon being asked to chair this committee and why you accepted it. Collier: I accepted it because I didn’t have much choice. They had just given me tenure, and one expects that once you get tenure--they are kind to you before you get tenure because they want you to write. But once you get tenure, they have the right to ask you to do things to contribute to the department because you’re no longer in danger of losing your job, et cetera. I got appointed to this because my field was legal anthropology, which is the anthropology of how other people settle disputes. So I was the logical choice to do that. [00:25:58] As far as I know, I’d never had Steven Mosher as a student. He came in and worked very closely with the China specialists in our department, but he didn’t really have much to do with other people very much. So I didn’t really know him, but I was appointed to lead this committee. There were three of us. So there was me, there was Tom Grey from the Law School, and then Joe Greenberg from our department. Have you heard of Joe Greenberg? A very famous elderly linguist. Very, very famous. Most famous for doing the languages of Africa. And it turned out to be a really great committee. Because I was good at organizing and running things. Tom Grey knew the legal stuff, and Joe Greenberg sort of kept us in line. Because what happened--I didn’t know Mosher. The case got dumped on us because there was a huge brouhaha in the China scholarship community, particularly from Berkeley. 101 [00:27:03] Apparently what Mosher had done was he had visited-because this was the one-child policy in China. So they were doing abortions on women who got pregnant with a second child and so on. He took photos inside one of these abortion clinics of women who were visibly very pregnant, awaiting abortions or late-term abortions. He didn’t cover their faces, so they were recognizable. He published this in a magazine in Taiwan. The China scholars of course had only recently gotten back into China because China wouldn’t let anthropologists or scholars in for a long time. So they were horrified, and indeed everybody was sort of horrified that he didn’t cover or put pixels or something over the faces of these women. [00:28:06] So there was this huge storm in the China community, and I was not a China scholar. I worked in Latin America and Spain. But anyway, it came to Anthropology. And I guess I don’t know the kind of pressures that were put on us from the China community. But anyway, we had gotten told we had to investigate this. I guess we were told that the China scholars were screaming, “Throw him out.” And we said, “You have to have due process.” I was the due process, or our committee was the due process. Joe Greenberg’s field was languages in Africa and my field was Latin America, so none of us were China scholars. Pretty early on it became clear that you couldn’t begin to throw him out for having published the pictures just on the grounds that, frankly, students are students; they make mistakes. And as long as they realize what they’ve done and realize you shouldn’t do that again, everybody is entitled to learning mistakes. If you do something in what you think is good 102 faith, and it turns out to have been the wrong thing, then you really shouldn’t be thrown out. But in investigating Mosher, it eventually became more and more apparent that the guy was an utter sleaze ball, at least to me and to Tom Grey. And that’s why it was really important to have Joe Greenberg on the committee, because Joe Greenberg wanted everything shipshape. So basically we spent a year interviewing people who had known Mosher through his research. Then at the end of the year I wrote up the report of our findings, which were recommending that he should be thrown out and saying that, you know, not for the pictures but for the other stuff that we uncovered that he had done. [00:30:15] It was a fairly thick report. We gave it, obviously, to Mosher to give him a chance to talk about it and refute it, and we gave it to the faculty. I don’t know if I was there when [the vote happened]--because George and I were headed off to do six months in Italy because we were teaching in the overseas program. But anyway, the faculty read the report and they voted, all of them, to throw him out. The thing that’s interesting about that is by that time our faculty was deeply divided. We didn’t agree on anything, but they all agreed to throw him out. [00:31:00] And then the other fascinating thing about the Mosher case was our graduate students were very combative. The idea of throwing out a graduate student, you would have expected them to hit the roof and organize and everything. There wasn’t a single one who stood up for Mosher. 103 Asfaha: I can imagine. Collier: Of course, he never published or let anybody see the report. The right wing of course was all horrified about abortions in China and that we threw this man out for publicizing the horrors of abortions in China. He went with that whole narrative, that Stanford threw him out because he had done this virtuous deed of publishing the horrors of abortions in China. Stanford couldn’t say anything, because all we could say is, “That’s not the reason. We can’t tell you why.” I fortunately was off in Italy. I guess somebody from Science Magazine called me, but that was the only interview I got. [00:32:00] Our poor chair of our department [Clifford R. Barnett] got interviewed on television. His story about the Mosher case--because of course nationally we had crucified this guy for doing a virtuous deed. But Cliff Barnett had talked about how when he was interviewed, there were two interviewers. So one would ask a question, and he would look over there, and then the other one, he’d look. But of course the television viewers only saw him, and he looked all shifty-eyed. [Laughter] So anyway, that was the story of the Mosher thing. It took a year and a lot of time. But, as I say, the really good thing was we had a good committee. Tom Grey was fabulous on helping sort out the legal issues, and Joe Greenberg was wonderful on, “You’ve got to prove that--you have to have more evidence.” So it was hard, but I think we made the right decision. Asfaha: It sounds like a very notable experience in your time as a professor here and in the department. I imagine that’s not really common. 104 Collier: No, it is very, very uncommon. Absolutely uncommon. We’ve had other graduate students get into trouble and stuff like that, but it’s been, like I’ve said, people make mistakes. And more often it was the lefties who were so enthusiastic about working with the lefty people that they endangered their informants because they were interviewing people on the left in areas where those people might get hurt. But this was nothing like that. Asfaha: [00:34:06] And so following--I guess this was sort of happening at the same time. The Feminist Studies major was founded in 1981. I wanted to hear a little bit about your involvement in establishing this major that was cofounded by Estelle Freedman and Shelly was also--right before she passed. Do you think that helping establish this major influenced, either helped or hurt you, in receiving tenure, and how did the Anthropology Department receive this new addition to the academic realm of the university? Collier: [00:35:00] In the first place I wasn’t really very involved. In fact, I don’t remember any involvement with the founding of Feminist Studies. Obviously I was for it, but it was really Shelly and Estelle Freedman. I don’t know if people from other departments, from English and stuff like that. Because out of the CROW group, people that worked--and people were doing a lot to sort of protect me, who didn’t have tenure yet, sort of giving me time to write and so on. So I was not really involved in the founding of Feminist Studies. It was only after Shelly died that I was pulled in as the person from Anthropology. By that time I had tenure. As far as I know it had no effect on my career or anything else. Stanford has continued to have 105 programs, and programs that respond to student needs and faculty interests, and this was one of them. [00:36:00] And it was great working across departments and so on. A wonderful group of people. Exciting, fun, sharing ideas. Asfaha: Absolutely. Following that a little bit later on--in 1993 you became the head of the Feminist Studies program. At that point how had your career and your experiences in the field and in the classroom affected your vision for this major and the type of message that you were going to impart unto students who were looking to really just dive into Feminist Studies? Collier: I inherited the Feminist Studies program, and I was asked to lead it basically because they couldn’t find somebody else. But that was fine. I cared about the program and I wanted to see it flourish. [00:37:03] So it was really basically administrative stuff, just making sure that the classes got taught, had people who taught them, that the paperwork and all that stuff got done. There had been CROW, the Center for Research on Women, which had gotten us all together, which was then sort of centered on funding research by scholars and so on who had come there and broke off from the Feminist Studies program, which was the undergraduate major. My vision for it as a major was always--I was pretty sure there weren’t going to be jobs in that, but I thought it was a great secondary major, particularly for women, but for anybody to sort of understand the workings of society. A lot of it had been set up by Estelle Freedman, who knew women’s history. A lot of it was centered on Feminist 106 Studies 101, which was really about current feminist theory and really modern society. [00:38:11] I mean, it wasn’t basically anthropology--the “Sex Roles and Society” course continued to get taught as part of the Feminist Studies program--but Feminist Studies 101, which was really on the history of the women’s movement and the shape of gender and equality today and then feminist theory, which was really quite exciting between liberal feminist theory and leftist, Marxist feminist theory and so on. So that was what the Feminist Studies Program did. As I say, my sense was that it was wonderful preparation for dealing with the world, but not preparation for getting a job. Asfaha: Did having this position allow you to perhaps mentor, advise students in a different way than before? How did you help prepare these students knowing that there may not have been a lot of opportunities solely coming from that Feminist Studies major? Collier: Again, there was a sort of general population to whom one taught, and then there were the sort of people who were really eager to do further work. So the general population--as I say, I taught them--you know, help you understand the world you’re going to come into and understand the history and so on. But there were some people who were really very strong feminists and knowledgeable, people who were writing honors theses or master’s theses. That’s a whole different level of work. Some of those have gone on to lead women’s studies programs elsewhere. [00:40:00] So there was, again, that general breakdown that you get in any department between the people who love the field and really want to 107 work in it and the people who are there to meet distribution requirements or because they have some slight interest. Yes. Asfaha: A little bit after that--1998--the Anthropology Department actually split. This tension was something that was growing and really reflected in anthropology departments nationwide, specifically between biological and cultural anthropology. So this was clearly a very difficult time to be here and to have to deal with that tension and to always have to be around it. What was your view then on this split and how do you view the situation now looking back? Collier: [00:41:00] In anthropology, the sort of four fields--there has been always in a sense a split between the people who look at behaviors as mostly shaped by culture and people who look at behaviors as shaped by our genes. So that’s always been there. But what happened in that period that made it particularly difficult was the split within cultural anthropology itself. And that to me I experienced as a generational split between people who had been trained in anthropology before the 1960s and people who had been trained in anthropology after the 1960s. The big shift was that before the 1960s the focus, in the sense that the big question anthropology seemed to face, was, “What keeps societies stable, what keeps them going?” After the sixties and the experience of all the upheaval and anti-colonialism, the big question was understanding power and how some groups have power and others don’t. We should stop a minute because here comes my sister-in-law. [break] 108 Asfaha: [00:42:11] So you were saying that pre-1960s was sort of the focus on what keeps society stable. And then after the 1960s? Collier: It was sort of what gives some groups power and others not having any power in society. So classically for people trained in the 1950s--and I was trained in the late 1950s as an undergraduate--it was structural functionalism basically. Then came all of the Vietnam War and all of the conflict stuff. The issue then became “How do some groups get power and shape society?” So that was kind of the real differences. [00:43:00] Structural functionalism is melded much better with the biological anthropology. Also because North American anthropology had very much been founded with biological evolutionary studies and cultural studies going along together. But of course the political view, the conflict view of how power is differentiated often conflicted a whole lot with evolutionary notions about “it’s in our genes” and things. Because often the kind of power that they saw in people’s genes was not the kind of power that one wanted, i.e. racist and sexist. [Laughter] If you were a cultural anthropologist, you wanted to think about other kinds of power, not as something inherent in one’s genes but as something that [was inherent] in social processes that gave some people power and deprived others of it. Asfaha: [00:44:11] And so following this split, you went ahead and did more field work, right? Collier: Yes. We escaped some of the conflict by applying for grants and going and doing more field work, yes, getting out after the split. Yes. 109 Asfaha: Then you came to the decision of early retirement with George in 1999, right? Collier: Yes. Asfaha: How did you come to that decision? Collier: We had always intended to retire early. My father retired early. He thought he had heart trouble--I think he was 55 or so. And so he retired, and his heart cleared up immediately. But then he had twenty years of being able to travel and do things he wanted to do, and he’s had a wonderful time. Basically we had always intended to retire early so we could have fun. And it is true that being a professor, as you hopefully will find out some day, is a 24/7 job. You are always working and you always have responsibilities, and particularly you have lots of responsibilities to students and colleagues and things that are moral responsibilities rather than so much day-to-day official things you have to do. You live in a web of obligations. [00:45:54] So we had always intended to retire early and the tensions in the department and the miseries around that convinced us to go ahead. Also, for me anyway, the kind of anthropology that I loved was going out of fashion. So I was just as happy to let other young people come along and do their thing. Because my experience had been, again, as a child of the sixties, I had a whole lot of criticisms and things to say about the earlier anthropologists who had been working under the paradigms of the 1950s and so on. So I remember a whole lot of criticizing and stuff. Younger people were coming along and criticizing me. I thought, “Hey, they deserve their chance.” [Laughter] And then as I say, the kind of anthropology that I 110 loved, which was partly some of that 1950s stuff, was trying to understand the world in which other people live, trying to realize that there are very different kinds of worlds, and how do you think yourself into somebody else’s world. [00:47:15] Whereas by the time we retired, there was a lot of pushback against that kind of view. Because, of course, lots of the “primitive” societies did not want to be seen as primitive. And obviously you had people wanting to not be treated as exotic and different from Western Civilization. They wanted to be treated as civilized and so on. So the kind of stuff I loved, which was really trying to realize that other people really did live in worlds that were different from ours, was coming under a lot of attack--for very good reasons. And so I thought, “Hey, I’m going to do other things.” Asfaha: [00:48:00] Absolutely. And so you talked a little bit about the commitment that it was to be a Stanford professor and to be a scholar and the responsibility that you felt to your colleagues, perhaps the field, and your students. Collier: Yes. Asfaha: In the year 2000 you received a service award from the graduate student program and board and the office of the dean of students. I think that’s such an exciting, exciting thing to receive and to be recognized for. Do you think of yourself as having really helped shift or expand the field? How do you understand yourself in relationship to Stanford’s history and the Anthropology Department in particular? 111 Collier: [00:49:00] I’m not sure so much as to Stanford history, but we had fabulous graduate students in the 1990s. And a lot of the pain of that split was trying to protect our students, help our students through really very trying times. As I say, we had really fabulous students, a lot of whom we still keep a lot of contact with. Asfaha: So you said to protect your students during trying times. During the nineties? Collier: Yes, when there were all those conflicts in the Anthropology Department, to try to not get them caught up in it. Because they obviously had to have advisors and so on. And trying to sort of see them through when all their faculty was fighting with one another. It was horrible. [00:50:00] But Joe Greenberg I’ve talked about, who was with me on the Mosher case, he retired and he for years and years and years had taught the basic incoming graduate student course, the History of Anthropological Theory. So I took that over and I loved that. Actually it had been a group of students who put together a course, because just like Western Civ turned into “Culture, Ideas, and Values,” the “History of Anthropological Theory” [changed]. How would I describe that change? Oh yes, they wanted not just the history of Anglo-American anthropology, but to add sort of French anthropology and other anthropologies. [00:51:00] So that was really fun. I inherited that course and taught it for years and years and years. So I got, I think, the graduate students in that course and got a lot of very good people who then worked with me out of that course. So the award didn’t actually mean that much to me, I’m afraid. 112 But the chance to work with these fabulous students really meant an enormous amount to me and continues to do so. Asfaha: Did you have perhaps a favorite part about being a professor? You have done the field work for so many years, but I imagine being a professor it was just so different, that sort of three parts of doing the teaching, of doing the research, and also the advising. Collier: [00:51:55] Yes. The part of teaching that I really enjoyed most was teaching graduate students obviously, working with graduate students. At the end a lot of it was even collaboration with graduate students. I collaborated with graduate students on articles and things like that. So that was probably the most deeply-rewarding to me. Once I figured out teaching, I really enjoyed it. Because having to organize things to be able to present them to somebody else helped me figure them out. Also I really enjoyed the writing-the research and the writing. Again, because I am the kind of person who likes to organize things. So I loved putting arguments in order and organizing things, both in writing and in teaching and in all the rest of it. [00:53:00] One of the things that happened in anthropology was the idea of organizing everything and putting nice pictures and arguments got challenged by postmodernism which said, ”No, no, the world is fragments.” [Laughter]. So again, that was one of the things that said, “Well, the things I love and the kind of work I do best is no longer in fashion. It’s time to let other people take over.” Asfaha: Oh wow, that’s just great. Thinking about life after Stanford, looking back, how do you compare the attitudes of women and men in your courses and 113 how that has changed over time? Maybe your experience up at the front of the table, the Socratic seminar or the classroom felt different for you? Did it feel different for you from the beginning of your teaching career towards the end? Collier: [00:54:03] Not that I recall, no. Anthropology has always been a field that was welcoming to women, even though they weren’t on the tenure line. And so when women did come in, it was very welcoming. A lot of our students have always been women. I guess I was really fortunate in that I personally never felt really discriminated against. I always felt grateful for having a chance. I knew that had I been male I would have probably had more chances and this and that. But hey, I was very grateful for the opportunities that I had. I mean there were always some men students, like Steven Mosher, who would have nothing to do with women and looked down on us. [00:55:03] There are always some men who look down on women. But basically no, I was treated pretty well and got along very well with male students and female ones, yes. So I don’t recall any major changes. Asfaha: Okay, well, I think that’s a lovely place to stop. Collier: Okay, thank you...