 Luu: This is Vy Luu. It is May 6, 2014. I’m interviewing Myra Strober on behalf of the Stanford Historical Society for the Pioneering Women Project. We are conducting the interview in Myra’s home. Myra, to start off, can we talk about where you were born and where you grew up? Strober: [00:00:17] Sure. And thank you for doing this interview. Luu: Of course. Strober: [00:00:22] I was born in Brooklyn, New York, and spent my childhood there. Luu: Can you tell me about your family? Strober: [00:00:36] My parents, Julius and Reggie [Regina] Hoffenberg, were also born in New York. They were in their mid-thirties at the time I was born, and my sister, Alice Amsden, was born two years later. Her name was not Amsden when she was born; she was Alice Hoffenberg. My mother was the eldest of seven children, and we were very close to my mother’s family. I had about twelve cousins, all of whom were younger than I, and multiple aunts and uncles. My father had two brothers, and they were both married as well. I had a very large and very loving family, and we 13 used to get together quite frequently, so there were lots of people to love and lots of people to love me. Luu: Can you tell me about your family’s values and how these values influenced you? Strober: [00:01:48] My mother’s father was an observant Orthodox Jew, and although none of his children or grandchildren were observant, we all participated, out of respect for him, in multiple Jewish occasions every year. We celebrated all the Jewish holidays and we went to his synagogue on the High Holidays. My grandmother was a wonderful cook and, along with her sister, used to make dinners for thirty people for these occasions. Luu: Wow. Strober: [00:02:34] They were fabulously delicious dinners. I don’t know how they did it because my grandmother and her sister were in their mid-seventies at that time, but they had an enormous amount of energy, and they entertained and we had a great time. The values that I learned were Jewish values about the importance of kindness to other people. My grandfather always told me that we all had a piece of God in us and therefore we needed to be kind to everyone we met because they had the same piece of God that we had. Luu: Can you tell me about your early interests? What do you remember doing with your time while you were growing up? Strober: [00:03:26] I used to love to read. Every spring when the weather got nice, my mother would threaten to take away my books if I didn’t go out and play because my preference was to just stay in the house and read. [laughter] So 14 today when I see kids with video games, who have the same passion for their video games as I had for my books, I’m probably one of the few adults who is very sympathetic to their interests. But I also was very interested in economics from an early age because my father was always afraid of losing his job. My father worked for his cousin in the men’s clothing industry, a very volatile industry where companies go bankrupt frequently, and he was always afraid of losing his job. My mother always worked too. She was an elementary school secretary. But my father’s fear of losing his job always made me wonder how the economy worked, how people got jobs, and how they lost jobs, and so very early on I was curious about that. Luu: What expectations did you have for yourself in terms of a career? Strober: [00:04:51] Well, my mother never called herself a feminist, but she certainly was a feminist, and she had expectations for both me and my sister. She always said, “Marriage is not the be-all and the end-all of life,” and you have to be able to support yourself in what she used to call “a rainy day,” by which she meant in case your husband died. Divorce was very uncommon then, so she wasn’t worried about divorce, but she was worried about death. So both my sister and I grew up expecting to have careers. The kind of career that I expected to have was as a teacher--either an elementary school or high school teacher. My mother had always wanted to be a teacher and that dream never came true for her, so she always thought that if I could be a teacher, it would be extremely fulfilling, not only for me but also for her. Luu: And you wanted to be a teacher as well? 15 Strober: [00:06:01] Oh, I thought being a teacher would be wonderful because, as I said, I loved books, so the idea that I could spend my life helping other people to love books seemed terrific. Luu: Did you encounter the Women’s Movement while you were growing up? Strober: [00:06:18] No, I never encountered the Women’s Movement while I was growing up. The only Women’s Movement I knew was my mother. [laughter] My mother could have been the president of General Motors. She was very organized and very smart, and she was a force of nature. In 1963, Betty Friedan published The Feminine Mystique, and that generally symbolizes the beginning of the second wave of feminism, while the first wave was with Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony and the fight for suffrage. By the way, I’d never heard of Elizabeth Cady Stanton when I was young. I had heard of Susan B. Anthony. But I had no information about the Women’s Movement when I was growing up, and, really, the second wave didn’t get started until the late sixties, even though Betty Friedan’s book came out in 1963. I graduated from Cornell in 1962, so I was totally unacquainted with the Women’s Movement when I was in college. Luu: How did you end up attending Cornell? Strober: [00:07:47] I had to bargain with my parents to attend Cornell. My father had never gone to college. My mother went to college at night at the City College of New York and worked during the day. For them the idea that I could go to college full-time during the day and not work was a miracle, and they thought I should be very grateful for that. But, of course, I wasn’t. [laughter] 16 I wanted to go to a great college, and I didn’t think Brooklyn College was a great college, and I told them that. I bargained with them to let me apply to out-of-town colleges, and they finally gave in. One of my neighbors told me about the School of Industrial and Labor Relations (ILR) at Cornell, and when I got their materials, I thought, “Wow! This program has been tailor-made for me.” Every course that was in the catalog was one that I wanted to take, and I thought, “I’ll really learn about working with people and how the economy works.” I was very excited. My favorite course at Cornell was “Bus Riding 101.” That’s what we called it. That’s not what it was called in the catalog. For this course, our class went to a different factory every week. We went to a steel mill in Syracuse. We went to a coal mine in Pennsylvania. We went to the IBM factory, to the Corning Glass factory. At all of those places we were able to talk to workers and to management, and we had to write a report each week on our trip. I got a very good sense of what the work world was like. I remember years later when I was teaching a course on labor relations at the Stanford Business School, and I was talking about the grievance procedure. We were studying a case in a chemical factory where a worker had filed a grievance because the foreman wouldn’t let him leave to go to the bathroom, and one of my students said that he was fed up with this case, that he didn’t come to Business School to spend his time talking about people who couldn’t go to the bathroom. Something clicked in my head, and I thought, “I bet this guy has never been in a factory.” So I asked the whole 17 class--there must have been about sixty students, “How many of you have ever been inside a factory?” Not a single one had. I said, “OK, class dismissed,” and I went home, made some phone calls, and got the class a tour of the Chevrolet plant in Fremont. My students got to see what the inside of a factory was like, what a worker’s life was like, and then we came back and discussed the case. Finally my student understood why it might be important to have a union and to file a grievance when you worked in that situation and were prohibited from going to the bathroom. Luu: Just going back a little bit here. Was it normal for women to go to college during the time that you attended Cornell? Strober: [00:11:35] Well, it was much less normal for anyone to go to college. About 25 percent of high school graduates went on to college. My high school had about 1,000 graduates, so about 250 of us went to college, and certainly the percentage of men going to college was much higher than the percentage of women. At ILR, there were sixty students in my class, and only fifteen of us were women. It was very unusual to be a woman in ILR, and at Cornell as a whole, about 25 percent of the students were women. Luu: Were you taught by any female faculty members? Strober: [00:12:23] I had one woman faculty member in my entire career at Cornell. Her name was Alice Cook, and she taught a class on labor union history. She had been in the Labor Movement and she was really a spunky woman. I made contact with her later on after she’d retired from Cornell because she became interested in women after the Women’s Movement started. We had 18 many, many conversations together. But she was the only woman faculty member I had at Cornell, and when I went to graduate school, I never had a single female professor. Luu: What led you to pursue graduate school? Strober: [00:13:17] Well, my senior year, the dean of students at ILR called me in, said that several faculty members had recommended me for a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship, and asked me if I had considered graduate school. I said, no, I was going to be a high school teacher and wasn’t interested. Then I told Sam Strober, the man that I ultimately married about this, and he said, “You should go to graduate school. Instead of being a high school teacher, you’ll be a college teacher.” Neither one of us had any idea that being a high school teacher and being a college teacher were two different universes. So I went back to the dean and told him I was interested. I never got the Woodrow Wilson Fellowship, but I did apply to graduate school, and I was accepted at Tufts for the master’s program in economics. Then I went to MIT for the PhD in economics. If that dean hadn’t called me in, I doubt that I would have gotten a PhD. Luu: Tell me more about your experiences at Tufts and MIT. Strober: [00:14:53] Well, Tufts was a wonderful little program. There were only five of us in the economics master’s program. We had terrific faculty members. I did my dissertation with Frank Holzman on Soviet trade unions. I thought I might become a scholar of Soviet economics because I was very interested in that, but I couldn’t manage to learn enough Russian, and so my dissertation 19 was based on secondary sources in English. Interestingly enough, I had a lot of sources from the CIA, which was doing a lot of work on the Soviet Union. Then at MIT, I was definitely interested in labor economics. I was one of only two women in my cohort of 30 students. And in the class above me and the class below me, there were also only one or two women. I was very lonely there. I was one of the few people who was married already, there were few women students, and no women faculty, and the secretaries really were not interested in talking to me. Luu: Who did you seek out for advising or guidance then? Strober: [00:16:42] Well, my faculty were great. Charlie [Charles] Myers was my main dissertation advisor. He was extremely supportive. Abraham Siegel, who was also a member of the labor economics group, was also very supportive, and he ultimately became dean of the Sloan School of Management. So I had lots of faculty support. I think all the graduate students were treated the same, including me. Luu: That’s great. So what did you do after you got your PhD in 1969? Strober: [00:17:32] I moved away from MIT in 1967 because my husband was going to work at the NIH, National Institutes of Health, in Bethesda, Maryland, and I got a job at the University of Maryland in the Economics Department. I thought my dissertation would be done by then, but it wasn’t. I had a new baby, an unfinished thesis, and a new job, so it took me another two years to finish my thesis. But when I realized I was pregnant with my daughter, I thought, “Boy, I’d better finish this thesis.” So I did, and when I went back 20 to MIT for my oral [defense], I was as pregnant as I had been when I’d left two years earlier. When I finished my third year at the University of Maryland, my husband finished his service at the NIH and got a residency and then an assistant professorship at Stanford, so we moved to Stanford. It never occurred to us to go on the job market together. The way things were then was that wives followed their husbands, and so he got a job at Stanford, and I came to the Bay Area with no job. I’d had lots of interviews, but none of them had materialized into a job. Then I got a letter from Lloyd Ulman at Berkeley saying that a position as a lecturer was opening there, and was I interested. Even though I’d been an assistant professor at Maryland and this was a demotion, I had no choice, because we had moved to Stanford, and now I was at the mercy of whoever was going to give me a job. So I took the job at Berkeley as a lecturer. Luu: Can you tell me more about your experience as a lecturer at Berkeley? Strober: [00:20:37] I kept trying to figure out why I was a lecturer and not an assistant professor. Two of my classmates from MIT were on the faculty at Berkeley, Tu [Lovell] Jarvis and Richard Sutch, and they were assistant professors. But the chair of the department told me that I couldn’t be an assistant professor, that he could never sell that to the department. So I was a lecturer, and that discrimination really was what got me into feminism. Seeing my classmates, who had had the same education as I, with regular faculty jobs and not being 21 able to get one myself, I began to do a lot of research on women’s discriminatory treatment. I discovered Elizabeth Cady Stanton. I asked at Berkeley if I could teach a course the following year on women and work. They allowed me to do that, and that was the beginning of my career. I had come to Berkeley thinking I was going to do work on unemployment, and now this whole new field that was truly new--there was nobody in it--was opening up, and I taught my first course at Berkeley on women and work. Then that year, Berkeley made me an offer as an assistant professor, and not long thereafter, Stanford Business School made me an offer as assistant professor, too, and I think that Stanford—well, I forgot an important part here. When I got to Berkeley, I found out that not only was I a lecturer, but basically every woman on the faculty was a lecturer, with rare exceptions, and that they had all filed a complaint with the Labor Department against Berkeley the previous year with the Women’s Equity Action League. It was one of, oh, hundreds of universities that had complaints filed against them for discriminating against women. Stanford didn’t want a similar complaint to be filed against them, so they got their act together and made me an offer. I was the first woman faculty member at the Business School, and they also hired the first black man at the Business School, the first Asian American man at the Business School, and the first Chicano, all the same year. Stanford also hired its first woman at the Law School and a woman at the School of Engineering. I was impressed by the power of the law to change institutions. 22 At that same time, September of 1972, Francine Gordon was also hired at the Business School, and when I got there, I taught my course on women and work. Luu: So it was during this time that you began transitioning into studying women and economics from your experience at Berkeley? Strober: [00:24:40] Women and work. Luu: OK, women and work. Strober: [00:24:45] Yes. Luu: Why did you choose to come to Stanford rather than accept a position at Berkeley? Strober: [00:24:57] Well, I really would have preferred to teach in an economics department than in a business school, but I was commuting to Berkeley. I had two little children. In fact, the chair of the department at Berkeley told me that he couldn’t sell me as an assistant professor to the department because I had two little children. The commute was OK in the morning, but truly horrendous in the afternoon. The idea of being only ten minutes away from my work and having no commute was exceedingly attractive, so I decided to accept the position at Stanford. Luu: Can you tell me more about what it was like to be one of the first women teaching at the Graduate School of Business? Strober: [00:25:59] It was really awful. Many of my colleagues were hostile. There were only five women students in the first class. And they had prepared a slideshow called “What’s a Nice Girl Like You Doing in a Place Like This?” In some ways it was like MIT, except at MIT, even though I was one of the only 23 women and it was lonely, it was never unfriendly, but at the GSB, some of the male students were openly rude, saying that they hadn’t paid all this money to have me as their professor. Really my salvation was the few women students that were there and also Francine Gordon, who was my colleague. But she was also having a tough time. This was her first teaching experience. I had had five years of teaching experience, so I had that going for me, but as a brand new assistant professor with all of the sexism, it was really a hard time for her. Arjay Miller, who was the Dean of the Business School, was a prince. He was extremely supportive. He had been the CEO of Ford Motor Company. He was not an academic. Francine and I wanted to create and host a conference on women in management at the GSB, and he supported that wholeheartedly. He told us that if we planned the conference, he would guarantee that his buddies would show up. And he brought them all, all in suits, and all interested in increasing the number of women in management. The reason why people were interested in increasing the number of women in management was because the government was telling corporations that as government contractors they had to hire women into management positions. But since business schools had never trained them, there weren’t very many to choose from. So these managers of major corporations, many of them high up in their companies, were very interested in figuring out how to bring women into management. The Business School began recruiting women students because its Advisory Council told them that they needed to start training women. They 24 asked Francine and me to help, but after only one year, we didn’t have to recruit anymore. Once the word was out that the Business School wanted women students, they flocked to apply. And this was true nationwide, not just at Stanford. So in just a few short years, the number of women students in MBA programs really increased enormously. Luu: Going back a little bit here, can you give me some examples when you say that your colleagues were hostile in the— Strober: [00:29:21] Ah! Well, for example they were very annoyed because the faculty retreat had been held at a men’s club in Portola Valley, the Family Farm, which is a lovely facility. And now, because there were two women on the faculty, the poor guys couldn’t have their retreat there, and so they cried like little babies and said weird things to us like maybe they could smuggle us in as men. We went to Arjay Miller and we asked him what we should do about this, and he said, “Just don’t pay any attention to them. Eventually I’ll figure out how to get you in there.” By the time he did get us in there, Francine had left, but a new woman had come to the Business School, Joanne Martin, and she and I had the great privilege (ahem) of being able to go to the Family Farm as women in this all-male facility. Luu: Were you close to anyone else other than Francine? Strober: [00:30:41] There were some men assistant professors at the Business School that I worked with, such as Bill [William] Dunkelberg and Charles Weinberg. We did joint research and that was interesting and good. But most of my colleagues were outside the Business School. 25 When I first came to Stanford, the administration wanted me to participate in a press conference in San Francisco, along with Barbara Babcock from the Law School and Lily Young from the School of Engineering, to tell the world that Stanford had hired these three women and were doing the right thing. And so I did. As a result, there was an article in the Palo Alto newspaper about the fact that the Business School now had a woman on the faculty, who, of all things, was studying women. So I was visited by an undergraduate woman, Cynthia Davis, who said that she and some other women wanted to start a Center for Research on Women and wanted to know if I could help them. Then there were two other students in my class who also told me they wanted to start a Center for Research on Women, Beth Garfield and Susan Hecht. Beth was running for president, one of the presidents of the ASSU, Associated Stanford Students, and Susan was a doctoral student at the School of Education. I introduced them to each other because they both had come to me independently and said they wanted to start a Center for Research on Women, and I also got them in touch with Cynthia Davis, who had come to me earlier. The students wanted me to spearhead this effort, but I told them that junior faculty don’t start research centers and that they needed to get senior faculty on board. So they got Eleanor Maccoby from Psychology and Jim March and Elizabeth Cohen from the Ed School [Education School], and Tom Ehrlich from the Law School, and Bill Kays from the School of Engineering, and we all came together. Eleanor and Jim said that they would 26 be the co-chairs of the policy board for Center of Research on Women. They wrote a letter to the Ford Foundation asking for a planning grant of $25,000 to start the Center, and they got the planning grant. But then not much happened, and when we reconvened, Eleanor and Jim said that they really didn’t have the passion for starting this Center, and Eleanor said she thought I should start it. [laughs] Jim said that I couldn’t start it without having some course relief, because I couldn’t be a junior faculty member, teach a full load, and start a Center for Research on Women. So he got the idea I should be a university fellow, and he and Eleanor made that happen. Then I became the chair of the policy board and eventually the first director of this new Center for Research on Women. Although I knew that junior faculty are not supposed to start research centers, this was so exciting, and things at the Business School were so alienating that I just dove in. I spent my time doing research, teaching my classes, taking care of two little children, and starting a research center, and, boy, it was a good thing I had a lot of energy because it was a lot of work. Luu: What was or wasn’t happening at Stanford in academia that motivated you and others to start the Center for Research on Women? Strober: [00:35:57] Well, what wasn’t happening at Stanford wasn’t happening throughout the world. There were no women in positions of leadership. Women earned less than men. Women were not permitted to be in jobs that were lucrative that men had. Elizabeth Cady Stanton said it right. She said, “Men have monopolized all the good employments, so women are not 27 wanted in law and medicine and academia.” Well, she didn’t say academia, but that was one of them. There were very few women on the faculty at Stanford. When I came, I think 4 percent of the tenure faculty were women. There just weren’t women here, in law, business, medicine, PhD programs. There were just no women, or hardly any. So we wanted to understand how all this worked and how to make it different, and we realized early on that this was a pervasive and deep problem. I began reading things like Simone de Beauvoir, The Second Sex, and understanding more and more that it really was going to require overwhelming change in the society to figure out how to get some levers to give women an equal shot. Luu: Going back to your time at the Graduate School of Business, as far as you know, was your salary typical of other female colleagues? Was it typical of male colleagues? Strober: [00:38:11] I think my salary at the Business School was fair and square. I don’t know for sure, but I think probably it was, because discrimination in salaries in general was not at the junior level. Men and women tended, if they were in the same position—that is, assistant professor as opposed to lecturer—to have similar salaries. But as time went on, the salaries of men rose much more than the salaries of women, so I think probably after a while my salary at the Business School was incorrect. But the problem with Stanford salaries is that there’s no salary schedule, salaries are not published as they are in public universities, and there’s a culture here where nobody tells you what other people make, so it’s 28 hard to know how much you’re being underpaid. But we can come back to that later on when I tell you about what I learned when I was ultimately in a position to know how much I was being underpaid. Luu: And you mentioned that some of the first reactions that your students had to you were kind of hostile. How did that change over the years? Strober: [00:39:46] Some men were hostile. No woman was ever hostile. The women were very happy I was there. Well, do you want to talk about my history at the Business School, what happened in my tenure case? Luu: Yes, sure. Strober: [00:40:01] So I started the Center for Research on Women. We got the grant from Ford Foundation for $100,000. The university agreed that we could have permanent status, although, of course, we had to be reviewed periodically, but the Center was established and I was the director. Then I felt I needed to go back to the Business School full-time because I was coming up for tenure and promotion, so Diane Middlebrook and Anne Miner became co-directors of the Center for Research on Women. I went back to the Business School full-time. And by then, things had changed somewhat. I was older. I was more established. There were more women students. The men were used to having a woman professor. So there was no more overt hostility of the sort there had been before. But then I came up for tenure and I was turned down. There was just no way those men faculty were going to let me into their club. It was one thing to have a woman assistant professor, but to have a tenured member of 29 the faculty who was a woman? They were not going to do that. So they turned me down. My husband wanted to stay here--he didn’t want to go on the job market--so I pretty much thought I was going to have to leave academia and work for a bank or a corporation. But David Tyack and Artie [Arthur] Bienenstock went to the dean of the School of Education and said they thought that the Business School had made a mistake and that I should be considered for a tenured position at the School of Education. I had worked with David Tyack for several years already, doing a project with him on how teaching became a woman’s occupation, so he knew my work, and he had introduced me to two economists at the Ed School, Martin Carnoy and Hank [Henry] Levin, and we got along really well. And Elizabeth Cohen knew my work from the Center for Research on Women. So when the dean of the Ed School, Art [Arthur] Coladarci, talked to all these faculty members, they said, yes, they thought it was a good idea for me to be considered at the Ed School. And Artie Bienenstock, who was the vice provost for faculty affairs, promised the Ed School that the university would pick up a half slot for me, and my other half-time job could be at the Center for Research on Women, so I’d have a full-time job, and I could be tenured at the Ed School. So I came up for tenure for the second time, and this time it went through. The Ed School faculty voted to give me tenure. But when my case went to the University Advisory Board, they said no. They said, “How could one person come up in the same year at the Business School and the Ed 30 School and while one says no, the other says yes? We’re not going to approve this.” So they turned it down. Art Coladarci left at the end of the academic year, and the new dean, Mike Atkin, called me and asked, “Who are you? Your papers are all over my desk. What’s going on with you?” When we met, he listened to my whole story and said, “We have to start this all over again. You have to come up for tenure again.” The third time turned out to be the charm. But my colleagues from all over the country who were writing letters of reference thought Stanford had lost its mind, having one person come up for tenure three times in one year. But they wrote yet again, and this time the Ed School approved again, and the new Advisory Board approved. I was in shock. I told my husband I was never, ever coming up for review again. I was happy to stay as an associate professor for the rest of my career because this review process was so awful. I went back to being the director of the Center for Research on Women, which was wonderful, and I hired Marilyn Yalom as associate director, and the center flourished. The center’s going to have its fortieth anniversary this fall, 2014, because it was in 1974 that we got the Ford grant and [the center] was approved by the university. I was also half-time at the Ed School. I loved being at the Ed School. I had wonderful students, doctoral students really for the first time. Well, I’d had one at Berkeley, but I was not the chair of her committee. And I had supportive colleagues. No feelings of alienation. 31 It was just amazing to me that three hundred yards from the Business School was this other entity that was so totally different. I had a wonderful career at the Ed School. I loved my classes. I did some research on teaching. I did some work on childcare. I did some work on the teaching of economics. I did some work on how economics was taught in high schools. And I continued all my work on occupational segregation, how teaching became a women’s occupation, how bank telling became a women’s occupation. I did a study of Stanford graduates, and a doctoral student of mine, Agnes Chan, did a study on the graduates at Tokyo University, both of us looking at the differences in the careers of the women and men ten years out. Then Agnes and I wrote a book together comparing the graduates of Stanford and the graduates of Tokyo University and how the sex differences were different in the two countries. Luu: What are some of the classes that you taught at the School of Education? Strober: [00:48:57] I taught a class on the economics of education and one on the economics of higher education. I taught one on gender and education. I taught a class on work and family, which always had a lot of undergraduates and was cross-listed with Feminist Studies. I was struck every year by the students in my economics of education class, master’s and doctoral students who had majored in a variety of subjects as undergraduates and so had differing quantitative backgrounds. Before I could teach the economics of education, I had to teach basic economics for a couple of lectures. I would do that first by simply talking about the economic 32 principles, then I would put graphs on the board, and finally I would put equations up. And every year the same thing happened: the students with quantitative backgrounds would say to me at the end of class, “Why do you drone on and on using only words? As soon as you put the graphs on the board or, better still, the equations, I know exactly what you’re talking about.” And then right behind them would be the students with English majors and anthropology majors, who would say exactly the opposite: “I understand everything you say, but as soon as you put the graphs and the equations up, I don’t know what you’re talking about anymore. Is it OK that I just understand economics in English?” So I thought, well, this is a really interesting question. [00:51:13] I talked to one of my colleagues at the Ed School, Jim [James] Greeno, who was a cognitive psychologist, and I said to him, “I understand economics verbally, graphically and mathematically. Do these students who understand it only verbally or only mathematically all understand the same thing or do they each understand something different?” “Well, the best way to answer that,” he said, “is to have your teaching assistant videotape your students discussing a very simple economics problem that you create, and then jointly graph the solution to the problem, talking all the while about what they are doing.” We did this, and I watched the videotapes. I was shocked, and after a while, I could only watch the tapes after having a glass of wine, because I learned that if these students couldn’t understand economics both in English and with graphs, it was clear that they didn’t understand it. I was truly 33 chagrined to find out how many of these students could pass exams without really understanding what they were talking about. So I wrote an article called “Economics, Lies, and Videotapes,” and when some of my colleagues in the Economics Department heard about this, they wanted me to repeat the study with their students, so I did. We got a group of students who were in Economics I, and we videotaped them discussing the same problem: If there is a shortage of science teachers in San Jose, and the San Jose School District increases their salary, what will happen to the shortage of teachers? It turned out that the students in Econ I couldn’t answer the question either, and the people in the Economics Department were really very surprised that they couldn’t. So then I wrote another article about making and correcting errors in economics, because what was happening in these sessions was that although one or more of the students would understand the correct solution to the problem, the students who didn’t understand it were able to take the whole group off in entirely the wrong direction. Then, after an hour or so, one of the students who did understand it would be able to bring them back. The article was about how this correction process took place. I got very interested in how students understand economics, and I changed my teaching radically. Instead of aiming for coverage, I aimed for understanding, and I would ask students frequently to explain to me what I had just said to make sure that they, in fact, did understand it. Luu: This is more of a fun question, but what did you enjoy about teaching at Stanford? 34 Strober: [00:55:13] Oh, I love teaching at Stanford. I absolutely love it. Where can you find such smart people? Well, I found very smart people at Berkeley, too, let me say. [laughter] But really, such smart students, highly motivated, interesting, diverse, a new idea every ten minutes, asking great questions, finding fabulous paper topics. I couldn’t have enjoyed myself more. I love teaching, and now that I’m retired, I’m still teaching, believe it or not, back at the Business School, and the same thing is true. I’m teaching Work and Family. I have more men in my class than I ever had before. Imagine, when I first started, all those hostile men. Now at least a third, and often 40 percent, of my class in Work and Family are men. They write papers asking how they can be the best father they’re capable of being, what the effect of childcare is likely to be on their children, and how they can help achieve flexibility for their employees when they are managers in order to give people the opportunity to combine work and family. I have had one of the most satisfying careers I can imagine. Luu: How did you manage to handle your family life and your career and being director of the Center on Research for Women? Strober: [00:57:02] Well, I wasn’t getting a lot of sleep. Seriously, I wasn’t. When my children finally went off to high school and I could get more sleep, I realized that I had had a sleep deficit for a long time. But my former husband was at the Medical School and he had a very demanding job, too, and he wasn’t really into sharing housework or childcare, so I really did it all. [00:57:40] And then our marriage pretty much came apart in the early 1980s, and we divorced. My children were fourteen and twelve, and that was 35 a really hard time because I was basically a single parent for a long time. They saw their father, but he wasn’t living in my house, and he wasn’t involved in their day-to-day care. But we got very close, my two children and I, and they were very supportive of me, and I of them, and we got through it. Then I was a resident fellow for the last two years of my daughter’s high school because she thought that things were going to be very lonely in our house when her brother went off to college. So I said, “Well, maybe we should move into the dorm,” and she thought that was a fabulous idea. I was a resident fellow in Schiff House for two years, and she and I both lived in the dorm. The Stanford students treated her like their little sister, and she just had a wonderful time there. Then I was single for a long time. I had another relationship, but it didn’t last, although it lasted for five years. Then I met Jay Jackman, the man who is my husband now, but I didn’t really “meet” him, because I had met him before, way back in 1960, soon after I’d met my first husband, because Jay was my first husband’s classmate and fraternity brother. In the 1970s, Jay and his former wife, Judith, had moved to Hawaii and raised their family there. Judith and Jay got divorced just around the same time that Sam and I got divorced. Then, Jay brought his kids from Hawaii to the Bay Area when they were looking at colleges. He stayed at my house, and we became good friends. In the summer of 1989, our friendship changed, and we decided that he would move back from Hawaii and we’d get married, which we did in the fall of 1990 in my backyard, with leis and flowers that his friends all brought from Hawaii. 36 We just have a wonderful, wonderful marriage. We share everything. We’ve written together. We’ve done consulting together. He’s a psychiatrist, and when he moved to Palo Alto, he decided not to open up a private practice, which was what he’d been doing in Hawaii, and he became an expert witness in criminal cases. Luu: Going back to your time at the Center for Research on Women, what were some of the challenges that you faced during the beginning when you were starting the center? Strober: [01:01:42] Well, our biggest challenge was money. Mariam Chamberlain at the Ford Foundation told me that I needed to get a commitment from the provost at Stanford, Bill [William] Miller, that when the Ford money came, Stanford would put money in as well, and they did. Bill made it very clear, though, that Stanford was never going to fully support the center, that we had to have outside funds. And it was very hard to get outside funds because the Development Office was really uncooperative. I remember one time—IBM was very interested in having more women in management and in science, so when they did a site visit at Stanford, one person came to the Center for Research on Women and met with me and was very excited about the center. Then the Development Office told me we couldn’t ask them for more than $5,000 because the Development Office wanted IBM to give money to the School of Engineering, not to the Center for Research on Women. We were very low on the Development Office’s priority list, and every time I said I wanted to approach whoever, they said, “Oh, no, no, no, that person is reserved for—.” 37 So I finally decided that I was better off without them than with them, and I just went off and did my thing without telling them. Then when a check came, they never asked me to return it. But it was very hard, because women who had their own money were generally widows, they had money managers who were men, and even though the women were interested in supporting research on women, their money managers were not. And the women were not sophisticated enough or aggressive enough to say to their money manager, “Look, it’s my money. We’re going to give the gift here.” And so it was very hard to get money. It’s interesting. The center’s first major gift came years later from Barbara Finberg, who had been a trustee at Stanford, and who had her own money, and she endowed the directorship of the center. By then I think it was called IRWG, the Institute for Research on Women and Gender. It has changed its name three times. It started as Center for Research on Women, then Institute for Research on Women and Gender, and then one of the students from the Business School, Michelle Clayman, who went to New York and was very successful in her company and also had her own money, endowed the whole center, and now it’s called the Michelle Clayman Institute for Gender Research. So finally when there were women who had their own money, they donated it to the center, the institute, and so that’s what’s enabled the institute—well, that’s not the only thing, but it has enabled the institute to flourish. We struggled so hard for money when we started out. We never 38 actually did a bake sale [laughs], but we spent so much time asking for so little money that we might as well have had a bake sale. Luu: How did the center change over time? Strober: [01:05:57] Well, there have been many directors since me. When I went back to the Business School full-time in 1976, Diane Middlebrook came on as director. She was an English professor. Her interest was literature. Then I came back after that, and then Deborah Rhode from the Law School was the director, and she also had an emphasis on women and work. Then Iris Litt came on from the Medical School, and the main focus of the center became women’s health. I’m probably skipping a few directors in here, but Laura Carstensen came on, and her interest was in longevity, and so she was interested in women’s longevity. Then Londa Schiebinger was director, and she was interested in women and science. Now Shelley Correll is back to women and work. The Center/Institute changes its focus depending on who the director is. Luu: Even after you weren’t director, you were still involved? Strober: [01:07:30] Oh, I’ve always been involved. My children kid me that the center is my third child. [laughter] And Shelley, Shelley Correll, asked me a couple years ago to join the center’s advisory board as a life member, and she also asked the three women students who helped me to found the center to do that as well. So Beth Garfield, Cynthia Davis and Susan Hecht are also life members. Susan Hecht passed away this last year, so she’s not on the 39 advisory board anymore. But I am very much involved in the institute. It really is like a third child. [laughs] Luu: What are some of the programs that were put on by the center? Strober: [01:08:43] You mean now? Luu: Or during your time as director or throughout, since you’ve been director. Strober: [01:08:52] Well, when I was director, we started the CROW Lecture Series. That was our first activity, even before we had money from Ford. And that was really amazing, because at that time there was so little scholarship on women, one person like me, an economist, could know what was going on in anthropology, know what was going on in law, and what was going on in literature. Diane Middlebrook started something called the CROW Group, which was faculty from all those various fields. We would meet throughout the year, and really by the end of the year, each of us knew what there was to be known about women’s studies in these disciplines—say, Estelle Freedman in history—because there was so little at the time. Then scholarship just skyrocketed. Now I don’t even know all of what’s going on concerning women in economics, let alone in all of those other fields. But the original CROW Lecture Series was just a marvelous thing. I got permission from the Business School to hold lectures for the center in Business School classrooms, and so many people came. People were sitting on the floor and people were sitting in the aisles. I thought we were going to be thrown out by the fire marshal. 40 Most of the people who came were secretaries on campus. The number of secretaries on campus has been greatly diminished now that we have computers, but it used to be that every professor had a secretary. Well, not every professor, no, a secretary would be shared by three or four professors. But you can imagine how many secretaries there were. They were all women, and they were all thrilled that there was now this Center for Research on Women with lectures every week, and they all came. They brought their lunches. Also, women came from Los Altos Hills, from Atherton. There were many more women from the community than there were students. Some students came, but women students were much less interested in all of this than adult women, both at Stanford and beyond. Luu: What were the subjects of these lecture series? Strober: [01:11:37] Well, the first one was on everything conceivable, including bride wealth in Africa, affirmative action, the law, changes in the law, women and work. Questions like: Is a novel different if it’s written by a woman than if it’s written by a man? Can you tell that the novel was different? Do women write differently from men? Sex differences in children. All these questions that we had. Why are there so few women in science? Some of these questions we still have today. [01:12:33] So it was a time of tremendous intellectual ferment. Childcare, how can we get a childcare system? That’s still a question. Luu: Did these lecture series continue after your time as director? 41 Strober: [01:12:54] Yes. For many years the CROW Lecture Series at noon was one of the main events of the campus, and eventually the center hired Margo Davis, who was in charge of the lecture series and got outside money for it. One of the most interesting debates at CROW was whether to take money from the Playboy Foundation, which wanted to fund one of our lecture series on Women and the Media. I thought we should take the money, and the provost, Bill Miller, thought we should take it. Bill Miller said he thought we should be like the Catholic Church and figure that the money was cleansed in the giving. But other people argued that we should not take the money. Nan [Nannerl] Keohane, who ultimately became president of Wellesley and president of Duke, felt we should not take the money, that we didn’t want the Playboy Foundation to advertise that they were supporting us, because that made them look good. So in the end, we didn’t take the money, and I had to go to Bill Miller and explain why we didn’t take the money. That was hard. Stanford was not used to faculty turning down outside money. Luu: This is Vy Luu. It is May 14, 2014. I’m here with Myra Strober to conduct the second session of our oral history interview for the Pioneering Women Project for the Stanford Historical Society. We are conducting the interview in Myra’s home. Myra, in our last interview session we had talked about your time at the Graduate School of Business, your time at the School of Education, and also about the Center for Research on Women. I was wondering if we can talk about when you came back to the Graduate School of Business, because I know you started teaching there again. Strober: [00:00:40] Yes, I began teaching at the Business School again in the early 2000s. I first came back from a two-year leave of absence in 2000 while I was in Ithaca, New York, and sometime after that, 2001 or 2002, somewhere in there, the Business School wanted me to be the director of the joint degree program between the Business School and the Ed School, in which a student could get both a master’s degree in education and an MBA in two years, by taking the right combination of courses. 43 I began to direct that program sometime in the early 2000s, and at the same time, the Business School began to cross-list some of my courses on the economics of education, and Business School students began taking those courses. Then Joanne Martin went on sabbatical, and I taught a course on women and work while she was away. When she came back, she told the dean that she thought that the Business School could stand to have two courses on women, hers on women and organizations and mine on women and work, and he agreed. So I began teaching my course on women and work at the Business School around 2003, somewhere around there. Luu: In regard to your experiences with trying to get tenure over at the Graduate School of Business, do you know how this experience compared with other women’ experience around that time? Strober: [00:02:47] Other women who tried to get tenure at business schools? Luu: At Stanford. Strober: [00:02:53] Oh, at Stanford. Not all women had trouble, but many did. Diane Middlebrook had trouble with a promotion from associate professor to full professor in the English Department. Estelle Freedman had trouble with tenure in the History Department. Sandra Bem was turned down for tenure in the Psychology Department. She left Stanford and went to Cornell. It was a hard time for women at Stanford. Luu: Another thing that you mentioned in our previous interview, when I asked you about your salary compared to others, you mentioned that later on you were in a position to know what the salaries were. Strober: [00:03:48] Right. 44 Luu: Can you tell me more about that? Strober: [00:03:50] Well, sometime in the early 2000s, Nel Noddings became the acting dean of the School of Education, and she appointed me to be the associate dean, and in that position I had access to everybody’s salary, and so I could see how very poorly I was paid as compared to my colleagues with the same experience as I. And Nel was paid poorly, too, so she was very sympathetic about my being paid poorly, and she recommended a hefty salary increase for me, which the provost granted. But also when I chaired the Committee on Recruitment and Retention of Women Faculty that Jerry [Gerald] Lieberman had appointed, I told him that we could not possibly talk about the factors that were holding women back at Stanford without knowing something about salaries. He was very reluctant to give me any salary data, but finally he agreed to having me and two other members of the committee come into his office and look at the salary data, which I had asked him to organize by quintile for full professors at each school. Basically, he created scatter plots—years since Ph.D. degree graphed against salary. I suggested that he put a little red circle around each plot point that represented a woman, and because there were so few women, you could easily see the pattern for each school. There were lots of little red circles in the lowest quintile and almost none in the upper quintile. It was obvious that women were disadvantaged, particularly in the upper ranges of experience, and part of that was because men would get offers from other universities and come back to their department chairs and say, “You know, if you want 45 to keep me you’ll have to increase my salary and match my offer from….” Fill in the blank. Princeton, Yale, wherever. Women were much less likely to seek these outside offers and much less likely to get them. Often they were in two-career families, and they really couldn’t move. Sometimes they were concerned about their children in school and didn’t want to move their children. Whatever the reasons, women were not bargaining for increases by seeking and receiving outside offers, and so even when the salary scale was fair for new assistant professors, male and female, it got out of whack very quickly once people had a PhD, say, more than seven or eight years. Luu: This was when you were chair of the Committee on Recruitment and Retention of Women Faculty? Strober: [00:07:45] That’s right. Luu: It was in 1992 or 1993. Is that correct? Strober: [00:07:57] Yes, that seems about right. Luu: Do you remember what led the provost to create this committee? Strober: [00:08:05] Well, he knew that we were not doing well as compared to our peer institutions, and so he wanted to know what was going on at Stanford that was causing us to fall behind in terms of recruiting and retaining women. He and I developed a good working relationship years before when I was director of CROW and he was vice provost for research, and so I think he trusted me, and he knew that I was interested in this subject, so he appointed me as the chair of the committee. Luu: What did the committee do in order to compile research on what the state for women was like at Stanford? 46 Strober: [00:09:02] We were able to get statistical data on other peer universities. We looked at universities in the Ivy League, and also at universities in the Pac-10 that we played football against, and we added MIT and Caltech to the mix. That was the group that we compared ourselves to. We were able to get those data in terms of percentage of women in the various ranks. But to try to get a handle on what women were thinking and feeling, we did interviews of Stanford faculty, and each of the committee members participated in conducting interviews with focus groups. We decided to concentrate on junior women, and we decided to interview men as well as women, because we wanted to know which problems were problems for all junior faculty and which were women’s problems in particular. So we were able to sort that out pretty well. One of our major findings was that there was not a culture of support at Stanford, that departments went to great trouble to bring the best and the brightest junior faculty to Stanford and then proceeded to ignore them. There were faculty who told us they couldn’t even get senior people in their department to read their work, and they didn’t feel supported. This was men and women. Then a lot of women told us they felt underpaid. And there were problems with sexual harassment, particularly in the Medical School. We recommended that Stanford pay attention to this culture of nonsupport and try to create a new culture of support, and that the university look pretty carefully at the salary system to figure out what to do about these grave disparities in salaries between women and men. 47 By the time our committee reported, Jerry was no longer provost, and, actually, one of the people on our committee, Condoleezza Rice, had become provost, and so she resigned from the committee because she could not be on the committee and also be the one to receive the report. Gerhard Casper, who was the new president, was very interested in all of these topics, and Condi was interested, too, so they appointed a new vice provost for faculty affairs to be particularly concerned with women’s salaries. And the technique that Jerry had used to present data to our committee became institutionalized, so that every year the provost asked the deans to present those kinds of scatter plots to show how women were doing in their salaries as compared to men in their peer group. Then after a while, the analysis got more sophisticated. Nancy Tuma and John Pencavel began running regressions. Of course, it’s very difficult to know what to hold constant in these regressions, because if you hold constant too many things, then there’s no disparity at all, and if you’re holding constant some of the factors that are, in fact, discriminatory, then you’ve giving away the game. Bob [Robert] Weisberg was appointed shortly after my committee’s report as someone in the Provost’s Office to whom any woman who felt she was being underpaid could go and talk to because, as I said to you, it was a little hard to know whether you were being underpaid. So you would go to Bob, and he would look at the data, and then he would say, “Yes, you’re underpaid,” or “No, you’re not underpaid.” And if you were underpaid, you 48 could get a salary increase, and many women on the faculty did get salary increases in that way. But that’s kind of trying to fix the barn after the horse is already out. Giving people salary increases because they’d been discriminated against for years is not really a good solution to this problem. It’s an important solution for the particular women involved, but it was necessary to get a more systemic picture of how salaries were being set and why these disparities were arising. And I think Bob did a good job of trying to figure out what was going on and what the pockets of disparity were and trying to give women increases. Women got very large salary increases. But they didn’t get them retrospectively, so if you’d been underpaid for twenty years that was not going to be remedied. I’ve never tried to calculate how much money I lost over the years because I was underpaid, and by how much my retirement account is lower, but I can tell you that it is a substantial amount. I think it would be too depressing to actually know how substantial. Luu: It sounds like in the report that the committee made, you suggested changes that the university should make. Looking back now, do you think the university actually tried to make those changes? Strober: [00:15:40] I think that the biggest change that was made was by Gerhard Casper, who was, after all, a law professor and very concerned about sexual harassment and the university’s obligations and liabilities. So he created a sexual harassment reporting system that I think was very good and continues to be very good. Particularly he created a group of people--and I was one of them--who were called sexual harassment advisors. I always used to joke that 49 if anybody wanted to sexually harass somebody, they had to come to me first for my advice. [laughter] But we were called advisors, and the good thing was that our names were publicized, and anybody from any place in the university could come and talk to any of the advisors. So if you were a woman in Chemistry and you didn’t want to talk to an advisor in the sciences because you wanted more anonymity than that, you could come and talk to me, and many women from the sciences did come and talk to me. Gerhard was very concerned about due process for the person who was being accused, and he was also concerned about the rights of the person who was doing the accusing, and I think he set up a system that was fair. It’s not perfect. Many women suffer sexual harassment and don’t report it because they fear for their future, particularly graduate students, where it might get around in their discipline that they have complained in this way, and they’re fearful that they won’t get an assistant professor position. So it isn’t perfect. But the other thing Casper did was to hire Laraine Zappert to run this program, and she is a therapist and very sensitive to all these issues of rights and responsibilities. She trained all the advisors, and she often worked behind the scenes, so if someone, for instance, would come to me with a complaint, I would go to her. Let me backtrack a minute. As an advisor, I had to be very careful to tell the person who was coming to talk to me that if she told me the name of the person who was being accused, that it was my responsibility to report that to Laraine. But the woman didn’t have to tell me the name of the 50 person. She could come to me and tell her story and get advice without telling me the name, in which case I would tell Laraine that a complaint had been made. But I wouldn’t tell her by whom, and I wouldn’t tell her, obviously, who was being accused because I didn’t know myself. But if the woman complaining told me who she was accusing, even if she didn’t want to file a complaint, Laraine might talk to her and kind of work behind the scenes. So, for example, one time there was a complaint, and Laraine suggested that I go to the faculty member who was being accused, with that faculty member’s department chair, and just sort of tell that person that there had been somebody who had talked to me and maybe this faculty member wanted to be a little more circumspect in the future. And you would be surprised, this works well. Faculty members, when they are confronted by their peers who tell them, “This is not acceptable behavior at this university,” may well reform. Luu: That’s good to hear. Strober: [00:20:28] Yes. So I think, as I say, the system is not perfect, but I think that in many instances the system works well. Luu: Did you find that after the report of the committee was made, Stanford compared better to its peer institutions in regards to retention and recruitment of women? Strober: [00:20:53] I’m not sure I’ve seen comparisons. But Stanford most certainly got better. We increased our percentage of women, and the salary disparities got smaller. I’m not sure about the culture of support. I think it improved somewhat. 51 One of the costs to me of having chaired that committee was that then I was known all over campus as someone who was concerned about these problems, so I had many visits from very unhappy women, particularly at the Medical School and in the sciences, who had been turned down for tenure or for promotion and felt the decisions were unfair and were considering suing. They would all come to my office with manila folders filled with papers, and they would show them to me, and I would try my best to be sympathetic. I would tell them, of course, that I had no power to do anything on their behalf, but they would leave their folders with me. So eventually I had a whole file drawer filled with folders of people’s very unhappy stories. When I went off to Ithaca for my two-year leave of absence, I went through them all, and it was very painful for me, because these were stories of people who had had a very hard time, just like I had had a hard time, and there was nothing I could do for them. There was no point in my hanging onto their folders anymore, so with great pain, I threw them away, and I was glad to leave Stanford for two years, because by the time I came back, women had found other women to go and talk to, and so I was off the hook. Luu: Could you tell me more about your experiences as one of the sexual harassment advisors? Strober: [00:23:40] Well, I thought the trainings were excellent when I started out. After all, I don’t have a background in counseling of any sort. And I thought the sessions that Laraine organized were very helpful in terms of understanding what Stanford’s policy was, understanding what the law was, 52 and understanding how to listen to people who are in great pain. The same thing with the women who came to me with their terribly sad stories about tenure and promotion. At least I could provide a sympathetic ear and a warm heart, and that was helpful to them, and I think that was true for the harassment situations too. Sometimes the women didn’t understand what exactly was happening to them because there was very little quid pro quo sexual harassment, where a faculty member would say, “If you don’t sleep with me, I’m going to give you a failing grade.” It was more what we called hostile environment harassment, and particularly in the sciences where there were very few women and the environment was very male and very hostile, situations arose like going to strip clubs at meetings off campus. So one of the things I did was to provide a sounding board for these women to say, “Yes, what I’m experiencing is in fact harassment, and, no, I don’t have to put up with this.” What I would tell them is that whether they wanted to file a formal complaint or not, perhaps they just wanted to absent themselves from difficult situations. I assured them that it was not part of their job description, formal or informal, to go to strip clubs. And also I spent time teaching women to say no, because the first part of the training really was that if somebody is being sexually harassed, they need to make it very clear to the harasser that they want this to stop, and some of the women had not done that, and so I counseled them to do that and then see what happened. Sometimes a couple of words did the trick, and sometimes it didn’t. 53 Luu: Can you tell me about your time working on the Signs journal? Strober: That was a very exciting time. We competed with Wellesley College--we were the two finalists--to bring the journal to Stanford. The journal had been started by Catharine Stimpson in ‘75 at Barnard College. The University of Chicago owned the journal, and Catharine and the University of Chicago Press felt that it would be good for the journal to rotate venue every five years, get fresh blood into the editorial team, and so the University of Chicago Press held a competition for the next venue. When I heard about this, I went and talked to Barbara Gelpi and asked her if she would be interested in being editor, and she was excited and said yes. Then we put together a marvelous editorial team: Carol Jacklin from Psychology, Shelly [Michelle] Rosaldo from Anthropology, Estelle Freedman from History, Nan Keohane from Political Science, and myself. I can’t remember whether Jane Collier was on the team to begin with or she came later. But anyway, we were successful in our competition. We had wonderful support from both the provost and the president. Don [Donald] Kennedy, who was provost when I first went and told him about it, said he knew that support from Stanford was going to be critical here, and said, “Now, you just let me know what you need me to do to get this journal here.” When the University of Chicago Press came to campus for their site visit, Don was very charming and explained to them how much Stanford 54 wanted the journal, and then they met with Dick [Richard] Lyman, who was president, who was also very supportive. Luu: So it stayed at Stanford for the next five years? Strober: [00:29:54] It stayed at Stanford for the next five years, yes. Luu: What was your role with Signs? Strober: [00:30:02] Well, at that time feminism was bursting its intellectual seams. There was so much new material coming out, and because Signs was the preeminent journal in women’s studies, all these manuscripts came to us, and so our graduate students were able to read things even before they were published, and we were able to discuss all these new ideas. It was a crossdisciplinary team because we had submissions from all these disciplines, and it was very exciting trying to figure out how much of the journal’s space should be on psychology, how much should be on literature, how much should be on economics. Those decisions had to be made. Then we had a wonderful conference on women and communities and published an issue on that subject, including women in Catholicism. We had Joan Chittister, who was the abbess of a Benedictine abbey in Erie, Pennsylvania, come to the conference, and she gave a sensational final address. The faculty members who were doing this and the graduate students who were doing this bonded strongly, and then we became preeminent in terms of Stanford’s association with women’s studies because the journal was here. 55 Luu: Are there any other special appointments or positions or leadership roles that you had at Stanford that you would like to discuss? Strober: [00:32:09] The School of Education doesn’t have chairs of departments because it doesn’t have departments, but it has areas, and I was chair of the area of administration and policy analysis, so I played a leadership role there. The program that I told you about earlier on, the joint degree between the Business School and the Ed School, came out of that area committee. Mike [Michael] Kirst, who was in that area committee, was the chair of that joint degree program before I was. That gave me some practice in a leadership role, being chair of the area committee. Then I was associate dean, and then I was acting dean of the School of Education because the dean that they appointed after Nel Noddings was Rich [Richard] Shavelson and he couldn’t come right away, so I was acting dean during the time after he was appointed but before he came. Luu: We can move on to talking about the research and publications that you made during your time at Stanford. This is a really broad question, but what was some of the research that you did? What did it focus on? Strober: [00:33:50] Well, the two areas that I was most concerned with were occupational segregation and the economics of childcare. I did a tremendous amount of work on occupational segregation. Why was it that women and men had different kinds of occupations, and why was it that men’s occupations were paid more than women’s? I looked at how teaching became a women’s occupation in the nineteenth century. I did that with David Tyack. The extant theory at that 56 time was that women became teachers because they were cheaper to hire than men. But that just didn’t make any sense to me, because women were cheaper to hire for all occupations. So how come women were teachers but they were not physicians, they were not lawyers, and they were not CEOs? So I said, “This cheapness hypothesis really does not explain what was going on. Why did women become teachers?” David and I looked at this very carefully, and I developed the relative attractiveness theory, which says that men get first choice of occupations because they are presumed to be the breadwinners in their families, and so why wouldn’t you give them first choice? And they choose the occupations that are relatively attractive, given their level of education. So if you have only a high school education or less, an attractive occupation might be truck driver, because the pay is good and the pay increases over time and the benefits are good. If you have a college degree, then a relatively attractive occupation might be physician or lawyer or dentist. Of course, you would have to get a post-graduate degree, but that would be a good direction to go. So once men fill up the attractive occupations, then the ones that are less attractive are available for women who meet the educational criteria. In teaching, there were two separate labor markets: one was in cities and one was in the countryside. In cities women were teachers from the beginning because the system was set up like a factory. The wages were low, the education requirements were high, and it was not an attractive occupation for men, except in high schools where the pay was higher and the intellectual excitement was greater. So high school teachers were more likely to be men, 57 although still there were a lot of women high school teachers. But elementary school teachers were pretty much women in the cities. They all had a principal above them, and the principal was like the father, and if the boys misbehaved, the women teachers, the equivalent of mothers, sent the boys to the principal. But otherwise the women taught in the classrooms. By giving men first choice of occupations, educated women were prevented from going into occupations like law and medicine, dentistry, and business. And so very bright, highly educated women went into teaching, and they also went into nursing, and they went into librarianship. All of these occupations paid less than the male occupations, and men were not interested in them, so they were available for women. In the countryside, men had been teachers of the boys during the winter, and women were teachers of the girls during the summer and the winter, but in the summer, the boys and the male teachers all left school to farm. So they were mainly farmers, these men, but they did some teaching in the winter when they weren’t farming. Then the states began putting in all sorts of requirements. As education requirements increased, they wanted to lengthen the school term, they wanted people to go to school more years, they wanted teachers to be recertified, and the men who were teaching, who were basically farmers, said, “This is not an attractive occupation anymore. I’m a farmer. I’m not going to a summer institute to learn how to teach better.” So they dropped out of teaching. 58 So as soon as men moved out, women moved in, and we found this, too, in bank telling. In 1935 when Princeton University did a study of employment in banking, they didn’t find a single woman bank teller. When the researchers asked about this, the bank managers would say, “Women bank tellers? Who in their right mind would come into a bank and give their money to a woman?” So there were no women in bank telling. But then World War II came along, and the men went into the armed forces, and banks hired women as tellers, and nobody had any problem giving the women their money. After the war, the banks tried to recruit men back, because, again, men get first choice of occupations, but now we had a G.I. Bill. The country had said we want to reward all these men who served in the armed forces. We want to give them free college tuition. So men who used to work in banks or might have worked in banks, went off to college. They didn’t want to be bank tellers. And it used to be, prior to World War II, that you’d come into the bank as a bank teller, and even with only a high school education you would work yourself up. I interviewed men who were vice presidents of the bank when they retired, and they had no more than a high school education. But then all of that stopped. Men went to college, women went into bank telling, and, guess what? All of these ladders up disappeared. When women came into bank telling, they stayed in bank telling. They didn’t move up. And the men who went to college came to the banks at much higher levels. 59 So, you see, bank telling had been an attractive occupation when men were in it, because you could move up. But then when women came in, it became an unattractive occupation, and by 1950, the vast majority of bank tellers were women. So that’s how the relative attractiveness theory works. Luu: Could you tell me more about your research on childcare? Strober: [00:41:59] I was very interested in the fact that there was so little childcare and childcare workers were so poorly paid. I wanted to understand how we could revise the system and provide childcare in a group setting, because I never thought that the solution to women working was to hire poorer women to take care of their children at home. That just seemed to me ridiculous. I thought we should have childcare run by loving people who were experts in childcare, who were reasonably paid, sort of like teachers, but teachers of very young children. I wanted to understand why this hadn’t happened and, beyond that, what we could do to make it happen. In 1971, it almost happened, because Congress passed a bill that would have created a national system of childcare, but President Nixon vetoed it. He said he thought it would weaken the family. And there’s been no comprehensive childcare bill since. I did a study on childcare centers as workplaces and interviewed childcare workers about their concerns. I learned that it’s just an extremely difficult job. Not only is the pay very poor, but many of the childcare aides have very little training. There are no substitutes, so if a teacher gets sick, which happens all the time because they’re around young children, then all hell breaks loose because the government has mandated certain adult-child 60 ratios, and if a teacher gets sick, there’s no substitute. The cook has to come out of the kitchen and become a teacher so that there are enough adults in the classrooms. So everybody’s stressed, and it’s just a difficult system. Luu: What were some of the reactions to your research during your time at Stanford? Strober: [00:44:47] Well, when I first came to the Business School, I had already been doing research on childcare, and they asked me to give a seminar within the first couple of weeks that I was there. I decided I would talk about childcare, because that’s what I had been researching. I knew it was a controversial topic, but I was trying to talk about the economics of childcare and what the economic rationale for childcare subsidization would be, and I said that childcare was equivalent to education and that the same reason why the government provides universal education is the reason why government should provide universal childcare. Well, my colleagues never let me finish more than five minutes of my talk. They were incensed. “More government intervention? We need less government, not more government. Why are you telling us this?” The man who was ostensibly running this seminar, Lee [George Leland] Bach, never said a word to my colleagues, never told them to be quiet and let me continue, and I was too new at the game to tell them myself. So they just ranted among themselves, and finally the forty-five minutes was up, and I left. Everybody knew this was a disaster, and at least three of my colleagues came to me within a couple of days to advise me to stop doing 61 work on childcare, that this was not a suitable topic, that I should do some other work until I got tenure, and then once I got tenure, I could work on whatever I wanted. But in the meantime, they didn’t want me to work on childcare. I listened to them, and I thought, “I’m not going to take their advice, because I’m all fired up about childcare, and if I’m going to be in academia, I’m going to do research on what I want to do research on. And if not, I might as well go work for a big bank and get a lot higher salary than I’m getting here.” So I just kept doing my thing, working on childcare, and working on occupational segregation. I also worked on the difference in spending habits between two-earner and single-earner families. I wanted to find out if you have two families, and each earns the same total amount of income, but in one family, the husband earns it all, and in the other family, the wife and the husband both earn it, is there a difference in their spending? And the answer is “Yes,” because the family with two earners spends more on childcare and more on transportation and clothing. If the total incomes are the same for the two kinds of families, the family with one earner saves a lot more money than the family with two earners. So over time, that family became better and better off, because they have more wealth because they save more. So even though they have the same incomes, these two kinds of families are very different. Luu: How did the reactions to your research change over time, or when did they begin to change? 62 Strober: [00:49:13] Well, the Business School never clearly defined my field. I called it women and work, but we never had a discussion of what my field was, and, again, I was too new to the game to know that this was what you were supposed to do. But they knew that this was what you were supposed to do, and why they didn’t do it, I can’t tell you, but they didn’t. So when it came time for me to come up for tenure, I had colleagues coming to me to tell me they were very worried about this tenure decision. And I said to them, “You’re worried? I’m worried.” Well, they said, my field is too new, my field is too female, I don’t have enough men writing for me; you know, their complaints were legion. But all of this should have been figured out long before I came up for tenure, and it wasn’t. So what were their reactions to my work? You know, I don’t really know. [laughter] One of them told me I didn’t hit a home run, which, I thought to myself, was a real male metaphor. And he told me that my work was not seminal. I thought, “Oh, boy, a second male metaphor.” Luu: Can you tell me about the books you have published? Strober: [00:51:19] I did an edited book with Sandy Dornbusch from Sociology called Feminism and the New Families, and I did a book with some people from Signs on women and poverty. But the first book where I was an author was with Agnes Chan. We looked at the graduates of Stanford and the graduates of Tokyo University. It was the 1980 graduates, and we surveyed them in 1990. We wanted to know how women and men had fared in comparison to one another over those ten years. There were women from Stanford who, despite their education, did 63 not work, were not employed. The same thing for the graduates from Tokyo University. The male-female salary differential between graduates at Stanford was about the same as the differential from the graduates at Tokyo. That was surprising. Most people thought that earnings differentials would be higher in Japan than in the United States, but it wasn’t the case. Very few of the Stanford men were helping with housework, but an even smaller percentage of the Japanese men were helping with housework. So it was an interesting comparison of the two cultures and the two sets of very highly educated women and men and what happened to them over the ten-year period. Luu: How did you and Agnes begin to work on this research together? Strober: [00:53:10] Well, Agnes was my student, and when she first came to Stanford, she was one of the research assistants on the project to analyze the Stanford data. She got interested in that topic and did her own dissertation on the graduates of Tokyo. Then, after she finished her dissertation, we decided to put together the two sets of data, and we wrote that book. Luu: That’s interesting. I don’t really have any other points I want to address on my outline, but is there anything that you would like to discuss about your time at Stanford that you don’t think we have covered? Strober: [00:53:58] Well, the last chapter of my memoir is called “If You Live Long Enough.” I have returned to the Business School and I’m a very popular teacher now over there. I taught a course just a month or so ago on work and family, and I had put a limit of sixty students on it. It was filled and there was 64 a waiting list of another fifty-three students, so I could have taught another section, which I didn’t want to do. I get letters from the current dean, Garth Saloner, telling me that he thanks me for all I do for the Business School, so it’s a very different world than when I was there before. Luu: That’s very good to hear. [laughs] Strober: [00:54:55] I think over time, things have changed, not only for me, but for all women. I think Stanford is a far better place to work. I think that women are welcome at Stanford and faculty women are welcome. I was a pioneer. At the time I didn’t quite realize that I was a pioneer, but as I look back, I certainly was. By and large, I enjoyed it. It was a good run, and if I had it to do over again, I hope I’d be smarter, but I certainly am glad that I persisted at Stanford, that I succeeded at Stanford, that I got to spend my career at this fabulous place. I turned out to be lucky. Luu: I guess I just have one last follow-up question. Do you think there are still improvements or changes that could be made now at Stanford in regards to how women faculty members are treated? Strober: [00:56:19] I think that the situation in the STEM fields [science, technology, engineering, mathematics], and even in economics to some degree, is not as good as it could be, and I think the university recognizes this and is trying to remedy this. This is a social and economic problem of long standing, and it’s going to take a while to change, but I think that in engineering and computer science and physics, there are still bastions of maleness that will eventually need to change and, I think, will change. 65 Luu: Thank you so much for your time, Myra. Strober: [00:56:19] You’re welcome. Luu: Thank you for participating in the interview...