 Marine-Street: This is Natalie Marine-Street with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is August 22, 2017, and I’m here with Stanford University’s Barbara Tversky, Professor of Psychology Emerita. We’re conducting this interview as part of the Stanford Pioneering Women and Stanford Faculty Oral History Projects, and we are in the department lounge of the Psychology Department in Jordan Hall. Barbara, I wanted to just get us started by asking you to tell us a little bit about your family history. You have a very fascinating family history, from what you and I have discussed, and I thought maybe you could tell us a little bit about your mother’s side of the family. Tversky: [00:00:43] Thank you. I want to say, before I start talking about memories, that memory is something that I’ve been studying since I was an undergraduate and from many different perspectives. I think I know firsthand that we constantly rewrite our memories. Memories don’t happen in words. In general we talk about them in words, so even interpreting what’s happening as it’s happening is the beginning of creating a memory, and 13 we’ve done research on this. We find that people retell memories differently depending on the audience and the context, and so on and so forth. So we’re constantly re-crafting our memories depending on the context of retelling, and we can introduce error at any one of those stages. We mix up things from different memories. We incorporate other people’s memories into our own. So I’m saying I’m happy to talk about memories, but with the understanding that truth, reliability and so forth are not guaranteed. [laughs] Marine-Street: [00:01:59] Yes, and I think in oral history, we see that all the time--that memory is a really tricky terrain, and it’s influenced by our relationship. It’s influenced by the events that are happening right now outside us that are making us see things differently. But nonetheless [laughs], let’s hear some memories. Tversky: Most of my growing up was in a Protestant suburb of Chicago that was upper-middle class, and it took a while to realize that my family was different from some of the people around us. Now I think everybody feels that, but perhaps the differences here were a little more obvious. [00:02:44] I grew up with other languages in the house. My mother had been born in Sweden. Her mother had been American but her father is Swedish, and that’s a nice story of how they met, but she did grow up in Sweden. Family came to visit, and Swedish was in the house. He was born in the States but his first language was Yiddish, and his parents spoke Russian, Yiddish, and English. Yiddish was their favorite language, so when they were visiting Yiddish was in the house. So it was natural to have other languages, and other cultures, and other ways of behaving in the house. 14 We didn’t go to church. Everyone around us went to church. So these were all things that I gradually realized made us different from other people--again, on the background that everybody feels a little different. [00:03:44] As I said, my mother’s family came from Sweden. Her father died when she was very young, and the family didn’t have a lot of money. There were four children, and her aunt, who lived in Chicago, was reasonably well-to-do and eventually brought the family over to Chicago. My father grew up in this very left-leaning, socialist, communist family in New York and in different parts of Brooklyn, different parts of New Jersey and so forth. They were moving. He remembers growing up with always extra people in the house. His own father had fled the pogroms in Russia at nineteen, coming to the States with no English and essentially no money and made a good life, but the minute there was money in the house they brought someone over from Russia. And the minute that person was on their feet and there was a little bit of room in the apartment, someone else came, and [then] someone else came. These added a great deal to my father’s life. They were figures that he respected highly. There were a lot of stories there. [00:04:58] But he grew up in this socialist, communist environment, Yiddish-speaking, a lot of literature, theater in Yiddish, Yiddish-speaking camps that were very left-wing. He himself in high school was head of the newspaper, and he discovered that the principal was skimming off lunch money--a penny of milk money from everybody’s lunch--and he printed that in the paper. The principal went to Brooklyn College, which is where bright 15 Jewish kids went in those years, and told Brooklyn College, “Don’t take this guy. He’s a trouble-maker.” [laughs] [00:05:39] My father, who had skipped two grades and graduated very young, couldn’t go to Brooklyn College, so he went to Wisconsin, which turned out to be a hotbed of communism at the time. There his best friend was my mother’s older brother. He would go out for Thanksgiving--New York was too far. He went to Chicago with my uncle and met my mother, and she went to Wisconsin. They fell in love. They got married. They were involved with many leftist circles, and [with] all kinds of interesting people, and both were Party members until 1938. I didn’t learn about this until I was in college. [00:06:28] I do remember coming home from school--my mother never watched TV--coming home from school and she was watching the McCarthy hearings and [was] terrified because many of their friends were blacklisted and in danger. They felt personally in danger, and it was a terrifying time in U.S. history and a personally terrifying time for them. I remember her fear. I was too young to ask or didn’t know how to ask, but when I started getting involved in leftist causes as a student at University of Michigan, I wanted to go to some youth meeting in Finland. I didn’t have the money to do it anyway, but she said, “The FBI has a file on us, and it’s dangerous.” I was a kid. I didn’t feel danger, but as an adult now I certainly understand her worry. Marine-Street: I want to just back up a little bit because you had mentioned the story about your father’s father escaping from Russia. Can you tell me about that? 16 Tversky: [00:07:41] Again, he lived in a village in what’s now Ukraine, and there were pogroms against the Jews. The Cossacks would come and ransom the villages and kill if the ransom wasn’t good enough. They sometimes slaughtered even if the ransom was good enough, which is how one of his cousin’s father was killed. That’s a dramatic story too because this father was the only Jew elected to the Duma after the 1917 election, so this is much later, and he was killed. He was the one who ransomed the village, and they got the money and killed him. So my father’s father’s life was in danger. [00:08:30] The other thing that happened to young men at that age was they were drafted into the army, and it was almost certain death. So he got a fake passport somehow, and it’s winter and he’s walking across the border to get to I think probably Poland. I don’t remember the rest of the journey. He meets soldiers from the army, and he has to make a hole in his pocket and get the real passport out of it and onto the ground and step on it without the soldiers seeing him. It’s a dramatic story that my brother later recorded. He succeeded in doing that and in showing the fake passport that I guess gave him an age that was over the army. I can’t remember. He did get out and arrived in the States. He did have family in Philadelphia, so that allowed him entry at Ellis Island. He eventually worked as a labor organizer and then later had a series of what are called candy stores in New York. They’re still around. They’re convenience stores. And laundromats, small businesses, but self-taught English, very much an intellectual, very much, and I adored him. 17 Marine-Street: [00:09:51] So you knew your grandfather? Tversky: Oh, I adored him, and we wrote frequent letters. He was anti-religious because he’d grown up in a very religious home. He’d rebelled and gone into socialism, so there was no religion in the home whatsoever. He didn’t go to Israel because they spoke Hebrew and he thought that’s the religious language. Yiddish is the language of the Jews. They didn’t know then about Jews in Arabic-speaking countries and so forth who wouldn’t be speaking Yiddish. So he wouldn’t go to Israel. His wife’s first cousin was the national poet of Israel, so some of the family did go. I never had connection with them, but he wouldn’t go, and in fact when the Bialik came to the States he wouldn’t go see him. Marine-Street: This is the poet. Tversky: [00:10:46] Yes. There were strong feelings, political feelings then, and families split apart on which branch of socialism or communism you were involved in. The same thing happened in Israel, so it was familiar to me. So when I wrote him that I was marrying Amos and going to learn Hebrew he wrote back a letter blessing me, a long one, and then he couldn’t resist adding a P.S. saying, “Why don’t you learn Yiddish? That’s a good language.” [laughs] Marine-Street: Oh, that’s a good story. Now your father, then, goes to Wisconsin to get his degree, and then how does he support himself after that? Tversky: He studied statistics and economics and he got a job originally with the Bureau of Labor Statistics, so he did have a job even though those were Depression years. They lived in Philadelphia for a while, then they moved to 18 New York. My mother was an artist, and so in New York she studied at the Art Students League, which is still there, and at that time had an amazing group of teachers and artists around it. She didn’t continue her career after she got married--a pity, although later in her life she began--oh, so there are some nice stories there. [00:12:09] Eventually I was born, and I was born some six, seven months after Pearl Harbor. I kept my father out of the army for a few more months, but not forever. He was eventually drafted and [was] in the Philippines for a very long time. At some point my mother moved back to Chicago because her mother was there and all the sisters-in-law. She, instead of writing letters, sent pictures to my father, sketches about the family, and it was eventually published. Marine-Street: No kidding. Tversky: Yes, it’s called Love, Margaret, and it’s much treasured in my family. She was on a talk show on the radio in Chicago. They’re adorable. They were adorable pictures that she sent to my father, a lot of humor in the pictures. Marine-Street: What kind of pictures was she drawing? Tversky: [00:13:04] Sketches. They were family life and really precedents of comics, because everything was said in the pictures and not in the words. In fact, often she just signed, “Love, Margaret,” and the picture told the story. I should have brought one, but they’re in New York. They were adorable, and as I say, much treasured. Much later she wrote some kids’ books that were more or less self-published, and just 19 before she died she was working on a cartoon for children who weren’t reading. It was again something all said in pictures, and they were adorable. [00:13:50] That’s a sad story, that she didn’t--in that sense she was way ahead of her time, and I do research on comics, so the art stayed with me. She very much encouraged me to go into art. She said, “You’re better than I am,” which I didn’t believe--or “I was.” It was a career I certainly considered and I loved drawing, but I realized, who’s going to pay me to do that? [laughs] It felt very self-indulgent, and it came at a time when people were going to pay me to go to graduate school. Marine-Street: If I have this right, then, you were born in New York but then moved to Chicago during the wartime? Tversky: [00:14:38] During the war. Right, exactly, and they were supposed to keep the apartment in New York for us, for soldiers. They didn’t, so my father ended up in the apartment in Chicago and eventually found work there, and after the war were good times. Again, this is the background of being a minority. At the time in New York when he was looking for work there were many businesses closed to Jews. There were businesses that were open. They’d moved to somewhere near Eastchester, somewhere north of New York on the border of Bronx and Westchester, before I was born, because the city apartment was cramped. When he wanted to find a doctor to deliver me, finding a doctor who would deliver a Jewish baby was hard. It’s just a bit of a reminder that the world was quite a different place. 20 Marine-Street: [00:15:38] Tell me what some of your early memories are from the 1940s and living in Chicago. Do you have anything that really sticks in your memory, images from this time? Tversky: Sure. We had a family across the way that was my mother’s best friend, my father’s best friend, and there was a boy a couple of months older than I who was tall. I was tiny, and of course I was in love with him at four and five. His name was Michael. The empty lots were [near our] building, and at some point we played a lot in the empty lot. Parents weren’t very observant of children. Three- and four-year-old kids playing in empty lots with no adult watching over them? So Michael was on a big pile of gravel and he said, “Sit at the bottom of the pile, and I have a brick, and I’m going to throw it over your head.” Well, you can guess where it landed. [laughs] Marine-Street: [laughs] Not funny. Tversky: [00:16:34] So I got taken to the hospital--stitches. I still remember this feeling of ketchup--of course, it wasn’t--kind of rolling all over my head, not quite knowing what had happened, and poor Michael locked himself in the bathroom. He was so horrified at what had happened. He loved me, and he was a gentle child. That child was allowed to explore the trains of New York, the CTA, the elevated train, alone at five. He knew the whole city. Again, parents-Marine-Street: Very different. Tversky: [00:17:13] I went to school. By then there were two other children, and again, I was tiny. By the time I was in first grade my mother gave me I think two dimes, one dime to take the city bus to school. I could barely lift my leg 21 up on the [step] to get in. It was a city bus. There were no other children on it. Then I learned very quickly that if I walked home--it was only a mile--I could stop at the drugstore where all the big kids were getting Cokes [laughs], and I could kind of stay in the background and do the same thing with my dime, and nobody knew that I hadn’t taken the bus home. So that was my early trespassing on the rules of the house. We left the city because the schools were problematic and the private schools were filled. There were long waiting lists for the private schools, and we moved to the suburbs. That’s how I ended up in this suburb where there weren’t too many people like me. Everybody was Republican. We were very liberal. Marine-Street: [00:18:28] Interesting. So you weren’t really part of an ethnic Jewish community then in Chicago. Tversky: Well, later, yes, and my parents, because they weren’t really religious, we later moved to a different house. In fact, always there were a few Jewish families. There were my parents’ friends. They were wonderful people, just wonderful people, and took care of each other, and many did well. We moved to a kind of nicer part of town at one point, and there were five families. They got together every Thursday. The women would have a cocktail and then the men would join. It was the Maple Avenue Boozing Society. [Marine-Street laughs] [00:19:06] Again, they were wonderful people, and I kept up with them despite moving to Israel. My brothers kept up with all those families. They still do. Even though they don’t live anywhere near, they’re still close people. By the time I was in high school, the intellectuals in that 22 community--and again, they’re people I still keep up with--very few. But you still kept a low profile. You didn’t want to stick out. Marine-Street: You said that they were very liberal, but you also said that they weren’t in the Party anymore since before the war. Tversky: Right. Marine-Street: How did their political consciousness or sensibility--how did you become aware of that or how did that manifest itself? Tversky: [00:20:00] Oh, early on, early on. We were Stevenson people when everybody was for Eisenhower. One of their closest friends, not Jewish, was a couple. He was a speechwriter for Stevenson. Marine-Street: Adlai Stevenson? Tversky: John Bartlett something, he wrote many books. He was a journalist, and he wrote speeches for Stevenson, and Stevenson was from Illinois. He’d been the governor. The family was very political anyway. The number of magazines and newspapers that arrived--I read Salinger in The New Yorker as originals when they came out in The New Yorker. [00:20:38] The table conversation was a lot of politics and literature. The family read all the time. I would come home from school and when the McCarthy hearings were over my mother’s face was in a book, or The Atlantic, or Harper’s, or Saturday Review, or Commentary, or you name it. Everything came to the house, and so that was the topic of conversation, and the reading, and certainly the left wing. It wasn’t really left-wing. Nothing in the 1950s was really left-wing, but the political sensitivities were there. 23 Marine-Street: Interesting. Then what about their expectations for you? Tversky: [00:21:22] There were four kids. My mother was manic-depressive. I didn’t realize it until later. The words weren’t around then, and I was the oldest, so I got ignored a lot, which was fine. I raised myself. I helped raise the kids. This is still back in Chicago. When I was three and my sister was one, my mother taught me to take two slices of bread, put butter on them, a little bit of sugar, give one to my sister in the crib, one to me. That was breakfast. She slept in. That early independence probably served me well in many ways, so I think they knew I was bright. It scared my mother. She was of the opinion that very bright people became neurotic and maybe crazy, so it worried her, if anything. There was a girl down the street who was older and had gone to University of Chicago and been an intellectual, and she’d gone crazy. This was, “Don’t go to University of Chicago. It’s intellectuals. It’s not-- ” Marine-Street: [00:22:37] So she had some experiences that made her think that, some personal anecdotes. Tversky: A little bit worried, and my father had more traditional views about women and men. Everybody did then. My sister and I were the older two. We went to learn typing. By then [my father] had a company that was doing reasonably well. My younger brothers coded. He was one of the first people to use computers in his business, and he took them on and they learned to program in the summer. My sister and I were sent to type in case. I think they were proud of me in some sense. They never looked at report cards or grades. They worried more that I was staying up too late 24 working and things like that. So they didn’t have expectations for me for a career at all. I did go to graduate school. I did get married. I got pregnant. My first baby was born two months after I finished my PhD. My mother was horrified that I was going to continue working and told me so. By then it was too late. She didn’t tell me much through the years, but again, I was pretty independent, and I sort of looked back at, why did I do this? If I’m not going to work, it’s--. So there was no encouragement there at all. [00:24:10] My mother took her own life when she was 57, just a year after my second child was born. Anyway, I was in Israel. My father took great pride in my husband’s career, but none in mine, at least not visibly He was happy I had children. He adored my children, but my role as a professional didn’t interest him. Marine-Street: It was like he couldn’t see you like that somehow. Tversky: Right, right, right. Again, things need to be contextualized. In the 1950s, that was the way things were. I went to a high school where 95 percent of the people went to college. The four or five percent who didn’t came from a small suburb nearby that was lower-middle class, and they were the ones that got pregnant in high school, whatever. Some of them of course did very well. So 95 percent went to college, but many of the women two years into college were married, and many back in that same suburb, which I had no intention of being in. [00:25:23] In fact, my two best friends, women, one of them I’ve lost track of completely. The other lives in San Francisco and is a photographer. We’re still close. We wrote prophecies for ourselves our senior year and 25 found them not long ago, and basically our prophecies were saying, “We’re not going to end up here in this suburb. We’re going to have careers.” We didn’t know what, but we were pretty sure, and we prophesied for each other as well, so we pretty much lived that out. Marine-Street: Did you have role models when you were that age? Were there other career women that you said, “I want to be like her”? Or maybe it was a career man, like “I want to have a life like that person”? Tversky: [00:26:11] I think inspiration somewhat came from literature. I was a big reader. It didn’t have to be male. Microbe Hunters, Sinclair Lewis, was a book that I really liked about somebody in a biology lab, making scientific discoveries, chasing phenomena, and figuring out what they meant. That sounded exciting. I did science projects in high school and was in a science fair. I discovered that I had a genetic mutation in my fruit flies [MarineStreet laughs], and that was very exciting, and a biology teacher who really encouraged me in that direction. I had math teachers that encouraged me in that direction. [00:26:55] We had social science teachers, and they were wonderful women. When I look back on it, they lived together. They sort of said, “You can’t get married and have a career,” and again, that looked like, why not? That didn’t make sense to me. My physics teacher was very uncomfortable-I was in what the equivalent of AP classes--was very uncomfortable having a woman in his class, extremely uncomfortable, and I realized that. I was uncomfortable that I was making him uncomfortable. Marine-Street: Wait, so you were the only female student in advanced physics? 26 Tversky: In AP physics, yes. I don’t think he’d had female students. I don’t know, but it was clear that he was unhappy. One of the social science teachers said, “Well, we’re having this advanced class. Come.” I did, and so my physics education is very limited. [00:28:01] Role models were anybody that was really good. I didn’t identify with any of them, but the idea of chasing ideas, I think, was very strong in me. I remember going to the Chicago Public Library and reading original material--Edmund Burke letters for a history project--and feeling really great. This is fun. Marine-Street: That’s great. Tversky: I think that was more, we had a group, again, of like-minded people. My mother had a great collection of art books, and in my senior year we each took an artist and had dinner at each other’s houses and gave each other seminars on artists. That kind of self-education--you could do it--was there. I don’t know that there were specific role models. I’m a bit of an airhead in not understanding things, so the gender thing didn’t really occur to me much, and I was oblivious. That probably was some sort of an advantage. [00:29:11] Even in college. There was a graduate student who was there in the dorm. She was in English, and she talked about those issues. I thought, “Well, maybe in English.” Again, she was interesting because I could talk literature with her. So there were people I found in many places, especially at university, but even in high school, that were exciting, dealing with ideas and turned on by ideas. 27 Marine-Street: Yes, and you gravitated towards that. Tell me a little bit about how you ended up at University of Michigan. Tversky: [00:29:51] There were several things that converged. One was, my father’s business partner was discovered to have been corrupt, and so my father left the business. My father truly didn’t know about it. He left the business and started his own. So we’re in this suburb. We’ve just moved into a new house. There’s no money to finish it. I went to high school--I had skipped a grade, so I was young. And there was a coat that I bought my freshman year. This is Chicago, before global warming. By the time I finished high school, it didn’t quite reach. It was two inches shy, so it was too small. My mother went back to work, so there was that issue, and there were three kids behind me. So there was that issue of money is tight. [00:30:47] I didn’t want to go to a girls’ school. My father insisted that I apply to Radcliffe, which I did, because at that time there were joint classes with Harvard. They came to interview me. The first question was, “How many times had I been to Europe?”--a measure of your wealth. They had a quota system, and they took one Jewish girl from the suburbs of Chicago, so a second was out of the question, especially one who’d never been to Europe. Michigan was my backup school, and I needed to be in a coed environment. I knew that. Universities appealed to me too. Colleges--I felt, I’m in a high school of a graduating class of 460. I’ve outgrown them. I was a little bit arrogant, and how can I go to a college that only has two 28 thousand, four thousand people? I need more. So I sort of knew I needed to be--so Michigan was an excellent school, was a backup school. [00:31:56] There was an honors college at the time. We had special courses all the way through. It was competitive. It was as competitive as any of the Ivies, except they didn’t care if you’d been to Europe or not. There were many not wealthy kids, many of them Jewish, from the suburbs of Chicago, from Detroit, from the city of New York, from Chicago itself. They were exciting people, and I had great teachers, because they were small classes. I had this legendary philosopher for my first philosophy class, which was exciting. It’s psychology, and he got me my sophomore year. I took psychology because it was a natural science course and it was a good one. It was based in biology, in the brain, and the guy asked me to work for him after my sophomore year, stay at Michigan. The last thing I wanted to do was to go back home, so that was great. Marine-Street: [00:33:00] So he asked you to stay on for the summer and be a research assistant? Tversky: Yes. I ran rats. At that time they were doing rats in memory, also human work. At that time I would get a six-pack of rats from the rat lab [MarineStreet laughs], literally a six-pack, and I was running them in mazes. I learned that I could do it really fast if I let the rats kind of crawl up me, and then I’d put them down one by one and back in the six-pack. That worked very well until one took a chomp. [laughs] So that system ended, but it was fun. I was hanging out with graduate students. I got to know a lot of the graduate students. 29 So I came to Michigan. Again, it was exciting. I had an advisor. They ran you through two days of tests guaranteed to give you a migraine, and a lot of it was their own experimental things. There were personality tests and all kinds, but who knew? [00:34:03] After I’d taken those tests, the advisor I was assigned said, “You’re going into math, aren’t you?” At that point I was interested in writing. I’d done a lot of writing, and art was there too, but writing, and I looked at him like he was out of his mind. Math, it’s about acceleration, and automobiles, and--no. But maybe I should have listened. I certainly should have taken more math. I did, and the math courses were too oriented toward rockets and cars. Again, I’d be the only female in the calculus class. I learned a lot of math later from my husband but not nearly enough, so that’s a lacuna in my education. [00:34:55] I needed to study more math, but I ended up taking writing. A freshman English teacher who was actually quite arrogant and in retrospect a bit of a misogynist was disdaining of my writing, and I think it was partly he was judging me on standards of near professionals, because the writing wasn’t that bad. [laughs] I also learned from art courses, too, that you discourage people. Because it’s a hard life, you’re hard on them, but I didn’t know that. So writing I got worried about. I ended up in honors classes in history, in philosophy and psychology, and I got accepted to all three honors programs. History, I decided, was exciting, but it was too specific to places, and time, and people. I wanted something more general. Philosophy I liked a lot, but it always left 30 me in a quandary. The man who ran the philosophy program, who liked me a lot, and I did well in his course, said, “Barbara, I’ll take you into philosophy, but I have to tell you, you don’t think like a philosopher.” I tell that to students because he was right. I knew it. [00:36:21] Psychology was research. It was opening up then. The black box was opening up. Cognitive was opening up. You could look at the mind. You could do all these interesting, creative things that you hadn’t been able to do before. Really smart people were in the field. Here was somebody telling me I could do my own research project, and I’m eighteen. This was exciting too, and having an effect, so I started taking more psychology and I got more job offers. At one point I was working in three labs, but one of them was two miles away. It’s winter, I’m walking, the snow is--so that one I stopped. As I say, I got to know graduate students and they were exciting, and so it felt wonderful. You could think about the human mind. I’d always been everybody’s shrink in high school. [00:37:27] So anyone that had a problem-I loved it. But I sort of sensed research was a better fit to me than doing clinical work and working one-on-one. Again, it was the bigger ideas and finding them out, so the clinical side never--I got wary of the theories because they felt to me unproven and on shaky grounds and dogmatic, and I still am of some of them. I still have that skepticism about some of the theories. Anyway, I think for me, doing research, finding out new things, the teaching, the bigger picture, was more comfortable than one-on-one problems. 31 Marine-Street: Did you ever have any female professors? Tversky: [00:38:20] Well, the woman who ran the honors program was anything but my friend [laughs], and in fact she withheld honors from me. The people I’d worked with were very unhappy with that, and they saw that it was a personal--she was a very proper person and rigid, and I was pretty contentious as well, but I always had more ideas and I always was contrarian. “So you say this. Well, how could it be different?” I’d come up with ways that it could be different, and I was a little impatient. She took an instant dislike to me. [laughs] In graduate school there were women around, but none of them that I can think of was an inspiration. [00:39:26] In fact, when I go back to think about it, the other graduate students were more inspiring than faculty, and I had good relationships with many graduates, starting from when I was an undergraduate. Mike Posner, who was a graduate student and is close to God, he was a graduate student way ahead of me, but he came back and visited. He’s still a good friend, and he’s even closer to God. He’s just brilliant. He’s the person that brought imaging--brain imaging--into the field--all the methods and all the rationale, the way you did studies. He’s still doing outstanding science now on how meditation affects the brain, and he’s amazing. He was someone who visited Michigan on and off. [00:40:24] Here is a story, and I don’t know when you want to break. My husband and I met when we were--I took a graduate course as an undergraduate in math psych. It was actually taught by Dick Atkinson, who was at Stanford at the time and came to teach the course. He later was 32 chancellor of University of California, also head of NSF. He taught math psych. He tried to get me to come to Stanford for graduate school. I ended up at Michigan. My husband was in the same class, and he became a mathematical psychologist. My first year in graduate school, he was already a third-year student--second-year or third-year. He lived in a house with two other graduate students, three other graduate students. I had a tiny one-room apartment, and they asked me to come on as a cook. It was for company. [00:41:28] Now so why a cook? My senior year in college, we still needed to live in dorms, but I didn’t like the dorm, and the Friends, the Quakers, had a co-op. The co-op was international. There were eight undergraduates, eight graduate students, female, who lived there. The eight graduate students were foreigners, and then there were sixteen men who boarded, who ate there. In a co-op you either cooked or cleaned, so I cooked, and I made dinner every Wednesday for thirty-six people, two-anda-half hours, so I got very good at that, at cooking for thirty-six. It was kind of fun and very rewarding. Thirty-five other people liked what you made. [laughs] It was very rewarding. [00:42:21] In fact, I formed really good friends there. I had two Japanese roommates. One was a bit of a dud. The other one is still a really close friend. We’re both widows. She was in art history. She ended up in Afghanistan, married to the head of the Kabul Museum, had two children. When the communists came in 1979, because her son was eleven and they were pulling twelve-year-olds off the street, and giving them rifles, and 33 telling them to shoot the Russians, she went back to Japan with the two kids. Her husband didn’t leave because his mother was still alive, and they never saw him again, not the kids and not--he died a natural death. So she’s in Japan with the two kids and eventually became a professor of art history, and used to come to Stanford to give lecture tours. [00:43:21] Her field was fifth-century Buddhist art in Central Asia. I’d bring home a slide projector, and she had two suitcases full of slides. Every night I got a talk. [laughs] Marine-Street: Oh, interesting. Tversky: Afghanistan turns out to be the crossroads of Chinese, Indian, and Western art, and it’s all there because they all got there. So it’s exciting. She’s still a close friend. She lives in Kamakura, a suburb of Tokyo. Whenever I can get to Japan I go. So that was a treasure from the Friends house, but I made other friends that stayed [there]. Marine-Street: So this is the house where you met her, where you were the cook, you helped to cook. Tversky: Exactly. So that’s why I cooked for the men, and cooking for the men was very easy. We’d go shopping once a week. That was fun. They were great anyway. We’d eat at six. Around four o’clock I’d call. Someone would be at home, and I’d say, “Turn on the oven for about 350.” Then I’d call fifteen, twenty minutes later and say, “Put in the roast.” [laughs] Then I’d come home to dinner. Marine-Street: [00:44:28] You were like a virtual cook. [laughs] Tversky: I’d come home. This was cooking. [laughs] 34 Marine-Street: Oh, that’s funny. Now so I just want to clarify. Are you cooking for Amos and his folks at this point? Tversky: Yes, yes. Marine-Street: So you didn’t live in the house. Tversky: No. Marine-Street: They said, “We just want to-- ” Tversky: Well--[laughs] Marine-Street: Well, okay, that’s another story, but, “We just want you to come and cook for us.” Tversky: Right. Dinner conversations were all psychology. [00:44:52] They were great fun. I remember they were all advanced students, so I learned so much from them. One of them is a well-known psychologist. Another who recently died became a psychologist and a lawyer and had an outstanding career. The other one kept switching, but the one who also became a famous psychologist and worked in attention, memory kind of things, came home one day and said, “You can’t do two things at once.” I said, “What do you mean? I’m talking and eating.” [laughs] “Well, you’re alternating rapidly.” I said, “Yeah, because I don’t like to chew with my mouth open.” I mean, “I don’t like to talk with my mouth chewing.” There was a theory around that you could only do one thing at a time. That theory came apart. Marine-Street: I was going to say, a man came up with that theory, right? Tversky: [00:45:49] Right. So that was great. There were basketball games, and all the graduate students would come by and watch the games. We had a TV. Not 35 everyone did, so it became a center of intellectual and social life in a nice way. It was great fun. It was really great fun--a million stories from there. Marine-Street: Let’s take a quick break. [End of Part 1 of 5, Interview with Barbara Tversky - August 22, 2017] 36 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: BARBARA TVERSKY INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 22, 2017 PART: 2 OF 5 Marine-Street: We’re resuming our interview, and I wanted to just ask you about your decision to pursue graduate school. How did you decide that you really wanted to continue with the study of psychology? Tversky: I guess it seemed like the most natural thing in the world. I was doing research anyway. I loved it. I did toy my senior year a bit with art. I took a life drawing class, and I actually did well in it. I loved it. But I found myself then going to my physiological psych course, and instead of drawing crosssections of the spinal cord or the brain, I was redrawing what I’d seen in art class. It was compelling to me. I just needed to get it right, and I kept drawing and redrawing and redrawing to get it right. [00:00:53] It was obsessive, and again, I loved it. I came to the realization that it’s either art or science, and again, art felt very self-indulgent to me. I have no way of knowing that I’m going to be good enough that other people are going to be interested in what I’m doing and want to buy my art. I have no idea, and I don’t know how I’m going to make a living because at that point, my junior and senior year at Michigan, I was pretty 37 much paying my own way. My sister was already in college, and my brother was preparing to go, and again, my father’s business was not yet--his new one--was not yet on the ground. So I was paying my own way. [00:01:39] So you finish undergraduate school. What are you going to do? Well, most people, women who weren’t married, went to New York and got a secretarial job or something equivalent. They got a teaching certificate. Things weren’t open to women, and the arts seemed too risky, because again, I had no means of support. So going to graduate school, they were going to pay me. They were going to at least pay me enough to live on. Now I didn’t buy clothes for many years. [laughs] I never ate out. I didn’t even have coffee out, but I wasn’t doing those things anyway because I was paying my own way. It didn’t feel like suffering at all. I had everything I needed. It didn’t feel like suffering. I grew my hair long. Anyway, it was a period of time when everyone grew their hair long, but getting a haircut seemed superfluous. Why spend money getting your hair cut? So going to graduate school seemed natural. I loved what I was doing, and it seemed like the next logical step. Marine-Street: [00:03:06] Did you have a sense of what you wanted to study, what area of study? Tversky: The mind, and at that time I didn’t know about most of the work going on in social psychology. The little bit that was there didn’t grab me. I didn’t have much experience with it. It was partly this woman that I didn’t get along with was teaching a very rigid course, in personality and social. There was one person who later came here, Bob Zajonc, who was very interesting, 38 but I didn’t really have contact with him, and the theory they were working on I didn’t like very much. I think had I been in another place, I would have gone into social, but where I was the cognitive was exciting. [00:03:57] Memory was always interesting to me. It was the basis for learning, memory and learning, so that seemed like a natural. I was supported by someone named Robyn Dawes, who went on to be an extremely original thinker in decision-making, but also social psychology, personality. He did wonderful things that were his own style. I worked with him a bit, but he didn’t have support for me the next year, and the human connection wasn’t as strong as I would have liked. I could have kept going, but he didn’t have support. He sort of indicated that he wasn’t interested in continuing, or at least that’s what I felt. I could have been wrong. So I moved to somebody else who did have support, and he was a bit of a jerk. [00:04:48] In the meantime I’m taking courses, and I have fellowships, and I am supported. One of the people that I was taking courses from--I had taken courses as an undergraduate and then a graduate-Arthur Melton, taught memory, and he essentially said, “Come work in my lab. You can do whatever you want. I’ll just support you.” That was very unusual. Most of the people he supported he put on projects, and he told me, “Do whatever you want--carte blanche.” So that was I guess empowering, and I think I was a little bit of a person that you couldn’t tell them what to work on anyway. [laughs] It didn’t work. I had to have my own ideas. After all, I’d raised myself. So I did do that. 39 [00:05:41] That was the Human Performance Center, and Melton ran it with a man named Fitts. They’d both come out of World War II training where you were training real people on the ground to do real tasks, and that had a huge influence on psychology in the U.K. as well--that mentality, and it stayed. You’re task-oriented. What are people doing, and what do they need to remember, and how do they need to perform? Fitts was more the performance side. I didn’t have contact with him, and he died quite suddenly. He was much loved, and I never even had a course from him. Melton got ill. I had a class with him, and then he more or less went home, which wasn’t Ann Arbor and didn’t come in much. He wasn’t well, and so there was no direct supervision of what I was doing. [00:06:37] My third year, you take prelims. By then my husband was done. He had a sort of post-doc at Harvard. We weren’t married, but he was sort of waiting for me to finish and he was at Harvard. I’d go back or he’d come. My third year, you take prelims. Now prelims at that time, you chose your own reading list, and mine was a stack of books like this, and then you had two days of examination and then a questioning period. So that was more or less my third year in graduate school. I had this tiny apartment, with a TV table here and a TV table there, and the unread books were here and the read books were there. [laughs] So it was a little bit like these models of human performance. There was the input, throughput, output, [Marine-Street laughs] and that’s what happened. [00:07:43] That served me well because I’d picked a wide reading list on memory, but memory is everything, and it served me for years, that 40 reading. Then I had the two days of testing. That was in February, and I remember walking to the testing place. It was a couple of miles away. There was a bank with a thermometer, and it was minus-seven [laughs] when I was walking home. I think the second day--my sister had a car. She was by then at Michigan, and I called her for a ride. [laughs] The oral exam was a little bit--Melton and the jerk were kind of doing too much of the talking, and I think at some point I sort of looked up in the air and they remembered me. [laughs] Marine-Street: So they were having a conversation between themselves? Tversky: Yes, an argument. [00:08:35] A disagreement, not an argument. By then I had an idea for a dissertation and started running it, and that summer I ran it. So I got very interested. The field at that time was dominated by language, and later by something, a kind of distillation of language called propositions, which are a way of formulating ideas in language but in words. Even spatial-visual memory was being reduced to a description, and I’m thinking at that time--huh? We remember faces. We can’t describe them. We remember scenes. We can’t describe them. It can’t be language. It’s got to be--we have spatial thinking and visual thinking, that it can’t be reduced to language. We remember what things look like, what people look like, all kinds of things. [00:09:30] So again, being contrarian, I’m going there. But it was a peripheral field for years because people looked at it as an offshoot. There’s memory; it’s language, and there’s this offshoot about visual memory, and an offshoot about music, and an offshoot about other things, but they’re 41 offshoots. This is the core. So I’ve been a little marginalized. I think much less so now. I think the field’s come around to it. But I think the depth of how much of our thinking is with the body and with the world, and is interacting with just the eyes and what we do in the world. The thinking is there, and not necessarily in words. I think that realization has been slow to penetrate, so I feel good being able to finally see that, come round to seeing that that influence is strong and that what looked like almost a hummingbird sort of career where I’m going here and going there. I’m pulling it all together now, and it’s coherent. [00:10:42] But I started out saying, well, the idea that Mike Posner had done some of that, and a little bit Herb Clark, who became one of my closest colleagues at Stanford many years later--who knew?--and George Sperling, who was a great and still is a great person in memory and perception--the idea was you would keep something visual for half a minute; then it had to get turned into these proposition-like things or it was lost. There were studies even showing that, which makes you pause about “Studies show that …” We’re still doing it today, and what’s missing are the studies we don’t do, that might show something different. [00:11:28] What gives me pause about the whole scientific method, is what we don’t study, either because we can’t or the mind doesn’t think of it. This has got to be a reminder in any kind of science. It’s limited by what we can think, and not all the thinking is here. Some of it’s here. My studies actually tried to show that not only do you keep visual memories and they become functional, but you create them from words. That’s what my 42 dissertation showed, and it showed it for faces and simple things. The way I showed it was really quite clever, by looking at speed of reaction times for one thing relative to another and errors that people made. It was quite elegant, looking-back, and simple and straightforward--a kind of reasoning of how can you look inside the black box now that behaviorism is done? But it was that contrarian view that led me to those studies. [00:12:38] I did one study, and at that point Amos had a job in Israel. Jobs were really hard to get in Israel, and at that time they gave him a halftime in psychology and a half-time in business. Now they weren’t even going to commit him to a full-time job, so he needed to go back to snap up this job. Otherwise it might disappear. It didn’t make sense to go back without me. He’s starting a new life. He hasn’t been in Israel for five years, and what he’s going to leave this, his partner--we weren’t married then but got married soon thereafter in the States. You didn’t telephone. There was no email. Marine-Street: It was time. I want to stop you because I really want to hear that story, but I want to go back to your dissertation just for a minute because I was wondering if you could give me an example. I’m not sure I understood. You said that you were interested in showing that these visual memories got formed from words? Tversky: Right. Marine-Street: [00:13:46] So can you give me an example? Tversky: The example I used in my dissertation was I taught people schematic faces. I made them schematic, again, so I could tell what kinds of errors were 43 being made. They had eyes, a mouth, and a shape of a face that was either elliptical this way or oval this way. I gave them names that didn’t correlate with the visual similarity of the faces--again, simple names like Dili, Gimi, Golo, Domo, so I could tell what was a verbal error. So Gomo and Golo would get confused verbally, but the faces of Gomo and Golo were completely different visually, so I knew which visual errors people were making, and I also knew reaction time. [00:14:34] If I showed a face or a name and said, “Is this the same one you saw?” the speed depended on how similar it was. So if I would show Dimi and Dili, and I showed Dimi and then there’s Dili and you have to say, “No, it’s different,” there’s only one feature different, you’re going to be slow. If there are three features different, you’re going to be fast--same with the faces. So I could tell people, “You’re seeing a face now, but I’m going to test you on names.” So it would be to their advantage to remember the name, and then they’d be fastest if I asked them which one, if the names were more different. But if I gave them a face and said to remember the faces, they’d be fastest on the faces. But then if I surprised them and gave them a name, they’d have to translate it and they’d be slow again. [00:15:29] So it was very contrived stimuli, but because they were contrived, I could look at the reaction times and I could look at the errors and say, “No, they kept a visual code because it took them too long, or they created a visual code.” I’d say Dili, but you’re going to see a face. So then they’d construct a face, and then the times and the errors would depend on the visual similarity, not on the verbal. 44 So it’s a very contrived study, but that way I could show that they could keep a visual stimulus for a second that was past the half-second point, and short-term memory at that point, or short-term visual memory at that point, was supposed to be half a second, so it’s over that. I could also show that they would take a name and create a face, and then they’d be faster if they got a face. [00:16:26] It was clean work. We’re not there yet because I did it only after moving to Israel, and that work was so clean. Dick Atkinson at that point was editor of the main journal that was doing that kind of work then. The Cognitive Psych journal hadn’t started. I submitted the paper to that journal, and he accepted it by return mail. So that was extraordinary and a very bad first-time experience because it’s never happened again. [MarineStreet laughs] You never get papers accepted without revisions, and in fact now revisions are, “Do more experiments. Do more data analyses. Include this.” Revisions are extensive, and acceptance rate is only about 25 percent, 30 percent, so this was a very bad first experience. Or very non-predictive. The study became widely cited, but it still didn’t infiltrate into kind of trying to say, “Pay attention to this other way of thinking.” Marine-Street: Do you think that your background in art sort of influenced you in this direction? Tversky: [00:17:40] I’m sure. I’m sure. I’m sure, and the more I get back to it, I’m studying comics, which my mother did. I’m working with artists currently, and have spoken in museums, and involved with art very much, so yes, I think that. It’s not just my mother. I have a cousin who’s an artist. My 45 mother has a couple of cousins who are artists in Sweden or were artists. One of my nieces is in art history, so that way of thinking I think is very much embedded in me in both genes and environment. [00:18:22] Architecture--my mother was a huge fan of Bauhaus, and that Bauhaus, some of it moved to IIT, which was outside Chicago. New York architecture, because they lived in New York, was very much a topic of conversation, so I grew up with art design, Bauhaus. The furniture in our house was all Danish, Swedish-modern. That sensitivity was very real in my thinking, so I think I come at it both genetically and in the environment, yes. But the writings there, too--my mother wrote, everyone, and I still like writing. Marine-Street: Right. Language is there, too. Tversky: It’s not one at the expense of the other by any means. Marine-Street: Tell me, do you remember the first time you met Amos? Tversky: [00:19:18] Probably in that class, in math psych. I later realized he had his eye on me. I didn’t know that. We were both involved with other people, and so that was a saga. Even when that first year in graduate school, when I was cooking at their house and he was involved with some other person who happened to be living in my house because she had nowhere else to live, and there was someone else before. We knew that the minute that we got this person on a plane. Nobody said anything--we knew. We got her on a plane, and I went home to my parents’ house over Christmas vacation that first year in graduate school. In January we were already together. I don’t know how to explain that--all the stuff in psychology, how that attraction-and it worked. 46 [00:20:24] I know people by now who met in junior high, and one of my graduate students, beautiful marriage, two kids later. I know stories like that where it was almost like a magnet. Now some of those obviously fall apart. Amos used to say--he studied decision-making. He was very selfconscious about it. We spend more time worrying about a coat--and he certainly did--or a suitcase, or finding the right sunglasses or the right pen. He was constantly buying new pens, new jackets, new briefcases to get the perfect one. Nothing was ever perfect. The time on that, and then a spouse? [snaps fingers] Like that. It’s one of those things that you can’t explain. Again, sometimes it doesn’t work. I think he had his eye on me, but we did drift first. I don’t even know how I ended up in that house of the four graduate students, whether it was Amos that invited me or one of the other people, so I can’t even remember that. Marine-Street: [00:21:36] Interesting. Just for the historical record, do you remember where the house was? Tversky: Yes, Vaughn Street. There was some research showing that when you leave college towns you forget the names but remember the spatial layout, so I could look at a map and tell you. I lived on Hill Street, my apartment, and there was a diagonal street that went about half a mile to his. He was on an old kind of decrepit Victorian on Vaughn Street. I don’t know if it’s still there. I did get back to Ann Arbor for a good friend from graduate school who later has taught there--Ed Smith, his retirement party--but it’s years ago. I think the house was still there then, but I don’t know. 47 Marine-Street: Oh, interesting. Probably another set of graduate students in it now. Tversky: If I had Google Maps I’d find it in a second, and then we could look at street maps and see if it’s there. Marine-Street: [00:22:32] We’ll have to do it. So tell me, this is an interesting time to be at University of Michigan, I think, given what’s happening socially in the country and politically. Could you talk about that? Tversky: It was a great time for me to explore. Because it was such a big school, you could change social groups every couple of weeks, and you’d have a new group of friends and a new group of experiences, so it was trying on stuff. I even went through pledging a sorority. I knew there was no way I was going to pledge a sorority, but I was curious, so I went through some of that until it got boring. [Marine-Street laughs] I got in with the music crowd for a while. Did I get in with the theater crowd? I don’t think so. [00:23:21] But there were the philosophers and the psychologists, and for a while there were mathematicians. I was in with a whole group of mathematicians. I often studied in the student union. There were three different rooms, and different groups hung out in different--the mathematicians were in the third room, and this you had noted. Once Bobby Dylan came by and I got introduced to him. In one of the rooms, I think the second room, and this is the person, the novelist, who doesn’t remember me, Ed White, who was then from an upper-middle class suburb of Detroit, very upper-middle class, and was in a fraternity and had a wild girlfriend then. He was wild. I got in with wild people, no question about it. I was not myself that wild, but you’re in 48 college. Try stuff out, foreign groups. But Ed became later a great writer, a novelist, and was gay, and wrote about those years at Michigan. When I read it probably twenty years later I saw things that I hadn’t seen then, because it was such a big school and so much was happening. [00:24:35] So yes, I worked for a while at the Daily. Tom Hayden was the editor. I didn’t really know him, but there were interesting people working at the Daily, and he was certainly a campus figure, leftist figure by then. I didn’t really get involved with SDS, but it was forming. There were sit-ins and people going to the South. One of my roommates senior year did do that. I didn’t, because by then I was so involved in research, and in many ways that saved me because I saw, especially coming back to Stanford 1970, 1971, there were people that got involved in very leftist causes, and I understood that. It felt like a moral imperative. Vietnam was wrong. Racism was wrong. To be involved in your own research didn’t feel like--it felt there were really important things we should be doing. [00:25:39] So I understood that mentality, but there was something in me that couldn’t do it and that couldn’t give up other things to become radicalized in that way. The more radical things, like burning stuff or even sitting in on the Northern branches of stores that did not discriminate, where anyone could sit at the counter of Woolworth’s--anyone could sit at the counter. It didn’t matter what your color was. So shutting down their businesses because the Southern branches, there was something in me that didn’t feel comfortable with that. It’s not that I don’t respect the people that do that, but I personally couldn’t. 49 [00:26:29] I’m never comfortable at demonstrations. I can’t deal with crowds. I went to one football game at Michigan. It’s not a game. My vision isn’t great. I can’t see what’s going on in order to understand the game. I don’t like being in crowds. Now obviously I’m a minority. How do crowds form? People like them. But the same with marches and demonstrations. I can’t be in it, and it’s not that I’m claustrophobic, but I guess there’s a level of claustrophobia that I don’t like. And I’ve seen enough crowds go berserk and trample people. I’m not comfortable where--so there was a set of leftist things that other people did, and maybe I felt twinges of guilt, but I just couldn’t do them and still can’t. [00:27:25] There was SDS. There were sit-ins. There were all kinds of leftist things. I knew many of the people. The one thing I did participate in was the first teach-in, and as I recollect it was sort of my idea because it fits with me. We’re going to teach instead of demonstrate. We’ll inform ourselves. So that was a huge success, and there have been teach-ins ever since. I guess the thing I did earlier that I mentioned, it was my sophomore year, and the best friend who’s the photographer in San Francisco had been taking a different psych course with a man who was quite leftist and involved in politics. Of course, he was from Brooklyn, a New Yorker, and he and his wife were both graduate students in psych. We got a group around us, and [asked] what political activity might be meaningful? So there was Kennedy was about to run, and we more or less came up with the idea of the Peace Corps. We think it’s our idea, maybe not. But we started collecting signatures for it, and Al Guskin, the guy running it, was good at 50 that. He probably came from labor organizers like my grandfather, but he was good at that kind of thing. I helped collect signatures, helped on the committee. For some reason he asked me to be one of the two people to go to Toledo, where Kennedy was making a campaign spot, and to give him the petitions. Marine-Street: [00:28:58] So this is JFK. Tversky: Yes. Marine-Street: And the petition was-Tversky: For the Peace Corps. For starting a Peace Corps. That again fits with me. There are ways of helping people that are peaceful and respectful of their customs and their countries, and not violent or disruptive. So as I say, it fits with me. My sister actually went to the Peace Corps in Peru. I didn’t because by then I was in graduate school and then married. So now I’m in graduate school. I’m starting my dissertation. Should we get back there, or are there more? Marine-Street: [00:29:47] Well, I just wanted to ask you, do you have any memories of the teach-in? I know it was a long time ago. Tversky: Lots of people, lots of classes. I think I was more in the organization and making sure that there were rooms, and people, and paper, and that sort of thing than actual memories. There were a lot of people, and you did find that list of faculty, and that warmed my heart because I remember many of them. Again, there was this moral imperative. You had to speak out in classes, too, and say what you thought about those things. 51 [00:30:25] So I think there was a huge amount of passion, especially about Vietnam. The sit-ins I guess were happening at the same time, and there was certainly passion about them, but the war felt like you had to stop it now. It was just the wrong thing to do. There was no way it could be won. The domino theory was nonsense. We believed all this. It turned out to be right. People were getting killed, and not just our people, them, and that we were going to end up doing more harm by causing antagonism, causing these countries and these people to hate us. It didn’t happen so much in Vietnam. It certainly has happened since. We have in recent memory places where we got involved. We only increased the hatred of us. Marine-Street: [00:31:25] Right. All right, so you’ve met Amos. You’ve decided that the two of you don’t want him to go back to Israel by himself. Tversky: Well, he decided he didn’t want to go back to Israel without me. [laughs] Marine-Street: Yes, so tell me the story from there. Tversky: I’m going to Israel. I don’t know a word of Hebrew except the words that everybody knows--shalom. I don’t know a word of Hebrew. My grandfather said to me, “Why don’t you learn Yiddish?” [Marine-Street laughs] So I find State Department books that teach people Hebrew, and they teach people any language. They’re books. There’s nothing online. So I start reading that a little bit, so I know a few words, and I’ve never left the States. I’m going to the Middle East and to Israel. My parents are not happy because it’s so far away. We stop in London on the way. I’ve never been to London. It’s November. We’re going to theater and nothing’s heated [laughs]. You’re freezing in your winter coat. 52 [00:32:39] Anyway, we get to Israel. We arrive at night--not at night, at sundown, and I’m greeted by his sister and his brother-in-law, whom I’d met. I’d known them. In my second year of graduate school Amos’s mother died, and he went back to Israel. I managed all his affairs while he was gone, learning to forge his signature and things like that. Then he came back two months later to JFK Airport, to Kennedy Airport, with his sister and his brother-in-law. I drove from Ann Arbor in his car to pick them up. [00:33:19] By the way, this is 1964. The plane was two hours late. It was an El Al plane. Why was it two hours late? The prime minister of Israel was on the plane. There was no special plane for the prime minister of Israel. He flew on an ordinary plane. He needed to give his speech in Philadelphia, so the plane went to Philadelphia. He gave the speech, he got back on the plane, then they came to New York. [laughs] Marine-Street: Oh, that’s a great story. Tversky: [00:33:50] That was another adventure. We stayed overnight with that same best friend that’s the photographer in San Francisco. She was living in New York then, and [was] probably a secretary. That’s what we did. We stayed overnight with them, and Amos, when bringing the suitcases into the apartment, left the trunk open of this little red Falcon that was his. This is in a neighborhood that’s now a nice neighborhood of New York. It was an okay neighborhood then, but it was the bad old days. Amos was five-nine and thin, but a runner. He was a really good athlete. He came back, and there was a big guy, probably high on something, a huge guy running off with my sister-in-law’s suitcase. Amos chased him, but this guy was faster. I 53 was actually glad. What were you going to do when you caught up with this 300-pound, muscular--? What were you going to do? [laughs] [00:34:55] By then, by the way, Amos was a decorated hero in the army, because he’d done something like that, rescuing somebody who’d lit a grenade and froze. He was lying on the ground. The grenade was about to go off. The guy would have been killed. Amos saw it, ran, and got the guy and dragged him off and covered him up with his body. He lived with shrapnel for the rest of his life. He was doing this as part of a military exercise, and the commander-in-chief was saying in Hebrew, “Amos, come back. Don’t do that.” But he did it, and for that he got a citation. I get goosebumps. I didn’t witness it. We arrive in Israel. They pick us up. We drive through an Arab village. This is my first time, except for London, [and] I’m incredibly curious. We get taken to the house we’re going to live in, which is a twentyminute walk from the university and a five-minute walk from my sister-inlaw. It’s night, and I can’t wait to get up in the morning. What have I come to? Where am I? That was incredibly exciting. Marine-Street: [00:36:08] You were in Jerusalem? Tversky: Yes. He was teaching at the Hebrew University, and as I say, it was a twenty-minute walk. You walked through the wadi and then up to the university, and there was a hole. There was a fence, but there was a hole you could sneak through, because otherwise you had to walk around through the gate. The hole kept moving, but we always found it. [Marine-Street laughs] 54 It got very muddy in the winter because it was mud. In fact, that was one of the first words I learned in Hebrew was the word for mud. All my shoes-[00:36:50] He was teaching there. They gave me an office, and I worked there. The first few days he took me around Jerusalem, showing me, and that was incredibly exciting. Then Jerusalem was split. The original site of the university was in East Jerusalem, and you could drive way around and catch a glimpse of it on Mount Scopus, but there was a caravan that went every two weeks, where people, soldiers stayed there. In fact, my husband was due to go in that caravan, but the Six-Day War put it back in his troops’ hands. But he showed me where they taught. That campus had been cut off in the 1948 War, and they were bringing caravans of people up to teach there. The reason there was no psychology department for many years is the bus carrying the psychology department up to Mount Scopus was ambushed and everybody was killed, including all the faculty in the psych department. This is 1948. It took them many years to set up a psych department after that. There was education, and psychology was taught there, but it took many years to set up a psych department. [00:38:11] In fact, it was an American who came from Columbia, a wonderful man, who set up the department, and he was the first person that hired Amos. Amos was in the first class to study psychology. It was a highly selective major, and the group that he studied with was outstanding. Many people ended up being well known professors in that class. He was teaching there, and they gave me an office. Those first few days we wandered around, 55 I learned his Jerusalem--where he ate, where he hung out with people, where the university was before the new campus had been built. It’s a beautiful city, and I loved it, walking around. It’s November. It’s warm. I’d come from Chicago and Michigan, and that was a treat. It was surreal to me. I hadn’t lived in California, or I’d been there summers, but that doesn’t count. [00:39:21] I’ll tell you one story that’s a little uncomfortable, but it was a little bit my introduction. There was a café. He hung out with a lot of-politics was very much his thing, or one of his things. He was very astute. His mother had been a member of parliament until she died. His uncle was the third president. Everybody grew up in politics. It was how you established the country, and it was what brand of communism, socialism, and there were fine distinctions between them. But politics was core. The youth movements were connected to the political parties. They were part of your life. You worked in them in the kibbutzim. It was inbred. It was in your heart and soul. [00:40:10] He met with a group on Fridays. Many of them were academicians, writers, radio people, because there was no TV, intellectuals, and it was a simple wholesome place, very simple, in the heart of Jerusalem. It’s still there. It’s now fancy. They remembered him. They remembered what he liked. We sat there one lunch. It’s open onto one of the main streets in downtown Jerusalem, and we’re having lunch near the entrance anyway. It’s all open. You can see outside. An Arab woman comes up, long skirts, and sits and pulls up her skirts, sits on the curb and does her thing. 56 [00:40:57] I laughed, and I sort of knew this can’t be typical, but the thought crossed my mind, where have I gone? Where have I been brought? [laughs] I never saw anything like that again. Partly I don’t see, but it was fascinating seeing the city through his eyes. I then went to what’s called an ulpan. It’s five hours a day, five days a week, learning Hebrew, and because I’d studied a bit, I was in the secondlevel class. I had an amazing teacher, and she taught also on the radio. She had a newscast in Easy Hebrew. They made so many opportunities to learn the language and to become involved. She liked me and I liked her, and so I learned very quickly. The class was great. [00:42:01] There were slimmed-down versions of classic books in Hebrew--Agnon, and Amos Oz, and various people like that, both modern and more classical, history books that were rewritten in Easy Hebrew, small ones. I raced through them, so I got good at reading the language and good at speaking. I started in January. The class ended with the Six-Day War a month early, and that’s a story. I bought groceries, and the man at the grocery store wouldn’t weigh my vegetables until I told him the name. There were so many immigrants from Europe or Northern Africa, Morocco, Algeria, Iraq, Iran, Egypt, so many from those places that didn’t know English. I learned kind of quickly that their Hebrew wasn’t that great. I was learning grammatical Hebrew, proper Hebrew, and so I had that advantage eventually. [00:43:15] Amos would take me to parties. These were academicians, artists, intellectuals, and newspaper reporters. Jerusalem at that time was the 57 intelligentsia of the country, and he’d introduce me in English, sort of implicitly saying, “This woman doesn’t know Hebrew.” They’d speak English for about sixty seconds. So I came home in tears a lot. I realized until I learned the language, I’m just soundless. I learned later why. They’re talking politics. It’s fast talk. You can’t do it in English. I now know when I meet Israelis, go right into Hebrew. Marine-Street: So they all knew English in his circles. Tversky: Right, they all knew English well, but you can’t have those conversations in English. You’re a different human being in Hebrew, and that is why I speak. It doesn’t happen to us in English because too many different kinds of people speak English. Israel is a small country, shared history--intensely shared history, and so reading those books of the history was important. I learned the songs. That was important. [00:44:27] Many years later, well after the Six-Day War, Amos isn’t with me. I’m with three children in a café in Cairo with a whole bunch of-I’m the only non-sabra in the group. Most of the people are older than I am. It’s an archaeological tour of Egypt. We’re not in a café, but in small, simple restaurant in Cairo, and we’re singing Israeli folk songs. This in Cairo? This struck me--wow. That was a period of time when Egypt and Israel were in good relations, and I knew all the songs. I knew the politics. You had to know the history--who said what to whom at the International Congress, Zionist Congress in 1920. I didn’t know all of that, but I sort of knew. You had to get embedded in the culture, and the ulpan did that as well--not completely, 58 but Amos loved to tell me and so I learned from him as well. That was hard, and you had to learn the language. I knew in order to work, to teach, I had to do it in Hebrew. [00:45:41] In the following year, in fact, I taught a huge class in learning and memory, 120 people, and most of them are older than I am because they’ve been in the army and I haven’t. The first day, I’m teaching and I’ve translated all my lectures from English into Hebrew and made sure that I have the Hebrew terms, even though the Israelis all use the English. I wrote it in English, because I know in my mind I can’t read Hebrew fast enough, though I know the Hebrew because I’ve translated it. Someone from the back of the room screams out, “Not true.” In Hebrew it’s much more brutal. It was students against teacher. You don’t want to have your first teaching experiences being that. Marine-Street: [00:46:35] So wait. Let me just make sure I get this right. You get to Israel. You speak no Hebrew, and one year later you have to teach a--? Tversky: Right. Oh, less than--yes. Marine-Street: That’s incredible to me. That took guts. How did you get through this, because I understand this isn’t just your class, but this is more of the academic culture in Hebrew. Could you talk a little bit about that? Tversky: Oh, yes. Oh, even worse in other classes, but yes. I’m getting this academic culture, argumentative. This contrarian thing that I had? Ah. [laughs] [00:47:19] Israel’s talked about as a startup culture, and the mentality really is. I saw it then. Then it was a poor country, and I liked it. Everybody 59 had the same dishes, the same furniture, the same apartment--no luxuries whatsoever, bare necessities. Eventually when I had a baby, that woman who had a third-grade education and came from Kurdistan in Iraq and was a lovely woman took home two-thirds of my equivalent to assistant professor’s salary, and I liked that. It’s not that way anymore. It was a very egalitarian country, and so what mattered were your ideas. Because you had nothing and many locally made things were crummy--you couldn’t import stuff; it was too expensive-improvisation, and so you’d figure out how somebody else did it and you’d do it better. [00:48:16] That mentality persists even though now it’s a country of huge disparities and every luxury you can imagine. The children and especially grandchildren of our generation are incredibly spoiled. They’ve had everything, because that’s what you do when you grow up poor and you have money--you treat your children and your grandchildren. But at that time it was an improv, very much an improv, and that mentality, it partly was having British occupation for so many years. The British were hostile to the Israelis, friendlier to the Arabs, so again, you did everything behind the scenes and illegally. So that disrespect for rules and laws is embedded in the culture--that you’re going to do it differently, and you’re going to do it your way, and you know better. [00:49:20] At the same time, because of the socialism it was pretty moral. In fact, moral principles were pretty high, in not the way certain groups in this country would see them. Free love was fine [laughs], but 60 treating people decently was presupposed, and a certain amount of gender equality was there. The women worked in the kibbutz, dug trenches. All the women I knew worked. Nobody didn’t work. Marine-Street: What about at the university? Did you encounter other academic women? Tversky: Plenty, plenty. Again, not role models for me, but certainly friends. Some friends, some not, but yes, certainly. I’m not sure they were equal, either in numbers or the way they were treated, but there were plenty of women in every sector. Marine-Street: Let me ask you to tell me one more story and then we’ll call it quits for today. Tell me about your experience of the Six-Day War. Tversky: [00:50:28] Okay, that’s a longer story, but I will tell you. Amos had been a paratrooper, and as I said, an officer in the army. He’d fought in the 1956 War, but because he’d been five years in the States and hadn’t been training with his paratrooper outfit and no more jumping out of airplanes. In fact, when he came to the States was the first time he landed in a plane. [laughs] He’d taken off many times, and he loved it. [00:51:02] He loved skydiving. On May 22, Nasser closed the Straits of Tiran. That’s a casus belli, and he said, “They’re going to--” I came home from the ulpan. Well, actually, after the ulpan I would go to the university. For some reason he came home later. I can’t remember. We’re in our rented apartment. He said, “They’re going to come and get me.” So we found the trunk that held his army clothes. It was way up in the entresol. We pulled it down. The clothes still fit him, all the old army clothes, and sure enough, at 61 ten o’clock at night there’s a knock on the door, and he’s gone. The war broke out on the fifth of June, so he’s gone. [00:51:53] The country’s in a panic, especially Jerusalem, because in 1948 they were cut off and people went hungry. Amos remembers as a child collecting grass, and his mother would make stuff out of the grass. Kids that grew up then were slight, because afterward there was rationing. Amos would have been taller, no question in my mind, had he grown up with better nutrition, because there was rationing for quite a long time. So people were in a panic about it, and also, where we lived I told you there was a wadi before the university. In that wadi was an ammunition factory. If it had been targeted [laughs] and the border was very close. There was the concern that Jordan would get involved, and they did. In fact, the ulpan had damage. The apartment that we bought, which was on the other side of the university, had damage. There were shells falling all over Jerusalem, and people were hurt. That happened later. The city was in a panic, and people were buying everything in sight. I understood that. Personally, I’m not a panicker. [00:53:13] Amos came home twice before the war started. He couldn’t tell me where he was. He came home and he said, “There’s nothing to worry about.” At that point the prime minister was the guy that gave the talk in Philadelphia, Levi Eshkol. He’d been born in Poland, so people were distrustful of him because he was not a sabra. They wanted Moshe Dayan to become prime minister. There was rallying for that. Good thing it didn’t happen. Dayan disappeared for part of the war, so it’s still a mystery. The 62 country was in a panic about Eshkol, about food. They were in a panic. Amos came home and he said, “There is absolutely nothing to worry about. It’s all going to be air power, and we have the air power.” So he said, “There’s nothing to--just don’t--” At that time, and maybe still now, everything went on rumors. People talked with each other and who you knew. He knew the right people, and the right people trusted him because he was Amos Tversky, Genia Tversky’s son. He’d been active in all kinds of scandals before he left to Israel. He’d been a spokesperson. [00:54:30] Anyway, and he was an officer, so that relieved me. So on the fifth of June I’m driving to the ulpan, and the war breaks out. I’m listening to the radio in the car, and the war breaks out. I go anyway. I quickly see that we’re going to be put in shelters--it was on the border--and that Jordan is going to get in it, so I go back to the university. I figure I’ll work on my dissertation, which wasn’t done, and I was working on it anyway. Then they put us into shelters. Oh, by the way, before the war I’m volunteering at a kibbutz. I’m going from the ulpan straight to a kibbutz that’s on the border, and I’m digging trenches and talking to the people, which was just a huge inspiration. Some of them had been injured in 1948. Some of them wrote poetry. They were awesome. [00:55:29] I didn’t go to the kibbutz. I went to the university. They put us into shelters. We’re sewing sandbags. I’m getting hungry. It’s four o’clock, and I think I don’t want to get stuck here overnight. My car is there. 63 The university buildings are shielding it from the Jordanian side. Amos had told me we had a new car bought without duty because we were returning students. He said, “Whatever you do, don’t let them draft the car.” They were drafting cars. I said, “How am I going to stop them? [laughs] They’re going to come and--. ” They never got to our year. They were drafting old cars. I left the car because I thought it’s protected, because in order to drive home, I had to drive where I’d be exposed. It was longer, and I would be exposed to shells way up high and then come home, so I thought it was safer to leave the car and run home, which I did. [00:56:21] I ran home with another woman who was a graduate student in psychology who lived a bit farther. A shell fell in her yard just as she entered the door. I got in. They put us in shelters. My sister-in-law, who lived two doors down, came and got me and said, “Stay at our house instead.” They had a basement apartment, and then they had a part of their apartment in the basement. A family of four kids, one missing, the baby, had also converged on her apartment because they lived even closer to the border, so there were a lot of us. There were my sister-in-law’s two kids, my sister-in-law, her husband, the father, the other parents, me. Somehow we all managed. We put the kids downstairs. I was in the first floor, and technically I shouldn’t have been there. [00:57:10] Everyone went to sleep except me, and I had the radio on. I’ve had my four months of Hebrew. Rabin, Yitzhak Rabin, who was later assassinated, was chief of staff. He came on the radio at ten o’clock at night. His Hebrew, because he grew up in a kibbutz, was very slow, and he said in 64 his very slow, clear Hebrew, “In the morning, the Egyptians had 104 planes. Now they have three. In the morning, the Syrians had X planes. Now they have two. In the morning, the Jordanians”--who had been told explicitly, “Stay out, and we won’t attack you,” but they did not heed that--“had X planes, and now they--” So we’d wiped out their air forces. They were stupidly exposed on the ground. That would never happen again. They were easy pickings. Amos had told me it all depends on air power. I knew it still wasn’t an easy war, and the hardest part of it was taking the old city, which was his old division, and I’m glad--many people, many casualties, because it was door-to-door fighting with snipers, so many casualties. [00:58:29] I was the Vietnam generation. My two younger brothers, neither of them was drafted. One had a high number. The other, who played varsity tennis, had flat feet, and so neither of them was drafted. I knew nobody who fought in the Vietnam War, much less was killed. I’m six, no, by then eight months, seven months in Israel. I knew three people who were killed in the Six-Day War. One was Amos’s cousin. He was a general. He was taken by a sniper. He had four children. Another was one of his best friends growing up and is the son of his mother’s best friend, the person who called him to say that his mother was dying. He was an ordinary soldier. He was killed. The third person I knew was another young assistant professor [of economics] at the university and he was killed. That was then. Later, I knew other people, but I hadn’t met that many people. 65 [00:59:34] In that country, the elite are the officers. The officers go first. So everybody’s a soldier. Things have changed a bit now. Politically, my group of people don’t like the wars. They’re the minority that’s dovish. But then, it was very different. When Jerusalem was taken, we were out of the shelters. In those days we had this new apartment, and we need a carpenter, and we need a painter. You go downtown and you found those people. No one’s by their phone. You bumped into them. [laughs] You do all your business, because everybody’s downtown, and you have to go downtown to do everything, paying checks to this, checks to that. There isn’t anything that you can do without going downtown, so I was going down and I was doing all the errands in the house. [01:00:34] So one day I’m downtown. People had already gone into the old city. It was open. People went back to see their old non-kosher butchers and things like that. I’d gone, but I saw a wrecking ball, and there was a wall dividing the city. It was right near downtown. The wrecking ball was taking that wall down. Nobody announced. The mayor of Jerusalem, the west side of Jerusalem, was a maverick, and he knew, “If I said anything, there’d be an international incident. I’m just going to do it.” So he took down the wall. I went with that wrecking ball and I watched the wall fall. Hardly anybody noticed it the way I did and knew that it was an historic event. You’d see, you could almost touch the other side of the city. It was inorganic. It was done by neighborhoods, but not really in neighborhoods’ overlap. That was a thrill. 66 [01:01:40] We didn’t hear from Amos until a day after, maybe two days after the war started. He didn’t call, but one of his soldiers called and I didn’t get the phone. His father did. That family ended up staying there forever because their house was severely damaged and it took a long time. They were happy. They stayed in my apartment, and they were very happy there. At some point, your house is finished. Are you going to go home? [laughs] Amos’s father took the call, and I realized then--his father hadn’t talked for days and I realized his father was really worried. It was not long after he’d lost his wife. He was really worried, and his father was a little depressive, but all of a sudden he became his funny self. [01:02:38] Amos came the next day in a jeep with another soldier. We picked up the other soldier’s wife and he took me all over the West Bank, so I saw those towns--Bethlehem, Hebron, Schem--before problems arose, and saw the West Bank. Those were heady days. We went back to the States because I had to finish my degree. He became the military governor of a suburb of Jerusalem that had been Arab-wealthy Arabs there. He lived in Hussein’s summer home, a temporary summer home, and I sometimes visited him there, but eventually he got released and we went back. [01:03:27] We went back to Ann Arbor, where I hadn’t finished. I finished the following summer, but when we came back he got involved with a group of left-wing--not even that left-wing--dovish professors who 67 stayed dovish, who spoke to Egyptians and kept urging the government, give back those territories. We can’t keep them. Marine-Street: That’s amazing. Tversky: We can’t keep them. So you want to end, and that’s probably a good place. Marine-Street: Let’s end here because we’ve been talking for a while, and we’ll pick up, because I’d like to ask a couple more questions about that experience. It’s amazing. All right, thank you very much. Tversky: Well, thank you. [End of Part 2 of 5, Interview with Barbara Tversky - August 22, 2017] 68 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: BARBARA TVERSKY INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 23, 2017 PART: 3 OF 5 Marine-Street: This is Natalie Marine-Street with the Stanford Historical Society’s Oral History Program. Today is August 23, 2017, and I’m here again with Barbara Tversky for the [third] part of our oral history interview. Barbara, yesterday we spent some time talking about your family history, and you mentioned something very interesting about the mother’s side of your family. I wanted you to fill in some details on the Heineman side and what the Swedish-American connection is. Tversky: [00:00:30] Thank you for reminding me. My mother’s mother was American and grew up on the South Side of Chicago in an upper-middle class family, a Jewish family. She had rheumatic fever as a child and as a young adult went to Europe to have a cure, to a spa in Baden-Baden, which is a famous spa area-Bad means “bath”--and that accepted Jewish visitors. My grandfather, whom I never met, came from Sweden for the same reason, and they met at this spa and fell in love. They went to London, got married, and settled in Sweden. [00:01:16] My grandfather’s family, again, had been an upper-middle class Jewish family. His grandfather had been the first rabbi in Gothenburg. 69 His father had been an industrialist who was very successful and had seven children, so I have a very large family in Sweden. My own grandfather was not such a successful businessman, and he died when my mother was two. She had three older brothers, and so my grandmother was left with four children and not much money. This part is confusing. She had a sister in Chicago who again was well-to-do who came over to Sweden, looked at the family, decided they were acceptable, and eventually brought them to Chicago to live. [She] set them up with a house and a car. [00:02:10] My mother was nine. Her brothers were in high school. They never lost their Swedish accents. I loved them dearly, and I always thought this was the way uncles talked until I realized it was a Swedish accent. They were lovely, wonderful men, and I think because there were the four of them and the mother, the four children stuck together forever. For me growing up, those three brothers were a wall of security because I could tell they all took care of each other. We were in each other’s houses as children. [00:02:54]Now I’m jumping back to World War II. My father got drafted and went to the Far East eventually. The three brothers were all in Europe, and the wives were all clustered in Chicago around my grandmother, having these small babies. My oldest uncle, who was Henry, because he knew languages, was stationed with the OSS. That was the spy agency in World War II. He was stationed in Sweden, listening to and intercepting German intelligence. His German was excellent. He was working with Willy Brandt, who had left Germany in protest of the Nazis and later became mayor of Berlin, a heroic figure in post-war 70 Germany, and the chancellor--a wonderful man. I never met him, but his friendship with my uncle endured, and whenever he came to the U.S. he looked up my uncle and later his widow. That uncle, Henry, never had children. He lived not far from us as I was growing up, and he was a lawyer who loved to engage me in intellectual arguments and found arguments to engage me in. So we had a wonderful relationship where he would challenge my thinking. He died when I was twelve. I would have to answer him to come up with arguments. This was very, very special to me. It was special to him, it was clear. [00:04:35] He got very ill, spent a long time in hospitals, and wrote me letters. He wouldn’t let me come visit because he was so emaciated, but the letters were extraordinary and meaningful. I was his daughter. He had no children, and I was the child he would have wanted, so it was a treasured place for me too. I think I’ve said my mother was the non-conformist in the family and rebelled against any sort of constraints, and had a real issue with depression later. She could be charming and fascinating, she could be angry and cruel, and she could be distant. You never knew. Marine-Street: Interesting. I just wanted to ask you a question about the Swedish family. You mentioned that someone was an industrialist. I guess that would have been your great-grandfather that was the very successful one? Tversky: [00:05:35] Yes, yes. Marine-Street: Do you know what kind of industry he was in? 71 Tversky: He was in railroads and I think banking. There were the seven brothers and sisters and they were very close. In fact, two of the brothers married two sisters. They lived together. They celebrated holidays together. My first visit to Sweden, which was just after the Six-Day War, I met the favorite aunt, Faster--that’s mother’s sister--Sigrid. She was then around ninety-nine. Her English was perfect. Her hearing was bad. She had just read books about Moshe Dayan and Israel, and was conversant on it. These were an inspiration. [00:06:17] They were, again, a Jewish family, but highly assimilated, so they celebrated all holidays, and some of that tradition came to America. I remember seeing Fanny and Alexander by Bergman many years later, and there was a Christmas celebration, singing Christmas carols. One of my uncles married a non-Jew, and we did Christmas with them and sang those songs. That warmth and closeness of family, again, they brought to America, but they’d apparently experienced it very much in Sweden. When I started to go back as an adult, I was encompassed in it. I’m still close to especially three cousins about my age who visited us when we were children and whose father I adored. He lived across the hall from my mother, so the two families grew up as one, and those three cousins I’m especially close to. I will see them in September. Marine-Street: [00:07:26] Just a totally random question, but did you all celebrate in any way the special Swedish festival that happens around Christmas time? I can’t remember the name of it. 72 Tversky: No. It’s around the twelfth of December with the lights. No. But I know that celebration. I have been in Sweden when it happens, and it’s lovely. Sweden, because it’s so dark in winter, light is everywhere, especially in Stockholm. It’s just well-lit everywhere. Marine-Street: You told me something about Baden-Baden. Tversky: That was where they met, the spa in Baden-Baden. Marine-Street: Why was it that they went to Baden-Baden, particularly to that one? Tversky: [00:08:05] To have a cure. There are baths there, and it was believed, and is still believed by many people--it goes back certainly to the Romans--that those baths have minerals in them that have curative power. So they went to one of those baths. My grandmother’s family was only one generation removed from Europe anyway, so those traditions would have been strong. Her family came from Alsace-Lorraine, and in fact her maiden name was Blum and she was related to Leon Blum, who was the first Jewish prime minister in France. Her family was only really one generation removed from Europe, so that idea of going to curative baths was strong in the family. Marine-Street: This was a particular resort that was friendly to-Tversky: [00:08:58] Where Jews could go. I’m just thinking, that would be the early part of the twentieth century, about the same time that my Russian grandfather was escaping the pogroms in Russia--a nice contrast in a kind of a more European upper-middle class Jewish family and an Eastern European, slightly impoverished but certainly intellectual family—a real contrast in culture. 73 Marine-Street: Let’s switch countries. Last time we left off, you had just experienced the Six-Day War in Israel and told me about Amos taking you in a jeep to see the West Bank. I know not too long after that you end up back in the States, so can you tell me a little bit about that? I guess you came to Stanford, right? Tversky: [00:10:00] No, we came to Michigan. Marine-Street: Okay, tell me about that. Tversky: We came to Michigan. Amos at the end of the Six-Day War was a military commander of this suburb of Jerusalem. We were due back at Michigan anyway. He was going to teach for the summer, and I needed to make progress on my dissertation. I needed to run another experiment. I’d run one. I needed to analyze the data, and I needed to run another experiment which I had planned out. We needed to wait for his military release in order to go. Then we went back to Ann Arbor. He needed to get back, and I worked on my dissertation. He needed to get back to Israel to start teaching in October, but I stayed on because I had more work to do and it was easier. Collecting data I could do at Michigan. Analyzing them I could do in Israel, but I needed to collect the data, so I stayed on and collected the data. [00:11:05] I should back up a little bit on the experiments. We did say Melton was my advisor, but he was ill and not on campus. I sent him one proposal for a dissertation and never heard back from him. Now he was very forgetful, but I thought it’s his way of saying he doesn’t like the work. It turned out to be wrong. A very well-known and established researcher in the field of memory took on that exact proposal and published many papers 74 from it. But I decided since I didn’t hear back from Melton--I’d written him a letter--he must not have liked it. [00:11:43] Probably he was distracted and ill, and there were stories about his forgetting that are legendary. He forgot to publish manuscripts, and he didn’t realize why people didn’t know them. Then he discovered he’d never published them. How could they [know] right? [Marine-Street laughs] So I came up with another proposal, and this was the one I think I told you about, about transferring things from visual to verbal and vice versa. That got his stamp of approval, and I started carrying out the two experiments. I flew back to Israel in the end of December or January, and it was snowing. I went to visit my parents in Chicago. It’s snowing there. It’s snowing on the East Coast. I had trouble getting to Kennedy Airport to catch my flight to Israel. We got stuck on the ground in Baltimore for twelve hours, and then flew to Kennedy. I thought, “Oh, the flights, they’re surely gone. What am I going to do?” The flight wasn’t gone, and they told me to run to catch it. I ran to catch it, got on the flight, and thought, “Okay, I’m done with snow,” and read an Israeli newspaper saying there was actually a heat wave of sorts. [00:13:02] So I arrived in Tel Aviv in the airport. Amos was in the Gaza Strip as a soldier because he was on reserve duty two months of the year. All those years he was an officer, so it was a little bit longer. The Gaza Strip was not a safe place to be a soldier in those years. It was quite hostile. It still is. He thought he couldn’t get off to meet me, so I arrived at the 75 airport. There was a message waiting for me saying, in Hebrew, “The road to Jerusalem is--, ” and there was a word I didn’t know, and that I was to call his aunt who lived in Jerusalem. [00:13:52] So I’m getting my suitcase and trying to get out of the airport, and I see through the glass windows Amos jumping up and down. [laughs] He’d gotten a release and was meeting me there, and it turned out the word I hadn’t been able to translate was “cut off,” and it was cut off because there were twelve inches of snow in Jerusalem. It snows about every two, three years there. When it does, the city is cut off. It’s twelve inches. There’s no clearing equipment. It’s the city. So we stayed at his aunt’s. We took the train up the next day because Amos couldn’t drive down to get me. It was filled with kids from Tel Aviv who’d never seen snow. They opened all the windows of the train, and they were leaning out, and the train is going up the mountains. They were leaning out, and I’m thinking, “Don’t do that. The train’s going to fall.” [Marine-Street laughs] They spotted sewage and screamed, “Snow.” [laughs] When we got to the train station, you couldn’t get off the train because they were throwing snowballs. Then we started to go home. We found a taxi that would take us part way, and then we had to walk with my suitcase. My beautiful new suitcase that we’d gotten in Sweden the handle fell off. Anyway, it was an adventure. [00:15:14] Back in Israel, I’m trying to work. I’m teaching this course for the first time and encountering the difficulties of teaching in Hebrew, 76 readjusting, working hard at both things. Oh, so what happened that year in February. By then we were living in our own apartment and Amos’s sister lived near where we had lived. She’s remarried, has a two-year-old boy. She’s not a young mother. Amos’s father is living with them. This is hard to say. On the same morning in February, Amos’s father died and his brother-inlaw died. The brother-in-law was thirty-six. The father was seventy-four and had been a chain smoker forever. Losing both on one day was a tragedy that my sister-in-law took years to overcome and changed our lives. [00:16:28] We moved in with her for a while, helped to take care of their son, and there was a daughter who was older--ten or eleven--and was okay, but it was a hard period. Still we’re working. Still we’re going to go back to the States in that summer so I can finish. I’m quite close to finishing, and a good thing because I was pregnant. Marine-Street: So we’re in 1968, right? Tversky: 1968, the summer of 1968. [00:17:12] I realized I was pregnant. We went in June. When the school year was over, the whole psych department went on a hike to the Golan Heights, which was wonderful. We hiked up at daybreak and started to hike down, and my husband disappeared. He was a mountain goat. He ran down in two minutes. It took the rest of us a couple of hours of switchbacks to get down. We stayed a couple of days hiking there, and one of the mornings, I’m hiking very light-headed, passed out, got up and kept hiking. I was pregnant--that was why. [laughs] Of course, very happy about it, but now I had a deadline. I had to get that dissertation done. 77 [00:17:57] My chair was someone from anthropology. [In] anthropology they are used to doing dissertations in two or three years, and you get a lot of warning. I was giving him a dissertation and saying next week or two weeks from now is my orals. At first he said, “I’m not sure I can do this,” but he did. So I finished my orals in October. We needed to be back by the beginning of November for the teaching. By then I was in my seventh month, and in a dress, and the dress kept popping up during my orals. I had a real kicker, and I think no one else noticed it. [00:18:42] We decided to stop in Paris on the way. I really had little European experience, so we had four days so we could stop in Paris and then fly to Israel. By then I was in my eighth month. I had to sign a statement saying I wasn’t, because you can’t fly. They’re afraid you’ll give birth on the plane. So we get back to Israel. Amos is immediately drafted again. I’m trying to teach. By then I had an appointment. There was a nepotism rule, so I couldn’t teach in the psych department. I did have an office there. Marine-Street: So this is in Michigan. You’re back in Michigan. Tversky: No, now we’re back in Israel. [00:19:21] There was a nepotism rule, so I couldn’t teach at Hebrew University. They gave me an office, and I was allowed to teach a seminar as sort of a teacher from the outside, but my appointment had to be elsewhere. So I had a series of odd appointments, the first one being teaching in Be’er Sheva, where the Hebrew University was setting up a new university which eventually became extremely successful and is an excellent university with a campus now. But then, the 78 city was a backwater, and I was teaching in what was later going to be a grocery store on the bottom of an apartment complex. So it’s not yet a grocery store. It’s set up for a classroom, but it’s all glass, and all the people walking by, including children and mothers, are looking in at me teaching cognitive psychology, a course I made up. [00:20:20] There was no textbook then, and I’m making it up and teaching it in Hebrew. So it was a funny situation, and I taught in Be’er Sheva two years. It was a trek to get there. You either drove through the West Bank in a kind of organized taxi, and then it was only an hour-and-ahalf. But after dark you couldn’t drive that way. You took a bus way around, and it was a couple of hours each way, and I taught two courses. Marine-Street: So just to clarify, you’ve had the baby by now. Tversky: No, I’m pregnant at first and teaching pregnant, because the baby wasn’t born till January. Amongst my first students were two people who eventually got degrees, PhDs at Hebrew University and became the stalwarts of the psych department in Be’er Sheva, so that was an honor. They turned into fine researchers. There were others as well, but those two I remember especially. [00:21:24] The baby was born in January. There were no breast pumps, nothing like that. To get to Be’er Sheva and back meant being eight, ten hours away. I couldn’t bring a baby with me, so Amos taught for me. The mornings before I was to teach, I gave him a crash course in what I was teaching. He had an excellent memory, in fact an unbelievable memory. 79 He’d go, teach the class. [laughs] When I could take a break from nursing, so I could be eight hours away, I resumed teaching. Marine-Street: Now did you have any help with the baby, other than Amos? Tversky: Yes. There was a woman taking care of the baby, not full time, but five hours a day, five days a week, a wonderful woman, and I inherited her from somebody else. Luckily the baby was late because Amos was home. He was in the Golan Heights and he got home in time. Otherwise he would have missed the delivery. He got home in time for the baby. The caretaker of the baby was impatient, as if it was my fault. [laughs] [00:22:41] She was wonderful. She took home two-thirds of my assistant professor salary. She had had a third-grade education in the Kurdish area of Iraq, and she was a very smart and wise woman. She had no opportunity, and was a wonderful babysitter. I was happy that she took away two-thirds of my salary. The disparities were tiny in Israel then. Everybody had the same apartments--we were all cramped--same dishes, same furniture. What mattered was who you were. There was no competition. Everything was modest--same clothes. I liked that. Things have changed, but that value system was important to me. Marine-Street: Was there any pushback about you teaching and being in academia while you were pregnant or when you had a young child? Tversky: [00:23:35] No. Everybody worked. The women worked. It was taken for granted. If you didn’t work, you were aberrant, and it was odd, like maybe you weren’t competent enough to work. It was almost that. There was no idea that you should be home with your children, not at all. The children 80 can be well taken care of. The kibbutz tradition was great, where kids were raised collectively and did wonderfully in every way you could imagine. So it was standard for women to work and even have serious careers. Marine-Street: What about men and childcare? Tversky: [00:24:17] Men were involved in families, a little less in childcare. To some extent the women didn’t work full time, so they were home more in the afternoons. There were sex roles or gender roles. They weren’t nearly as strong as in the States. Again, the real expectation was that women worked, and for the most part had good careers, fulfilling careers. So that again was comfortable to me. What was interesting to me when I’m pregnant but racing to finish this degree, and still back in Ann Arbor and people wanted me to talk about this baby bulge. I wasn’t interested. I said, “Talk to me about the dissertation.” [laughs] When that baby was born, I completely changed. Marine-Street: How so? Tversky: Oh, you bond, and it’s the most important and interesting thing in the world, and it’s absolutely spectacular. But when it was still a baby bulge, it didn’t interfere with my interest in the field, not one iota. Now I had two passions, or more than that. I had more passions than that. [00:25:41] So I taught in Be’er Sheva for a couple of years. Then I got an appointment teaching in the School for Overseas Students at the Hebrew University. This was a collection of mostly Jewish students that came for their junior year abroad. I taught them intro psych, and that was a fascinating experience. The standard classes in Israel used an English textbook. The students on the sly alternated translating chapters, and the 81 faculty turned a blind eye, but we all knew it was going on. Probably translating a chapter was a good experience, but the idea was the field is in English; you need to know English. So it was in every field--the good textbooks were in English. [00:26:30] So I’m teaching these kids, and they’re from France and from South America, and they’re from Russia, the United States. They’re from all over, and the first thing that happened is the French revolted against an English textbook. [laughs] No way. I didn’t realize what I’m in for. I looked for a French textbook that was comparable, but I couldn’t find one. I said, “If you can find one, I’m perfectly happy to use it.” But they were disgruntled about the English hegemony. Then I had all these South American students. They didn’t complain ever. They were always cheerful and happy, but everything was “mañana.” [laughs] Nothing got done in time, but they were cheerful, and happy, and wonderful to teach. [00:27:25] Then I had Russians--very few, and they’d come from the Soviet Union, where they were a minority that was not looked upon well. It was a society that looked over you and was wary of you. People learned doubletalk, to say one thing and to mean another. Your friends knew you were being sarcastic, but everything you said would pass censorship, and you only said certain things in a family with people you could really trust. Trust was a problem in the Soviet Union for a long time. So you’d ask these students the normal thing you ask people when you see them, “How are 82 things going?,” and they’d look like that, like “Are you a spy? Why are you asking this question?” Marine-Street: “What do you mean by that?” Tversky: [00:28:17] Right, exactly. It was a real experience in this, teaching the kids from the Overseas Students. That I think I only did for a year. Then I got an appointment in the School of Social Work. This is many years later, after the second child was born and after the sabbatical at Stanford, but I’ll finish Israel more or less this way. We’d been away, and when I came back, I was teaching intro psych in the School of Social Work. Now social work is dealing with social problems, but the people running the School of Social Work were Freudian, the man especially. He was German-trained and very self-important, and he had been trained in psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis is years of individual therapy. Social work deals with people who beat their wives, or have drinking problems, or child abuse problems. You don’t do years of therapy looking back in childhood with them. You can’t handle the problems in that way. It just doesn’t work. So he was suspicious of me because I was more evidence-based therapies and so on, so he already was suspicious of me. I was a woman--suspicious of that. [00:29:53] Then I got pregnant with our third child. Now in Israel there is a law saying you have to take off twelve weeks, and the government pays those twelve weeks or pays three-quarters of your salary. But the law says you can’t work. I don’t have tenure. I’m teaching in the School of Social Work. I’m pregnant. My TA is pregnant. She gave birth two months before I did, and 83 there’s nobody that can take over my classes anyway. They don’t even offer it. Men go on reserve duty for the same amount of time. It’s automatic that they go, and somebody finds a substitute. A woman is pregnant? Some nerve. [laughs] [Marine-Street laughs] The vice head of the school sort of looked askance at me. [00:30:45] “Who’s going to do your classes?” I said, “I won’t miss a single class.” “What about Yael, your TA?” “I’ll take over for her.” I did not miss a single class. Now I gave birth to the baby, again, a January birth. I was there teaching. I only taught once a week, long lectures. I’d been having false labor for two weeks and they’d wanted me to go to the hospital. I didn’t come home. I went and bought a lot of groceries, had them shipped home, came home, got my neighbor to take care of the other two kids. My husband had taken me to the hospital. I’m home in a day anyway, and by the next week I was back in class. Marine-Street: Wow. That’s incredible. Tversky: Right, because I was vulnerable without tenure. Marine-Street: Yes, what could you do? Tversky: [00:31:39] Interestingly, the two days I was in the hospital with that baby, the rector of the university--it’s like the provost--came to the hospital. He was a very good friend, and he came to the hospital to tell me that they’d overturned the nepotism rule for me. They’d decided that actually I wasn’t a 84 violation of the nepotism rule because I had studied abroad and not in the same department as my husband. Now I could get a job at the Hebrew University. This is 1976. We had a sabbatical the following year at Stanford-we’ll get to that--and we ended up staying. Marine-Street: You never got to take advantage of it. Tversky: Right, and it was hard. I don’t know if you want to jump back to our first sabbatical at Stanford. We probably do want to jump back there. Marine-Street: [00:32:38] I think so, yes. Tversky: Okay, and then come back to 1976. It was 1977 by the time we got to Stanford, but we can jump back to 1970, 1971, our first sabbatical here. Is that a good--and the Yom Kippur War? Marine-Street: Yes, we need to talk about that. Tversky: We have too much to talk about. Marine-Street: Well, we’ve got time. So tell me about the first sabbatical to Stanford. Tell me a little bit about that. Tversky: [00:33:10] We had a sabbatical 1970, 1971. By that time my husband Amos was working with Danny Kahneman, and they’d started the project that eventually led to the Nobel Prize. My husband wasn’t alive when the prize was awarded. It’s not awarded posthumously, but his name was mentioned in the citation, and Danny Kahneman has always been extremely gracious to point out that it was joint work. So they’d begun their joint work. The way their joint work went was they were together working on every word of every questionnaire and every word of every paper. They were always together, and in fact when that first son who was born in 1969 85 was a year-and-a-third--he was an early talker--he asked me, “Where is Abba?” Abba is the Hebrew word for “Daddy.” [00:34:04] I said, “Daddy’s at work.” He said, “Daddy talking Danny.” That was his impression of what work was--the two of them together talking. The collaboration was in many ways a dream. It was really two minds thinking as one, and the work that came out of it was extraordinary. They tried out everything on me, all the questionnaires and all the ideas, and I knew this work was going to be something special. So I had a front-row seat, and that was a thrill for me. [00:34:41] We had the sabbatical 1970, 1971 at Stanford. Amos was at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences. I was working here in the psych department very happily, doing continuations of work on my dissertation, developing new directions, and making friendships that endured with faculty members in psychology, some of them working on similar problems. So the synergy was great. It was perfect for me. I worked again on visual encoding and spatial ways or visual ways, and also in coding and memory in anticipation of recall. So why do we study differently for a multiple-choice test and an essay test? Because a multiple choice depends on recognition, an essay depends on pulling things out of memory and integrating them. I brought that sort of thinking into an experiment. At that time people thought the way you encode things in memory is good for any kind of memory test, and I said, “No way. We encode things differently depending on how we’re going to need them, how we’re going to retrieve them.” 86 [00:35:54] I did some, I think, elegant work showing that our encoding is in anticipation of how we’re going to use it, and we encode differently in particular if we’re going to recognize something or have to integrate and recall. But the lesson holds. This was all work I was doing here at Stanford happily with this post-doc. I waited till our health insurance kicked in, and we’d wanted another child, who was born at the end of that year, in August. By August of 1971 I had two sons, one who was two-and-ahalf and one who was a few days. Marine-Street: So your second son was born here at Stanford? Tversky: [00:36:37] Was born here, is the only genuine American [laughs], passing any birther. The other two were American on birth because I could get American birth certificates from them, although interestingly, their American birth certificates don’t say they were born in Israel. They say they were born in Jerusalem, because Jerusalem is still contested, the status of Jerusalem. So it says they were born in Jerusalem. If they’d been born in Tel Aviv it would have said Israel, but they are American citizens because I was American. So I’ve finished my year. Amos at the same time is working, doing amazing work with other people as well as continuing with Danny. We decided to stay a second year on leave, and we go to Oregon. That was a wonderful year, despite the fact that the second son was sick all the time, hence I was sick all the time. But it was a wonderful year. Danny Kahneman came too with his family, and the two of them were able to work at the Oregon Research Institute with Paul Slovic, who was again a long-time 87 collaborator and good friend. I worked a little bit. I was in Mike Posner’s lab, and he’d been one of my heroes. [00:38:01] It was a wonderful thing for the families, and it was a wonderful thing for their project. They did, again, more seminal work, more exciting work, and so it was a fruitful work. Then all of us went back to Israel. We went back in 1972. Do you want me to talk about the Yom Kippur War or skip it? I can skip it. Marine-Street: Well, I want to ask you a question about your time at Stanford, because the time that you were here actually overlapped with pretty contentious times about the Vietnam War, and I just wondered if that was in your consciousness at all. Tversky: [00:38:43] It was definitely in conscious. You couldn’t help it. We met good friends who’d been at the Center. They were slightly overlapping Amos, and there’d been a fire at the Center because of the protests against the Vietnam War. By then the protests were protests, and faculty members were involved. I talked a little bit about the 1960s, early 1970s the last time, and those feelings had spread by then to Stanford, so it was background. There were again faculty members and young faculty members. [00:39:22] There was a very promising faculty member here in cognition who essentially gave up his career because he got so involved in not just the protests. What also happened then, which was interesting, was these protests that were everywhere--in your face and in the city, and even bombs. A group broke off and essentially became hippies. Instead of being involved, they withdrew, which again is a natural response to those 88 situations. It was back to the land, communes, hippie stuff, make your own clothing, free love, children raised. So there was that movement as well, of withdrawing and creating your own good society within it--again, a kind of idealism that didn’t last, really, but that was happening then. So I did see people who gave up, who in other years would have had outstanding careers in the field, either withdrawing into this hippie commune, sort of, and Oregon and California were filled with that. In fact, that year in Oregon, I went through five daycare people in my house because I needed a daycare person for the second son and a daycare nursery school for the first one. It was bizarre, because people kept leaving for all kinds of reasons like that. One of the people I didn’t hire said her current job was sewing clothes by hand, because there was sacred stuff going into each stitch. I thought, [laughs] this is too much. It’s okay for you, not my kids. So that kind of spiritualism was a little too much. Going through five, they were all experiences, but there was that transition in that period from the anger, the violence, and the protests to another group that withdrew. [00:41:35] That transition seemed to happen there, and partly I think because I had been in Israel and I’d been part of a war for existence, those issues felt remote to me. I was part of a country that was still developing, that was still establishing its existence, that on all sides was still surrounded by enemies, where there was violence and terrorism going on in the country, where the only escape was by air or by sea. 89 [00:42:10] In fact, I neglected to say, when my first son, who was born in January of 1969, was three weeks old, one Friday morning when I didn’t have daycare I left him sleeping with his father and went to the only real supermarket in Jerusalem to buy food. There was a bomb in the supermarket, and the bomb was about four feet from me. I’d just walked past the spice aisles, just walked past it. The bomb was in the spice aisles. Two students were killed, and everything came shattering down. My suit had to go right away to the cleaners. The ceiling was coming down. I hung around to see that my help wasn’t needed and went home. I’d left my baby. I was really a minute away from being killed. Now I forgot to tell Michael Lewis this, because I wasn’t killed. Two students were killed. There were people being killed in these border skirmishes. I said my husband was on the Golan Heights. There were infiltrators every night. They were watching for infiltrators. So there were people in real danger. [00:43:32] I had another [experience], since we’re on bombs. Before my daughter was born in Israel in January, 1976, I was downtown having my clothes taken out, and there was a dressmaker that would do that. I was in the shop, and the shop was probably 200 feet from the very center of Jerusalem. A bomb went off there and thirteen people were killed. We could feel it. It’s like an earthquake, only more. A neighbor was killed--I didn’t know her--who had just given birth to her third child. That was the life you led, so to come back here, America looked a bit privileged. I agreed with all the things going on, but by that time I had two children, and a career, and a husband who was gone quite a bit, and I was over my head with that. 90 [00:44:43] We’re in Oregon, and Oregon has the hippie movement, not so much the violence. There was certainly more here, and you did feel that there very much, but there was something benign about it. That takes us to end of 1972, to 1972, fall of 1972, when we all go back to Israel. Marine-Street: This is when you have the different appointments in the various places that you’re teaching. Tversky: Right. By then I’m in the Overseas Students and then the School of Social Work, but I’m managing to keep research going somehow or other, and I needed to have a job. I’d been working essentially since I was ten or eleven, and I couldn’t not work. In Oregon I wasn’t getting a salary, but we didn’t need it, and I could work. Amos always said, “Just do good work.” [laughs] With all this--peripheral appointments, children, a husband not there--just do good work, so that was why that kept me going, or kept me going this way. Marine-Street: [00:46:00] Okay, so I have to ask you, you told these sort of harrowing stories about these very close calls in Israel, so what did you tell yourself to sort of be able to keep going on and not just hide in the house all day? How do you cope with that risk? Tversky: We had a wonderful group of friends, and the department in Jerusalem was wonderful. They treated me well. I liked them. They were involved in ideas. I’ve always been interested in ideas. I grew up in a political family. The politics interested me. The arts interested me. Our group of friends included people in the arts, journalists, people from all walks of life, because again, the intelligentsia was in Jerusalem, and our friends in the university weren’t confined to psychology. The provost whom I told you about who is still a 91 close friend was a chemist. We had good friends in geology, in philosophy, in you name it. [00:47:01] This idea that I wanted from an undergraduate--why do you go to graduate school? So you can keep learning. But you find yourself getting very narrow, and narrower and narrower in a field. So this was expansive again. There were other fields. There was politics. There were the arts. There were real problems in Israel, so the politics wasn’t abstract. [00:47:24] All of that was exciting, and the friends. There were Friday nights of these political discussions, Saturday afternoons at people’s houses with coffee and cake, and lots of kids playing together. Our kids grew up with other people’s kids. We had friends whose kids were born two or three months after each of ours. I’m still friends with them and with their children. Many of them had ties to Stanford, so even after we got to Stanford they came for summers and for sabbaticals, and the friendships stayed. Many of them were friends of my husband’s from childhood. When our first child was born, I found photographs of my husband, and I made him an album, and I looked up his kindergarten class. In his kindergarten class were five or six people I knew. I can’t say that about my kindergarten class. One of the people he grew up with ended up being the head of the Supreme Court and a much-heralded judge. Marine-Street: In Israel? Tversky: [00:48:29] Yes. There were a couple that were psychologists. There was an economist. There was a biologist, a neuroscientist, and so on. I gave a party for as many of them as I could find. When he grew up it was a country of 92 600,000 and a kind of elite, and they grew up together, took care of each other. That first generation above my husband’s went to the army. His generation went into academia. The children went into hi-tech because that’s where the challenges were, and the children in hi-tech have done spectacularly, spectacularly. Marine-Street: So these friendship networks made that risk manageable. Tversky: [00:49:17] Not just manageable, it gave heart to life--heart, soul, and ideas to life. I said when the third child was born I went downstairs to my neighbor and left my children. That was taken for granted that you did something like that, and in fact, the afternoons, at four o’clock some of the women napped, or some of the men too. Four o’clock, you could go outside and make noise. Sometimes all the kids were playing together, because this was an area where many people were from the university. There all kids were playing together. Sometimes I’d have twelve kids for dinner, sometimes none, and dinner was chopping up tomatoes, and cucumbers, and eggs, and bread. You always had enough. It was some sort of idyllic life--really locally; and as I said, those years the values of the country were good. [00:50:20] We left, in a way, at a propitious time, when Menachem Begin was elected in 1977. He was a right-winger, and that was upsetting to us. It was the first time that the labor party--or some semblance of a labor party, of a socialist party--wasn’t elected. It was more hawkish, and that was dark clouds on the horizon, which have since taken over the country. When we left and decided to stay at Stanford--and that’s a story we should get to-- 93 there were those friends that I mentioned in Israel, and we had a wide circle of friends. Amos had been this sort of golden child who had grown up in a politically important family and who had been a heralded soldier and a very highly regarded academician. Why should he leave Israel? There was a threat to everybody, because any of those people in academics could have gotten jobs in the States. So his leaving was threatening and angry, and even though I was American, I’d fit in. I’d learned the language. I had an excellent job. Even if it wasn’t quite a full professorship in the department, I still had a career and a job, and fit in and clearly loved them. So if we’re leaving, it’s threatening, and they were angry. There were people that didn’t want to talk with us. [00:51:51] We came back frequently, but later when the politics turned grim, some of them whose children ended up in the States didn’t mind. They’re very unhappy and frustrated by what’s going on, and worried about their children’s future, worried about the future of the country. The dream they grew up on and helped create, which has been shattered in many ways. So it’s tragic. Should we go to 1977 coming back? Marine-Street: Let’s take a quick break. Tversky: Okay. [End of Part 3 of 5, Interview with Barbara Tversky - August 23, 2017] 94 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: BARBARA TVERSKY INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 23, 2017 PART: 4 OF 5 Marine-Street: Okay, so we’re resuming. I know you talked about this extensively to Michael Lewis, and it’s in the book that he wrote about Amos and Danny-your account of the Yom Kippur War. I wondered if you could just share a few of your most sort of visceral memories or experiences during that very historic time. Tversky: [00:00:26] That was fall of 1973, and the years we were living in Israel, Amos would be on reserve duty almost two months every year. He also went to the States every summer, and he did that on a lecture tour. And not just the States. He’d often go to Europe and then the States, giving lectures here and there to many different communities--philosophy, economics, psychology, you name it. That year, for a couple of summers he came to Stanford. They were consulting with people doing decision-making at SRI. There was a very fine group there then, and they were working with that group. [00:01:10] When he was gone in the summers, and I didn’t know where he was because I couldn’t keep track of where he was. He would 95 change it. There was no email. There was no way to call. I do have some letters that he sent from some places, and I kept them. I found them in my daughter’s garage. I’d moved them there, and so I had letters on and off, but that was really the only way we could communicate was letters. [00:01:39] I neglected to say that the first son had an accident when he was six months old. Everything was fine, but again, I was alone in Israel. He was somewhere wandering around Europe and the States, and I didn’t know where, in order to get him. That summer of 1973 he was at SRI, but amongst other places. I knew that was one place he would be the longest. The war broke out very suddenly. Yom Kippur--in Israel, everything shuts down. The holiday begins at sunset, but at two o’clock the media are gone, and they don’t come back until well after sunset the next day. It’s the holiest day of the year. There’s no transportation, no traffic, no cars, and everybody takes over the streets and walks on the streets. People usually go to synagogue and pray, and many people fast. We weren’t religious, so that wasn’t the synagogue part, and the fasting wasn’t necessarily part of it, although I don’t know if we fasted. In later years we did go to synagogue, but in those years we didn’t. [00:02:54] Anyway, Amos was gone. I’m there with two sons. They’re two and five by that time. Friday night, already the holiday had set in. As I was falling asleep I could hear trucks going, and that made no sense to me. I didn’t understand it because that doesn’t happen. That afternoon anyway, we’d had a silly family thing. My kids were not big eaters, and you would feed them late. Starve them, then they’ll be 96 hungry. So I would feed them late. They were out in the balcony eating this chopped up tomatoes and chopped up cucumbers. The older kid used to make a habit of making the younger kid laugh by being a clown, so what he did was stuff small pieces of cucumber up his nose. They got stuck. It’s almost the holiday. My pediatrician lives in walking distance across the valley, the wadi. I called him up and he said, “No, the holiday. I can’t help you. Take him to the hospital.” [00:04:04] The hospital is a long drive away, unfortunately, so I took him there. It turned out the resident on duty was a neighbor. [laughs] We waited in line, and he used tweezers to pull the cucumbers out. My son was being very brave. Because there was lemon on it, it really hurt [laughs], but he was being very brave. By the time we were driving home, it’s dark, and so you’re not supposed to be on the road. People would stop me and say, “Lady, what are you doing on the road?” This is all of course in Hebrew. I explained, “I have a sick child,” and there were two children in the back. He wasn’t sick, but that was the most efficient. I’m not going to explain about the cucumbers. [laughs] [00:04:58] So we got home. I fed the kids again, put them to bed. The trucks sound when I’m just getting to sleep. At about five in the morning, jets flew overhead and woke the country up. That was on purpose. The war had started on the Egyptian border. The Egyptians had infiltrated into the Sinai, which Israel had been holding since 1967, and they literally caught Israel with their pants down. The jets flying over was a signal to people in the army to call their units and to get called up, so we immediately woke up. 97 [00:05:38] It’s Saturday. Normally there’s no transportation in Jerusalem on Saturday anyway, although if it weren’t Yom Kippur you can drive. And of course there’s no radio and no television. Later we could get Jordanian TV in English, but at that time we couldn’t. So the neighbors start piling out into the street, all the neighbors and all the kids. It’s a beautiful day. We’re going to walk with the kids anyway. The wife of the man who pulled the cucumbers out of my son’s nose had a cousin who was a general in Tel Aviv, so she called him and he told her, “It’s a war. They caught us with our pants down, and it’s not clear what’s happening.” That was probably ten, eleven in the morning, and at one there was a siren to go into the shelters. [00:06:28] Now we knew by then Jerusalem was shelled in 1967, but now the holy sites of the Moslems as well as the Jews were in Israeli hands, the Old City, so we doubted very much that Jerusalem would be bombed, and that was the case. There was some bombing of Israel, but it was on the coast. Jordan proper was too far to shell Jerusalem, and anyway, they wouldn’t have done it because of the holy sites and the risk of hitting the holy sites or hitting Arab neighborhoods. So we weren’t worried, and actually we didn’t go into the shelters. We sort of went inside the concrete buildings. At two o’clock the radio came on, eventually television, so Yom Kippur was totally broken in this very, very, very dramatic way. [00:07:27] Amos is still in wherever. I don’t know. There’s a blackout in Jerusalem. We had to make sure that the shades didn’t let out any light, and people came to check. We blacked out the headlights. That meant you 98 could see the stars, and I would take my kids at night. They didn’t like darkness, but I’d tell them “Look at Orion. Look at the North Star.” I’d distract them with the constellations and how beautiful the stars were, and they were clutching me [laughs], because it was stunning. Every night we’d watch television. Every night we knew they weren’t telling us the whole truth, and every night we were worried. How far were they going to get? Would they get into the Sinai? I mean, would they get into the Negev? Cross all the Sinai? We didn’t think so, but still there were huge losses on the Israeli side, huge losses of people. Syria was coming in in the Golan Heights, so that was another worry, and would it be a general war? It was scary. [00:08:40] So getting back to Israel from the States was hard. We had a good friend who was a graduate student then at MIT and his good friend, they were crack pilots. They nearly got killed driving to the airport, but they made it quickly back to Israel because the planes were being filled by essential people. So getting back to Israel was not easy. They flew to Paris. Danny’s sister, who’d grown up partly in France, was working in the Israeli embassy there and got them on planes back to Israel. They bought combat boots because the Israeli ones were heavy and leather, and so they bought canvas ones, Palladium. But I had no idea where they were, and I was trying to work at night. [00:09:35] Classes were more or less cancelled. Everyone around me was stressed, so I went to the library, researched stress, wrote an article for the Jerusalem Post on stress, which was widely read. I got a lot of good 99 feedback on it, just to tell people, “Whatever you’re feeling is normal, so don’t think it’s abnormal. Everybody’s stressed out. These are the symptoms of stress.” It was longer than that, but I got a lot of good feedback. I felt this is something I can do that will help. One night I’m in the study, which was right next to the entrance, working, and I hear familiar footsteps bouncing up the stairs, and it was Amos. They’d gotten from Paris to Israel. It was ten o’clock at night, and he took out his army clothes again. This was familiar to me by then, and at five o’clock in the morning he hitched a ride to the Sinai. He wasn’t really needed by then. It had been quiet for so long--in other words, no wars since 1967. He’d been doing all this two months of the year on these borders, and then we were away. He’d switched [to the psychology unit, so he was giving advice, and the army was eager for that advice. Danny Kahneman had been doing it for years and [the army] relied on them. [00:11:01] There was a unit of soldiers that later came and did PhDs in psychology. There were students that were elite soldiers. They were selected for their academic ability and were doing work related to psychology and the war effort. They [Amos and Danny] moved to the psychology unit, and they went around the Sinai taking surveys, seeing what they could do. It wasn’t clear to me. I knew my husband had to be there. There was no way there could be a war [laughs] without him being there. There was no way. [00:11:38] He ended up on the Nile, the Suez Canal, which was then the border when the ceasefire happened. He had told me years before, a 100 ceasefire isn’t a ceasefire. They empty their shells after the ceasefire, so no, there’s no such thing as a ceasefire. That man was completely exposed during the ceasefire. He wanted to see the last shell. Well, they started coming, a barrage of them. He jumped into a trench. He jumped on the helmet of another soldier who thought he was a shell. He thought Amos was a shell and he was dead. [laughs] Amos had to tell him, “No, I’m not a shell. I’m Amos, and you’re alive.” [laughs] Those were his words. When he came home I rolled my eyes. “Yeah, what did you tell me about ceasefires?” [00:12:37] Nineteen seventy-three, Six-Day War. We left that summer. Israel was so tense because the war of attrition began, and it was unrelenting--the border skirmishes, the fear, the losses, the negotiations. It was unrelenting. We had a mini-sabbatical at Michigan. We each taught a course condensed for two months. It was just a relief to get away for two months, and Amos could begin working. He had collaborations there anyway. I did too. The kids, the two sons, relearned English. So it was a good break. Otherwise life sort of continued--the teaching, raising the kids. I had a third child in January of 1976. This was when I was teaching in Social Work. I had to go back teaching anyway, and I’m getting some research done. I’m working with a few masters students and continuing more or less the lines of research that I mentioned. Then we had another sabbatical at this time at Stanford. [00:14:07] I should say we both had had Stanford connections before that, not just that first sabbatical, but as graduate students each of us had 101 been at summer institutes at Stanford, and there were many. Amos had been twice for mathematical psychology. I’d been to one on learning and memory. They were institutes that had a small number of young faculty starting out as assistant professor and two or three graduate students. I was lucky enough to get accepted, and he was fortunate enough to get accepted. It started some other collaborations of his that went on for another fifteen years with Pat Suppes, who was at Stanford, and others. Marine-Street: But associated with the Psychology Department, the Institute’s work. Tversky: [00:14:52] Yes, math psych was very strong here, and it was associated. The one I was in was a little less associated. There was one person from Stanford there, but mostly they brought in faculty, senior faculty to teach, and they were wonderful experiences--led us to drive out and see the country, drive back. We had a lot of adventures. Now we’re back to 1977. We came [to Stanford] in August. My kids didn’t know English then. I had not been speaking English. I’d been teaching in Hebrew, my neighbors in Hebrew, my kids in Hebrew. I hadn’t realized it, but I’d picked up an accent in English. My English was terrible, and I’d forgotten a lot of it. I had a heavy accent. My family cracked up when they heard me. My friends didn’t understand me. For years people said, “Where are you from?” or said, “I know where you’re from” and identified it. That was a little strange. [00:15:55] The kids quickly learned English and didn’t realize they were forgetting Hebrew, the two older boys, and at some point the older one, who was then eight, said to me, “Ma, you can’t speak anything. [laughs] 102 Your Hebrew’s no good. Your English is terrible.” They were both fine, but I had picked up an accent. What’s more, the culture was foreign to me. I’d come from this country where all women worked and raised kids. I came to a psych department where there were a few women. No one had children. The men who had children didn’t raise them. It wasn’t part of their life sphere. The idea that you had to go at five to pick up kids, fetch them from various daycares, and you weren’t on 24/7, and you couldn’t even talk about it. You couldn’t even say, “It’s five o’clock. I need to go.” You couldn’t say that. You had to act as though there were no children. [00:16:59] On the other hand, the women that I knew who were the parents of my kids’ friends, none of them worked, and many of them thought I was totally irresponsible. They frowned on me and they spoke behind my back. I was made to feel uncomfortable. Even my daughter at some point when she was much older and I’d come to her soccer games-which I did religiously, if only to take her, and I’d bring reviewing and sit on the side--she said, “Ma, you’re the only one who brings reviewing to soccer games.” I sort of said, “I’m the only one that has reviewing.” [laughs] I later asked my kids, “What if I hadn’t worked? What if I’d been home?” and they looked at me like I’d come from an alien planet and said, “You would have been in our hair.” [Marine-Street laughs] I think it’s okay. All of them are working. [00:17:53] It was a foreign culture to me. I felt alienated. The other way I felt alienated is the country had gone from radicalism to hippiedom to 103 cynicism--Nixon--and deep cynicism about anything to do with the government, deep cynicism. I was still under the assumption that Israel was okay. As I said, it was a turning point that I hadn’t completely absorbed, the country hadn’t absorbed. It was a turning point, but the change hadn’t happened. So it felt alien in so many ways--that shift in American culture, in my own culture. Now I certainly managed, formed new groups of friends in the department. Why did we decide to stay? We weren’t going to stay. We’re in the department. [00:18:49] Again, I had a kind of teaching position in the department, and Amos had a kind of teaching position in the department. We felt very comfortable here. We knew the people well. The department itself felt homelike. It had then a cognitive thread through all of our programs, so we all talked to each other. We went to each other’s lab meetings. I could go to developmental. I could go to social. I could stay in cognitive to brain. There was a cognitive thread that united us, and I was anyway always interested in too much and felt comfortable. I ended up being on dissertation committees in all those areas, and it was a really homelike, respectful. Graduate students are good. Everybody respects each other, likes each other. Potential conflicts are all subdued. They’re not allowed, and that was good, that you don’t talk about your colleagues behind their backs. You don’t say bad things about your colleagues. That atmosphere was productive for good work. It was a happy atmosphere. So we’re back in that. 104 [00:20:10] Danny Kahneman had come as well because he and Amos were still working--“Abba talking Danny.” It was still that “every word together.” Danny was up at the Center. By then his marriage had broken, and he was involved with Anne Treisman, who by herself was a very eminent psychologist doing work on attention. She’d done significant work on attention. It was well known everywhere. She was there as well, and the idea originally was all four of us would be there, then we’d all go back-Anne to Oxford, Danny and Amos and I to Jerusalem, and we’d see what would happen. In fact, I said, “Should I bring the clothes that are too small on the older one and will fit the younger one in a year?” and he said, “No. For sure we’re going to be back in a year.” [00:20:57] This is August. By September we’re staying, and it was because Danny and Anne quickly saw that they didn’t want to go back to their respective places. They were going to look for jobs in North America. It was neither Israel nor the U.K., so it was neutral. That meant in order to keep the collaboration up, we’d have to stay, and the department here anyway very much wanted Amos. They worked and got him an appointment overnight. I remember the discussions we had then. We walked up to Coyote Hill, and how did we leave the kids? I don’t remember. Maybe they were in daycare and we did it in the day, and just sort of talking it over. As I said, I didn’t feel comfortable here. I felt I’d had ten years post-degree, and what I’d done is learn Hebrew, fought wars, had children, and sort of kept a career going. But I hadn’t done the work that anybody else would have done 105 between those years to advance their career. Those are the ten crucial years in a career, and I’d lost them. I’m coming back at a point where my classmates are getting tenure, and I’m starting afresh. [00:22:19] I thought, I can’t do this, and Amos said, “You will.” The fact that he had confidence in me was empowering, and so this man says I can do it. Well, I can do it. [laughs] I think there’s something in me that knew I could do it anyway, because I learned Hebrew in six months and I was understanding Rabin on the radio five months after. So there was something in me that sort of knew I could catch up, and the department was again very welcoming. Amos got a nice position. I got a half-time position teaching more than a full-time load for half the salary of a post-doc. [laughs] But I had an office, and then I had a foot in the door. He was earning enough; the money didn’t matter. We were never affluent. As long as we had enough to eat and to send the kids to school the money didn’t matter. Remember, we started out as socialists, so money wasn’t important ever. [00:23:29] I had an opportunity. There were graduate students there I could teach. Graduate students came to me, so I started working with graduate students. They were very good graduate students. Eventually I got grants. I couldn’t get a grant officially because I wasn’t academic council. Gordon Bower--who was very much a protector all the years, and I’m still grateful to him. If there’s a role model, he’s certainly a bit of one in some ways and some ways not, but we’re very close. We deeply admire each other--he discovered my dissertation and put it in an article he was writing. 106 Now how did he do that? It was long before I ever came to Stanford, so he’s been a wonderful person in my life. [00:24:36] Again, things were open. Ed Smith, who was a friend from graduate school and a hero of mine, invited me to co-lead his research meeting, and Herb Clark, other colleagues here. So again, a lot of intellectual activity, and it worked. Eventually I got the grants. Gordon signed for them. Although the money was clearly mine, both NSF and NIH, both organizations told me they really wanted me to be the official PI. They understood what was going on, but they didn’t like it. Eventually, slowly, the department moved me from position to position, and from teaching positions, so senior research associate, something like that that came with a modicum of tenure. Then I was a teaching professor, and then they, on their own accord, made me a full professor. [00:25:35] In the early 1990s we never pushed. We never used other job offers to manipulate either salary or position here. I didn’t want that. Amos didn’t want that. It was something we didn’t have to talk about. We knew implicitly that neither of us wanted to push in any way for jobs. For me or him, it would have to be an invitation. We waited for the invitations, and the department--I don’t know who was responsible, but I’m grateful-the department on its own did each of these switches. Marine-Street: Interesting. Tversky: [00:26:18] Yes, and things are very different now. When you come with a spouse, the spouse is given four years of essentially post-doc and so on, and the attitude is different. So things are very, very different now. But I’m 107 happy I earned my own way, because being the wife of Amos Tversky works both ways. You’re in his shadow, and people think, “Well, you got everything because of him,” and so forth. On the other hand, people pay attention to the name. There were plenty of books that cited both of our work, but his was cited as if it was mine. [laughs] I mean, no, sorry, mine was cited as if it was his. It never happened the other way around. So you’d look in the index and you wouldn’t find Barbara Tversky, but my work was being cited, and it was because people assumed that it was the same person. So it worked both ways, probably more against me than for me, undoubtedly. But again, you can’t let these things bother you. This is the life you have. It was an enviable life. [00:27:34] It was hard. That I have to say, too. Amos was still gone two to three months of the year. The child-rearing was a solo act. The housekeeping was a solo act. The cooking was a solo act, even taking the cars to the garage. The income tax--solo act. I did everything. Eventually he helped out with the carpooling, but notice that I said “helped out.” [laughs] That won’t escape anyone. Now this was the deal I made. When we returned to the States in 1977, I had social pressure from the other women to get him to do the dishes, so he did, dragging his heels, take that over and became very much in charge of the dishes. [laughs] Marine-Street: So tell me who the other women were. Tversky: Oh, just friends. [00:28:30] Not names, just friends who thought it was awkward, because by 1977 here, even though the women, most of the 108 women weren’t academics. I can’t even remember, but there was social pressure on him to, and then I sort of felt, yes, you have to do more, a little more. Marine-Street: Were there other sort of dual academic couples around at the time? Tversky: Oh, yes. The Clarks. Ellen Markman was an academician. Her husband was a professional in another area. There were plenty of women around, so Ellen and Eve Clark were both very good friends. They waited till they had tenure and then had one kid, and by then it was equal time and parents. Brian Wandell was chair. His wife was working most of the time, doing very nice work, and they had one child very late, equal time, and then you could leave at five o’clock to go pick up your kid at daycare, and you could talk about having children. But by then my kids were very old. So yes, things changed enormously, and there are many dual career couples within the psych department, both psychologists, some like Jennifer Eberhardt, whose husband is in law, and there were children. [00:29:53] Things have changed enormously. Stanford started daycare. My daughter has wonderful daycare for her kids. She lives on campus. There wasn’t daycare then, and daycare was always a scramble, always. So yes, now it’s the norm. At least for educated people, it’s the norm that both people are working and both people are doing half-and-half in daycare and half-and-half in everything else. I have three children all married, and that’s the situation with them, that it’s all shared, absolutely shared. I see my sons delighting in their children, and my son-in-law, and they’re as in love with their babies as I ever was. There’s something about 109 taking care of them that induces that, and there’s work on it now. You get endorphins [laughs] from holding babies. Marine-Street: [00:30:54] Interesting. Let’s switch focus just a little bit. I want to talk about your teaching, your approach to teaching, and your approach to working with graduate students. Tversky: I first taught intro to a huge class. This is hard, and I’m a researcher. I can teach too, but I maybe am too much on getting facts and not too much on drama, so I watched a couple of Phil Zimbardo’s classes. They’re wonderful. They’re very dramatic, unbelievably dramatic. No way can I do that. [laughs] You have to be in character. So I watched a couple of people, and you realize you have to get your own style. [00:31:39] Intro was fun. Eventually Ed Smith left and I took over cognitive. That was cognitive, and I was doing seminars. I loved doing cognitive. Partly I loved it because the Symbolic Systems students had to take it. I was active in Symbolic Systems. These people, you can spot them on campus. They all look weird. [laughs] They all have a passion, say for jazz--one of them worked with me on comics. They have these weird passions, and they become experts in weird things. They’re smart, and they’re engaged, and then they all share this love of kind of computational approach to mind, and language, and symbols, and that whole mélange of things. So I loved teaching them. [00:32:28] Many of them I got involved in research. Many of them went on to huge successes in Silicon Valley. I remember Reid Hoffman-PayPal, LinkedIn--being an undergraduate here and in my classes. I really 110 liked him, and trying to get him involved in my research. He was interested, but he had other things in his mind. Anyway, he was going to go do philosophy at Oxford. So much for philosophy at Oxford. I had others. He’s the most memorable, but I had many of those people. They were such exciting people to teach, and they were great fun. I had graduate students in engineering, graduate students even in medicine, in business, so everything goes through the human mind. Cognition is core to everything. So that was great, and I loved it. [00:33:20] I had been an honors student as an undergraduate. There was no real honors program here, so I developed one, and that was a high, because so many students went through it. I developed a procedure for taking them, a procedure for how they developed their own work, and taught them how to find a mentor, how to find an idea, how to craft an experiment, how to write a dissertation, how to present it orally in a way that’s interesting, and nurturing students through that whole process. They’re really smart. Many of them didn’t go on in psych. In fact, Michael Lewis had hip surgery, and the surgeon was one of the kids that had gone through the honors program and remembered me. Michael told me about it, he said “He was a fan of yours,” and then added, “I am too.” [laughs] [00:34:21] One of them, who was also in my cognitive class and couldn’t come because she was taking singing lessons--she was on a singing scholarship or something, so her major was singing, but she was taking psychology--she sent a friend with her tape recorder to the class and set up 111 the tape recorder. The friend wasn’t taking the class but thought it was interesting, so she stayed. That person, who was never in class, got an Aplus in the course and is now provost at Princeton. She was a psychologist at Princeton, then dean, and is now provost at Princeton. Marine-Street: Wow. Tversky: Right, so how much fun to get these? She wasn’t in Sym Systems. She was in the psych honors program, but seeing these kids pop up in those ways, what a reward. I loved it, and I loved seeing those students that way. [00:35:23] Oh, the other thing I did in cognitive that ended up being fun is they had to do projects, and I had them take a standard experiment, anyone who wanted to, take a standard experiment in psychology. At that point computers were just coming on, and I got a pre-publication version of HyperCard, which turned into PowerPoint. They set up the experiment so you could run yourself in it, get your own data. The group data would be collected and you’d see the group data, and there’d be a section explaining the meaning of the results. I developed twenty-one units. I worked with students in Sym Systems. I got small grants to pay people to tidy up the programming, and that got sold and used by a hundred universities and colleges. Now it’s been replaced by all kinds of better things, and I couldn’t devote my life to that. It was a side project. It won an award for software. Fun, right? Fun. [00:36:29] Stanford allows that creativity, and even more, augments it, supports it. There are some funds to do it. There are students who are eager to buy on or to come on. The student who mainly helped me made a career 112 in software, because he knew the human side. He was one of the first people that really could do both, and was brilliant, gifted. Graduate students, I did another thing, too. The standard way I think of training graduate students is you have a set of problems you’re working on, and students come and work on those. Not Stanford, because we were lucky to have good funding for our students, but in many cases the grants support the students to do that research, and that’s certainly the case in the hard sciences, that both graduate students and post-docs are more or less required to work on the grant research. They come with that expectation and they come because that’s what they want to do. [00:37:32] I had a different tack with graduate students, and it was one that only gradually became conscious. That was to work with each of them on a new problem, one they were interested in and one they felt that sort of matched their skills and talents. Some of them like very constrained data like reaction time, where you get lots of trials and regularity, and you can make sharp predictions and sharp tests. Some of them like more openended things where you’re looking at behavior; you have to figure out how to code it and then how to make that coding meaningful. So those are two extremes, and so I had to find where they fit on that continuum of how much certainty they need and how much they’re willing to be exploratory, and have the talent to be exploratory, because it takes talent and content. What kind of content are you interested in? [00:38:30] I was constantly telling the honors students who would come in wanting to work on X and there was nobody in the world, nobody 113 at Stanford working on X, and I said, “Anything you work on becomes interesting because you’re working on it. You’re better off at this stage in your career, unless you’re really independent, matching yourself to the teacher, accommodating to the teacher instead of asking the teacher to accommodate to you. Trust me.” Most students bought that. A couple left. Fine. So that was fun. It was finding out what these graduate students, what content worked for them, finding a problem that we could both develop, where I’m thinking and they’re thinking. I don’t want to give them problems. They’re going to have to go out in the world, and that’s more or less what happened. There were sort of groups that worked slightly on the same problem, but everybody went out into the world with an area they were expert in and continued in that area. [00:39:41] So I have students all over doing very different things, and that’s been rewarding. It stretches me too much. I have to learn too much to keep up with them, but we did a lot of work on spatial thinking, on reaction time and spatial thinking, biases in spatial thinking, and there were many little projects there that people took on. Space naturally led to time, and one of my later students, Jeff Zacks, went on and did work on events and time work that we started here. A second student started on that and did fine work, but there are some that didn’t. It’s a long story why that didn’t continue, but that again turned into a really fruitful area. [00:40:27] Design--thinking about the spaces in our minds, the space of navigation, the space of the body, the space around the body, which are 114 all spaces I worked on, led to thinking about the spaces we create, so that led to diagrams and sketches. How do you create them? How do you interact with them? How do they teach you? How do they represent information in ways that are different from language, which they do, and more directly than language? So that’s led to a huge number of projects that different students have picked up on at different times. Thinking about how we use space to communicate led to gesture, because then what do you do if you don’t have paper? Gestures turned into a wonderful field and a wonderful way of studying how we communicate. You’ve seen mine, and you can set up a whole framework for a set of ideas by the gestures you use. You can also use specific gestures to show specific meanings, like “Carburetors do this.” [00:41:36] We’ve found that those things help you think and help other people think. So gestures are effective both for your own thinking--if you sit on your hands and we don’t let you gesture what you’re learning about, you don’t learn it as well. And if we do gestures that match the ideas that I’m trying to convey--I make gestures that match them, not handwaving--then you’re going to learn better, especially for action, which leads to causality. Those are hard things to find. [00:42:10] That’s a bit of the research, but it’s also my philosophy for raising students. It’s been terribly rewarding to watch students who come in who aren’t sure of themselves, and gradually, partly because we’re working out a project together, and gradually they own it. The confidence goes with that. Then you watch them turn into professionals, and the first couple of 115 years, I know, they’re still writing and calling me about issues they’re having with students, their own students, issues they’re having with teaching, issues they’re having with other department members, the sorts of things that happen because you can’t anticipate all that in graduate school. [00:42:56] Again, I’m so happy I could help with those issues-changing departments, moving to another place, life decisions. I’ve had students come to me with--probably because I’m a woman--with all kinds of life decisions: watching them get married, create families, create their own careers. Sometimes they send their students back to me. I’ve had second generation. Some of them have gone into the Valley, because about half our students do, and seeing them succeed there in one way or another and develop careers there in one way or another has been exciting. The Valley, Sym Systems, collaborations within Stanford, and Stanford is masterful at facilitating that and unique at facilitating that. I worked with a student in Comparative Literature. He was working on what’s called visual poetry. It often has no words. You have to look at it. I looked at it long enough that I began to understand what it is. It might look like art or photography. It isn’t. It’s different. It is poetry, and it is spatial and visual. He was interested in how the spatiality of it created the meaning, and it does. He wrote papers, and I read them. He came into my office one day after I had read a paper. I thought it was really exciting and gave him lots of comments. He was in tears at the end. He said, “Nobody in my program has ever read anything I’ve written.” 116 [00:44:42] I was shocked. But then I learned something basic about the humanities and the sciences. We collaborate with students, and we publish together. In the humanities, you don’t publish with your graduate students. The graduate students have to do their own work. So if you’re a graduate student, you’re in competition with the professor’s time. So the idea that you’re collaborating to me is healthy, because then we’re both invested in it, and I like it. I was happy to help him. It was in the end my being overloaded that we didn’t get some joint publications, because there was an experiment there that was terrific, showing spatiality that would have been great. I collaborated with somebody in Structural Engineering who was essentially doing architecture, working on the Gehry Concert Hall in LA and needing coordination of language, which I’ve also studied quite a bit--spatial language, language and the spatiality. Again, I could help on that. [00:45:42] A graduate student in Computer Science working on making maps. The first maps, the predecessor of Google Maps, the first maps that gave you routes online and could do 100,000 in nanoseconds-now I’m exaggerating--was a program developed by him--Maneesh Agrawala and Chris Stolte. Chris went on to found Tableau. Maneesh is now back at Stanford and the winner of a MacArthur, partly based on joint work, I think. He came to me wanting to work on maps. We’d done some work on maps. He wanted to generate these maps. [00:46:25] What makes a good map, a good route? We knew what made a good route. He took those principles, cognitive principles of what 117 makes a good route, one that someone can follow, and instantiated that in the maps. Then we wanted to do something together. A route tells you what action to take until you get to a turning point and have to do a new action, and then a new action. So it’s telling you the path you get to each turning point, the action you have to take and go on. That’s a model for everything. It’s a model for going through life. There are turning points in life. It’s a model for putting something together. We needed a new paradigm, something that anyone could do, because maps are appealing--anyone can do them. I don’t like abstruse tasks. So putting together a piece of furniture, IKEA. We had a big project on that, on creating instructions that follow the cognitive design principles. One of my graduate students worked on it. Maneesh was still a graduate student, and he worked on it. [00:47:31] Again, this got a great deal of attention and prizes. He developed an algorithm that he and a number of collaborators worked on. It was in Pat Hanrahan’s group, and Pat has been someone that I was so delighted to get to know. We’ve been close colleagues and good friends ever since. It’s like becoming friends with your children’s parents. [laughs] You become friends with the other students’ mentors. [00:48:04] Maneesh built an algorithm that took apart an object by these principles and then developed how to put it together, together with the instructions so the instructions wouldn’t obscure anything. You wouldn’t have anything occluding anything else. Again, [he] won awards, 118 great work, a lot of attention, set new directions. That’s been enormous fun, those collaborations across campus. I just gave you a few. I got involved in CSLI [Center for the Study of Language and Information]. The original grant didn’t allow psychologists. The person who developed the program, the Sloan program, didn’t like psychology. But once the original grant ended and more money came in, they invited us all in, and that was again ended. It was like Sym Systems. It was philosophy, computer science, and later it became MediaX and expanded to design and engineering and communications. [00:49:13] We had interactions with hi-tech companies, mostly in Japan but also here. I always found those interactions fascinating because again, they’re real problems, and they’re human beings interacting. We can help. The Silly Valley [laughs], as some people mock it, that connection was great, and there are such smart people there. I love engineers because they need knowledge from so many different sources, but they need to make something. So I got involved a little bit with the d.school as it was developing and with Mechanical Engineering, because they’re product design and they’re interested in how groups collaborate. It’s developed into an interest of mine, joint action using sketches to think and gestures to think. I’ve been on committees of a number of those students, and it’s just been fun and enriching. I think anybody who sits in their closed room and works on the same paradigm forever is missing too much. Marine-Street: [00:50:30] That’s fascinating, the trajectory of your research to me, and I see what you’re saying about going sort of towards where your students are 119 interested and the collaborations. But I wondered, as you look back from your start doing pictorial encoding, and then you got into categories and some of the spatial thinking, is there sort of a thread or a question or two that ties things together? Tversky: Yes, there is a thread, and I’m going to add more, and that’s memory, because I opened yesterday with memory and we did do work on memory. We looked at the way people retold the stories of their lives. This is with Beth Marsh. We collected them from students in the dorm, and they told us every day what they were telling, and they told us. [We asked,] “Did you add features? Did you subtract them? Did you exaggerate? Did you minimize?” “Yes” to all of the above. “Were you telling the truth?” “Yes.” So you were allowed some license in exaggerating, in adding details, in changing details, in eliminating. You were allowed some of it to make a dramatic story. [00:51:45] This never got published and the student left. He’s gone on to a wonderful career, so I can’t even get angry at him, but we went on to, “How do people receive those stories?” Listeners, same thing: they know people are exaggerating, and adding details, and subtracting them, and still more or less telling the truth. So we discount. So if somebody tells you, “I haven’t slept a wink all week. I haven’t had more than two hours of sleep a night. I had six exams and four papers,” what you go away with is they’re stressed out. You don’t take it literally that they had six exams and seven papers and only slept two hours. They’re stressed out. That’s the message, and it’s a colorful way of saying, “I’m stressed out.” 120 [00:52:36] That led us into, “How do you craft stories for different audiences?” We had a bit of that in the original research, and that gets into narrative, and narrative gets into events. We’d already studied events, simple ones like making a bed and how do you perceive them? There are junctures there--again, discontinuities, just like changes in the road. So those discontinuities are universal in cognition. There are discontinuities in our body that divide our body into parts, so segmenting into parts, whether it’s a journey, or an event, or a story, or a narrative, there are junctures, and they’re overdetermined. There are physical changes, and cognitive changes, and interpretation changes all happening at once. So that thread---and it’s essentially a root--is everywhere, and storytelling has become a meme in every discipline you can imagine. [00:53:40] I worked with a bunch of people doing data visualizations for journalism. Journalism now does a lot of data visuals, so they want to tell stories. So I wrote a chapter for them, for a book that’s coming out soon, “What’s a story?” Going through everybody’s definition of a story. English, linguistics, nobody can claim to have a unique version. So what’s common? What makes a story? What’s the difference between the events and how you retell it? How do you introduce drama? Sometimes you introduce drama by non sequiturs. You throw somebody into some new character all of a sudden without making the connection, and that arouses curiosity. [00:54:25] Sometimes you need clarity, if you’re explaining how to do something, how to operate a piece of equipment, especially dangerous equipment. You better go in a linear order, but other times not. There are 121 ways of visual storytelling, so that again brought me to comics. I’ve been interested in how we remember, think about and use the visual-spatial world to think, remember and communicate, and that’s taken me everywhere. It’s taken me from objects, remembering objects, remembering faces, how do we encode them, remembering scenes, remembering environments, understanding how the parts of your body--lots of things I haven’t mentioned because I tend to do a few pieces of research on one field and then a new problem. That I wouldn’t advise anyone to do, but I can’t spend my life doing eighty experiments on X, so I have a different model. It might not be a guaranteed key to success. I would not recommend it. In fact, I’ve told students, “Don’t do it.” First get depth in an area. Then you can flit a bit, but depth is important. You become the authority on X. [00:55:49] But I’m tying all of that together, and visual storytelling, comics, movies, diagrams telling you how that pulls it together. Studying space and how space is structured, developing a theory of it, developing a theory of visual communication, which I’ve also done, developing theories of narrative and how you break things into chunks and string them together, provide continuity in comics or diagrams. All of that makes you contrast with language. so how does language do it? How is it done without language, and how do they work together? Because I’m talking, I’m gesturing, making, creating spaces. I’m often more spontaneous--like I’m explaining to you how to cook. I’m using the world. All those things coordinate to produce a message. 122 [00:56:46] We’re such a booky people that we get used to words alone, but there’s so much more. Again, facial expressions communicate nuances of meanings that we don’t have words for, and important nuances, really important nuances, and bodies too, and uses of gesture and space, nuances that words can’t do justice to. We need them all. We use them all. Now if you look at language, its spatial roots are becoming more and more investigated. Math--the people in math have come to me, and philosophy of math, because the spatial-visual is important there. How you space an equation, where you put things? All of that is important in how people reason. [00:57:42] John Etchemendy, before he became provost, was working on visual proofs, and that’s a huge field now in logic and in math. It’s, “Can you make them as rigorous?” Of course, proofs always had a visual structure. So does language. We have spaces between words, spaces and paragraphs. That’s visual, and it contributes to the meaning. I can pull all that together, and in fact, I’m on Chapter Six, trying to do that. [both laugh] I can finally admit to doing that. I’m not a person that admits to working on stuff until they’re done, but now I’m confident that unless something terrible happens, this is done. It’s the hardest thing I’ve ever done intellectually, and it’s the most fun. [00:58:40] It’ll go through all of those threads. So I look back on my life, and I’ve been incredibly lucky, incredibly lucky. I ended up in interesting places, not in the Chinese sense, in interesting places at interesting times. I didn’t tell you, I was in New York on 9/11. So that, and 123 certainly my experiences in Israel at the time we had more close calls. There was a Molotov cocktail and the car caught fire. That was much later. Again, I survived those things, but they affect you deeply in so many ways. I’ve known really interesting people and people who’ve been good friends and have contributed to my life in enormous ways. Because I was always after ideas and because I haven’t really needed help, doing the solo business is familiar. I really just wanted ideas and friendships, and I’ve had those. [00:59:53] Now I’m in New York. I took early retirement from Stanford for basically personal reasons. Partly, my vision was going, and it was before Uber. I really don’t see well enough to drive, so in New York a car is a liability. Here I can manage now on a bike, but it’s limited. Bike, Uber, trains--I know them all, but it’s limiting, and New York offered culture. Silicon Valley was great, and high tech was great. Now I have, among my friends, composers, dancers, actors, directors, filmmakers. It took a while to build those friendships. Artists--I’ve been working closely with artists. I said I was working with designers. I’ve worked with writers. [01:00:43] All of that is again cognition. It goes through the mind. There’s something we can say about it, and there’s something I learn from them. It’s another kind of background noise, and it’s been extremely rewarding and exciting. I still can come back here for summers and breaks and keep up with my friends and my colleagues, so I have this illusion of a double life. 124 Working with students has been harder in New York. The caliber of students here is unbelievable and unmatched. The caliber of university is unmatched. There is not a better university in the world, no question in my mind about it. I’ve seen enough other universities, and this one is spectacular--a little too protected, which I’m not in New York, where I live in a neighborhood that’s 20 percent white and I ride the train. I think it’s even a smaller minority of me’s in the train, especially my age, but I like that. [01:01:50] I’ve had all of these experiences. I think I can keep a little of Stanford. I have all this other background on New York. Some of my students in art are going to make a difference in art education because of cognition and perception, and that’s thrilling to know. It’s not me; it’s them. I feel very, very lucky that I didn’t design my career. There was no checklist. I sort of fell into it at different times and places. I think I had the right instincts. I did make mistakes. I will make mistakes. I’m not as wise as many people about avoiding them. I still wonder, “Was it a mistake to leave Stanford?” Of course, in ways it was a terrible mistake, but I’m good at lemonade, and New York gave me more things than I could have gotten here. I knew I had to move when I could still get a university job and not after retirement. I had to have that. Whether it was the right decision or not, I live with what I have. [01:03:13] I have three amazing children and eight amazing grandchildren, and each one of them is a character. [both laugh] So far, they love me, and needless to say, I’m nutty about them. And again, I still have 125 the friends in so many places, back in Israel, where I feel at home and don’t get lonely. I didn’t talk about professional service, but I’ve had a lot of international contacts. There are four groups in Paris that I work with, and there are two or three groups in Padua, which is the best psych department in Italy, and some groups in Rome. I’m working with groups in Sweden and Germany on and off, many groups. Marine-Street: These are professional groups of psychologists? Tversky: [01:04:04] Yes, and some of it is computer science and some of it is design, so it’s different things that I’m working with; some philosophy; again, computer science of different flavors. There are many flavors of computer science, and so I have all these little colonies where I can go and combine seeing fascinating places with doing work and working with collaborators: Japan, China, Beijing. I have Nanjing. I’ve been really lucky in that way. I grew up with languages. I had curiosity about cultures, so I’ve been able to combine that with my work. I’ve been extraordinarily lucky, extraordinarily lucky. Marine-Street: [01:04:53] Let’s take a quick break. Tversky: Okay. [End of Part 4 of 5, Interview with Barbara Tversky - August 23, 2017] 126 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD FACULTY ORAL HISTORY PROJECT INTERVIEWEE: BARBARA TVERSKY INTERVIEWER: NATALIE MARINE-STREET DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 23, 2017 PART: 5 OF 5 Marine-Street: So Barbara, in 1996, rather suddenly, Amos died, and I wondered if you could just expand upon that a little bit and talk about the effect that that had on the rest of your life since then. Tversky: Well, I first have to say what he was in my life. I already said it was a kind of instant attraction, and I’ve said over and over again that there were things we agreed on implicitly. We didn’t have to say them, because the values were so clear. Even the mistakes we made, say in decorating the house, we agreed on, and then we agreed they were mistakes. It was all implicit. It’s not that we didn’t argue. We did. But on the core things that most couples argue about, there was just no dissent, and a deep trust of each other, that the other would do. [00:00:59] The other thing we had is we always surprised each other. It was a thirty-year marriage, and plus a couple of years together before the marriage. He would say things that I found interesting and novel, and I would say things that he found interesting and novel. It was surprise. It was new all the time. We never got tired of each other’s company. 127 We had so much together because we had the languages, both languages, and we loved both languages. Hebrew is a beautiful language. There’s beautiful literature in it, and at some point when I was living there, there was a book that I especially liked that I tried to translate, and it’s untranslatable. It was a book that moved me enormously. We had the language and the love of the literature in Hebrew. [00:01:55] We loved theater, here and there. There were books in English that we shared and loved. He liked thrillers movies, and I didn’t. One time we went with Danny Kahneman and his wife, and we decided the men would go to the thrillers and the women would go to the Poverty in X. We came together afterward, and his wife and I were crying, and they were all hyped up. We were all four happy. So our movie tastes diverged. There was a confluence later; he went to the thrillers with the kids. I didn’t like watching sports. I don’t think I see well enough. The games don’t interest me. So I don’t like watching sports. He didn’t like classical music, so I gorged on classical music after he died, and I’ve become an opera fan. Actually, I was moving him toward classical music the last years of his life. I took him to a concert, and he said, “You know, that was really nice.” So we were converging. I don’t think I could ever watch a football game. [laughs] [00:03:05] Politics--we knew politics deeply in each country and shared the same values there. We were both psychologists in slightly different fields, so I learned his field. I could keep up with it. Through him, I didn’t have to read it. I knew his colleagues and so forth. We were in the 128 same department, our offices separated by our secretary, shared the same children. He was part of me. I was part of him. The friends in Israel, we could do seamless. Again, those letters he would send would be telegraphic to anybody that didn’t know our lives. Again, it’s not that we didn’t fight. We could scream at each other. But the love and the trust was there. There were times that weren’t easy. The fact that he was four months of the year away was hard on me. I’d have to adapt to life without him, and then he’d come home, and he was an enormous presence--demanding of me, my attention, the kids’ attention. [00:04:07] He was an incredible conversationalist, an incredible storyteller. He kept all the parties, everybody in stitches, rolling on the floor, because he got funnier and funnier as he went on. He was just a presence wherever he went, and he kind of barged into your life, took over, and then he’s gone and there’s this big hole. Those adjustments weren’t easy for me. On the other hand, I understood why they had to be done, but you can’t always control your own emotions. You’re upset, there are constant readjustments. But we really did have a shared life that most people could only dream about. [00:04:51] So losing him wasn’t easy. It took the wind out of my sails and the taste out of many things. We always had family dinners. He was appreciative of the cooking from the time that we were graduate students and I was cooking for everybody there, but then it was just the two of us and he was an incredible audience. He liked everything I did, even when he 129 said, “I don’t like soy sauce chicken. I’d make it, and he’d say, “Boy, was this good.” [laughs] Then the kids did the same. I had a lot of fun cooking things from every culture imaginable, and dinner table was hours. We hung around the dinner table. Often we’d go up and work, kids and I, and then there was tea at ten o’clock, and tea was just an excuse to talk. Home life was fun. I couldn’t go into the television room when they were watching sports. [laughs] [00:05:57] He didn’t like family vacations. He didn’t like being away from work, and I soon learned he’s going to turn into a grouch if we’re in Paris. [laughs] There were some vacations where I took a collaborator along and then went sight-seeing in the day. This was after the kids were grown, and that worked. We did Norway that way. We did Italy that way. We did Russia that way. So that worked anyway. I think, again it was partly because of the two cultures and the depth of them and partly sharing the profession, and even the traveling together, knowing colleagues in different countries, because they came to us. [00:06:46] When you lose someone like that you’re in terrible grief, and all you have left is memories. But bringing back the memories brings back the loss, so you’re completely ambivalent. Should you bring back the memories and then you bring back the pain? The pain takes over you. It comes all of a sudden without warning, and you’re just engulfed in misery. That first couple of years I thought I just have to carry on. Something will happen to fill that hole. Nothing can fill the hole. But something will 130 happen. When after a year nothing had happened, I was still as isolated as before, it threw me in a depression. [00:07:30] Again, I came out of it. I must be the only person that went through a loss like that without going into therapy, and maybe therapy would have helped. It’s not something that is in my character to do. So you realize there was nothing more that he wanted to do than to live. I have that gift. I can’t squander it. You have to find joy in life. You feel guilty for living. He was a kid with very pale blue eyes and very pale skin, and he grew up in the sun without sunglasses, so he developed first a melanoma on his arm. That didn’t metastasize. It was fine, but it was a worry until we got past the five-year mark, and that happened early on. But then at some point a year-and-a-half before he died, he said, “I’m seeing double.” I said, “Are you seeing double with one eye or two? and he covered up and he said, “One eye.” He was fifty-seven. I thought maybe macular degeneration. It was clear if it’s one eye, it’s in the retina. If it’s both eyes, it could be in the brain. So I said, “Go right away to an eye doctor.” Instead he went to Israel. It wouldn’t have made a difference. [00:08:50] It was December; he always went. He came back, and it turned out he had a melanoma of the eye. They’re very rare. He was treated for a year, and there were two places that did treatment for that. One was UCSF. One was Tel Aviv. Luckily we were close to UCSF. They send you to a proton beam, to a linear accelerator, and they hit the eye. For a while it looked like it was working. I’m going with him, and I’m seeing the resident 131 drawing the tumor. It got smaller and smaller, and then it got bigger. That was six months before he died. We eventually went to an oncologist. By then it had spread. It was everywhere. There’s nothing to be done. Now you can do something; then you couldn’t. So it was sort of go home and die. He was feeling good, and in fact, pretty good till the end. [00:09:53] He made the decision we don’t tell anyone, and I understood that, because otherwise you’ve got five months to live, and everyone’s asking you all the time, “What are you doing?” Everyone needs to know. So we told a small group of people. People came into the house and worked--a couple of good friends from Israel. Some came, some weren’t allowed to come. His sister came. Danny Kahneman--the relations then were pretty tense, but Danny certainly came. He was at Princeton by then, not across the Bay in Berkeley, but he came quite a bit, and they worked. About probably seven, eight, maybe ten graduate students and post-docs came, and he must have finished a dozen papers. They were sworn to secrecy. There were people in the house all the time. [00:10:45] My job was to field phone calls and make tea. My teaching load was light in spring anyway, and we could joke about it. But not telling people was good while he was dying; it cost me afterward, because people thought I wanted to be left alone, or people thought I wasn’t their friend or I would have told them. I didn’t think of that. I wouldn’t have changed anything anyway because I didn’t want to keep talking about it and explaining it to anybody who wanted to know what was going on. I didn’t want to spend my time doing that. The kids came home. They were all 132 there. There was an election in Israel, and Shimon Peres, the dovish candidate, lost, and I think that hastened everything, because we were still involved in politics. [00:11:50] The funeral was kind of amazing. People came from all over, all over, and he was buried in the Jewish cemetery. He didn’t want to go back to Israel, which was fine. I asked him. He didn’t want to have anything to do really with the funeral. I understood that, and so I had made arrangements unbeknownst to him for two burial plots. People came from all over. Danny eulogized, and Paul Slovic, Eldar Shafir, people who had worked with him, and each of my kids, and each eulogy was amazing. I didn’t know my kids had that in them. They knew to be light and funny, and they were. So it was a celebration. [00:12:39] Jewish funerals--so there were the eulogies, and then you walked to the gravesite. In Israel people are buried in shrouds, as the Bible says. You can’t do that by the laws of California. But they’re buried and then the tradition is that each person throws a shovelful of dirt, and this long line of well over a hundred people, everybody did. You first say the prayer over the dead, which is a beautiful prayer. It’s in Aramaic, a language close to Hebrew but not quite. The oldest son says it, and that’s all. Then I shovel dirt, and the kids and everybody. That was all you heard, is this line of people on the hillside, one by one, and the dirt. Utter silence. So it was unbelievably dramatic, solemn, respectful. Then you sit in the house for a week, and people come by and bring food and tell good stories. [laughs] At the end of the week, again, I’m not 133 religious, but the rituals help. You’re in the house that week. You tear a cloth ceremonially. You cover mirrors. Some of it, it’s obviously superstitions, but there’s something comforting. I didn’t do everything, but there’s something comforting about doing that, and people gathered. At the end of the week, you leave the house and walk around the block. That’s entering the world again, and there’s something you do at thirty days. We didn’t follow all of that, but that imperative of you go back into the world-you may not feel ready, but you do it. [00:14:28] So I did it, and I knew what would save me is work. So the focus was on work. They were very productive years, and I had great graduate students those years. The career was blossoming, and there were talks, and there were this and [that]. So it was all blossoming. There were people that said, “You’ve come out of Amos’s shadow.” [00:14:51] That part was rewarding, and on the personal part, I sort of said, “I have three kids that aren’t quite grown, and they’re my concern.” With kids that are almost grown, you can’t interfere. You have to wait to be asked, and you have to oversee. One went into a depression, and that was cause of concern because, as I said, my mother had been seriously depressed, took her own life--my sister as well. She didn’t end her life, but she had many attempts. She was a very talented woman, and lost a career and lost many of years of her life to hospitalization. So I sort of said, “I can’t let that happen to one of my children.” That was an anxiety that I carried and still carry, and I know the kids suffered. 134 [00:15:48] He was such a wise man, and you could go to him with problems or concerns; that was his research. He could always see farther than anybody. He’d told me his whole research path at twenty-seven. Walking home at night, he told me, “I’m going to do work on judgment and decision-making. I’m going to do work on similarity. These are both fields that need to be opened. This is how I’m going to do them.” Twenty-seven-no wonder I fell in love with him. On politics he had the wisdom, and even staying, he knew they needed to stay. We needed to go back to Israel, and then we needed to stay here at that point, and that I could do it. He knew I could do it. So he was a prophet. [00:16:43] I’ve learned now to turn the memories into joy, and I do talk about him a lot and do try to revive the stories and keep him alive. The memories go, unfortunately. I can feel his presence still. I miss him every day. But the joyous part of him, that confidence that he had in me, gives me strength, and he gave me a wealth of friends and colleagues that are loyal to me. Michael wanted to write this book about them. Michael wrote Moneyball, and Dick Thaler, who’s a behavioral economist, and Cass Sunstein, who is a lawyer and writes books faster than anyone can read them, and they’re brilliant books, and was in Obama’s administration. He’s an amazing man. The two of them had worked together and had written the book Nudge. I don’t think they had written it then, the British government and the Obama government had nudge units to get people to behave in ways that are to their own benefit. 135 [00:18:00] They wrote a review of Moneyball, and they said it’s a fine book. In Moneyball, Michael was showing how the manager of the Oakland A’s used statistics to choose players and on a small budget built a winning team, and that changed baseball. Now you work on statistics. You don’t work on the eye of a presumed scout who is all full of biases. Moneyball was a great book. So Dick and Cass said, “Moneyball is a great book,”--as Michael puts it--“but Michael doesn’t know what he’s talking about. He should read Kahneman and Tversky.” Michael said that to a good friend of his whose name is Dacher Keltner. He was a graduate student here and a TA of Amos’s, a graduate student, a social psychologist, brilliant in his own right, at Berkeley, a friend of Michael’s. Dacher said, “I know Danny. He lives up the hill.” Danny at that time kept a house in Berkeley. He lived there summers, but he was in Princeton. He said, “I know Danny. I’ll make an introduction. Do you want to make an introduction?” So they began walking and talking in the hills. They’re neighbors. Danny began explaining the work to him, and Michael gradually saw there is a book. But it took him a while. [00:19:24] The other connection with Michael is he once taught a course in finance journalism at Berkeley, and my oldest son, the one that was born in 1969 and said, “Abba talking Danny,” took that course and did well. Michael thought he wrote well. I agree. They became friends. Michael didn’t make the connection, but it was my son who introduced me to Michael. 136 [00:19:47] So Michael began hanging around, reading Amos’s papers, sitting upstairs [in my office] with me, asking me questions, translating Hebrew. Michael is great company. He asks great questions. He’s fun to be with. I learned about his other projects, which are amazing, some of which happen, some of which don’t, but they’re always interesting to think about. He spent a lot of time with my kids. He liked them. That always wins a mother’s heart. I gave him lists of people to see in Israel and in the States. He made many trips. He saw many people. He went to Israel. I met him there. He did due diligence, and he has an amazing memory and obviously is one of the world’s best storytellers of non-fiction. In fact, one of his early sessions going through Amos’s papers, he found a letter to Amos from the statistician who advised the Oakland A’s, and he jumped up and down. Of course, I’m an idiot. How do I know? I don’t know the manager of the Oakland A’s. [laughs] I don’t even know the statistician. [00:20:48] Anyway, Michael went into it with enormous glee. He also learned the work. The work is hard. He learned the work. People use that book. People here at Stanford are using that book as a beginning textbook in statistics because he’s explaining the work well. He learned Israel. Israel is really hard to learn. Even for an American Jew, it took me a while. I got it very well, and it felt more comfortable than my stereotypes, very comfortable. But even people that know Jewish culture here, Israel, it doesn’t make sense to them. He got it, and he fell in love with the right friends of ours. So he’s remarkable to get the book. 137 [00:21:41] That said, and Michael knows this, Michael wrote the book. He did four years, six years of research, and amazing research. Then he wrote it in a kind of musical trance in two-and-a-half months. I understand writing that way, and I understand he knows his own creative process in the book, but there are mistakes there. Some are small. Amos never ran out of his house in his underwear. He was actually a bit of a prude and quite concerned about dress. He dressed not typically, but it concerned him, and he wanted to be dressed comfortably but appropriately. It was important to him. [00:22:26] It wasn’t that he was an absent-minded professor. No way. He was terribly funny, but a lot of those quips that are quoted in the book-and they came from all the friends who collect them--Amos never said to people’s faces. There was a British statistician, very proper and shy and a very good statistician, who invited him to speak at the Royal Society, and that was a huge honor. There is a script. You first have an antagonistic speaker after you and then a friendly one, so a whole script. But I think either going to the talk or from it, the statistician said, “You know, I don’t really like Jews, but I like you.” So the quip, which it’s not even clear that Amos made it and certainly not to that guy’s face, was “I don’t usually like British statisticians, but I like you,” or “I don’t usually like Brits, but I like you.” You can choose your quip, but it’s in the book as if he said it. No way. His behavior was good. It was also in the book that he only cared about himself. Not true. He was a super good citizen in high school. The leadership roles in the youth 138 movement were a huge part of Israeli life, especially then. He was a leader in the army, a leader in the university, a leader in politics, a leader in the Hebrew University when he was a faculty member; he was on major committees, took leadership roles in the university way beyond his rank. [00:24:07] Same here in the department. Almost every major decision in the department was funneled through him, and later on the advisory board of the university. So he was aware of what was going on. He didn’t want to be department chair. He didn’t want to do finances. I did that. But on the major decisions where it took wisdom, he went out of his way, and he didn’t have to. Everyone came because he was wise, so he was loyal to his friends and helped them on anything. He was visiting ill people when he himself was ill and calling ill people back in Israel when he himself was ill. So that leadership, loyalty, doing his part, very much a part of his character. [00:25:07] Now Michael didn’t know him. He had to get him through the reflection in other people’s eyes, and it’s remarkable what he did catch. But there were aspects of Amos that I think were misrepresented. There were things there on the dissolution of their relationship, because the undoing means three things. It means the project they were working on when the collaboration with Danny Kahneman broke up. It means the undoing of the collaboration. It means the undoing of economics and the introduction of behavioral economics, and that he missed a bit by not talking to people like Kenneth Arrow, who came on board really early. Michael funnels things through characters: Don Redelmeier, who is a prince; Dick Thaler, who is, again, an amazing character. So doing that can 139 bias you in ways, so I think that story isn’t quite right--the story of the epiphany, the original seminar that Amos and Danny taught together. [00:26:24] It wasn’t that Amos thought people were rational and Danny convinced him that they weren’t. Amos had been studying the irrationality of people before he even met Danny Kahneman, so that he knew deeply. The epiphany was--I checked this with Danny and I know where the mistake came--the epiphany was seeing the deep connections between perception and cognition. That was the epiphany, so that isn’t right. I think some of the influences on economics aren’t quite right, but that’s in a way okay, and I’m not the expert there. The dissolution of their personal relations--I learned things about Amos that I didn’t know, and these are Danny’s quotes. I have to trust Danny, although Danny does sometimes complain about his memory, but I came to understand his views. Some of the things he said about Amos didn’t feel like Amos to me. They felt too cruel. Those bothered me enormously and I needed help on that. [00:27:38] I reached out to friends of Amos’s to kind of, “Am I right? Am I not right? Tell me.” I’m grateful to them. I don’t usually reach out. On that I reached out, and I’m really glad I did. It was a huge help. I can’t know the truth. I know people err on memory. I’m doubtful that Amos said hurtful things, but I have to trust Danny. It’s possible he did. It brought me closer to Danny. I spend a lot of time with him now. We don’t live that far from each other in New York, and I certainly see his point of view, and understand him and respect him enormously. He’s as 140 unusual as Amos is, in different ways. The collaboration was unusual, and Danny is still ever grateful. He’ll say things like, “He made me who I am,” because Danny before that was doing research all over. He has such a fertile mind and so many ideas, and that brought him into a depth and a focus that has made him who he is. [00:28:49] Anyway, Michael’s book excited so many people, and that’s important. He wanted to tell the story of the collaboration. There are people that are envious of that collaboration. They understood if they didn’t know it. People who are close to them didn’t know it, and it was exciting and thrilling to them. So that story of that collaboration. He wanted to show scientists are human. He did that, and [showed] that they chase ideas and they don’t know where the ideas are going to go. But they are going to chase them, and he wanted to get the word across. He wanted to bring the characters to life, and, I’m not the judge, but I think he did. [00:29:36] I got the book in October. Friends were visiting. We got home at midnight, and they were friends, mutual friends, close friends of Amos’s, and I didn’t tell them because I knew they’d want the book. I stayed up until three in the morning, read the book, slept two hours, woke up again, read the book again. I read it twice that night [laughs], because I missed things. I’ve read it since. It’s a great read. Marine-Street: It was clear that you were a major informant for the book. Tversky: He wanted me to give an American perspective on Israel, and I think I could do that. There were places he didn’t completely trust me on Amos, and those last months before he died Michael didn’t get right. He relied on 141 Varda Liberman, who was a collaborator from Israel who came for three days and said she was the only one allowed to come. I just told you dozens of people came. She came for three days. [00:30:40] There was a call there about a possible Nobel Prize, and I took the call. Our studies were like this [perpendicular], and I told Amos to pick up the phone. I wasn’t in there when he spoke with Peter Diamond, but he came in right afterward and told me. He wouldn’t have said to Peter Diamond, “The last thing on my mind now is a Nobel Prize.” He would have thanked him. Peter Diamond was a friend. He would have realized this is a huge honor and thanked him. He wouldn’t have dismissed him in that way, so that can’t be right. [00:31:23] Those things, those last few weeks, the not saying things to people’s faces, and there are a few other things, [that] are important to me. They probably aren’t important in the long run. The epiphany maybe is important. Other people have other things. Danny actually has some factual errors that are important to him. But then I went to the doctor because of back trouble. They gave me their report. It’s full of errors. [laughs] I told them. I gave them a narrative. They wrote down that narrative wrong. A memory begins with recording. Michael got it overall right. When we started working together I’d come home in tears. It was just so hard to go back to those memories. It was so hard, and I kept saying [to myself], “I can’t do this. I can’t do this. I can’t do this.” Because Michael enjoyed it, I did, because he was such a good listener and because he clearly loved Amos. 142 Then I realized that Michael’s going to commemorate Amos in ways I could never do. Marine-Street: [00:32:35] That’s right. Tversky: And he did. Marine-Street: Yes, he has a big readership. Tversky: I’ve written him many letters of gratitude, which he’s been grateful for. Marine-Street: But I’m glad to hear your perspective too. Tversky: Again, he [Amos] empowered me. There was life after Amos. He gave me gifts. I hate to use this hackneyed phrase, the gift that keeps on giving, but it is. I have those friendships. I have the wisdom from him. I have that field, the front-row view. I have all kinds of friends and companions and wisdom, so much that I got from him. Many other friends got things from him, students, but I really got the best. Marine-Street: [00:33:20] Right. So speaking of life after Amos, I just wanted to close by asking you to tell us a little bit about what you’re doing now. You’re soon going to be the president-elect of the Association for Psychological Science, and this is a big honor. I wondered if you could just say a few words about your hopes and plans for that position. Tversky: Yes, it is a huge honor, and it totally came out of the blue. I’ve been active in many, many, many organizations, including international ones. That one I always admired, but because it came on the weekend in which the honors students were practicing, I could never go. I’ve been a couple of times since, but I never got involved in it, so it was a huge honor. I’ve always admired it. It broke away from the American Psychological Association early on 143 because the APA got too involved in clinical issues and less scientific. It wanted to be a solid science organization. [00:34:22] Gordon Bower was one of the first presidents. Many people helped start it who were eminent psychologists, the best in the field, who really wanted a strictly scientific organization. It’s been terrific in promoting psychology as a science, in promoting researchers, in promoting young researchers, in democratizing the field. There’s no big person there. It’s lots of people doing good work, and so I’ve always admired it. It’s gone international in nice ways, which I’m happy about because the field is international and we can’t be arrogant. There’s really fine work going on everywhere, and so it now has an international meeting every couple of years as well as its own meeting. Again, it encourages students. There are fellowships, and poster sessions, and mentorship sessions. It just does all the things you want it to do. It makes science exciting for people, and rewarding. It encourages good teaching, so I’m a real fan of the organization. It has 30,000 members worldwide, so I’m humbled. [00:35:41] I’m president-elect I think starting in September, and then I’m president from next May for a year. There’s a wonderful central organization, so I don’t have to do day-to-day duties. What I do is help arrange a presidential symposium. It’s usually on one’s own work, but two of them have covered some of the fields I’m in, two recent ones. I spoke at one, so I’m not as keen on that anyway. My tendency is always to deflect from me, and so given the times we’re in now and given excellent research in psychology that’s relevant to policy, I want to shift that meeting to policy 144 and to the ways that our research on environment, on poverty and decisionmaking, on riskiness, on perceived risk, on leadership and on disparities, on so many things our work as psychologists--not mine, but some of them are students of Amos or have been influenced by Amos. [00:36:53] I haven’t cleared it with them yet, but I think people will come on board, and it’ll be I think a year before an election or when an election occurs. We do have important things to say about impact of political agendas on the lives of people. So it feels to me there’s almost too much, so that’s a secret. I haven’t even cleared it with the main organization yet, but I don’t think they’ll object, and I don’t have much responsibility. That’s a bit of it, and I’m hopeful that I can do that. [00:37:41] I’ll also be able to be president when the meeting is in Paris, and that’ll be, again, bringing in European and international scholars, and that’ll be an honor and a pleasure. I’ve never sought power, but when power can do that, bring issues and people into something that people that I admire. Some of the people I have in mind are young people that aren’t well known--that’s a use of power that is precious and that I enjoy. So yes, it’s a huge honor. Your first impulse is, “I can’t do this. I’m not up to it. I don’t have time.” Then you think, “Barbara, don’t be ridiculous. This is once in a lifetime.” [laughs] Marine-Street: Right. Well, I’m glad you decided to do it, and I look forward to hearing about how it turns out. With that, Professor, I want to just thank you for sharing the memories of a very fascinating life. Thank you very much. 145 Tversky: [00:38:43] Well, thank you for being such a good listener. I’ve gone on and on. Thank you. I appreciate it. Marine-Street: It’s our pleasure. Thank you...