 Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is April 30, 2014. I’m here with Jeanne Kennedy to conduct our first session for our oral history interview for the Stanford Historical Society. We are here in Jeanne’s home in Palo Alto. Jeanne, to start out, can you tell me a little bit about where you were born and where you grew up? Kennedy: [00:00:21] Well, I’m a Yankee. I’m a New Englander. I was born in Worcester, Massachusetts, which was called the Heart of the Commonwealth. When you’re suddenly talking about when you’re born and brought up, what more do you say? I have a lot of things that I think about, about my upbringing and about what I got from my parents. I certainly think of myself as a Yankee and all that that implies, which is usually a respect for the land and individual, being an individual, being independent, that kind of thing. I also found out much later that I was a WASP. The reason I didn’t know I was a WASP, whatever that meant, was that they didn’t use the term 13 until 1964, and I was born in 1933. But I grew up knowing certain principles, knowing that I had ancestors that came over on the Mayflower, and that did have an effect on me, feeling very much part of the land from the beginning. I do have extra feelings about land and about the ownership of land, which comes up when we get to Stanford. Tracy: Can you tell me a little bit about your parents? Kennedy: [00:01:47] My father was a New Englander, born and bred in New England. He was one of a whole series of lawyers. Oddly enough, in my generation, my brother was a lawyer, but in the generation that follows, only my daughter, Page, is a lawyer out of the people that follow. She’s the first woman that’s been a lawyer, and I love that feeling. I often thought that I might have been a lawyer had I had any idea that I could have worked and had a career at the time I was growing up. My father was Charles Nichols Dewey; my mother was Barbara Plum Bruske Dewey. She came from Detroit. She’s the one that goes back to the Mayflower, oddly enough, because my father always prided himself on his heritage. They were very good parents, no question about it, but their ideas were very limited, and I didn’t even know it. As a child, you don’t know it. But they had a lot of prejudices, and it took until I was actually going out with Don Kennedy for me to start understanding that they had any. They didn’t think they did, but they did. My mother was afraid of blacks, because of Detroit, Michigan, where it was really a tough thing. 14 My dad loved being a lawyer, but his favorite thing was when he was an assistant D.A. For a while, he was the rape specialist. He really prided himself on that. I had one brother. We called my brother Nick. He was named for my father, Charles Nichols Dewey, Jr. Nick was two years younger, and I was very jealous of him. The reason was that after he was born, my mother spent eight weeks in the hospital, and that sets up that sibling rivalry at an early age. I actually remember seeing my mother in the hospital, I mean seriously remember her. I must have been two years and about four months or so, and I remember going in and seeing this huge, huge, long figure, very high above my head, obviously on a hospital bed, in a navy blue bathrobe, and it was my mother. Most people don’t think you can remember that far back, but I have other memories, early memories like that. They are intriguing for me, not so much for others. Nick was two years younger, and we grew up moderately amicably. I was just awfully jealous, and that was not very good for him. But in our teenage years, I actually saved his life when I was fourteen and he was twelve or maybe thirteen and eleven. I came back from school, he was a little guy at the time, and he had a toy box and he wanted to see if he could fit in it. It had a clasp that fell down over the fastening, and he locked himself in. Tracy: Oh, my goodness. Kennedy: [00:04:45] And nobody else was home, and I saved his life. I never wanted to be mean to him again. [laughter] I was so sad and upset and worried. 15 I know that as children we had a very different life than they have nowadays, maybe different from the way you were brought up too. We were free to do just about anything we wanted to in the sense of roaming around. Worcester at that time was, and still is, the third largest city in New England, but we lived on the outskirts. So in my childhood, I had orchards and woods and swamps and hills and meadows just to roam unendingly through, and I got to know them very well. It was a huge part of my growing up--that feeling of being able to be close to nature, learn about it, have these private places that I always remember and I still remember. In those days, there were gypsies that camped out in the woods, and we were all warned. The children were warned against them. I remember walking down a path where I knew I shouldn’t go. It was a path in the woods. I could go one way, because that led to a friend’s house high on a hill, but going the other way meant leading to the gypsies. They saw me and yelled, so that scared me and I ran away. It was an odd, different time. Also New England’s terrain is so different from California. It was built up so long ago, and houses have fallen, so in these woods and fields you find remains of stone foundations. The land was stony, and they had to dig up the stones to farm it. The remains of stone foundations or stone walls are everywhere, and these stone walls were made without masonry, without anything to hold them together, just put up together. I missed that when I came to California, and also I missed the ability to roam everywhere the way that I could then. 16 Tracy: I remember for the brief time I lived in New York, the thing that struck me, having grown up on the West Coast, was you went to places in New York and New England that you’d heard about in history all through childhood and this history happened in New England in a way that it didn’t seem to happen out in the West. Kennedy: [00:07:09] Yes, I guess that’s true. It really is. I have to tell you, though, I’m a westerner now. I say I’m an effete westerner because this climate is so wonderful. I grew up with a lot of snow and I don’t care if I ever see snow again. At any rate, I particularly remember things like sliding on the sleds down the hills and other things like that. When we went to school, I went to a private school for the first--well, I started nursery school there. I got moved a year ahead in my grade, which made a difference in my life going along because I was always the youngest in my class. I got moved a year ahead because I was in nursery school and I knew that when you were five you could go to kindergarten. So on January 4th, I turned five, and I marched in next door and I said, “I am going to kindergarten. I am five.” I remember a little guy, Joel Scott, wearing knitted beige tiny shorts and a top, which kids wore back then, and he refused to let me in. He put his hands on his hips. But I refused to take no for an answer, and I, therefore, skipped a grade without realizing I had done it. Now, that’s my impression of it. I’m sure my parents had to have known about it. But I think of it as my walking in there on my own doing that. Then I was there for three more 17 years in the private school. I had to be driven, because they didn’t have buses. But then I got to the public school, even though my parents had me go out of district. We had a public school nearby, but it wasn’t as good, so my parents [had me go out of district]. In that day, it was easy to go out of district if you wanted to. It was quite a long way to school. I would walk a quarter of a mile to the bus, picking up one friend along the way, take the bus in, or I’d ride my bike in and pick another friend up and we’d ride our bikes all the way in. Sometimes we even walked, but that took too long. It is amazing how nowadays people can’t do that anymore. It just doesn’t happen, generally speaking. That was free and easy, and I liked it. The other thing--I was always a bit of a rebel. Even though I wanted to be a good girl, I still would get very angry because my brother got to shovel snow once a week or mow the lawn once a week, and I had to do dishes every night. I didn’t think it was fair, so I was an early feminist, you might say. I didn’t have much in the way of grandparents. Two of my grandparents died early. My father’s mother died when he was eighteen and his father died when I was almost two. I don’t remember him. I do remember my mother’s mother who died when I was eight. I only had one grandfather that I knew, and I always missed having the others around. I’m so happy now that my grandchildren know all of their grandparents. It’s a wonderful thing. 18 My parents thought that I was--well, I was smart. I got good grades. I worked hard. My parents sent me to something that was called the Johnson O’Connor Labs then. They were supposed to figure out what you were likely to do in the future. Unfortunately, the results have been lost, but I remember that they said--I was about thirteen when they sent me--that I would be a very good architect because I had good spatial identification. I never actually wanted to be an architect, but when you’re told that when you’re young, it’s interesting how you find how it works in your later life. Later when I did photography, one thing I could absolutely do is frame a picture with balance really well. And the other thing is I can figure out in houses where things go, where furniture goes, where to hang pictures. I’m very good at rearranging and making things work. After I went to elementary school, I went to a prep--our word for junior high--school that was way on the other side of Worcester. That was my first indication that there were a lot of different kinds of people, and by this I mean Jews, because my parents did not associate with, really, anybody different. Worcester had very few blacks, but we did have a large Jewish contingent; I hadn’t gone to school with them because they lived in a different district. I suppose they probably lived in what they’d call a ghetto, but it wasn’t that they lived badly; I don’t mean that. That was fascinating to me because the class had two different camps: people that weren’t Jewish and people that were Jewish. It started me wondering about where that prejudice came from. 19 The prep school was for two years, and then I went to a high school which was within walking distance. At the high school, I did pretty well, but my parents wanted me to go to a private school. They’d been talking about it long enough so that I thought it was a good idea, and I did want to get a good education. I went to this boarding school [Miss Porter’s School] in Farmington, Connecticut. I had a hard time there. It was the most elite one. That’s where Jackie Bouvier Kennedy Onassis went, and her sister was in my class. I knew both of Ogden Nash’s children, and Isabel Nash was in my English class. She’s gone on to be a writer. Mr. Spear, who was a very avant-garde English teacher, was my favorite teacher. I was his favorite, which amazed me when someone else [Isabel Nash] was in the class who was really good at what she was doing. Farmington was an eye-opener because I had not been with a great many [wealthy families]. Well, they weren’t all very wealthy, but a great many were from very wealthy and very prominent families, and I had not had that. I wasn’t terribly happy there. Mainly, a lot of the people were different, but I did have a gang to be with. We were the people that came in [for two years]. If you came for three years, that’s when you were in the height of what was right. If you came for four years, your family was rich and wanted to get rid of you. But if you came for two years, you were considered to not have much money, and that was usually the case. I don’t mean my parents weren’t comfortable; they were very comfortable. We hung out together, and I’m glad I did have somebody. 20 I hated the restrictions. They only allowed you to have two weekends a year in your junior year to go home, or elsewhere, and three weekends in your senior year. You were allowed to see boys only if their names were on a list or if your parents okayed you for any boy. They came to see you at the headmaster’s house. They could walk you around a prescribed route and then come back for tea. You had three expelling offenses: smoking, drinking, and seeing boys when you weren’t supposed to. I wasn’t allowed to call home without asking the headmaster and his wife to use their phone. So I did something also totally forbidden. There was a church behind my house that had a pay phone, and I wasn’t allowed to go there. It wasn’t on the prescribed route. But I went there anyway, and I’d call home on a pay phone. The school’s restrictions were almost impossible. I thought the whole thing was ridiculous. I still think it’s ridiculous On the other hand, the teaching was fantastic and I really learned a lot. I wish I’d done some of the things like the fabulous art course they had. But I didn’t, I was more science-minded, although I liked English a lot--science and mathematics. Tracy: Had you always been interested in science and math? Kennedy: [00:15:39] I don’t know that I had, if you’re thinking about elementary school. No, I don’t think so. I was good at it, and women weren’t that good at math. I was interested in biology. I always liked it--I still like watching animal behavior and things like that. I wasn’t that interested in math, I just knew I was good at it, and women weren’t, so people would push me into it. 21 My interests are far wider now. I love art and all of those things, and I never took one art course when I was in college. I did afterwards. Tracy: It’s interesting. Women from your generation, I would assume, but maybe wrongly, that they were discouraged from math and science. But it sounds like that wasn’t the case. Kennedy: No, they weren’t discouraged in my case, but most women had the idea they couldn’t do it. I know later when I was working and hiring people, I’d find women working for me and I would ask them about their number skills, and they would say they didn’t have them. I would say, “Can you balance a checkbook?” knowing that’s something you do in daily life, and many of them would say yes. Those, I knew, had number skills. The ones that said no, okay, they didn’t have them. I think we were just trained to think it was unusual for a woman to have any skills with numbers. No, I’m not a mathematician, I never was. I’m just good with numbers, and a real mathematician is far more abstract than I ever got. I was very pragmatic about it. Tracy: In thinking about schooling being important to you and your parents, what did they hope ultimately that you would be able to do with this good education at Miss Porter’s School? Kennedy: [00:17:35] Well, you should add in college too. I never thought I couldn’t get into a good college. If you mean, what did they think I would do with my education, they wanted me to get married and settle down in Worcester. They didn’t have any idea about my having a career--they weren’t pushing me or they weren’t thinking about it. 22 I actually never thought that I would get married. When I was thinking what I thought I would do, I thought of myself as being a career woman. I didn’t know what in. Being a career woman and not getting married until I was forty-two or so. Of course, that was because I thought nobody’s going to want me. So I thought that I would preempt that decision and say that that’s what I wanted. That was kind of funny, because it certainly didn’t work out that way. Tracy: Right. Why did you think that no one would want to marry you? Kennedy: [00:18:32] What did you think about yourself in high school? You never think you’re that attractive in high school. [laughs] And that was what I felt then. Tracy: I seem to remember that you had talked about being involved in dance. Am I remembering that correctly? Kennedy: [00:19:02] Dancing school. That’s different. That was one of the things you had to do--go to dancing school, and I loved it. It was ballroom dancing, and little girls wore party dresses and little boys had to wear white gloves because their hands perspired so much. Later I think they started having women wear gloves, but, no, back when I was there, it was the boys. I was lucky because the only time in my life that I ever was glad I was short was in dancing school because you got danced with more often since you weren’t taller than the boys at that age. It was really fun. Dancing school went all the way up through high school. We started wearing formal dresses when I was thirteen. The parents were trying to train us in good social manners. We would have dinner parties where we would have to write a formal invitation, or if we were getting the invitation, we’d 23 have to answer it formally. Holds no terrors for me now, but at the time I was just furious at having to do all this stuff. You had to learn how to seat people, and then the parents acted like servers. [laughs] We’d all sit around the table before dancing school, and they would serve us dinner. We’d have to have good manners and all that sort of thing. Then you had to write a thank-you note. [laughs] I’ve got to say, some of that training paid off in later life. Tracy: I can imagine. Kennedy: [00:20:58] I also was a good dancer later in life. I loved to dance. It was fun. But not only that kind of dancing since I learned things like the Lindy and so forth later. Tracy: So you did two years at Miss Porter’s, and then from there you moved on to Smith College. Do you remember the application process? Kennedy: [00:21:37] Oh, yes, I remember it very well, and you also probably want to know why I picked Smith College. Tracy: Yes. Kennedy: [00:21:43] You should want to know, because it was a deep, deep thing. One of my best friend’s older sister, who I thought was very glamorous, went to Smith. [laughs] Seriously, I mean, there was no question about it. And back then, I only applied to Smith. I knew that I would get in, because it wasn’t the way it is now. Now you wonder if you could ever get into any of the colleges. I wanted to talk a little bit more about Farmington. [00:22:15]One of the reasons it was hard for me was that the headmaster, for some reason, 24 took a dislike to me. When I came there, he told me that I wasn’t working hard enough because I didn’t get very good grades. I had not had to work hard before and Farmington required much more of me than my public high school had. He said I wasn’t working up to potential, and he scolded me, when I actually was working as hard as I could because I was really way behind. So then when I finally got all A’s, he told me that I was getting a swelled head. I was rebellious, and I rebelled at Farmington several times. You weren’t allowed to have any food in your rooms that hadn’t been sent by your family--in which case you had to share it with your whole dormitory--or that you hadn’t gotten at the school store or the little restaurant on the loop you could walk. I loved cheese, but cheese was not available. So I brought a good sharp aged cheddar from home after Christmas break. It was cold, and we had no refrigerators, but I could keep it on the windowsill between the storm window and the regular window. They found out, and I got called on the carpet for doing it. I claimed a health problem as the reason I had to have it. I said that if I didn’t eat it, I would get constipated. I don’t know what made me say that, because everyone knows cheese constipates you. But that’s what I said, and they couldn’t refute it. So they said, “Okay, you can have it, but you have to go over to the infirmary to have your ounce a day.” [laughs] It was this kind of thing that just got me. You couldn’t do anything, you couldn’t go anywhere. It was one of the most restrictive schools, and I hated that. 25 We had another thing that sounds very odd today. On Saturday nights we had movies, and as old girls, we would take dates who were the new girls. At one of those Saturdays in February of my senior year (a time which is notorious for making people want to break out), we decided to go on a rather criminal spree. We went down, stole rolls from the kitchen, shortsheeted several new girls’ beds in a couple of different houses, and put toothpaste on the biology teacher’s seat because nobody really liked her. Then we did the worst thing of all: we went in our own living room and turned everything upside down and turned the pictures to the wall. Now, we didn’t hurt anything, but that’s what we did. We got found out pretty quickly. I was called to the headmaster’s office; everybody else was there and they were all in tears. By this time, I was not liking Mr. Johnson very much, as you can imagine, because of the way he had been treating me, and I refused to cry. He said, “What did you do? Tell us everything you did. I already know.” Well, I told him what we did. Didn’t seem that bad to me, but he wanted to make me cry, and I absolutely refused to. He then sent everybody else away. He called me a bitch, and said that he would make sure that I never got into a good college or any college, and he campused me for three days1. He said I was the ringleader. Actually, my roommate was more the ringleader, but I was the only one that got punished. That’s the kind of thing that makes you see how bad it is to be in a place where somebody has too much power. But it wasn’t my first example 1 Being campused means Kennedy was confined to her house except for classes. 26 of someone having too much power, and I had talked back to power, but in the sense that I talked back to teachers on behalf of other people, which was a different thing. A good thing came out of it. My dad and mom were very supportive. My dad decided that since Mr. Johnson came from Worcester, maybe someone in our family had done something to him, and he just was going to hate me because of that. But he thought the whole thing was ridiculous, and he gave the headmaster a hard time about it, not that that changed anything, but it made me feel really good. This was part of the repression, and I fought it a lot in different ways, but you couldn’t do too much. In the end, our class was the one that gave the school [a phone]. We raised money ourselves and gave the school a payphone so that other people could call home as an act of rebellion. [laughter] I did make friends there, I got a great education there, and I learned a lot about a different kind of world there, but I wouldn’t say I enjoyed my years there. Tracy: No. This headmaster just sounds like a Nurse Ratched type. I mean, he just sounds so terrible. It’s also remarkable the sense of self that you would have had even at that time to stand up to just this sort of completely arbitrary-Kennedy: [00:27:52] That’s interesting. No, I hadn’t thought of it that way. I was scared to death. My stomach was pounding, you know, when you’re terrified. But I just wouldn’t cry, and that was my--I mean, it sounds like a silly act of 27 rebellion, but certainly he took it that way. He thought it was defiant, which I was trying to be, scared but defiant. Thank you for saying that. Tracy: Well, and certainly his promises to make sure you didn’t get into any college did not [prove true]. Kennedy: [00:28:18] Well, it would be ridiculous. I was second highest in the class, you know, and I didn’t take it too seriously. I told my father, and my father read him the riot act. I told my father what he called me . During that time, I met Don Kennedy when I was fifteen. He went to a small private school in Dublin, New Hampshire. That was a very unusual school because it took boys that were sometimes difficult to educate, I mean kids that were hard to handle. It had admitted a lot of bright kids. The students did huge amounts of work in the school. They laid out the ski trails, worked in the gardens and stuff like that. It was a really great school. His roommate was my best friend Sally Horner’s older brother, Henry. Henry got blind dates for all of us. Not Don, he had his own date, thank you. We were sophomores and Don and Henry were seniors, so they got us dates with sophomores and juniors, and a whole pile of us went out. It was my first experience of doing that. The summer I was fifteen, one girl said I was a sad sack. [laughter] Tracy: What did she mean by a sad sack? Kennedy: [00:30:02] Oh, I don’t know. I wasn’t what the popular girls were or something. I was plenty popular at home because I had my own gang. As a high school sophomore, I was not particularly attractive. On Friday night Don, because his date didn’t come till Saturday night, danced with all of 28 Henry’s sister’s little friends, and I thought he was the greatest thing in the world. I mean, I was just awed by him. Sally had a terrific crush on him too. But he never looked at me at all. He was just nice to me. Then I went away to boarding school and I came home for Christmas break. Sally called me, and she said, “Well, Don Kennedy’s coming to stay at our house and he asked me to go out tomorrow night, and I can’t because I’m going out with Win Jordan. Could you go out with him? I trust you.” [laughter] Even then I thought that was funny. By this time, I’d had a good haircut and a little sophistication from the four months at Farmington, and I was enough older so that he was attracted, I have to say. But he said to me, “I’m not going to go out with you again. I’m not going to write to you or do anything, because I don’t want to have anything to do with someone who’s locked up in a boarding school.” [laughs] So then I had to hear about all the tales of everybody else that he dated, and he dated a lot of other Worcester girls. Also, to Sally’s great dismay, he had a mad crush on his cousin, Liz Riggs. He brought her to stay at the Horners’ house, and Sally had to leave for the weekend; she couldn’t bear to see him with her. I had to sympathize with her. [laughs] On the other hand, there was a picture of Don and Sally at a Halloween party that she’d sent me, a newspaper picture, and I cut her half off and kept his half in the bureau. I just had that one date with him, and then somewhere in my senior year, I went to a wedding. I was at Farmington, so my parents must have picked me up and taken me to the wedding. I put the wedding cake under my pillow. Guess who I dreamed of? I wrote my mother a note and said, “Mum, 29 I dreamt of Don Kennedy. Do you think I’ll really marry him?” [laughs] I still have the note somewhere. [00:32:28] Isn’t that funny? Tracy: That is funny. Kennedy: [00:32:29]. Then when I finished boarding school, I graduated and I came back to Worcester. I was at Sally’s house, because we always hung out in the basement recreation room, and Don was there. He had a thesis with him, and I was nervous about his being there and happy to see him. I managed to drop his big thesis all over the floor, and it wasn’t paginated. I was so mortified. He asked me out that night. [laughter] And he wouldn’t let me go home and change. I had on a peasant blouse and a dirndl skirt, which we wore then, and he took me to a movie. He was quite forward, even forward in his dancing too. By that I mean he bent my arm back, back over my shoulder, or he tucked my arm and my hand under his chin. Well, at the movies, instead of my hand, he took hold of my upper arm. I’d never had such a thing. I was thrown into a state of extraordinary confusion. [laughs] That’s when we started going out, the summer after my senior year. Tracy: So then obviously you continued seeing each other throughout your time at Smith. Kennedy: [00:33:41] He came to see me in Michigan. I spent every summer of all my years growing up going a thousand miles inland from Massachusetts for our summer vacation to a lake my mother had grown up on in Michigan, called Higgins Lake. Don lived at that time in Ann Arbor. Don had a summer project up on Lake Michigan, close to the Upper Peninsula, and he actually came down to see me. [00:34:14] Unfortunately, I was out in the boat with a 30 boy that was a lot older, but he’d asked me to go sailing. I said, “As long as you get me back,” but we were becalmed and my brother had to come and get me out with Don in the boat. I was in a little bit of trouble there. Then he came out for a week before Harvard and Smith started. He stayed with a friend and saw me all the time, and that’s how it started. So we were crazy about each other very early on. Tracy: Once you graduated and finished high school, then you did go to Smith. It was the only school that you’d applied to. Do you remember, did you have any expectations about college? Did you have a vision of what it would be like? Kennedy: [00:35:04] Not particularly. Well, I’d already been in boarding school, so all I thought of it was it’d be far less restrictive. I had gone through being away from home earlier, and with college, I wasn’t worried about that part. I already knew that was handle-able and I was thrilled about the releasing of the restrictions. The problem was even though I was crazy about Don, I had not dated a lot. I’d dated in the summer and occasionally a little bit on vacation breaks. Certainly I never dated before I went away to boarding school, and so I knew very little about dating guys. This is one of the bad parts about going to a boarding school that’s very restrictive and not coed. So I went a little crazy when I went to Smith. Back then they had a book of all the freshmen girls at Smith that they put out. It was supposed to be for us, but all the boys’ schools would get copies. [laughs] And they called. They got the new crop of freshmen, so even 31 seniors would look, but mostly it was juniors and sophomores and some freshmen that would look and call you. They called you because of your picture, and it was unbelievable. Luckily, my picture was better than it would have been when I was fifteen. I got so many calls. There I am, crazy about Don, which gave me the confidence to go out with any number of people and act just like myself, because I didn’t give a darn about whatever they thought. I was so popular that I had for three months overwhelming popularity. I would have maybe ten requests on weekends for dates. Now, whenever Don could see me, he was the one. I even broke dates for him because it wasn’t easy for us to see each other. He did not have a car. His best friend, Henry Horner, had wrecked the car one time driving it, and he couldn’t get another car. So Don had to hitchhike from Harvard. He would hitchhike to Worcester and pick up my mother’s car, which was a 1935 convertible Ford (she called it Freddy) with a rumble seat. This is in 1950, so it was a pretty old car then, but it was pretty fancy. It had no air conditioning and it had no heater. Before he got to know them well enough for them to say, “Okay, come do that,”--and hitchhiking to Worcester is no easy thing; it’s forty miles--he used to hitchhike the whole way to Northampton, and just for Sunday, because we didn’t have money to put him up in a hotel. There was no way he could stay. Nowadays they can stay in the dorms, but, you know, we couldn’t do that. 32 He was very, very intense in his pursuit, which was very nice. He would come up, and we saw each other almost every weekend. Then we got to the place where I would go home for Sundays. I’d take the bus home, and my mother and father would pick me up and he’d meet me there. Later on, after we were engaged, we would meet in Worcester when my parents weren’t there, and they were okay with that. That was the best fun. We’d play house. We’d go out and buy a steak in the Jewish market because the Kosher markets were the only ones who were open. We’d use my mother’s old car because neither of us had a car, and come back and cook. Then I’d take the bus back. He’d drive me to the bus, take the car back, and hitchhike back to Harvard. It was not easy. Sometimes he would find someone coming up to Smith that he could ride with and that made it much easier. He proposed to me in my freshman year, just after I turned eighteen, and that must have been January 6th or 7th. I said yes, but we couldn’t be married--I mean, there was no way that we could be married. We said yes; we were committed. However we didn’t say we couldn’t go out with other people or anything like that, and that was good because I was way too young and had way too little experience not to go out with other people. I didn’t like it that he went out with other people, but it was only fair. Tracy: Outside of your social life at Smith and your experience of courting with Don, do you remember how you ended up majoring in mathematics? Kennedy: [00:39:54] I was going to talk about that, but I have to tell you that college for me was the first real experience of men. I mean really. I had a little bit, 33 but that’s why it was so important, far more important than studies. I mean, it was a whole different attitude. I can tell you, I did not work hard at Smith. When I came, I really wanted to take psychology. I had a dean, actually, who was my advisor, and she absolutely said, “Oh, don’t do that. Everybody takes it. Everyone wants to take it.” What did I get interested in later in life? Of course, it was psychology and art and things like that. I didn’t even know I’d be interested in [art] and didn’t try it. They said, “Oh, you’ve got good math skills and good science skills. You’ve got to take science.” So I did. I was exempted from freshman English due to my test scores, which was a big mistake. I took a horrible sophomore course on Beowulf and Chaucer. I’d been a lot more interested in the freshman course but I didn’t realize that at the time. I was singularly unthoughtful about what I wanted to do about college and education. I think it was the times. I know none of my friends thought particularly about that. I didn’t enjoy much of my classes. I did enjoy biology. I really loved biology and botany too. I liked mathematics. I never was able to do calculus, far too abstract for me. I was very good in algebra and theory of numbers. Now they teach those in grammar school. [laughs] They really do. It’s amazing. But, listen, I was not fascinated with my studies. Then we got engaged after my sophomore year, in June, and married the following June. As I say, I never worked that hard. I got perfectly decent marks, but not the good marks I could have gotten. I just wasn’t that interested in working very hard at it. As long as I could get by--I’d get two 34 A’s and two B’s and once in a while a C, or some range like that. I wasted my time there. History and English [classes] that I took were boring as anything, and they don’t have to be boring since I was fascinated with my English classes at Farmington. Some of that I lay to the teacher, but I really didn’t have a motivation. I didn’t have anything I particularly wanted to do with it. Now I think that was terrible, but at the time, this was the actuality. We got married after my junior year, and my parents were terrified I wouldn’t finish college. I always planned to finish college (as long as they planned to pay for it, which they did). That was interesting, because at that time the Seven Sisters colleges, except for Radcliffe, had an arrangement where if you were married--because many people married early--you could go to Wellesley or you could go to another one of the sister colleges, depending on where you were. Wellesley was the only one [I could attend] because I was in Cambridge. His father and mother gave us a car, so I could drive to Wellesley. At that time, there were five of us that were in my class that were married to people in Cambridge. We were all going to Wellesley. Well, the kicker was that you were supposed to go back for the special course the second semester, the second half of the year, to Smith. There were so few math people, that my mathematics professor said, “Okay, instead of having it twice a week, for Jeanne we’ll have it once a week so she can come back only one time.” 35 I had to commute to Wellesley, then commute back to Smith which was an all-day affair. You had to take the train from Boston, change at Springfield, take the train to Northampton, walk up to school, do the class. But I got to see my friends and that was fine. Meanwhile, Don was a second-year graduate student, because he graduated a year before we got married. Our parents supported us in that first year. He was earning money. He was a T.A., but it wasn’t very much. His parents gave us $200 a month, and my parents did all my college [tuition], books, and some clothes. I didn’t need much clothing because they gave me a huge trousseau. Then I went to work after that. Tracy: I wonder if the institutional culture at Smith was such that--I mean, were they concerned that you were not particularly interested in your studies? Kennedy: [00:44:50] No. You know, the ones I did well in, math and biology or botany, they thought I was great. [laughs] I was happy with that. I didn’t have much of a personal relationship with any of my professors as I had had at Farmington with Mr. Spear and then later at Farmington with Miss Campbell, because having to apologize to her about the toilet seat made me realize she was so human and so sweet. She was just darling, and I loved her thereafter. I had some good teachers at Smith, but not ones that I remember as being outstanding the way I did at [Farmington]. Of course, that’s probably my fault. I didn’t take things that I would have been fascinated with, like English. I should have taken different English courses and done some art courses and the psychology, but I was set. 36 No, nobody paid much attention to it. My parents didn’t mind. I didn’t mind. I knew I could have done better, but it didn’t matter the way it matters now. It matters so much now, and back then it didn’t matter. At my graduation, when I was already married, the president said something about, “Most of you will have the degree M-R-S before long.” I mean, can you imagine? That’s what it was like. I am outraged. I was pretty outraged when he said it at the time too. But I did like Smith a lot. They didn’t have any sororities or fraternities, and you couldn’t identify the students that had to work to go there. They had everybody work so that there wasn’t a two-tiered system of people staffing the houses who had to make extra money. I think they did it [financial assistance] with scholarships and things like that, but everybody had to wash dishes, serve the food, set the tables. Everybody had to do that kind of thing, which I liked. I didn’t like doing it, but I thought it was an absolutely perfect way to do things. Tracy: So up until the time that you and Don got married and you would have started living with him, did you live on campus at Smith? Kennedy: [00:47:03] Oh, yes. And afterwards, even if I had wanted to stay at Smith, though I didn’t because Don was at Harvard, you had to live off-campus-you couldn’t live in the dorm. You could go to Smith if you were married and live outside, but not in the dorm. You couldn’t even live in a dorm married whether your husband was there or not. 37 Tracy: Yes. Once you had completed your degree and stopped having to do this crazy commute to Wellesley and Smith and all of that, did you then start working? Kennedy: [00:47:41] Yes. Tracy: I want to talk about the jobs that you had, but another question I had was were you working in part to support Don and help him with his Ph.D.? Kennedy: [00:47:52] Oh, yes. [laughs] His parents were very sweet. They wanted to keep on giving us money, because they had quite a bit. We said no, because Don was earning $1,800 as a T.A. then, and I went out and got a job for $200 a month. That’s $2,400. We had a budget of $15 a week for groceries, and we stuck to it, mostly. [laughs] We certainly didn’t have much room for doing much, but it was fun. We had a good time. What wasn’t fun was the first job I got. That was in the Baker Library at Harvard Business School. I went there and they wanted to hire me to help the Harvard students with their case studies, because I’d been a mathematics major at Smith. Well, I thought that sounded great. So they start me, and I find out that they didn’t mean what they said. What I had to do was simply add on a calculator for seven and a half hours a day, and I got so bored by it. And the longer you were there, the more senior you were, you were allowed to do formulas. Nobody else had a college education that was doing it. I mean, I cannot understand why they would have hired me. But I didn’t know, and it sounded like a terrific job. No, you weren’t going to work with the students, you were just going to run one of these calculators. Eventually they let me do formulas because I complained so about it. Then I would find 38 a quicker way to do the formula, and they would forbid me to do it, even though the answer came out the same way. [laughs] It was a horrible job. I did it for two months. A Cambridge summer is not to be believed--it is hot and humid and miserable, and when you have no air conditioning on the top floor of any building, it’s awful. I would come home on the bus, and Don would be there and he would insist I take a cool bath right away. He was very sweet. It was great. So it was not a good job, but we had a good time nonetheless. I didn’t know how to cook. Don knew a little more about cooking than I did, so that was another thing I had to learn, that I had to tackle. His major professor was Don Griffin; we had him and his wife for dinner, and we wanted to be very sophisticated about it. Now, you’ve got to picture it. It’s a basement apartment--one room. It’s modern, very modern. It was a new building. Before we got married, Don moved in with a roommate to hold it for us. It had cutout windows all the way across it. It was essentially one big room. It was eighteen by thirty with a kitchen and bath that were separate inside that eighteen by thirty. All we had were bare boards and wrought-iron things and foam mattresses and unfinished bureaus. We did not have much. Did we care? No. Actually, one time there was a hurricane flood. Our place was flooded to about a foot and a half deep, and he came home to find me sitting disconsolate on the bed. Nothing got ruined because it was all just wroughtiron legs, including the butterfly chair. [laughs] It wasn’t good for the bureaus, come to think of it. But it was fun. 39 So we decide we’re going to have them for dinner, and this is maybe six months in. No, it’s probably more like nine months of living together by the time I cook [this meal]. So I was tackling veal with butter and wine. I had learned something. And I set the kitchen on fire. [laughs] And Don and Ruth Griffin were there. Of course, we called them Dr. and Mrs. They’re there and we’re serving them martinis. We didn’t serve martinis ever, but we were trying to give them what they would expect. I burned the veal; it goes up in a whoosh of flame, and I say, “Don, could you come in here?” We put it out, and it was all right, but it was funny. Meanwhile, it took me a long time because I wasn’t used to cooking, and the upshot of it was, poor Ruth passed out cold from drinking too many martinis. [laughs] That was so embarrassing, and we felt horrible. She just fell asleep with her head in the plate. We had no idea what we were doing. We weren’t drinking a lot because we were so busy, but Don just kept pouring them. Luckily, they never held it against us. They were sweet as anything to us the whole time. That was our first academic entertaining we did. Tracy: Obviously you hadn’t lived with Don before you got married. Kennedy: [00:52:57] [laughs] Oh, are you kidding? My parents wouldn’t let us go anywhere. When I was eighteen, we were invited to his uncle’s house in Maine. Ed and Mary had a house in Maine, and it was way across Shin Pond, so we took a road up to the opposite end of Shin Pond. It was way up in the midsection of Maine. Then they would come across in a boat and pick us up. No cell phones, though; you had to have a prearranged time. We wanted to go up there, and Mom said, we could have Freddy, the little rumble-seat 40 Ford, and I said, “Well, we’re going to have to stay somewhere along the way.” And she, “No, you can’t do that. Absolutely not. You may not do that.” And they let us have one of the other cars that was faster, so we could make it in a day. [laughs] Isn’t that funny? Tracy: Yes. Kennedy: [00:53:53] I mean, we had to do a lot of work to make it in a day, but they were absolutely adamant I could not stay overnight in a motel. That made a big impact on me. So now, I’m eighteen, I think it was September of my sophomore year. We went up and Ed took the boat across and met us. We went back to a cabin he’d built himself, and he’d built a lot of furniture in it. They had a little guest cabin, and they wanted me to sleep in the main cabin. I was too embarrassed to sleep there because the bedrooms only had open transoms over them. I was too embarrassed, and I just really wanted to sleep in the little guest cabin. They thought Don would sleep there instead. But I was like, “No, no, I really want to.” They let me do it, and let Don sleep next to them. I just was overwhelmed at the idea of staying in the same place with them and essentially hearing them sleeping and everything. Don would come in in the morning and put the fire in the stove, and I’d have my hair up in curlers so I’d look good later, or rags, actually. We used rags to put our hair up. I forgot that. We used rags to put it up to make curls. And I’d try to get them out quick. I’d try to wake up before he got there to get them out before he saw them. 41 One night I heard this huge crashing around and bumping into my cabin. Oh, my god. I opened the door and I looked out, and there’s a big brown bear running that way. I think it might have been black, come to think of it. It was night; I’m not sure. I just yelled, “Don! Don!” And he heard me, he wasn’t asleep yet, and he came running out. I said, “Don, I saw a bear! I saw a bear!” So he settled me down, said, “Okay, the bear is gone.” So he settles me down, and he goes back in. “Donny, what was wrong?” “Jeanne saw a bear.” “Oh, no, she didn’t. Go back to sleep.” “Ed, she said she saw a bear, and she did.” [laughs] We went fishing. We had a fly fisherman come and pick us up in his airplane. Ed and Mary arranged and paid for it, which was lovely of them. He took us fishing. It was the first time I’d ever tried to cast, and they decided that after I tried a couple of times, I could use bait. [laughs] So here we are in a lake that you can only fly into. There are no houses, nothing but fishing out there. It was a wonderful outdoor experience, and I got a lot more of that with Don, and I loved that. It was just the kind of thing that he did that was so different. His family was so different from mine. And what I think I saw even then--I mean, I was crazy about him, but I think I saw even then that he always planned to be a professor and leading an academic life would be very different and sounded much more like what I wanted. Now, I had no idea 42 what it was. I thought that it would be being very poor and having tea. I do like to have tea; that’s not a problem. I had no idea what it really would be, but I knew it would expand my horizons. My mother and father were not too accepting of him at first. You know what he looks like. At that time he had very dark hair and dark skin, because he tans easily, and his hair was very fuzzy and curly. My mother got the idea, first, that he was Jewish, and then that he was black. This isn’t sensible, but it was what happened and it was what my parents lived with and knew. It was really awful, because I was crazy about him. I wanted to be with him, and she was feeling this way. It wasn’t her fault, really; it was how she was brought up. I was appalled and he was appalled. Finally they found out that Don’s uncle, by marriage to his mother’s sister, had been my father’s roommate or at the fraternity at Williams that they belonged to. After that, it was all fine. [laughter] It was really hard in those days, and they wanted so badly for me to live in Worcester and not to go off like this. Once they accepted it, once they saw how much in love we were, they were great. It was the only wedding in Worcester I went to that had Jews for ushers. Don had a lot of Jewish friends and they were my friends. For my parents, this was not done in the life they knew, and so I have to say that I give them great credit because they were able to reverse their prejudices and it never came up again. You know, in university life you see people of all kinds. My parents went with the flow always. [00:59:03] I was very proud of that, that they could do that. I was not 43 proud of the way they acted at first, though my father wasn’t as bad as my mother. But then it was great. Tracy: They came along. We talked earlier about how you thought of yourself as being a career woman to hedge your bets. Once you had married Don and you saw yourself going into this academic life, did your expectations of your own career change or evolve? Kennedy: [00:59:36] Well, sure. I mean, I only wanted to be a career woman because I thought that was better than just sitting at home. At that point, then, neither Don nor I had any idea of me working. We had worked to get him through, of course, when we had to, but as soon as he was making money, we wanted to have children. We actually started before he finished. So in that time, we had a lot of fun. I had a terrible job. I changed jobs. The next one paid me $240 a month doing Almy Chemical Company’s Cryovac Division. This time I had nothing to do. The other time I had boring work to do, but this time I had nothing to do I don’t know why they were hiring people and not giving them anything to do. I think it had something to do with the consequences of the guys you were working for, and I was supposed to look busy. We sat in what was a huge bullpen of people with the three bosses in glassed-in offices behind you. There were a lot of people in the firm. I wasn’t allowed to read, and the only thing I could do was draw house plans. There was no work. It was really terrible. And then finally they started giving me orders to correct. I was supposed to be a higher-level person, and they gave me orders to correct! The guy that I was working for was so 44 insecure that he wouldn’t give me anything that he was supposed to do. It was very odd. I didn’t have any phones to answer, nothing. That was very hard. By that time, I could not quit. If I had, it would be very hard to get hired as a graduate student’s wife because they knew that you were going to [leave]. They kept saying, “You’ll have babies,” and so forth. During the time I was looking for a job, they were just beginning computers. I think it was IBM that was doing it--they were hiring people to work with computers. I thought maybe I could do that. They would not allow it. They said, “No, we don’t hire married women at all.” I insisted on taking the test anyway. There’s an act of rebellion for you. Of course, they didn’t hire me. I doubt I did well, because I don’t think computers were my strength once I saw the test, but I was outraged that that would be the case, and people were perfectly allowed to ask you if your plans were to have children, and they did. By this time, it was too hard to get a job. I couldn’t leave this other job, so I stayed with it. It was two years. Then we decided we were going to have children the December of Don’s last year, and I got pregnant right away, just like bang. Instantly, right. That was a surprise, and that coincided with me getting a new boss. Thank god, he had work for me to do, and it was wonderful. I had to do a lot of drafting-table stuff. I don’t remember now what it was, but I was crawling all over. As my pregnancy got bigger, I was crawling on this big table and everything like that, and I was thrilled to do it. It made me so happy to have this work, and it was interesting work. 45 Don knew he would be drafted, and so he got an arrangement where he could be an officer and just do two years as an officer and do research, which would help him in his biology research. I don’t know quite how that worked, but that was the plan. Then it turned out that he couldn’t have it for six months. He didn’t have a job, and we were frantic. He wrote his draft board to ask if they could defer him for six months. He said, “My wife’s pregnant. I’ve got to know what I can do.” They wrote back and said, “We’re not drafting prospective fathers at present.” It was now May, and [there was] no job in academic life. Luckily, his good friend Roger Milkman had turned down a job at Syracuse University. Don was calling his friends and everything. Roger recommended Syracuse, and Don flew out to interview, and they hired him. Tracy: Just like that. Kennedy: [01:04:06] Thank goodness. We were terrified. We had parents, but we did not expect our parents to support us. We were very independent, and we did not expect it. We were only twenty and twenty-one when we got married, and that was fine. But when you don’t have a job, that’s terrifying. And I’m pregnant. I’m not going to be able to work that much. So we were thrilled to go to Syracuse. On the other hand, the culture shock was astounding, really astounding. [laughs] It was like going to another world. We went out and found an apartment. Page was born on September 23rd. I think we went out in July. It was so different. They had no restaurants with tablecloths, except the one in the hotel. The whole way of doing things 46 in Cambridge--you went out after dinner, and you’d go out for wine and cheese or something like that. Syracuse was wonderful, just the way Cambridge was. The faculty had a lot to do with graduate students and each other, and so did Syracuse. All the biology people asked us out after dinner, and it was always for dessert and coffee. I didn’t drink coffee because I was pregnant, and the dessert was fine, but it was so different. It was little things like that took a lot of getting used to. It did not have the sophistication of the Harvard/Boston area at all. It was not easy for us to get used to. Don was supposed to be teaching the beginning course, and he liked that. I think he had trouble setting his research up. I can’t remember a lot about the way it went in Syracuse. I remember more about Stanford, but he had some trouble getting his research set up. We lived on the top of a drumlin in Syracuse. Syracuse is filled with hills, and a drumlin is a long sloping hill that goes up like that [steeply] and then drops sharp off. We hadn’t taken into account the heavy Syracuse winters when we got the house up there, so that was hard. Syracuse is tough to live in. The winters are long, and the precipitation, because it’s off the lakes, oh, the snow. The snow was unbelievable. So Page is this little tiny child. She was born in September before the snow starts. We move into the house in something like April. We’d been in an apartment before. We would shovel the snow, shovel the walk, and I would put her out. I’d get her all dressed in mittens, the hat, the boots, the one-piece snowsuit and everything, put her outside to “play,” quote, unquote. And she looks around and says, “I have to go to the bathroom.” [laughs] Well, back then, we thought we were 47 supposed to make them go out in the cold. I don’t know why, but the idea was they had to go out in the cold, and I watched her from inside. I didn’t go out in the cold. [laughs] Isn’t that terrible? Oh, lord. Tracy: How funny. So Don would have finished up his PhD at Harvard in spring of 1956, and this would have been fall of 1956 that you went to Syracuse. Kennedy: [01:07:29] Went to Syracuse, that’s right. Yes. Tracy: Then so it would have been April of 1957, then, that you had moved into this house that you were talking about. [interruption] Tracy: Jeanne, before we stopped, we had been talking a little bit about your early time in Syracuse, and you had mentioned Page and that she was born in September 1956. She was born right as you were getting started at Syracuse. Let’s talk a little bit about Page as an infant and the lessons that you were learning in terms of motherhood and raising children. Kennedy: [01:08:12] Oh, dear. Let’s see. The best lesson was nobody ever told me--I was the first of any group to have a baby--starting with being pregnant, nobody ever told me that you could feel glamorous and beautiful being pregnant. That was a huge shock to me and a very pleasant one. For one thing, I was able to buy a whole new wardrobe, and I got a black cotton skirt and top, sounds like nothing now, but my father had told me when I was thirteen that black looked terrible on me. He was just trying to talk me out of wearing a dress of my mother’s, but I didn’t know it then. I felt so glamorous in that black dress, and I got so many compliments about how I looked, that it was amazing to me that it wasn’t just getting fat. I was able not to see it as 48 getting fat at all, but to see it as a baby that was sticking out, you know, and not think that it was ugly. Really, I felt the most glamorous I had ever felt up to that point being pregnant. That was a great surprise, I can tell you. Now, in those days, the thing that they did was to make you wear corsets as you got bigger, and they were horrible-looking corsets. But you know what? You didn’t suffer the pains and problems that so many people do, because people didn’t wear corsets much after that. And I hated my corset, but I was able to go and do everything. I was able to walk. I even went dancing about a week before Julia was born in Syracuse. That was a delight. Now, having a baby, that was pretty amazing, too. Looking down at this little creature that’s just come out of you. This is mine, I’m supposed to take care of it, and all of that. Page had, you’ll be glad to know, silver eyes, and she looked like a sumo wrestler with black, black hair. And she was very, very adorable, of course. It was all new. Neither Don nor I knew what we were doing. My mother came. Breastfeeding was not in style at that time, and I wanted to do it. I suppose because it wasn’t in style I wanted to do it, and I just had a terrible time and I had no one to help me. Tracy: No lactation coaches or anything like that? Kennedy: [01:10:53] Oh, nothing like that. They didn’t want you to. I mean, they thought it far better to put the baby right away on formula. Odd, but that’s the way things were. 49 Also the other thing that they did back then was I was only allowed to gain fourteen pounds. They thought it was bad for the baby, and I’m a small woman. If I’d been larger, they would have let me gain more. This is so totally different from what they let [women do today]. I had to work to keep my weight down to fourteen pounds, and I did it with Page pretty much. I think it got up to be sixteen. With Julia, I know it got to be sixteen pounds. But for both pregnancies, they insisted that you keep your weight down. Now I think how unhealthy that is, but you do what the doctors tell you. Things were different then. It was hard because you don’t know how to deal with a baby and you don’t know what to do, and I actually had a bad time. I hemorrhaged and had to go to bed and couldn’t get up. Don was wonderful. He took all the night feedings, he got up and he changed the baby. We used to say, “Change the baby, feed the baby, change the baby.” That was the routine that you get into, and we made a joke out of it. But he was really fabulous about it. I remember when I went to the hospital [when I had Julia]--they kept you for about week at that time. Oh, I missed little Page so much. She wasn’t allowed in the hospital, and Don would bring her to the hospital. I was way high up, and I’d look out the window and way down at the bottom--it was the snow for Julia; it was March--there was Page in a little red snowsuit waving at me. I was in tears. Oh, it was terribly hard. It was so interesting, once you get through the caring for them and everything, I got along fine. You don’t know what a laugh they are. I mean, they are a constant bunch of laughs. They’re funny. They’re real little people. 50 I didn’t particularly like babies. I mean, I didn’t know anything about babies. Of course, mine were special, but they were so funny. With Page, I had all these ideas. I was twenty-three when I had her, and I was going to bring her up gender-free. This was a pretty new idea back then. Tracy: I was going to say. [laughs] Kennedy: [01:13:06] Yes, yes. So we weren’t going to give her all girlie things; we would give her trucks and stuff like that as well. At seven months, she’s sitting on the floor. She’s just learned to sit up. She’s sitting on the floor of our bedroom, and there’s a big long mirror in front of her. She grabbed one of my scarves and she was putting it around her head and posing with her head tipped side to side and looking at herself in the mirror. And I called Don to come in, and we said, “Well--.” [laughs] Tracy: She’s figured it out. [laughs] Kennedy: “She’s a girl. There’s no way that she’s not.” [laughs] We didn’t realize that, yeah, there are differences. You can try to bring them up without it, and some of that, I think, is good. But she was such a little girl, it was just too cute. It was really funny. Those are the kinds of things that you learn. I was very lonely. I made friends with neighbors and things like that, but I had not been without occupation. I needed occupation. I needed something to do. I just didn’t have enough to do, and with babies it’s not easy. I can remember saying to Page in her playpen, “Your mommy’s lonely, honey,” and hugging her. You do need adult conversation. That was a surprise, that I could be lonely. But, oh, she was cute as anything, really. Couldn’t have been sweeter. 51 Then we sent her to nursery school, and it was the Syracuse University Nursery School. We got a new teacher there. She called me in for a parentteacher conference. Page, was three, I think, when she went to nursery school. The teacher said, “Page keeps saying, ‘What?’ in this flat voice. No matter what you say to her, she says, ‘What?’” I said, “Well, yes, she does that at home too. Is there some problem?” “Well,” she said, “if she’s still doing it in high school, they’re not going to like that very much, and she’s not going to get into a good college.” [laughs] This was my first experience with new teachers that have their own theories. I knew that was ridiculous, so I really didn’t pay much attention to it. On the other hand, Page still says, “What?” flatly, the same tone, even though she’s fifty-seven now. At any rate, she was a lot of fun, even though I was lonely. Julia came along three and a half years later. I planned that, because I had been very jealous as a child and I knew that the time of sibling jealousy was eighteen months to three years. I’ve got to say it worked. There was very little jealousy, but it was in my mind that I had to prevent that. So, with Julia, again, I’m in the hospital, five days this time. I got a baby doll for Page, a really lifelike baby doll, and when I came home, I was carrying the baby doll to give Page, and Don was carrying the baby. And I did not pay attention to the baby, I paid attention to Page, and that seemed to help a lot. By then she hadn’t seen me or been with me [for a long time], so she had to test the limits and started to act out; I had to put her in her 52 room and be firm. I remember being so happy later that it wasn’t the way it was with my brother and me, and that worked out very well. Tracy: Did your mother come when Julia was born? Kennedy: [01:17:05] Yes. Since, as I said, when Page was born, I hemorrhaged, she left after three weeks because she was exhausted, but they paid for a nurse to come in because-Tracy: To help you. Kennedy: [01:17:16] Yes, because I wasn’t allowed out of bed. I think nowadays it would be different, but it wasn’t then. Then with Julia, by that time Don had been earning enough money, so we could afford to pay for a baby nurse after my mother left for a while, too. It was a huge relief because [with the] first I was too sick to do anything. But this time, I was really well, and we were able to go out and do things because we had a built-in babysitter. I didn’t always have to get up in the middle of the night and get exhausted, because, again, the baby was on formula, and that was a godsend. It was a lot of fun having these two girls. Tracy: Besides your mother and this baby nurse were there other sources of information or resources on mothering and parenting? Did you get advice from people? Kennedy: [01:18:13] Oh, yes, there was Dr. Spock back then. We read him religiously. I mean, thank goodness for Dr. Spock. He said, “Let the baby cry,” and his advice was very sensible. “If they’re still crying after fifteen minutes, go.” And after a while, they don’t cry. I mean, they just don’t. They cry a little bit to see and so forth. Oh, he was terrific. 53 But there wasn’t a lot else. There really wasn’t. My mother knew a little bit, but not a whole lot, because she’d always had baby nurses. My brother had a nurse. I had a nurse. So she was very sweet and very willing, and I was so glad to have her with me, and she worked hard at it, but she didn’t know a whole lot about it. [laughs] In Syracuse I had some friends that had babies, but they weren’t that knowledgeable about it. I talked to other mothers and saw what they had to say. What I also tried to do then after Page got to be old enough and I got to be settled enough was to figure out what could I do to relieve the loneliness besides visit neighbors and friends. My mother early on had made me join the Junior League in Massachusetts at age eighteen, and she said it would be useful to me, and indeed, she turned out to be right. I didn’t want to do it because it had a big work component. My friend Sally and I used to work for the Junior League, working in a mental hospital outside Northampton and a county hospital. This was not fun volunteer work, but we did it. I joined the Junior League at Syracuse, which helped me get to know a lot more people, and it also helped me to pick volunteer work to do. And that’s when I started my volunteer work for museums, which I loved. I took a docent program at Syracuse. I got really interested in art there, and we bought our first piece of art that we ever bought together. It was a Japanese Ukiyo-e print, woodblock print, and I still have it, still love it. That was a major interest that I was able to start there and do there, and that meant a lot to me. 54 Tracy: You’ve commented on your interest in art now. Is being a docent in Syracuse where it started? Kennedy: [01:20:41] That started it, yes. I hadn’t realized how interested I would be. My mother was so happy, because she’s the one that kept trying to get me to take art courses and I kept refusing. It’s my own fault entirely. [laughs] Tracy: Yes. Was Don very busy during this time? Kennedy: [01:20:59] Oh, lord, yes. He was hugely busy. I mean, he’s young, he’s trying to get his research going, and he’s having troubles with the lab. He’s teaching for the first--not the first time. He taught at Harvard as a T.A., but for the first time of having the responsibility for a whole course. Luckily, the students just loved him. He was an excellent teacher from the beginning. I do remember his first paper that he gave in Madison, Wisconsin. It was before we came to Stanford. I went with him for it and he wasn’t good at giving papers. I had to tell him to avoid all the “uhs” and tell him all the habits of speech that you’re not supposed to do when you’re talking. It was very funny to think he’s so incredibly good now, and, of course, he got good very fast, but he was really not good. The stuff was good that he was saying, but not his delivery. Tracy: And he was receptive to your-Kennedy: [01:22:13] Oh, absolutely. No, we were a team always. Who else would tell him? He wanted to know. We helped each other a huge amount as much as we could. I mean, for me, I was helping him by being the mother, staying home, taking care of the house. I was never very good at cleaning, but actually we were able to afford a cleaning lady. I loved the cooking, I loved 55 the flowers, I loved making the house nice and taking care of the children, mostly. [laughs] Tracy: I think most parents would say that. [laughs] Kennedy: [01:22:44] It just made me think about the ideas that I had about children. I had this idea that they shouldn’t have sugar. Of course, they didn’t put labels on baby food. I didn’t know baby food had sugar in it. [laughs] Page didn’t have any sugar that I knew about until she was one year old, and we let her have cake and ice cream. Now, what that did was it precipitated her--at the time she’s getting old enough to go to people’s houses, and as soon as she would go to play, she’d want candy. She was so crazy about sugar, she was sugar nuts. I thought, “Oh, dear, what did I do?” She’s not that sugar crazy now. As she grew up, she didn’t care as much about sweets. She likes them okay, but not the way she was. We started doing a lot of things with the other faculty and made good friends. I do remember one faculty member, she was able to breastfeed. It was a scandal [at the time], actually, because she breastfed at dinner parties and in front of people. And everybody was horrified. The university people were horrified. It was quite amazing, the difference then. You could breastfeed, but you were supposed to go off into a dark place, which is ridiculous now, of course. But just to give you an idea of what it was like back then. It was nice because I got to know a lot of faculty wives, and we were quite good friends with some other couples. Most of them had older children. Some of them had babies, newer babies too. While we had just 56 Page, we were able to take her with us. We played bridge with some people. We were able to take her everywhere with us, and that was unusual. People didn’t do that much, but we didn’t have any money to pay babysitters, so, “Would you mind if we bring Page?” She was really good. She would sleep through everything, and she looked so cute, everybody loved seeing her in her little bassinet. Tracy: Did your cooking and entertaining skills improve from--? [laughs] Kennedy: [01:25:01] Yes, they did. They definitely did. When I wasn’t working because I was home with the children, it was a way to get some creativity into my life. I really liked that part, and I branched out and did a lot of different things, and I started to really learn in Syracuse. Where I really learned [cooking] was later, but in Syracuse, I started. I liked it, and I liked the entertaining part. It was always fun to do that. Tracy: We have this sense of the faculty wife as being an identity or a role that a woman would play, but I wonder if that role had been articulated in the same way at this time--in the late fifties, early sixties. Was it thought about or articulated in the same way as we today think about that role? Did you think of yourself as a faculty wife? Kennedy: [01:25:57] Yes, I definitely thought of myself as a faculty wife, but the role was not articulated. I was incredibly proud of being a faculty wife. I still am proud of all those years I was a faculty wife. You know, when people talk about Don having been president, they always think that the presidency was the big deal. I point out to them that being the president’s wife was a big deal --well, sure it was--but I was a faculty wife for, good lord, how many years? 57 Tracy: Twenty-four years? Kennedy: [01:26:30] From 1956 to-Tracy: In 1981, he took the presidency. Kennedy: [01:26:34] Well, actually when he was FDA commissioner was really when we stopped having that, and he was provost in 1979. Well, somewhere in there, I had to give up being a faculty wife to be the provost’s wife and the FDA commissioner’s wife and the provost’s wife and then the president’s wife. But I always thought of myself as a faculty wife, and I liked what it implied, because for me, remember, I had no experience of it before. It was like exploring a new world. It was wonderful, these fascinating people--not everybody, of course--talking about things and ideas, and I loved it. Everybody liked my entertaining, so they liked to come to our house, and I loved being part of it. I never liked the fact that women go off alone [at parties], and they did do that. Faculty wives and faculty guys would go off alone, but I always tried to break it up. [laughs] If it were at my house, I could break it up easier, but at someone else’s house I’d go over and talk to the men, because I wanted to hear what they were saying. I always wished that they’d be more mingled. The wives, I mean, certainly they were talking about babies and things like that, and I was interested, but I wanted to hear more ideas at that point. No one there at Syracuse that I knew as a faculty wife worked, and none of my neighbor wives worked, so it was the given thing. 58 Well, I shouldn’t say that. No one worked for money. We all worked our tails off, but nobody worked for money. [End of Session 1 of 6, interview with Jeanne D. Kennedy, April 30, 2014] 59 60 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PRESIDENTIAL FAMILIES AND STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECTS INTERVIEWER: ALLISON TRACY INTERVIEWEE: JEANNE D. KENNEDY DATE OF INTERVIEW: JUNE 11, 2014 SESSION: 2 OF 6 Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is June 11, 2014. I’m here with Jeanne Kennedy to conduct our second session of our oral history interview for the Stanford Historical Society. We’re in Jeanne’s home in Palo Alto. So, Jeanne, I wanted to go back a little bit and ask you about your interaction with Don’s parents and your relationship with them as you were dating and getting married. Kennedy: [00:00:41] They were very different from my parents, which was amazing to me. I was absolutely fascinated with Don’s mother, “Babbie,” short for Barbara. Babbie was born in New Hampshire as the fourth out of six girls. She was the daughter of a Maine guide and a schoolteacher who had married beneath her, as they said in those days. She had so many tales of her childhood, it was really amazing. They grew up in Berlin, New Hampshire. A paper mill came in there, run by Orton Brown and his wife, “Caliney.” Caliney is short for Caroline, as I recall. They sponsored the Bean girls and gave them a lot of things that 61 would make their lives easier, like money for college, so forth. Actually, the second Bean girl, Dorothy, married their son Gordon Brown who, as it turns out, is the one that made my father happy about my marriage to Don because he was my father’s roommate at Williams College. I learned all these things, and it was a life that I had not known, a life that fascinated me. It was so different. Bill, Don’s father, was very quiet, very reserved. He had been in advertising and had hated it. Then he was in the OSS [Office of Strategic Services]. He was actually in both world wars. In the Second World War, he was in the OSS and he had traveled a lot. So Don and his mother were without him for many years. Right after he went in, Don’s mother and Don went to the Bement Elementary School in Massachusetts, where not only did his mother teach, but two of his aunts taught there as well. With Bill being in the OSS, later they had some time together in Virginia, and that’s where Don had his victory garden. That was what we used to call it in World War II. He planted this garden, and he was desperate to see all the fruits and vegetables that he planted. And, by god, his father got transferred one more time, and he never saw it come to fruition. But in his life later, he got more and more interested in gardening. They then went to Florida with his father. There Don went to a redneck school where they punished boys that misbehaved, or boys that they felt should be behavior-modified, through a gauntlet. There were a lot of redneck kids there. They had these military belts with metal buckles, and you ran the gauntlet. You were supposed to be hit by these kids who had doubled 62 the belt up so that they could hit hard with the metal part. And if you were a kid hitting and didn’t hit, you got sent through the gauntlet. So this is pretty outrageous, and his parents took him out of school, and his mother homeschooled him, with some difficult results. [laughs] She used to tell me a lot of these tales, as did Don. She was a great raconteur, fascinating woman, very interested in psychiatry. In fact, was in therapy for all of her life, as far as I could tell, but she had compelling ideas. She told me most of everything I first learned about psychiatry, about Freud and about Jung. She ended up going to a Jungian analyst. She and Bill moved to Zurich, Switzerland, and they both were in a school for Jungian psychologists. They were not going to school; they were simply being analyzed and learning there. It was amazing to me, all of these things that they did. Babbie had a million different hobbies. She built the first tongue-ingroove steel house in America in their house in Winter Park, Florida. She actually sold her engagement ring in order to buy a printing press at one point, but Bill gave her a great huge zircon which she loved and used to flash a lot of the time. Since I was fascinated, it was easy for me for a long while to be with both of them. Actually, Babbie turned out to be rather difficult as a motherin-law. She wasn’t at all interested in grandchildren, not really in the slightest. Well, I should say she was interested in the idea of them, but not the actuality of them. She once told me when Page was a tiny baby that she would never babysit, and I shouldn’t expect it. 63 Bill, on the other hand, though quiet and reserved, was always the one that wanted to be visiting us and would come. Babbie was writing a book-somewhere in the sixties, I think that started--and she would not come out to see us, using the excuse of having to write the book. But Bill would come. . I loved the liberal side of them. They were intellectual and liberal. This was marvelous for me growing up in a family that was plenty smart but not intellectual and certainly not liberal. So I’d say, all in all, it was a very good relationship as far as it could go. With Bill, it went much further. Babbie later got Alzheimer’s, one of the worse cases and also one of the most long-lived cases, which was very hard on Don. Bill stayed bright and clear in his mind all the way into his nineties. He died a little before she did, but it was a long relationship that I did have with them, and I’m glad that it went as well as it did. Don was marvelous, actually, with my parents. They didn’t hold his views or my views either, but they respected him once they got to know him. Took a while, as I’ve said before, I think, they respected him by the time we were married. They were definitely in favor of all that we did and fascinated by what went on. Later on, when Don was being looked at for president, one of the places that interviewed us and actually offered us the job was Williams [College]. That was where my father had gone, and he wanted us to take that job so badly, but it was really not for us. Don wanted to be able to do his research, and he really needed to be in a major university. My father was still alive, though he died about a year later. He was really disappointed but very 64 understanding. They loved Don, and Don’s parents loved me. So it really was about the very best it could have been. Tracy: When you first met them or while you and Don were still dating, you felt easily accepted, or I mean, you got off on the right foot with them early on? Kennedy: [00:08:50] Yes. The time I first met them was when I was eighteen, and Babbie and Bill invited us to go to New York. New York was a fantastic place to me. I had never actually been visiting in New York. I’d stopped on the way to the airport, but that was about it. So when we got off the train-Don took the train from Harvard and picked me up at Smith and we went on the train--his parents were there to meet us. And his mother hugged me and said, “I’m so glad it’s you.” [laughter] Then we had the most incredible time. We stayed at the Algonquin Hotel, which was my first introduction to all of that lore and history about the Algonquin, and it was absolutely marvelous. Of course, they insisted that we have rooms at opposite ends of the hotel corridor with their rooms in between. [laughs] They took us to shows, and one of the things was Babbie took us to see Billy Budd. Babbie picked out Billy Budd as the show to take us to, whereas I was definitely more in the mood for musicals. We did see one wonderful musical, and I can’t remember what it was. With Billy Budd, she felt that we were so intellectual, both Don and I, that we wouldn’t want to see anything that wasn’t deadly serious. If you’ve never seen Billy Budd, it’s pretty serious and depressing. But that was my first introduction. And Bill 65 had always acted pleased with me. He’d never had a daughter, and I think he was pleased. Tracy: So you and Don were married in 1953. Kennedy: [00:10:39] On June 11th, which is today. Tracy: Yes. You had mentioned an experience right after you were married, working at Woods Hole. Could you talk a little bit more about that? Kennedy: [00:10:50] Well, it was a continuation, really, of our honeymoon. I had a job in the United States Fisheries, and Don had a job at MBL, Marine Biological Laboratory. We just had a fantastic time. We had these jobs because, of course, we had to work in the summer. When we arrived there, we had an apartment. It was an apartment that had a bedroom and a bathroom and a kitchen. It was twenty-two dollars a month, including clean linen, clean sheets, and clean towels. It also had a door from the kitchen that opened on to a ballroom. It was in an old house, but they’d changed it into places for people working for the United States Fisheries to stay. Don’s major professor at Harvard, Donald Griffin, worked on bats and their extrasensory perception. I looked at this ballroom, and Don Griffin came over to visit and he said, “Well, good. We have a window [in the door]. I’m going to put in my experiment on these Panamanian fishing bats.” Well, I was only twenty when I was married and at the time I was horrified. There was a hole in the wall maybe an inch and a half across, and I said, “Well, shouldn’t we plug the hole?” And Don Griffin said, “No need. I will, but there’s no need. They have a two-foot wingspread.” [laughs] It turned out that it was actually something 66 fascinating. I got over any fear I would have had of bats and was not at all afraid of them. They did have a two-foot wingspan, and this was a huge ballroom. They put a pool in the middle, and the bats did a figure-eight over it, with the center of the eight being where they dipped into the pool and caught the fish. That’s the way they ate. We could walk into the room. I would walk closer and closer, and bats won’t touch you. They don’t want to touch you. But I would walk so close that the wings would go by within three inches of my face. I loved it. It was also a rather odd time because we rented a refrigerator, and in the refrigerator was something else someone had put there. I can’t remember who had put it there, but they were eyeballs from some animal in a package. [laughs] Also, another thing about Woods Hole that was just fascinating was Don’s parents knew Buckminster Fuller. They actually had built a house in Ann Arbor, where they lived, that had a geodesic-type dome over their swimming pool. As I recall, it was not actually done by Fuller, but it was inspired by his work. They sent us to see him because he was building a geodesic dome in a home in Woods Hole. So we walked over there, and there was the great man himself, all khakis and dusty and sleeves rolled up and working hard. He couldn’t have been nicer. It just was such a thrill, because I’d never met anybody like that, someone so famous. This kind of thrill lasts you a lifetime. I wanted to tell you, too, about the Captain Kidd. The Captain Kidd was the local beer and pool bar, and we would go there a lot. Leonie ran it. 67 She and her partner, Clyde, took to us, and they thought we were terrific young people. We were invited over all the time, and after the bar was closed, sometimes for dinner. I remember Clyde making me a drink called the Angel’s Tit, which had crème de cacao and that coffee liqueur with cream on the top and a cherry suspended by a toothpick. Now, remember, I wasn’t quite at drinking age yet, but back in those days, you actually could drink anywhere once you were eighteen in Massachusetts, even though the drinking age was twenty-one. Leonie had a parrot who talked, and this parrot was hysterical because the bar was called the Captain Kidd. For all I know, it was named because of the parrot, but that parrot was funny too. So lots of memories from Woods Hole. We saw things that I never thought I’d see, because all these biologists at the Marine Biology Lab were mesmerized with undersea, with fish and other animals in the ocean. We would take lights out at night, and we’d lower the lights [into the water]. You wouldn’t believe the things we would see--moray eels, huge ones, and all kinds of fish. It was absolutely incredible. They had an aquarium at the MBL where I was allowed to go backstage and look in from the top of tanks and even sometimes do some chores around. Great place for young people. We did go back a second time [when we lived in] Syracuse and Page was a baby. It wasn’t quite as good that time. Tracy: So you said that summer you were working for the United States Fisheries. What was your job that summer? 68 Kennedy: [00:16:22] [laughs] I was doing ray diagrams. There was some kind of sonar that they bounced off the bottom, and I have no idea what it was that it showed them. I could follow whatever the formula was and follow what I needed to do to draw these ray diagrams. I don’t recall being bored, so there must have been something going on that made me more interested than these sounds. Tracy: I just wonder, prior to marrying Don, did you have any expectations of summers filled with ray diagrams and fish and bats and eyeballs in your refrigerator? Kennedy: [00:17:12] No, but I was always interested in animal behavior. I took some courses in biology that were animal behavior, too, at Smith. They were far below what they have nowadays, but it was always interesting to me. Certainly by that time I was pretty used to the fact that Don was a biologist and so were all his friends and his professors, so I’d gotten more used to it by the time we got married. [00:17:42] Now, the wonderful thing was we had lots of friends in Woods Hole that summer, and they all wanted to come and see the bats. Every night, I swear to goodness, we had a party. Every night people would bring beer and food, and we’d have a party with all of us looking at the bats fishing, because the bats, of course, are nocturnal. One time, Roger Milkman decided he would make cioppino. The only problem was that, instead of using broth, he used solid oil, I mean just masses and masses of oil for the liquid. It was pretty near inedible. 69 Also, that’s the summer I learned that I didn’t know anything about wine. We had received a present from his parents of a gift box with three wines to take with us. They were delicious. We liked the wines a lot. So when they were used up, I thought, “I’ll go buy wine for the next dinner party we have,” since people were always over. It wasn’t a true dinner party, but I went downtown in Woods Hole, and I looked at the wines. I didn’t see anything I understood. I didn’t know what it was. I didn’t even know how to ask, and I saw one name that I knew, Virginia Dare, and I bought a bottle of Virginia Dare wine. That’s when I learned that you had to know about wine to buy anything good. It was the worst thing. Virginia Dare is known for being sweet and horrible and the cheapest thing you can buy. [laughs] That’s what started me wanting always to learn more about wine and drink it. Tracy: During these early years of marriage with Don, did you have much contact with friends that you’d grown up with or peers from high school or from Smith? Did you ever have a sense that your life was very different from your peers? Kennedy: [00:19:43] Well, we certainly had contact with friends, because Cambridge was only forty miles away from Worcester. Also, I did have to go to Smith every week my second semester, so I saw my old friends there too. One of my friends, Janice Orr, came and worked as a waitress in Falmouth while we were in Woods Hole, so we had loads of friends around. As for a different life, I had a very different life from the people in Worcester at that time. Most of my friends had what my parents would have wanted, a conventional marriage and staying in Worcester or close by. 70 However, my friend Sally Horner married someone later in life. He was in the State Department, and they traveled everywhere. So her life, too, was very different than what we grew up with. I was so young, and I was making friends with all of Don’s friends as well, so I got very used to the academic life and very pleased that I got to be part of it. Tracy: Last time, we were talking about your time in Syracuse. We talked about your experience with Page and Julia and early childrearing and making a home in Syracuse and Don’s experience working in the department. You were in Syracuse from 1956 to 1960. Don was doing research there and teaching. I want to talk about your move to Stanford. Was he actively looking for other positions at the time, do you remember? Kennedy: [00:22:29] No. The department at Syracuse was really doing well. I can’t remember how Stanford found Don, but they got him out to interview, and he was very impressed with the place. The problem was that at that point he was an associate professor at Syracuse, so Stanford would break him to being an assistant professor and they wouldn’t pay us more than the $7,500 we were making. We would have been making eight thousand dollars the next year. But they wouldn’t pay us that. So we decided we’d turn it down. At that time, Victor Twitty was the chairman of the department. First of all, he said, “If you ever want to change your mind, give us a call.” And then he said, “Who would you recommend as someone to do this job?” And Don said, “Well, Tim Goldsmith. He’s terrific. I think he’d be very good.” 71 And Victor said, “Well, but he’s Jewish, and we just hired Yanofsky, Grobstein, and Ehrlich, so we can’t have another Jew.” It was horrifying to us, in fact. However, the department at Syracuse started to fall apart the next year, and people moved on, and it just wasn’t the same place at all. So we decided, okay, and Don called Victor Twitty up and said, “Well, I’m still interested.” They hadn’t gotten anybody for the job. So again he went out, was interviewed, and this time we said yes. He was still broken to assistant professor, and his salary was still only what we were making, which was eight thousand dollars at the time. Stanford was growing like anything. In fact, when we told Roger we were going, he called it “Nobels’ Hotel.” [laughter] Tracy: That’s great. So he’d interviewed once, had declined the position, Syracuse kind of became dicey, and so Stanford seemed more appealing. Do you remember discussing the decision with Don? What were your memories or expectations or trepidations about it? Kennedy: [00:25:16] I was excited. I had never been west of Wisconsin. To me, California sounded like the golden goal for us. I was just absolutely thrilled, and I really wanted to go. I was definitely powerfully positive about it. My parents less so, of course, because we’d be further away. When we moved, we had an almost four-year-old and a four-monthold baby. So we drove across the country. It was actually a wonderful time. I’d kind of dreaded it, but when you’re young, you can do a lot of things like that. Page was the happiest child ever because she was with us twenty-four 72 hours a day. She loved it and she was good as gold. Julia was the baby, and she, of course, needed feeding and changing and so forth. Things were a little different at that time. The baby had a sort of a wooden car seat that wasn’t even strapped in. It was kind of wedged in between seats, and we would even leave her in the car when we went in to eat if she was sound asleep, because you could keep an eye on her. It’s so different nowadays, and you start thinking, “Oh, dear god, was I a terrible mother?” But then you realize, no, that’s what everybody was doing at the time. And Page was never buckled in either. She was free to roam in the backseat where she wanted to. We loved that trip across. Don drove up and around the North Bay, so that we could cross on the Golden Gate Bridge, and as we crossed, we sang “California, Here We Come,” and Page joined in. Julia says that she remembers it. She still claims she remembers it. Tracy: [laughs] That’s funny. Kennedy: [00:27:02] It is funny. But to see this beautiful white city rising out of a little bit of mist, it was just fabulous. It was just so incredible. Then we had to come down “bloody” Bayshore; they were already calling it “bloody” Bayshore at that time. It wasn’t a total freeway the way it is now, but it was pretty scary for us, and not very pretty. Billboards all over the place. It was horrible. We drove into Stanford, started down Palm Drive, and there--talk about totally different from the red bricks I was used to--was this majestic 73 avenue lined with these huge palms, and at the very end, this gaudy mosaic red-tiled sandy-roofed place, and I fell in love right away with it. We stopped just outside the Biology Department, which was the old one [in Jordan Hall] then. We’d seen the pictures of Agassiz plunged in the earthquake, you know, into the cement, but he was back in place again. We stepped out on to the, I think, Bermuda grass, and I was lost. I loved the place, just loved it. Tracy: So tell me about your experience establishing yourself in the Bay Area and in Palo Alto. Kennedy: [00:28:32] We didn’t have any money. We hadn’t been able to sell the house in Syracuse, and we had some weird arrangement with somebody who paid us a little bit, but then eventually it did get sold. We took a loss on it. However, at the time, we just rented a place that was tiny, and Don, I know, felt bad it was so small, but I didn’t care. It was California. One thing I couldn’t quite get used to was we just had one wall heater in this little tiny house, but I was always cold. I mean, I was used to the East, where it’s warm in the houses and cold outside. But I was always cold that first year. But after that first year, I was totally acclimated, and when we went to England in 1961, I could stand the English summer. I wasn’t near as cold as anybody else from America would be. [00:29:25] The interesting thing about Stanford was that we had an instant social life in the department. We had also in Syracuse. Harvard wasn’t quite the same. It was for graduate students, but not for professors. We got on very well with all of the biologists in the Biology Department, and we 74 rapidly made really good friends, some of which are still around and still are good friends. I was pleased at that. I’d never had such a circle of like-minded people, it seemed like. I wrote my mother--and I’ve seen the letters--saying how wonderful it was to be with all these people and having so much fun. The girls grew up on College Terrace, which is where our house was. Page went to the old Mayfield School because I had the idealistic idea of doing a Spanish immersion school experience for her. This was new back then. Well, it turned out that she didn’t really learn much there. When we finally moved, she was way behind her class. People had some strange ideas. I remember in kindergarten, she wanted to learn to write letters or print letters, and I didn’t know how the school wanted it done, so I was going to teach her. I called up and asked the teacher if she could send me over something to show me how to teach her, and she said that Page wasn’t ready to learn letters because her skills with the scissors and with jump-roping weren’t good, which meant she wasn’t ready to learn her letters. She wouldn’t send me the way they wanted her to learn. So I had to teach her the way I thought. Then in first grade, they called me and the teacher said, “Well, you know, we’re quite worried about Page. We think she should see a psychologist.” And I said, “Why?” “Well, she mirror-writes.” Well, I mirror-wrote and still mirror-write, and I said, “Well, what’s wrong with mirror-writing? I do it.” 75 “Well, it’ll give her trouble reading later.” And I said, “I read very well, and I’m not the least bit worried about her.” [laughs] And that was the last we heard of the psychologist. I didn’t know about dyslexia, which Page didn’t have, but I didn’t know why anyone would say something so silly to me. Tracy: We talked about, for you, the transition from Cambridge to Syracuse was kind of an interesting--very different culturally. I wonder if there was a similar experience transitioning from Syracuse and maybe the East Coast more generally to Stanford and California. Kennedy: [00:32:29] Oh, now, that’s interesting. When we got to California, of course, it felt much more like Cambridge. Stanford was a lot more like Harvard in a lot of ways, not all of them. At the time, I can remember Don saying we should take the top third of NYU [New York University] and mix it in with the Stanford kids, because they were so homogenous, you know, blond surfer types. That’s a stereotype and obviously wasn’t totally true, but there was much less diversity then, and we missed that diversity. The other thing was that you could feel the difference in the ideas, even the ideas at Harvard with four years in Syracuse in between. The ideas from the East Coast were only just coming to California, and it was so strange to see that time-lapse. Now, these were the faculty ideas, I mean, things that were in academic life, and the liberal ideas, and so forth. It was a very odd feeling to realize that we were way behind the times. Nowadays, of course, there is no gap, but back then we could feel it. Tracy: You mean just in academic life how people interacted or-- 76 Kennedy: [00:33:43] Not how people interacted. I can’t think of an example for you, but there were certain things that we’d known when we were in Syracuse and Harvard that were ideas that hadn’t yet gotten to Stanford. [00:34:02] They would come the next year or the year after. It would be old to us but new to people here. Tracy: [00:34:09] How long did you live in your home on College Terrace? Kennedy: [00:34:16] We lived for three years there because we needed to have enough money to buy a house, and College Terrace was a great place to live, but we needed something a little bigger for the kids. We looked for quite a while. Don wanted, as many men do, to live way out in the hills. I’ve noticed that happens. Since I was going to be the one doing the driving and the errandrunning and so forth, I said, “No way.” The other thing was that the campus was having lots of land available for faculty to build on, but being a Yankee, I’d always had it stressed that you own the land you live on. I said, “No, we can’t live at Stanford. We’ve got to live somewhere nearby.” So we were looking at both Palo Alto and Menlo Park. We were lucky enough to find the house that I’m still in, and I love the house, always have. It took some time. Don was earning ten thousand dollars then. Don had complained the year before to Fred Terman that he felt that the money was not enough for what he was doing, comparatively speaking. Fred Terman told Wally Sterling and they upped him to ten thousand dollars, which was kind of neat, meant a lot to us. 77 At any rate, at that time you could buy a house that was four times your salary, a bit different from now, so we knew we could afford forty thousand dollars. And the house we found was then $48,000, but old Mrs. Wallace said she’d love to see the children in the garden. She had us for tea, and she sold it to us for our top price of forty thousand dollars. Tracy: Gosh. You also don’t hear about that nowadays. [laughs] Do you think that ultimately living off campus impacted friendships or interactions with friends and colleagues? Do you think that your experience living off campus was different from, you know, a faculty wife who was living on campus? Kennedy: [00:36:30] Well, yes, it was different. The other part that I didn’t say, but it’s true, is I didn’t want to live in a, quote, “faculty ghetto,” end quote. But there were plenty of times when I was thinking it would be better for the children if we had lived there. That was early on. But all in all, it seemed to be a pretty fair trade all the way around. We weren’t as close to faculty members in other departments, except some that we knew, of course, but I think we would have been closer to some as neighbors and so forth. On the other hand, there were no battles with neighbors that we also had to work with. I’d say it evened out pretty well. Tracy: Page and Julia would have gone to whatever they were zoned for this area. What were the schools like in Palo Alto? Kennedy: [00:37:31] Oh, they were terrific in Palo Alto, but then the Palo Alto Unified School District was also Stanford. So there would be terrific schools either 78 way. We happened to live two blocks away from Walter Hays School, which was where they both went, and it was wonderful because they were able to get themselves to school all the way through high school, which was wonderful. I didn’t have to do any of that. [laughs] Tracy: At the time that Don came to Stanford, my understanding was that he was already recognized as being a very good teacher and that Stanford was very interested in his teaching abilities. Do you have memories of Don’s teaching? Kennedy: [00:38:27] Yes, I certainly do. The problem was that Don, yes, was always known as a good teacher, always. That’s one of his top things--he’s very interested in teaching. However, he was also very interested in his research. He expected to come to Stanford and have his lab all ready for him. He also expected to really be doing a lot of teaching. What was actually hard for him was to help Dave Regnery teach this big freshman course. His lab wasn’t ready for him. He had no way to do any of his research. It took about six months before he could, and he was, to put it mildly, quite unhappy not to be in charge of what he was teaching. So that took some while to get used to. It was a tough six months for him. Once his lab got opened and he could go get his research done, things got better. Dave Regnery was a nice guy, but eventually Don was able to teach courses totally on his own, and that helped a lot too. But it was quite a shock to find out what he was actually hired for. Tracy: So when you and Don and Page and Julia made the move to Stanford, how were you spending your time and what were your priorities? What were the 79 things that seemed to take up most of the time in your life for those first few years? Kennedy: [00:40:04] Well, the kids, of course. No question about that. My mother had made me join the Junior League in Worcester, and the Junior League at that time had a very elitist profile, and that was something I was not terribly pleased with. On the other hand, when I moved to Syracuse, I was able to join their Junior League and that brought me into doing docent work in the museum in Syracuse, and I was able to transfer into what was then the San Francisco Junior League. That meant that I met a lot of people. It gave me a huge connection with the community that I would not have had if I didn’t have this particular way to do it. It was not as elite. It became rapidly less elitist, let’s put it that way. It’s not elitist at all now. Nonetheless, academically speaking, the faculty--I sometimes had to keep it a little quiet that I belonged to the Junior League. I was actually the only Stanford-associated person in the Junior League when I joined it. That was when we were a branch of the San Francisco League. Then we became our own Palo Alto League, now the Palo Alto Mid-Peninsula League. Because you have to do community service for the League, it started to show me what was open to me to do. I was able to do a whole lot of interesting things, but mainly I was interested in our museum. I think I said that I had never taken any art in college or boarding school, but this was what I ended up wanting to be involved in. So I went and joined this just 80 beginning docent course at the museum, and that was good because I enjoyed the work. We were also very busy with entertaining. We would entertain visitors or faculty that were being recruited or all kinds of things like that, so we were always entertaining. We did have four couples, of which we were the only faculty members, and we had a roving dinner party, so to speak. Each person would give an ethnic dinner party. We would dress in costume if possible, and the food served would be that of the country. At that time, French cooking was not yet something that everybody knew about and did, so for my turn, I decided to make a French dinner party. Well, it was very interesting because our house in College Terrace is pretty small, so I couldn’t get the whole table set until everybody was in the living room, because it blocked the front door when I opened up the table. I served a French meal from scratch. I was starting to really be interested in cooking, though I had not cooked before. I mean, I had cooked, started learning in Cambridge, but had not gone into it. With the kids home and being home with the kids, I got really interested. I made an entire chicken soup from scratch. I’ve got to say it wasn’t very good. I made an entire French meal, [fish] quenelles poached in cream sauce, all kinds of things. To think now how much people know about that cooking, at the time it was unusual. People were fascinated. I also made them come in black tie and all dressed up. It was a lot of fun. Let’s see. It was in 1963 that the wife of one of those couples gave me Julia Child’s cookbook. That just changed my whole cooking and my whole 81 life. I learned from Julia Child, and that started me on a lifelong love of that kind of cooking, and I still love butter and cream and cheese and you name it. Tracy: [00:44:22] Julia was, as you said, four months when you made the move out here, and so I’m just wondering if, as a baby, did Julia pose different challenges than Page did. What was she like as an infant? Kennedy: [00:44:43] Well, the funny thing is, they looked like the same kid when they were born. They weighed precisely the same, six pounds, eleven ounces, they both had dark hair like a--I don’t know--a stevedore. The difference was Page had silver eyes and Julia had gray eyes. It turned out that the silver eyes turned dark brown and the gray eyes turned hazel, but it was like having the same baby in a sense. On the other hand, they were totally different types of kids. Now, with the first kid, you always have all these ideas that you’re going to make work, all these idealistic ideas. With the second kid, you’re much more relaxed. With the first kid, you don’t know anything. The second kid, you do know stuff. I think, just generally speaking, that a second child you’re more relaxed with. Julia and Page, though they were very different, as I said, Page was very responsible. She was full of--it felt like kind of wanting to know things, all that “what” stuff and always questioning. [laughs] One of the things I can remember, she had a great vocabulary. One of the things I remember about Page was when she was about eight, Don was out planting the garden here in Stanford in our house, and we were 82 talking about this couple that was coming to visit. The couple was actually Paul Levine and Ursula Goodenough. Paul had divorced his wife that we’d known and was now living with Ursula. So they were coming to visit. This is a sign of how different the times are. We weren’t the least bit shocked at it, but we were afraid that it’d bad for the children to see them sleeping in the same room. [laughs] But when I asked Paul about it, he said, “Of course we’ll be in the same room.” I thought, “Okay, how do I explain this to Page?” Julia was too young. So I was trying to explain to Page that they were coming and that they weren’t married, but they would be sleeping in the same room, and she said to me, “I’m so glad. I’ve never met a prostitute before.” [laughs] Of course, I nearly died, and I rushed with, “No, no, she’s not a prostitute. That’s not right. That’s very different.” And I said, “They’re going to get married,” which I didn’t have any idea of, but it was the only thing I could think of to make it all right with Page. Then I told Don. I went out in the garden and told Don about it, and he was very annoyed with me for not telling her the direct truth. I said, “Okay, you talk to her.” I sent her out, and I was watching from the back door, and she and Don are talking while he’s planting pansies. And finally I hear him say, exasperatedly, “Well, they’re going to get married.” [laughter] It was hilarious. But Page was like that. She always wanted to see deep into things. She was always angry at injustice, for others but also for herself. She ended up being a lawyer, so you can see how that worked. 83 Julia was more harum-scarum, more of a tomboy. Julia never liked dolls. Page was quite feminine from the start. Well, Julia was too. She was this little thing with a very husky voice, and she flirted, from the time she was at least two years old, with men all the time, and they just loved her. It was kind of odd, but if you gave her a doll, she took it apart. She was also very clearly able to take things apart. Once she took a watch apart and put it back together and made it work. She was very funny. She loved animals, so she had a million animals, which drove her parents and her sister crazy. One time she found five Palo Alto newts. They’re probably a good seven inches long, black with yellow on them. She put them in Page’s bed. First thing we knew about it was the screams emanating from Page’s room. We ran up to find out, and there they were. So “Julia!” we called. She came in. “What is this? What is happening here?” She said, “Oh, I forgot them.” I said, “Julia.” And then I thought, “Obviously she didn’t forget them. She did it on purpose. But what am I going to say? I can’t prove it.” So the only way we could punish her, I said, “Well, you do have to have a punishment. Maybe you did not do it not on purpose, but your punishment is for being cruel to dumb animals, so you have to let them go.” That was the worst punishment you could think of for her. She one time got some mosquitoes in the Hanawalts’ pool, mosquito larvae, and wanted to bring them up, and I was dead against it. Then it was, 84 “Mom, there’s a screen over the top. I’m not going to let them get out.” But guess what? They did. They both wanted dogs, but we didn’t have a good fence around the house then, and being on Middlefield, I didn’t want a dog to run out, so we got them each cats. Page got this sleek panther-like black cat who she named Cleo, and then at some party some biologist picked her up and gave Don such a hard time over the fact it was actually a male cat. [laughter] So Page was distraught because of the name, so I said, “Take the l out.” So he became Keo. [laughs] So this sleek panther couldn’t catch anything. He was totally inept and clumsy. The only thing he’d catch is my ankles when I’d walk by. Whereas Julia got this little white puffball of an Angora-type kitten, adorable little thing, and Snowfire was a killer hunter. She would bring them back into the house. Julia’s room would get filled up with all kinds of pieces of mice. Oh, it was really pretty disgusting. Julia loved it, loved every bit of it. She always was very interested in this side of things. Page, on the other hand, was not. Now, they were three and a half years apart. Page was more socialized than Julia, and they didn’t have a lot in common when they were growing up. I’m so glad that now that they’re the best of friends, but just that age gap and the fact that Page was much more grownup for her age and Julia was still young and a tomboy meant that they really didn’t have a lot of interaction. They didn’t fight a lot either. Of course they fought, but not that much. I was a little worried they would stay that way. 85 They were very, very different, both very smart, but neither of them working up to their potential in school. We figured the best way you could rebel in an academic family was not work hard. Both Don and I had worked hard and studied a lot. They didn’t do that. Page loved clothes. Julia would want to wear the most inappropriate clothes to school. I bless the dress code, because then she had to wear regular clothes. But after they took the dress code away, she wouldn’t. The only thing that she was forced to do was she had to wear shoes to school. They did keep that. She lost more pairs of shoes. She’d kick them off, and it was horrible. I had to keep buying her shoes. When the dress code stopped, she had a favorite t-shirt, and it unraveled from the bottom up. It was a knit t-shirt. And she wanted to wear it when it was so midriff-baring that it wasn’t decent. We had quite a number of fights about that. Tracy: During this time, Don was getting his lab together and teaching and finding his way in the department. So I wonder how you guys balanced things, work and home, and your interests and his interests. What was that like? Kennedy: [00:53:05] At that time, people pretty well took it for granted that as a woman, you’d do everything in the house. Now, Don always helped with the dishes, he never stopped that. He was working so hard though and he was working all day Saturday, and it got to be kind of hard. When you’re home and you’re with the children all the time, you really want more of the husband taking over kind of thing. On the other hand, it was totally understandable to me, because his making his way was as important for me too. But it was not simple. I 86 remember I gave one birthday party without him, and after that I swore never again. He had to be at every birthday party. It was too much hard work. So I’d say that mostly I was okay with it. I liked it because Don didn’t have any interest in the financial stuff, and I’d been brought up to keep a checkbook et cetera, so I handled all of that. That’s always good for a woman to do. Nowadays they do it a lot, but in my day, not many women did. I was happy about that. I loved the entertaining that went with his job, and that was always fun. Sometimes, though, I can remember being so tired after dinner. We’d go into the living room to sit down. I can remember some visiting professor, he’s sitting opposite me and I’m trying to stay awake, and I put my elbow on my knee and leaned forward to him and said, “Tell me what you do,” with my eyes as wide open as possible. And I fell asleep while he was telling me. I was so embarrassed. [laughs] He was very nice about it, but I was very embarrassed. The other thing was that we did a lot of recruiting, more when Don became chairman, but we did a lot of recruiting. We had a Rangpur lime tree right outside the dining room window, and we would lean out to pick a lime in the dead of winter for the gin and tonic. This was, as we called it, our recruiting tree. Tracy: I can imagine being able to pick citrus fruit from your kitchen window is a good selling point. 87 So you mentioned that Don became department chair, and that actually happened relatively quickly. Kennedy: [00:55:32] It did. Tracy: The dates that I have are from 1964 to 1972, so he would have only been at Stanford for four years at that point when he became department chair. Don became chair of the department relatively quickly, and he would have been a very young department chair at the time. Being his wife, you would have been a young wife involved in the department. So I wonder how your age impacted your interactions with colleagues. Kennedy: [00:56:10] Of course I remember it. It was an amazing thing. He did become chair at a very young age. I think it was 1965 [it was], but I could be wrong. At any rate, either way, he was very young. He was still an associate professor, and that was very unusual. He’d been made an associate professor in 1963, so it was very unusual for an associate professor to be chair of the department. Grobstein had left, though, and everyone wanted him to be chair. He was the youngest chair at Stanford, and I was the youngest spouse. At that time, I don’t think there were any women chairs. I was the youngest wife of a chair. It was exciting, actually. I remember going to see Ann Sterling. Ann Sterling used to give a tea for the department chairs’ wives, and I remember going all dressed up in my little suit and maybe a little hat, even, and I was nervous about going there. And Ann Sterling was just a sweetheart. She always was. But I got there and it was my first sort of formal appearance as a department chair’s wife. 88 What it meant was a large increase in entertaining and in recruiting. We’d been doing it all along, but I was eager and interested in doing it, in being the department chair’s wife. The first thing was that Florence Twitty, who had been married to a former chair, suggested that she help me on my first what we called then high teas. We would have an annual party for the whole department, and we called them high teas. They really were cocktail parties. And I was so young that I wasn’t smart enough to know that it would be nice of me to let her help me, but I wanted to prove myself, because I was only thirty-one or thirty-two. So actually, I gave the best one, probably the best party I ever gave. We had it outside. For six months, I’d been baking bread, the only time in my life I ever baked bread, and I baked bread for six months, and then I’ve never done it again. [laughter] But I’d frozen loaves. So the food for the party were different kinds of loaves of bread, whole wheat and rye and white and everything, and I had crocks of liver pâté, chicken liver pâté, and grapes and all kinds of cheeses around. It was really a marvelous party. I was really proud of myself doing that. I loved to cook, that really was the thing that was the creative part of housekeeping I liked. I hated cleaning, absolutely hated it. Picking flowers, not gardening, but picking flowers and arranging them and cooking and entertaining were things that I found very creative. It was a good thing to have, because I could do it at home even when the kids were around, although that made it a little harder. [00:59:38] Not that this relates to being the chairman’s wife; however, it does relate to eating. There was one blissful 89 time when Don worked on the lobster’s nervous system, and we had a lobster every week after they’d finish working on it. And, of course, we couldn’t afford to buy it, and we were out here on the West Coast, and we had both grown up with it. Particularly I had grown up with it. So it was heaven. Then, unfortunately, he switched to cockroaches. [laughs] Tracy: So not the same culinary delight. [laughter] Kennedy: [01:00:09] What a thought. Tracy: You mentioned this tea that Ann Sterling had for department chairs’ wives, so it sounds as though, if not written down, there was still some sort of formal expectations of faculty wives and of department chairs’ wives and that you would participate in the department’s operations. That’s not quite the right word, but-Kennedy: [01:00:45] No, you’re right. You’re right. Absolutely. But also, I mean, I really liked that part of things. I did. I know Don wanted to have tea in his lab the way George Wald had had at Harvard. So I can remember that I brought the teacups. He wanted real teacups and everything like that. And I remember I got him all set up so that he could do that, which is not a formal part of the job of a chair’s wife, but it was part of being a wife and being involved in it. I was involved in Don’s lab a lot. We entertained the graduate students. I knew them and I liked them all. I also went in every Saturday, because by 1968 I had gotten a really good camera, and I was fascinated with photography. I loved taking pictures mainly of people. That’s what I liked best. Don had a darkroom, no one was using it on Saturdays, so I would come in. I didn’t develop my film, but I did 90 print all my pictures there, all the blowups there. That just made me more a part of the lab, too. It was a pleasure having that kind of interaction. I think that I was lucky, because although Don’s research and teaching were obviously separate, but I was still so very much a part of things. Not everybody felt that way, but I did. Tracy: Who wouldn’t have felt a part of things? Kennedy: [01:02:18] Well, I expect that people that didn’t feel they had an identity. I sometimes had that problem, too, but there were people that really felt they didn’t or felt that if, at the time, if your husband earned the money, that wasn’t your money. I always felt that if he was earning money, it was just as much my money because I was contributing just as much as he was in a very different way. I was allowing him to do his job free of a lot of different things. So I didn’t feel I truly lost my identity. I know so many of my friends would say, “I’m only so-and-so’s wife and only so-and-so’s mother.” There was certainly an aspect of that for me, but it didn’t weigh me down the way it would do other people. I think expectations in academic life were stronger that way, that women could work. It was not something I ever thought I could really do after the children came. It didn’t occur to me that I could work, so I was moderately satisfied. But a lot of faculty wives had had the expectation that they would be working, but they’d given it up to have children. I would say that I don’t mean that everybody was unhappy at all, but there were pressures on people that I wasn’t feeling at that time. I guess that’s what I’d say. And I was enjoying what I did. 91 Tracy: Thinking about the other colleagues in the Biology Department, their wives, were you encountering some of them, that they had themselves had hoped to have an academic career? When you said that some of the women had expected to work but weren’t able, it made me wonder were some other wives also hoping to have an academic career. Kennedy: [01:04:11] I couldn’t give you the specifics. People I was closest too weren’t really like that. And actually, with the Hanawalts, Jo Hanawalt worked in Don’s lab as his technician, so it wasn’t precisely academic, but she was working full-time. Sometimes there were women that did work that way. It isn’t so much that the biology people were that way, it’s just that I encountered it. At different times in my life, I would encounter the unhappiness. I might also encounter unhappiness in people that weren’t involved in academic life. They didn’t know what they wanted, it was more that the expectation would be that the woman might work in academic life at that time, just more, not totally by a long shot. Mostly the expectation was you wouldn’t. Tracy: Did other faculty wives embrace or not embrace these unspoken expectations of how you would be contributing to your husband’s career? Kennedy: [01:05:34] Not really. I can’t even think of an answer. Well, it’s hard to say, but none of my really close friends seemed to have quite that kind of feeling. Also Anne Ehrlich worked at her husband’s lab, and she became much more academic than she was in the beginning. I did have a friend in the community who much later got cancer, and when she was telling me about the cancer, she told me that she felt that this 92 happened to her because she did not follow what she wanted to do. She did not get a job teaching. Her husband and her children wanted her not to work, and she didn’t. And she felt that that was actually why she got the cancer. So you can see this ran pretty deep in some people. Tracy: When Don’s name was presented as a possibility for department chair before he was actually appointed, do you remember having conversations with Don about if he would take it, what it would mean, how it would impact both of your lives? Kennedy: [01:06:56] No, no, no, no. It just seemed a natural progression, you know, “Okay, fine.” The chair was rotating too. It didn’t rotate all that much then, but it had been rotating, so it wasn’t any kind of a lifetime commitment or anything, although he did hold it for a long time. Tracy: So, Jeanne, one last thing I wanted to ask about was, Jing Lyman [Elizabeth Lyman], in her oral history, talked about a faculty wives’ organization. I wanted to know about your involvement in it and what it did as an organization. Kennedy: [01:07:34] Well, it was called the Faculty Wives’ Club, that’s true. It later became Stanford Women’s Club. Anyway, they later incorporated administrators and other staff. It was such a help because they were very nice to newcomers. Your first year, you were a newcomer, and it was a way to get to know a great many of the other wives. It was just booming at that time, a lot of young people coming in. Now, as with an awful lot of women’s organizations, there are fewer and fewer young people doing it because so many women now work. The organization is still going strong, though, and 93 it’s been around a long time. It was a huge help to me to have that and to see what was going on with it. I don’t recall that I participated a huge amount, but I certainly went to different meetings and enjoyed the companionship and meeting people. Tracy: So was it more socially oriented, in that you would go to meetings and just meet other wives from campus and interact with each other? What were the meetings like? Kennedy: [01:08:40] Well, that was one type of meeting. There were others based around people’s interests, you know, things like a book club, a sewing club, a knitting club, things like that. But the main part, of course, was to sit around and talk. There were speakers often and things like that. It’s still going on somewhat the same, actually. There were dance groups, ballroom dancing. That was fun. Tracy: This will obviously become a more important theme when we think about Don’s and your trajectory at Stanford, but I wonder as you were at Stanford longer and Don had become department chair, and you assumed more responsibilities in helping him with entertaining and recruiting, I wonder if there was ever any sense of a hierarchy among faculty wives and if you ever had a sense of yourself moving up. Kennedy: [01:09:44] Well, I don’t really think so, not me. You did rise in the hierarchy as your husband rose. Your status was that of your husband’s. But since it was his, I didn’t take it terribly serious because it wasn’t mine. 94 Tracy: For the Faculty Wives’ Club, were there officers or women involved in it that were helping organize and do these events? Did you ever become involved at that level in the organization? Kennedy: [01:10:25] No, I never did, as I can recall. [End of Session 2 of 6, interview with Jeanne D. Kennedy, June 11, 2014] 95 96 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PRESIDENTIAL FAMILIES AND STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECTS INTERVIEWEE: JEANNE D. KENNEDY INTERVIEWER: ALLISON TRACY DATE OF INTERVIEW: JULY 2, 2014 SESSION: 3 OF 6 Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is July 2, 2014. I’m here with Jeanne Kennedy to conduct our third session of our oral history interview for the Stanford Historical Society. Jeanne, last time we spoke, we were talking about Stanford after your arrival in the 1960s. So I wanted to pick up there and start with your experience with the Stanford Committee on Art. Can you tell me a little bit about how you initially got involved? Kennedy: [00:00:38] Yes. It actually was called Stanford Committee for Art. What happened was I had been in the docent program in Syracuse, and I wanted to do the docent program at what is now the Cantor Museum. It was just the Stanford Museum then. It was an early program. It was just starting. The woman running it had us write reports. I know I did one on Japanese woodblock prints--Ukiyo-e. I loved working on that as I loved being in the Syracuse docent program, as well. I started there in 1961. 97 What it led to was a whole series of things that I started to do with the Committee for Art. I helped out on receptions and got to know some really nice people there, including Margaret Dilg, who became a close friend and figured later in my life with Hoover House. I held several offices: corresponding secretary, treasurer, and eventually chair. I was involved in the first Treasure Market. That was when I was treasurer, and I was also treasurer of that Treasure Market. When I became chairman, the two things that I was responsible for getting started--I had forgotten to say when Lorenz Eitner came in, he did not want to have the original docent program and he killed it, much to our dismay. He didn’t want volunteers trying to educate the public, which I could understand, but at the same time, I was sorry. So when I became chair, he wanted the Committee for Art to start a bookstore for him, so I held it hostage. I said, “I’ll start a bookstore for you if you let us have a docent program.” He wasn’t too pleased, but he ended up doing it. The bookstore we started changed from being not just a bookstore, but it sold all kinds of jewelry and things that usual museum stores do. The original one was where the art gallery is now, the old building next to Annenberg. As that moved through its different phases, when the museum reopened after the earthquake, they put in a professional store. [Now disbanded.] The docent program, however, has thrived and is still thriving after what would have been somewhere between 1968 and 1970. It’s getting close to its fiftieth anniversary, it looks like to me. It’s amazing how it’s grown and 98 how well it does. The docents are extraordinarily professional, so I have been very proud that I had done that. It was an exciting time at Stanford in art, because getting Eitner in, who was a famed scholar, [was important]. He went on to bring Al Elsen [Albert E. Elsen] in. They were usually at total odds because they disagreed on everything, but both of them in their way were incredible scholars. It was Al Elsen that really brought the Rodins to Stanford and was responsible for interesting the Cantors, who had the collection and who donated the collection to Stanford. [00:04:17] When I became treasurer of the Committee for Art, I was lucky enough to have learned how to keep accounting books when I was in the Junior League and they made me treasurer there. I’ve always thought that to become a treasurer of an organization, you actually have control over an awful lot of really important things. Tracy: So the committee was primarily then associated with the museum itself. It wasn’t a campus-wide. Its interests were really primarily to the museum. Kennedy: [00:05:02] The Committee for Art was just like any other museum membership, totally devoted to the museum and building a whole core of volunteers who still do all kinds of things. The Treasure Market was so important to the community. Moderately recently they decided that they wouldn’t have it, and they called a lot of us former presidents to meet with them. It may be that that was about six years ago. I’m not quite sure of the timing. At that time, they talked to us--Sandy Dennis and Joan Hong--and they asked us if we would help them explain to 99 the community why they weren’t going to have it again. The board had made that decision at Tom Seligman’s [Thomas K. Seligman] request, I think. I said, no, I couldn’t help them because I didn’t understand it, and I thought we should continue it. Marian Arnstein and I, we had quite a bit to do with the fact that it did get continued. We wrote a long paper for Joan and Sandy to present back to the board of its importance to the community, both in terms of the community relationship--because people loved the Treasure Market and flooded into it--but also the volunteers that spent a huge amount of time on it. It cements them closer with the museum. So the Treasure Market is very important. Tracy: Did they continue it after? Kennedy: [00:06:31] Oh, yes, it’s been continued. It’s still going on. Nobody ever knew that it was going to not be going on. Tracy: You were involved in the committee up until the 1990s, and I wonder how you saw the museums grow and change over that time. Kennedy: [00:06:53] Oh, well, that was a fascinating thing to watch because of the push and pull between Lorenz Eitner and Al Elsen. Now, Lorenz was an incredible, incredible guy. He did a huge lot of good, but he did not like contemporary art in the slightest. So the changes that happened have been actually a shift to contemporary art, and when the museum was closed for so long and then reopened, it has some absolutely marvelous contemporary art now. Back when I was first working on the Committee for Art, we were lucky enough to have Diebenkorn here as artist-in-residence and also 100 Pomodoro [Arnaldo Pomodoro]. We had shows for Diebenkorn, for Keith Boyle, who was on the art faculty, for Frank Lobdell also on the art faculty. That was quite early on in the early 1960s. It was fascinating to see these artists. Thiebaud’s [exhibition] was particularly interesting because it was all of his figures that he had done, and we invited all the local people portrayed down to be there at the opening of it and to the reception. All the people that had sat for their portraits were people pretty well known in the San Francisco area. It was an incredible thing to see, and that was long before he was anywhere near as well known as he is now. Same for Diebenkorn too. I left out the most important one of all. Nathan Oliveira had a show, too. Don and I met Nate and Mona way back when they first came. We’d come a little before they had. And I remember going to Nate’s studio downtown. It was a great big empty theater, and he had a huge painting of an empty stage set. I never saw that painting again until many years later I found it in I think the National Gallery of Art. It might not be, though, because I’ve been in an awful lot of museums. But to see it again as an old friend. [It is now in the Anderson Collection at Stanford.] At Nate’s show, back then along with Diebenkorn and Keith Boyle, they all had done figure painting. So they were all together at the three shows, came along seriatim, as I recall. I actually bought a drawing from Nate Oliveira. I also bought one from Keith Boyle. But Nate was incredible, and we stayed friends all the way up until his death. 101 Tracy: I don’t know if it’s still up, but the last time I was at Cantor, they had one of Nate’s paintings. It was a blue figure looking off to the side, and way in the distance you can just see this little hint of red right at the top. I just remember being really mesmerized by the painting. Kennedy: [00:09:59] Oh, his figure paintings are amazing. I remember at one point, we had some friends that had some money that were interested in his art, so Nate said, sure, bring them up to his studio. At that time, he was doing hawk wings. I tell you, it was amazing. I have photographs somewhere, because that was when I was really into photography. I have some great photographs of his work. I never did anything with them, but it was so much fun to see his brushes and glasses he kept them in and stuff like that. Really an outstanding talent. I’m so glad that they’re building the Windhover. They have a building that’s going to be dedicated to him. I’m not sure if it is open yet. Tracy: What did you enjoy about working on the committee? What kept you involved for over thirty years? [laughs] Kennedy: [00:11:14] Well, I loved art. I think I said before that I had never taken any courses in art, though my mother begged me to. It turned out that that was what I was really interested in. Along with many of my friends, I did not like contemporary art. I actually had a moment where I walked through a literal door and grasped it. It was when the Andersons had their show at the Committee for Art. They had a big show, and one of the pieces was a doorway with a door that stood open. For some reason, I always associate the fact that I suddenly “got it” when I walked through that door with 102 contemporary art. Not that I mean that I like everything--I don’t--but I understand it so much better, and it’s something now that excites me really more than anything else. And I took courses from Lorenz. He was, as I said, an incredible teacher. He allowed us to do that. I learned so much all the way along. It was exciting to be part of something like that, helping to build a museum, helping to bring in money. At that time, our Treasure Market was a huge moneymaker for them, and they didn’t have much in the way of getting money except donations. Now, I have to say that after Seligman came in, the donations really rolled in. Everybody really got behind the museum, and you see the rooms named for all sorts of the different people that are so interested in art, the Freidenrichs, the Meiers, the Gibbonses. Lots of these people; I’m not even naming them all. So it’s that excitement of watching something that you’re really interested in, always have to learn about, building and growing. When I go to that place, I’m always discovering something new. So maybe eight years ago, I saw their Northwest Collection--Fred and Marcia Rehmus’ collection--that has a lot in it, like some beautiful baskets. It’s in this room sort of upstairs and off somewhere. I had not ever seen it before. So there’s always something new to see there. Their exhibitions are done not just as exhibitions, but as learning experiences because the educational side is so important. Most any show you go to, you’re bound to learn something fascinating about it. Being able to be 103 in on the inside of it, to see how things grew, to help make it part of the community--all these things were pretty exciting for me. Tracy: The museum seems unique in terms of a university having such a prominent museum with such a large collection, and a prominent collection. I wonder about the relationship between Stanford and the museum and how they benefit each other. Kennedy: [00:14:28] Well, the thing is, in universities, anything that is peripheral to the academic side is like the lesser among equals. The hospital, for example, is not even part of the university. So for the art museum, the head of the Art Department was the head of the museum, which meant, of course, that the Art Department is going to be the most important thing to the person running both of them. Even though Lorenz did a great job with the museum--though, as I say, we had some differences with him--it’s bound to be that that’s going to be the stepchild. That’s going to be what’s left out. The museum is a great learning tool for students, and as time has gone by, particularly since it’s reopened, it’s become somehow much more student-used (I may be wrong about that, though). After the first earthquake, when the museum was totally damaged and in total disrepair, the students went down to the basement and would pick up the fragments of this great Greek collection with pottery and all these things. They’d pick up the shards, and they acted like archaeologists in it and would put them together. So the students really have always been part it. 104 But I would say it’s like the hospital in a way. Of course, I’ve worked in both, so that’s what made me think of it, but it’s not as important as the whole academic experience. I would say that the museum pulls more students in, but then medical students have to be in the hospital, too, so I’m not quite sure how to say that. [00:16:32] I don’t actually know that Stanford’s museum is better than other museums with other major universities. We don’t know enough about them to be able to say, but I’ve always been very proud of Stanford’s collection. Tracy: Were there ever any moments in terms of serving on the committee of an insider-outsider tension, of being “learned” in art and maybe being not so learned or not a professional working in art. Were there ever any of those tensions? Kennedy: [00:17:18] I think I see what you mean. Well, the first of them was when Lorenz came in and he did not want non-art professionals to be a docent. Eventually, he realized that we didn’t have the money to hire the docents. As they went on, eventually they got a staff member hired to help with all of that. So, as I said, there were tensions, but mostly none of us resented it because we were just happy to be a part of it. It became pretty obvious if you can’t have staff members and you need to get things done--the bookstore was run by volunteers and the docent program and so forth. So I wasn’t really conscious of it. I think the one time it came up was when we had a major event where we asked all kinds of people in the art world to come to Stanford. I don’t remember now what it was, probably some big exhibition. I 105 think it was when I was chair. I was responsible for getting people to host these eminent professionals. We had a big gun come. I’ve forgotten his name [Thomas Hoving], but he ran, the Metropolitan. So, this big gun came, and Al Elsen had a fit because we had him staying at the house of a quite young woman, and he didn’t think it was eminent enough for him. [laughs] So there was that kind of tension. I refused to take it away from her, however, and the guy had a great time. Everybody did. But small things like that that would happen, where there were tensions. Then another tension was that Lorenz wanted us out of the museum, and we didn’t know that. He announced it at a board meeting that I was chairing. He announced that he was going to move us into Tower House and away from the museum. It was a huge shock to all of us, because we valued our small office in the museum and being able to come and go in the museum. I’m happy to say the Committee for Art is back in the museum again, and that’s really wonderful. Tower House was a wonderful place, it’s beautiful, but it was just a long way away. Tracy: It’s completely on the opposite side of campus from the museum. Kennedy: [00:20:03] I’ll tell you one thing, though, it made the most incredible setting for a press party for Treasure Market. This must have been the second Treasure Market. We had Margaret Dilg who was just a genius at this. She arranged all this wonderful antique furniture, all the beautiful things that we’d gotten from people. She arranged them all over Tower House, so the whole place was filled with it. Margaret and I wore antique dresses that were also 106 going to be for sale. We had a press party that was not to be believed. We sent out treasure maps, because it was Treasure Market, and we sent them out with chocolate gold coins in the invitations to the reporters. [00:20:48] We had, of course, great food and drink for the reporters, and it was simply fantastic. That was back in the day when you could do things like that. Those days really aren’t there anymore. We still have incredible openings et cetera, but the organization has to be a little bit small to be able to arrange that, I think. Tracy: How did your involvement in the committee change or evolve over the years as your place at Stanford changed and evolved over the years? Kennedy: [00:21:21] Well, the pinnacle for me was, of course, when I was chair for two years, 1968 to 1970. That was the time that I was able to have the biggest effect. After that, I was, of course, interested and I went to the openings and all of that kind of thing, but I didn’t actually have a role, except at Treasure Market I was usually treasurer. I didn’t have a major role, and I was going on to do other things. The museum was always part of my life; it still is, and it very much pleases me. Tracy: So then in 1961, you started our own indexing business. What gave you the idea or the inspiration to do indexing? Kennedy: [00:22:22] Well, at a party we met Jess and Laura Bell, and Jess was the head of the Stanford Press, the director of the Stanford Press. He was talking at some dinner party about how hard it was to get indexers. I thought that very likely I would be a good indexer. It really charmed me, the idea of doing indexing for the Stanford Press. I had no idea how to do it. I asked Jess 107 about it, and he, in his usual gruff way, said, “Oh, well, you can come and talk to me about it.” So I went to his office and talked to him about it, at which point he said he couldn’t waste time trying to train somebody that didn’t already know how to do it, and he didn’t want to do that. I was really disappointed because I really wanted to do it. About a month later, he called me up and said, “I can’t do it unless you do an index so I can see how you do it, but it has to be for an index that’s already been done, so I can compare it.” And I was appalled. I said, “I can’t do that. I can’t do that for something that’s already been done.” I could see his point, so we kind of left it up in the air whether or not I would. And shortly thereafter, he called me and he said, “Jeanne, forget about that. I need you to do it an index on our Japanese court poetry book.” I said, “Well, what about the fact that you’ve never seen my indexing?” He said, “Well, the editor is Linda Brownrigg, and she’s going to help you.” I said, “Great. I’m happy to do it.” It was the best of all possible worlds, because Linda was a great editor and became a very, very close friend for many years. She taught me what indexes needed. I have an innate ability to catalog, which is one of the things you need for indexing, but I didn’t know what things were important. Well, in fact, everything’s important. [laughter] It doesn’t have to just be the main theme in the book. 108 That book changed my life, too, because it was fascinating. Japanese court poetry about the tankas versus the haikus, it was really incredibly interesting. That was in 1961 when I started that. Luckily, I really did a good job, because Linda was right there, working right with me, and I was able to talk to her about it. She would work on her editing while I was doing my indexing. The book really changed some of my appreciation for art. I should say there are a lot of those poets who have been later enshrined in these woodblock prints. I started to really look at the woodblock prints more and to understand them better as well as the whole ukiyo-e--floating world--that showed that. I still have some woodblocks of the poets, including some of the translations of their poetry. Then after that, it was a good index and I really had learned rigorously all the things that were necessary. I couldn’t have had better training, so I went on to index a lot of Stanford Press books. I got to be quite in demand, because the editors really don’t want to do the indexing. It is timeconsuming, and it can be very boring. It’s also is the best way to learn about a book. A lot of people felt that you couldn’t do a book you didn’t know, if you weren’t a scholar. A lot of the professors felt how indexers can do that if they are not a scholar in that subject. Once again, tension between the nonprofessional/professional, except I was a professional indexer. I had a great way to do it. If they were Stanford professors who lived nearby, I would ask them to come over and discuss with me what they wanted in their index. Not that I was going to pay a lot of attention to it, you 109 understand, because I knew what should be in the index, but I wanted them to feel they had input. So they would tell me all their ideas. Well, I certainly paid attention to what they said, but I knew it wouldn’t probably affect it, and it usually didn’t. Then at the very end, then I would call them with questions. That would make them feel better. It also would help me if I had a question and called them as I was indexing. And then they would give me the information, and at the very end I would ask them to come over and go over the index with me. Now, at that time, indexes were handwritten and hand-done, so all my indexes were in pencil. Then a typesetter set it from my pencil stuff. Nothing was typed. By the time they finished, the authors were thrilled with the index, and they had gone over every single thing in the index. So actually, it was a very good technique for making people happy with my indexing. I went on; I have done books from Princeton, from Yale. I can’t even think where I’ve done them from. I did a lot for Stanford, even Oxford and UC Berkeley. I did a lot of Stanford books. Well, of course, Paul and Ann Ehrlich are good friends, so I always did their books. I did Eleanor Maccoby and Carol Jacklin’s book Psychology of Sex Differences. I did Herb Packer’s book, The Limits of the Criminal Sanction. Oh, my gosh, I did a second one after that for him. That [the first one] book also was a mind-changer about drugs and what we should be doing about them. His whole point was that victimless crimes should not be illegal. People shouldn’t 110 be jailed for victimless crimes. I think the book was done in 1968, so he was way before his time. Well, he totally convinced me. Many years later, I said to my daughter something about the book that I’d indexed. She’s a lawyer. She said, “You indexed Herb Packer’s book? My goodness, I didn’t know that. That’s a classic for us.” I was very proud of that, and I was proud that he really liked my index and wanted me to do more. Herb was really a great mind, and it was so sad what happened to him after he had a stroke. He had a stroke, and then he committed suicide. His mind was so great, and he couldn’t bear not being able to talk or do the things he had been able to do. What a great man he was. The Brower and Miner book was my start. Robert Brower was a Stanford guy. I did the Hilgard books too. What I really remember, though, was there was a young professor named [name redacted] in the English Department, and I did his book on [an American author]. I prepared for it by reading all of the stuff that she’d written, which was just a joy to do. When I indexed it, I even could catch things like one time he said a heroine had blonde hair, and she had black hair. I was able to catch things like that, which usually indexers don’t do. I was thrilled with that book. I just thought, “Oh, this is just great.” To my great dismay, after it came out, it turned out that he had plagiarized a lot of it. Tracy: Oh, no! Kennedy: [00:29:38] Needless to say, he left Stanford under quite a cloud. So I have now indexed a book that was plagiarized. [laughter] Tracy: You weren’t considered an accomplice? 111 Kennedy: [00:29:50] Hardly. Hardly. I wouldn’t have the knowledge to know. [laughter] The interesting thing is that you can really index anything. I indexed a book on econometrics without any notion of what any of it meant, absolutely any of it. The guy that wrote it was astounded. Tracy: Having done indexing myself, I just wonder did you find that there were books that were easier to index than others? Was there ever a book that came across at your desk that you thought, “Oh, this is going to be a pain to index”? Kennedy: [00:30:28] Well, econometrics wasn’t easy. Tracy: Right. [laughter] Kennedy: [00:30:32] It depended on my interest in the subject, really. But the easiest books to index are the ones that don’t have much to index. That’s not where you get your reward and where you get to learn, so the ones that I liked best were subjects I was interested in and fascinated by. I have to say that I did some books that were, I found, quite boring. Psychology of Sex Differences was fascinating. So when I was absorbed by the book, then, of course, I was learning as I went through it, and I loved that. When I was less than interested, it became more rote. But the actual exercise of doing it has its own rewards. You’ve got to really not mind detailed work. I still try to do the monstrous Sudoku in the newspaper on Sundays, and Allan keeps saying, “Why do you do it?” Then he’s decided it’s because it’s there. I think it’s the same kind of thing that kept me really indexing things for so long. And it was nice because I brought in a little money. Don and I did not have much money. I tried always to use it for something special 112 and extra. It did have to go for groceries a few times, but then a lot of times I was able to buy something particular for us, for the girls, or for the house, or do something different with it, and that was just really nice. I could do it at home when the girls were home. It was the perfect thing to do for me, and I learned a lot and I really did become good at it, which made me so proud. I still have so many of the books I did. Tracy: In a given month that would you index, how much time did it take? Kennedy: [00:32:22] They would give me three weeks if I were lucky, or two weeks to do it. You couldn’t do that kind of hard concentrated work constantly, you know, I had to have time off in between. I certainly did a huge amount, but I would get it done whatever the time deadline was, because it had to be done. Three weeks was the usual amount, which is way too little. The point is, as you know, if you’re indexing, you can’t index from galleys. The pagination has to be finished. So that means that then you’re the one holding up the publishing, so the time was always tight. So I had to really concentrate on the work. I could not do it day-in and day-out, believe me. When my father was quite ill with cancer and staying with us, I would go to the library to index, and at that time, to take my mind off things. I was trying to see how fast I could do it to see if I could get up to ten dollars an hour. I was usually [paid] by the index, so your amount per hour would be very little or a lot, depending on how fast you were. So I decided to try to see if I could get to ten dollars an hour, and I worked really hard. But I was tense and my posture would be screwed up. I really wrecked my neck so that I couldn’t do embroidery anymore or needlepoint anymore. 113 I know it was all the tension of my father’s dying. But I could still index, I just couldn’t do it with bad posture. Tracy: You said you did it by hand with pencil. I wonder if, in the fifteen years that you were doing it professionally, were there any big technological changes? Was it you’d be sent copies of the finished laid-out manuscript? Kennedy: [00:34:20] For me, doing it that way was not a problem. Later, computers came in, but I wasn’t doing them then--I can’t remember when I stopped precisely. Tracy: I have 1976. Kennedy: [00:34:35] Oh, yes. That’s right. However, computers had not come in. What happened then was, of course, that everybody decided the computer could do a great job. You just run the computer and pick out the things. It’s not true. You can’t. You need the human mind, you need some sort of indication as to what’s important, what’s an important mention, what’s not an important mention, and it’s impossible to do it by computer. I think in the end they asked me to get a couple of my indexes typed, and I don’t know how I did that, because I was not able to type at that time. [laughs] So maybe somebody typed it from my handwritten stuff. But usually they just typeset. All these places just typeset from my handwritten [cards]. Tracy: You’d already talked a little bit about having spending money--that most of the time it was you used it to do something nice, though sometimes it did contribute to the household income. Even if it was just a little bit coming in, what did it mean to actually be making some income from the work that you were doing? 114 Kennedy: [00:35:45] Well, I was always of a mind that whoever made the money, the other person was doing their part, so it belonged to each. I did not feel that my husband made the money. I always felt that it was my money as well. So though I loved extra money coming in and I loved being able to provide it, I didn’t feel, “Oh, finally I’m doing something to help,” because I always felt that my contribution was equal to Don’s. Because of what I did, he could do what he did. So actually, the money was just good because we were getting the money. And I loved learning a new profession like that. I did like that very much. But I didn’t have that feeling. I know many women back then did. That doesn’t mean that when I did eventually get a job I wasn’t thrilled to be having a salary, because I was, but I did really feel that the money was always my contribution as well as his. Tracy: Did you have to advertise or was it just word of mouth? Kennedy: [00:36:57] No, totally word of mouth, absolutely. Well, the Stanford Press gave out my name to their authors, so I didn’t need to. Then the other presses would do that. Sometimes the Stanford authors would be working with these other presses and they’d find out about me. I had to turn some down. I had to turn down one from David Kennedy [Birth Control in America]. I think it was on the origin of Planned Parenthood, and I’m trying to remember the name of the famous woman [Margaret Sanger], but I can’t. At any rate, I had to turn it down, and I have never been so sorry. I just simply couldn’t do it in the time I had. I’m terribly sorry about that, because David is an incredible scholar. 115 Tracy: You said in the later years you weren’t doing it as much as you had been when you first started. So the date I have on here is 1976. Was there a big reason that that’s the cutoff point, or were you just uninterested in continuing in 1976? Do you remember why there was kind of an end to it? Kennedy: [00:38:04] Well, yes, I do remember. I remember that when I finished being chair of the Committee for Art in 1970, I’d been doing indexing while doing these others things, but that was a big job, you know. You run a museum membership organization. I realized that I was feeling antsy, and I knew I wanted to do something more. I don’t know that I had actually thought I wanted to do office work and paperwork, but I definitely wanted to do something more. So I started to look around for other things that I could do. Also, up to that point, everything had just fallen in my lap, one thing after the other that I was interested in doing, wanted to do, dying to do, and suddenly that didn’t happen. And I thought, “Yes, I have to start doing other stuff myself.” Now, I’d started feeling that somewhere in 1970. So I remember that I would watch for different things that would happen. Paul Ehrlich was always a good friend, and he knew that I knew about accounting and zero population growth. Their books had gotten into terrible shape and they weren’t handling the money right, and he asked me to go in and help on that. Now, obviously, I wasn’t paid for that, and I didn’t know enough to call it pro bono then, but I was happy to volunteer doing it. I did, and I was a big help. Then later, Paul was having problems with his university expense accounts and the things that came in--hard to read, hard to understand--so I 116 did that for him for quite a while, again without pay. But these things were important to me and I was learning a lot, and these were all around figures. I like figures. I’m not a mathematician, I probably said that, but I like figures, so I enjoyed doing that. Then Bill Kaufmann was setting up his publishing company, and Bill had been a big interest in our lives. We had known Bill since Syracuse days. He’d always been in publishing. He published for the Scientific American, and then after that, he developed his own publishing firm. Don had done some books for the Scientific American with Bill. I’d indexed them, of course. And there had been a lot of other interactions. We were close friends. So he set up his own publishing company in Los Altos. He had gotten a business school student in to do his books, and then the student couldn’t do anything anymore. They were letting people--interns--go out to do things. So I went in to do it. I have to tell you, I was very happy to find that the business school guy didn’t know anything about keeping books. [laughs] These are still pre-computer days, so this was all done by hand. I did know how to set up books, so I was able to set up his books. Now, I knew how to set up simple books, but a friend who was also my accountant, George Wentworth, would help me a lot with this too. So it was fun. Bill couldn’t pay me at first. Then eventually he said, “Look, I’d like to pay you. I could afford to pay you five dollars an hour.” I said, “Bill, I’m not going to work for five dollars an hour. What I will do is, you pay me for half my time at ten dollars an hour, and I will work the other half for free, so that way I can say I earn ten dollars an hour.” Well, he 117 was game for that, and that’s what we did. I did that for a while until really I wanted him to get somebody else in to do it. Once I got it set up and going, I lost interest in it. And he did need somebody to really spend more time, and I didn’t have the time. But these were the things that I was doing, trying to work up to what else I might want to do. Tracy: Let’s jump back a little bit and talk about your experience of the unrest on campus in the late 1960s, because many well-known events happened on campus, and certainly you would have experienced some of that as a member of the community. One thing that I had specific questions about was the trial for Bruce Franklin [H. Bruce Franklin]. Kennedy: [00:42:40] Well, let me go back to some of the unrest that happened before that. Of course we were deeply concerned. I think Don being a young faculty member, we were very concerned about the students in this. We really saw their point, but we also didn’t condone the violence or the breaking of windows--things like the rock that went through Dick Lyman’s house, or any of those things. That was terrible. But nonetheless, we really believed in the students and we wanted to help them. I remember one night we learned somehow--I don’t know how--that there was some student rioting going on Page Mill Road and that the police were being called. So we went down to see what we could do to help the students. The sad thing was that the minute they caught sight of Don, they started saying, “Faculty pig! Faculty pig!” [laughs] It was so distressing, because we were there to help. Didn’t stop us from staying there to see if we could do anything, which actually we couldn’t, but we really wanted to show 118 some solidarity with them. It didn’t seem to work too well. [00:43:54] That’s probably the clearest memory I have of my deep involvement, but there was an Encina sit-in. Dick Lyman was provost then, and Pitzer [Kenneth Pitzer] was president then. Pitzer was away, and Dick called Don and he said, “Don, the sheriff’s deputies are going to be moving in in the morning to take the students out.” Now, he called us at about six at night. “I need your help, because I’ve got to get faculty down there to stand head-to-head with these deputy sheriffs, because we don’t want anything to happen to hurt our students, and we need that help.” So Don was up all night and I was up all night, calling people and getting people lined up to go. The next morning, they went down there, and they did, indeed, have a faculty member opposite each of these. They were pretty young guys, most of them, and they were nervous. They had real weapons, unlike our campus police. It was quite scary, and they were fingering their billy clubs. That was a very strong memory. How they got the kids out from the sit-ins, of course, has been documented in many other places. My memory of that, and then Don coming home to tell me about it, it was just like, “Oh, my goodness, this is incredible.” As I said, Pitzer was out of town, and there was this incredible uproar about it. Dick had to be the one making all the decisions and doing everything, and Don had his part in it. Well, to the horror of the general university community, it turned out that Pitzer had gotten back that night, the night before [the sit-in], and hadn’t notified anybody. He just went to bed and took no part in it. He abdicated his responsibility, and he knew what was going on, of course, because he’d 119 been informed. So this was something that very few of us could forgive Pitzer for. As you know, he only lasted eighteen months. Tracy: Dick called Don to ask him for his help. Was it that he was one of many, many, many faculty members that were called, or was there more of a relationship with Dick and Don that he would have reached out to Don for that? Kennedy: [00:46:36] Well, we’d been friends with the Lymans. Of course, we’d been friends with lots of other people, too, but we’d been really friends with them for a long time. We visited them in their Salvatierra house, and they visited us. So we were really good friends. Don taught the beginning courses, the big beginning courses. He was an extremely popular teacher, so we had a lot of contacts with students. A lot of the students knew him. A lot really thought well of him--again, they did call him “faculty pig,” but they thought well of him, so I’m sure that had a great deal to do with it. And Don knew other professors, too, and was well known. Don at that time, of course, was chair of Biology. So it was a natural for Dick to call and get Don to do the calling. I’m sure Dick did some. They must have split the calling. [00:47:26] But he would be a natural person for him to have gone to. Tracy: Jeanne, you’d mentioned that with the student protest out on Page Mill Road, Dick reaching out to Don to stand toe-to-toe with the police that were going to come in. There was a commitment to protecting students; even though you didn’t agree with their methods used in the protests, even though 120 you disagreed with that, you still felt it was important to protect the students. Was that a common feeling amongst the faculty at the time? Kennedy: [00:48:06] As far as I know, it was. I don’t remember. I mean, anyone that teaches students, well, they’re not your kids, of course, but you are protective of young people as you get to be more and more adult. I think it’s a natural reaction. Some people probably weren’t at all, and the more conservative people, oh, my gosh, I mean like the conservative trustees, oh, they were so dead against it. And there were some conservative professors, I’m sure they were dead against it. Most of the people we knew, they didn’t want the students to be trashing. They didn’t approve of that, but they definitely wanted to protect them when they could, though there were times when you can’t. If they’re going to get arrested, they’re going to get arrested. It isn’t that we were silly about it, but there is that wanting to protect the students. We wanted to give them their rights for protest, not have that stifled, while stopping them from doing real damage to people and to things. Tracy: With the things that were happening, like the fire in Wally’s office and so many of these events, how did you hear about them? The next day, would you get phone calls from other people? Would you see newspaper articles come out? I’m just curious how you would hear about these events as they were happening. Kennedy: [00:49:34] Not that I remember specifically how I heard, but you must know that an academic community is about the fastest way to get any rumor around very quickly. You do hear very quickly about anything. I don’t really 121 know how, but we would hear right away. It was usually not something that you had to wait to see in the newspaper. Oh, yes, that destruction of Wally’s library, oh that was horrible. All of us just loved him, and Don and I felt so lucky that we knew him. We loved Wally, and he was wonderful to us always. I guess he was to many, many people, and every one of them felt that he had a special regard for them. He did give us a horseshoe for us to put up in our house for luck. I still can never remember--he told me at the time--whether you’re supposed to put it facing up to hold in the good luck for the house, or have it facing down to shower out the good luck on the house. But nonetheless, we have a horseshoe that he gave us. He and Ann were just so terrific. I mean most everybody had really wonderful feelings about Wally, so when this happened, it was just a campus tragedy. To see his academic stuff go up, oh, [it was] awful. Tracy: There was another big event, as I’d mentioned earlier--Bruce Franklin and his trial and eventual firing. As some background, Bruce had been involved with student protests, and the administration felt that he was inciting students in a way that he should not be, and brought charges against him. Don, at the time, was on the Faculty Advisory Committee, which oversaw things like tenure review and different things dealing with faculty and tenure, but then also was responsible at this time for overseeing Bruce’s trial on campus. So Don was very involved in that unfolding. I wonder if you could talk about your memories of what happened and any repercussions you and Don faced because of his involvement in the trial. 122 Kennedy: [00:51:46] Now, that was just an amazing thing. I don’t think Don was chairing the Advisory Board, but it’s possible that he was. At any rate, he was picked to run the committee of the Advisory Board that was to hear the case. And the people that were on it with him, Pief Panofsky, Lee Bach, Dave Hamburg, Dave Mason [00:52:27] Sandy Dornbusch, and Robert McAfee Brown. Tracy: And Don, so there were seven. Kennedy: [00:52:34] Yes. Right. So at any rate, we knew way ahead of time that Don was going to be doing this; it was going to start in September. One of the things that we had to do was have no social contact with anybody in administration once the trial started. Well, I told you we were good friends with the Lymans, and the last time we really saw them, I gave a party. I gave a party because the small closet outside our bedroom, I decided would have to be Don’s closet, and I fixed it up for him with shelves and two poles so it was layered shirts and pants. It was very funny because it was a small closet. So I gave a closet-warming party for it, and that was the last time that we could see the Lymans. People brought all sorts of funny things to go in his closet. I remember that very distinctly, though, because that was a big party, and I knew it was the last time, and we were quite sentimental. I know we were; I think the Lymans were too, but that was going to be the last contact we could have until after the hearings. When the hearings started, everybody was very nervous about it. The whole local community was very nervous about it. The university was 123 nervous about it. The campus police were very nervous about it. The Palo Alto police were very nervous about it. We were the only ones living in Palo Alto. The policemen were really quite amazing. They contacted us the minute the trial started. They sent people to walk around the house. Our bedroom opens on to the back garden, and the first night, we hear these footsteps outside. Can you imagine how scary that was? But it was the police. [laughs] So we had to ask them, “Please don’t do that.” Then they had two police cars often at night protecting us. I know Paul Ehrlich was particularly worried because my kitchen window looked out on Middlefield at that time, and I would be standing there. We didn’t have any curtains on it. I’d be standing there washing dishes. He was terrified someone would throw a bomb at me through the window. The police were worried about these things, too, so they had cars around the house. I was very grateful for the fact they really were trying so hard to help us. I’ve always like the Palo Alto police ever since that. I know they put someone in a driveway on Middlefield across the street from us. Page stuck her head out of her bedroom window, and immediately a spotlight from the car was on her head. [laughs] So that’s how we knew they were there. Tracy: Were there ever any actual threats made, or were they preemptively protecting you? Kennedy: [00:55:22] I don’t remember any actual threats being made. There was always the student threat that there’d be some retaliation. You knew that that was 124 there. You didn’t like it much. We hadn’t been a target before, but once you’re on the committee hearing the Franklin case, you are a target. In fact, there was a bomb found outside Sandy Dornbusch’s kids’ bedroom, and I can’t remember what, but something happened with Dave Hamburg. Things did happen on campus. Nothing ever happened to us, and that was really good. So the trial starts, and I am fascinated. Both girls were in school then. I made it a point to be there every single day of that trial. It was so interesting watching it. It also made me feel better to be on the spot, because I was worried a little about Don being in some kind of danger, not a whole lot, but a touch, because he was, of course, the one in charge. I made a point to sit on the left side of the auditorium where it was held, because that was near the Venceremos and Bruce Franklin and all of his friends over there. That was their side. The Lymans were way on the [right side]. The university, John Schwartz, and whoever the lawyers were on the administration side. So I made it a point to sit on the Bruce Franklin side, to kind of balance things, because most people were sitting on the other side. It was funny, at that time, I was still doing needlework and embroidery. I was doing a lot of it while I was watching this trial. I had a bag that I carried it in that had American-flag stripes on it. One of the people on that side, one of the Venceremos, one day he was wearing pants made of the same kind of fabric, and he came over to me and he commented how we had something in common here. [laughter] [00:57:17] I liked that a lot. 125 The trial itself was incredible to watch and to see what unfolded and what happened. I remember one time there was a major disruption. A whole bunch of students came in. They were wearing pig masks and police caps. They stampeded in and took the mic away from Don and started to make a real mess. Don tried to call for order, got nowhere, so he wisely just pulled the whole committee out. So that took away some of that impetus for the students to keep going, but they did a bit of guerilla theater there for us. I, of course, was like, “Whoa. What’s going on here?” [00:58:04] It was really amazing. It was also amazing, though, to listen to all the different [sides] and just try to sort this out to see what Bruce really did, what he didn’t do. Amidst the threats of real violence and guns from Venceremos and all that sort of stuff, it was scary but fascinating. It wasn’t scary to be in the room. I didn’t like the guerilla theater much. That got a little bit hair-raising, because you didn’t know whether they were going to do anything with weapons. They didn’t, which was good. But you never knew from day to day what the heck would happen, and, of course, I was worried for Dick, because I was very fond of him. He was much more of a target than Don, although the hearing committee was a target. One of the things that happened was my community friends--and I had a lot of them--were really scared to come on campus. They were afraid of it. So I started bringing them. The ones that dared to come, I would bring them to see. It was open to the public. So I’d bring them to see one of the Bruce 126 Franklin hearings, and it was terrific. There were some that were too scared to have me bring them, even, because the reputation of the violence on campus with the trashing and all that sort of thing. There wasn’t much violence against people that I can recall, sometimes the threat of it, but it didn’t really happen. It would be something like a rock thrown could hit somebody, but it didn’t. [00:59:31] So it was just a great way, though, to try to show people that they could be part of what was happening instead of viewing it as this awful thing happening on campus, as all of the communities did around the big universities where it was going on. They just felt it was horrible, and how could the universities permit it. And, of course, how do you stop it was another question. In the end, only two people--five of them came down heavily for Bruce to be fired--Don and Robert McAfee Brown, went for lesser penalties. They did not find him guilty on all the counts. But the majority ruled in this case, and he was, of course, fired. Tracy: From witnessing testimony and all of what was happening at the hearings, what was your sense of what Bruce had and hadn’t done and what did you think was the appropriate punishment? Kennedy: [01:00:38] Well, I thought long and hard, and I was not as liberal as Don and Bob. You know, I’m not an expert, but the bad things that happened as a result of what he was doing were enough for me to think that he was a danger to the students on campus, because he could incite them to riot. Now, going over it back and forth, I mean, I’ve really honored what Don 127 and Robert McAfee Brown thought, but I did feel that it was right for him to have to leave the campus. Tracy: How long did it take for all the hearings to occur and for them to come to a decision, do you remember? Kennedy: [01:01:31] Well, vaguely. As I recall, it was started in September. I don’t know how long the actual hearings went. My thought is maybe six weeks, but the decision didn’t come down till January, I’m pretty sure. Tracy: How did you talk to Page and Julia about what was happening? Do you remember having conversations with them about safety precautions and that sort of thing? Kennedy: [01:01:55] Yes, we talked to them about it. They thought it was very exciting. They loved being the center of attention this way. [laughs] How old were they then? This would be 1971, was it? Tracy: It was 1971, I think. Kennedy: [01:02:15] Yes, I think it was 1971, too. Then the decision came just in 1972. Right. So they were eleven for Julia and about fifteen for Page, so they thought it was a ball. [laughs] They weren’t the least bit worried. They were just fascinated by it. Tracy: In thinking maybe a little bit more broadly about what was happening at the time and the reasons for the protests and this general massive cultural shift and change during the sixties, do you remember having conversations with Julia and Page about these bigger movements and the causes for the protests? Kennedy: [01:02:57] No, I don’t particularly. I’m sure it came up plenty of times, I don’t remember particular conversations. 128 I do remember constantly talking to people in the community and trying to defend the right to protest, which I definitely believe in, but that doesn’t mean that you want to have trashing and bad things happening. It’s hard to explain to people outside of an academic setting. I’m sure we did have many talks with the kids about it, but they were privy to a lot of our thoughts for many years about that kind of thing. Tracy: Did you find any of it challenging in terms of your own beliefs or your own politics? Was this time transformative for you in any way in terms of your outlook? Kennedy: [01:03:48] I’ve got to say all my life with this university has been transformative in each stage of it. [laughter] Yeah, of course it changed my ideas. When you’re at the beginning of a movement, you feel one way, and as the movement grows and starts to become real and have a life of its own, you start to try to think it out, see where do you stand, what are the things that are right about it, what are the things that are wrong about it. One of the things that I feel strongly about is that people at the forefront of a movement are always doing things that the rest of us, as much as we may believe in it, won’t do. They used to call them bra burners for the feminist movement. But that’s what moves it along, and without somebody being way out there in a place where they really can be criticized, a movement doesn’t really move. [01:04:52] It’s a little bit like the woman named “Bloomer.” I’ll have to think of what the name was. [Amelia Bloomer]. But she wore bloomers for the first time that anyone had ever seen. And this was just a horrifying shock, but it was something that led 129 women to be able, actually, to even wear underpants, which most of them weren’t doing at that time. But it’s part of what meant that they could start wearing underwear, and that’s a whole other subject, and I don’t need to go into it now. But it was kind of a forefront of what they considered then to be the most daring movement of all, of women wanting to wear underpants. It actually happened because the women were wearing great big heavy skirts, and then the crinoline came in. The crinoline held out the outer skirt, so they didn’t need all the heavy skirts, which meant then that the crinoline could tip up and you needed to have some protection in case it tipped up. But also it meant that you could, in fact, be able to lift your skirts and pull down something, which you couldn’t with the heavy skirts, to use the bathroom. So they wanted it, and the men didn’t want it, and the traditional women didn’t want it, because it was considered man’s prerogative to wear pants. They eventually let them do it, but with the proviso that they have an open crotch. [01:06:26] So in my mind, always there are people heading up a movement that are doing way far-out things. Gay people are another example. There are always people doing outrageous things, although less so now, but there were back in time. So people would say how anybody could do that, and yet that’s what moves these things forward and starts to bring them into acceptance by the more general community. Tracy: It’s interesting to think about that. To bring it back around to Bruce Franklin certainly he was out in the forefront, but it seems as though at least the campus administration felt like he was leading students in the wrong direction. 130 Kennedy: [01:07:08] I don’t think it was that so much. It could be. I can’t speak for it, but from my perspective, I think it was the fact that he incited them to a riot that destroyed property. And that’s what I did think he did. When I said “incited to riot,” I meant the destroying of property. The inciting them to protest is just fine. It’s when the destruction, or the hurt to people or the students themselves get hurt, or the police have to be called in and there’s violence there one way or another against the police-these are the things where I felt Bruce went beyond. I only heard the testimony there. I’m not privy to a lot of other stuff, but that was where I drew the line for me. Tracy: Bruce Franklin gets a lot of the focus in discussions about Stanford in the late sixties and early seventies, but I wonder if you witnessed any people on campus that were working with students and motivating students to protest in maybe more positive and/or a less destructive way than what Bruce Franklin was doing. Kennedy: [01:08:26] I knew so many good professors and so many professors that were on the side of the students doing that. It was generally considered that you’re not supposed to bring your politics into your lectures. Most of the people, though, could be encouraging the protests, feeling encouraging about it, but wouldn’t actually use their lectures to do it, I don’t think. But there probably were some. I don’t actually know of anybody, certainly no one that did it on the scale of Bruce when he made it very public. Others would, I’m sure, do it quietly, but many of the professors were totally behind the students’ ideas, just not always the way they carried them out. 131 Tracy: Certainly, Stanford moved past this time of student protest and unrest, and Dick Lyman was largely credited, once he became president, for helping navigate Stanford through a lot of that. I wonder if you have any memories of when things started to get better and how things started to improve after the unrest started dying down. Kennedy: [01:09:49] I don’t have any specific memories of it, and it certainly was something that tailed off over a long period of time. There were people like David Harris and Joan Baez and others that stayed prominent for a while. I mean, everyone was glad to have the violence gone, but the students were starting to get some of the things they wanted. And nothing’s ever perfect, but it certainly was a good thing to have the campus come back to a more peaceful way to be. Tracy: Okay. So the next thing that I wanted to spend a little bit of time talking about was, in terms of your ongoing role as a faculty wife, in 1973, Don took over as director of the Human Biology Program. So I wanted to maybe talk a little bit about your memories of Human Biology and your involvement in the department. Kennedy: [01:11:01] Human Biology was really amazing. Don and Dave Hamburg and some others were working on this concept, and I know that when Don and I went to Oxford, we visited their program. So I watched it being born, so to speak, from the sidelines. It was really a very interesting concept, bringing this all together. Definitely it did come to pass that this was done. It was very unusual, and it was a totally different way of approaching biology and so forth. One of the reasons it was originally founded was to give students that 132 didn’t want to go to medical school but wanted some biology, but they didn’t want to have all of the stiffer requirements for medical school, some place to go. Lo and behold, it turned out that many people that were premed wanted to take Human Biology. It became immensely popular, absolutely immensely popular. Don became the chair of that, and I was used to being a chair’s wife by that time. [01:12:13] It was fascinating. We always had a lot to do with students. It seems to me it was a bigger enrollment than biology. Well, maybe not than the original biology, because eventually I think it certainly got to be. [01:12:30] But we knew so many students that we hadn’t known before that were in Human Biology. That was a very interesting thing. Trish Tobin then was one of the biology students that we got close to. She was Patty Hearst’s best friend. I remember she was a junior and she was at our house for some party we were giving students, and I started to talk to her. I had met her before, but I didn’t know her. I started to talk to her, and she was telling me how awful it was because the reporters were hounding her, because Patty Hearst had just been captured, and they were hounding her to get her take on it. I said, “Well, is there any way you can escape that?” She said, “No, I can’t. They know they can find me on campus.” And I said, “Well, what if you lived at home?” And she said, “No, no, they’re staked out at the house there.” So I said, “Why don’t you come and live with us,” and she did. It was really neat, because we became very close. Page had just gone off to college. Trish stayed in the guest room, the downstairs den now. And Julia had another older sister that she loved fooling around with. But Trish really 133 needed that quiet and that privacy. She became very close to the whole family then. I remember one time she was going to go see Patty in prison who was in the Redwood City jail. She was going to go by herself, and it was night, and I said, “I’m not going to let you do that.” So I drove her to the prison and went in and sat downstairs while she went upstairs. And, of course, her talk with Patty was taped, and it was then spread all over the newspaper. My life was always enriched by students, not just Human Biology [students], but, of course, the biology students as well. But Trish is someone who has become a lifelong friend. And others--Dave Maron and Jim Phelps-many of those students have become really close friends for me as well as for Don through our life. [01:14:44] I was, of course, fascinated with what they were teaching, and in 1974, the fall of it, I took the core Human Biology course. Tracy: Oh, really? Kennedy: [01:14:53] I did. I did. I took the whole core, actually. I asked this friend of mine, Betty Edwards who was very interested in education. She was fascinated by it. She didn’t work, but she tried to stay very active intellectually. So she did it with me, and it was great to take it. We were auditing it, obviously. We weren’t taking up their time with having to grade us or anything. But it was so interesting, and I’ve always been so happy that Don let us do that. [laughs] Tracy: Talk a little bit about what you learned in the core, which is the part of Human Biology that is interdisciplinary. 134 Kennedy: [01:15:40] I don’t remember who we had, but I do remember hearing the most fascinating speakers, many of whom were my friends, and it was so good to have that chance to be part of it. I think the same thing is true today of Human Biology. They bring in such interesting people from all kinds of different fields. And people like Robert Sapolsky, he’s fascinating. He wasn’t teaching back then at the beginning. But from sociologists, anthropologists, all kinds of people spoke. No wonder the kids are so fascinated. [01:16:15] After that, Betty Edwards was so, so grateful to us that she gave me--we had just remodeled our kitchen in 1974--the Kitchen-Aid mixing machine that I had been wanting but we couldn’t afford, and I still have it today. [laughs] I can show it to you. Tracy: One thing that happened during this time was an incident [regarding academic dishonesty] with [name redacted]. Kennedy: [01:16:52] Yes. I can’t remember exactly the exact year. That was very, very interesting. Don got a call from David Prince. We knew David and Reba Prince. He was at the medical school in Neurology. David Prince told Don that [name redacted] had taken some of his figures and put them in a paper and perhaps had plagiarized some other things from him. I don’t remember the exact details, but that was really quite a tough time. He was asking Don to be an intermediary in some way. David was afraid to do it himself, to try to take [name redacted] to task himself. He didn’t think anything would be done if he did. So he wanted Don to be involved in it, which Don proceeded to then do. I was fascinated, of course, because I knew [name redacted] 135 pretty well, and of course, in academic life, this is like a no-no beyond all belief. So I know that it was something we quite worried about. Well, during this time, somebody sent us a copy of The Crucible, and I thought, “Oh, great. I wonder who did that?” I couldn’t figure out who’d sent it to us. I thought, “Oh, great. I’ll read that.” Very interesting, very interesting. Then I get this call from Reba, and she is almost in tears because--and I must say rightly--she said, “This is because they are persecuting [name redacted]. Somebody is sending us this because we are [being persecuted],” and she was desperately upset. [laughs] I mean, you can see it wasn’t just naiveté; I always think the best of it. I just thought it was, “Great. I get the book to read.” But she was quite right. I mean, it was even less pleasant because it came not just to the guy, but to the wife as well. I can’t remember how it all came out, but I know that [name redacted] did have to endure something, and I can’t remember what happened. I’m sorry, I can’t remember that. I should have asked Don. Tracy: No, that’s okay. In terms of being involved with the Human Biology faculty, were you meeting a lot of new people on campus or new faculty members? I’m just wondering if, given the social sciences and the other sciences that were involved, if it opened up a different part of the campus community. Kennedy: [01:19:46] Most of them were people we knew anyway. I mean, we knew a lot of people, a lot of faculty. It was wonderful. That’s the nice part. Well, particularly the part that Stanford has people living close around. You get to a place like Harvard or Yale, and a lot of the professors have been driven 136 further out, and it’s not as easy to socialize. But Stanford, of course, a lot of people live on campus, so many of them were our friends. Of course, it was always interesting to meet new people. It was a whole new thing for recruiting [01:20:19] It was always very interesting because we were recruiting for biology, but here we were also recruiting outside of Stanford, too, and so we got to see a lot of people because the department chair and his wife are usually involved in it. That was always an interesting thing, meeting a lot of people from different places. Tracy: So still recruiting but just now different types of people? Kennedy: [01:20:42] Yes, I think so, yes. Tracy: Did you have to be more on your toes, in terms of chatting recruits up? [laughs] Kennedy: [01:20:48] No, no, no. A lot of times wives would need help with thinking what it would be like to live here and things like that. No, as I told you before, sometimes after I’d given a dinner party, I was very sleepy. I wasn’t much on my toes. But I don’t think it prejudiced the outcome anywhere. I was charmingly sleepy. Tracy: During this time Don had a sabbatical in England, or no? You’ve mentioned before going to England, so I’m trying to place if that was a trip that you took or if there was a sabbatical in there. Kennedy: [01:21:44] I can’t remember. I really can’t. Because it was the Bruce Franklin thing, that’s when he was off--I think, the next year we went to England and did the Oxford thing. But was that when we went around the world? I think it was. [01:22:18] Don had to get his way paid around the world, and nobody 137 was going to pay for me, so that was tough enough. It was a fascinating thing that he was able to do it in the first place. He was supposed to go and look at the Oxford thing. So Stanford paid for him, I’m sure. Then he had to pick up different gigs as he went along, sometimes I think something with his research so that he could pick up something from his grant for travel. Then he taught in Nairobi at the University of Kenya for two or three weeks there. So we had all these different things that we planned to go around the world for, so it probably must have been part of that year after the Franklin hearing, because I think that’s when it was. My time sense has kind of slipped again. However, it was an incredible trip. I could look up the exact dates. I have a report on it. [01:23:30] We were in Japan and we wanted to go to Cambodia, but it was just before Nixon sent the troops in. So everyone told us we couldn’t go to Cambodia. [01:23:42] When we got to Japan, we had these friends in the Foreign Service, Herb and Cornelia Levin, and they were a little closer to it, and they said, “No, if you can get in, you can get out.” So we actually had arranged a trip where we thought we would be able to spend one day there, but we ended up being able to spend one night there, and we had two days before we were able to get out. It was quite scary. We landed in Siem Reap, and then we had to go get to Angkor Wat I’ve forgotten now exactly how we got there. Maybe it was a little plane we flew in into there. Then we stayed in a motel, Auberge Royale, across from the main Angkor Wat, and that was fabulous. Do you want me to go on with this? [01:24:31] It was just an incredible thing to see, and the 138 whole place was armed. Cambodia was all armed because the Vietnamese were threatening to come in at any time to just start to take over Cambodia. So it was little bit scary that way. But, oh, the place itself was incredible, and that was when I was still taking pictures and doing photography. I got some incredible, incredible shots of it. We were among the last people to see it before the war broke out, and a lot of it got wrecked. So it was an amazing chance to take to see that. We went on to the Angkor Wat and then another one whose name I’ve forgotten, that’s all overgrown. [Ta Prohm] We went early in the morning, six in the morning, because we had to leave that day. It was all overgrown with banyan roots and it was eerie and beautiful. The ruins were just incredible. We saw a bit of the countryside going around. We had to rent--I think we’d gotten a car or something to get to some of these places. We saw the way they lived in houses on stilts and things like that. It was the knowledge that it was going to come to battle shortly that was so astounding. We got out and flew to Siem Reap, and we were in the airport there, and there was a long wait before we could leave. We wanted to go into town and see a museum, because we knew that a lot of the old Angkor Wat stuff had been put into the museum there in Siem Reap, and we wanted to see it. So all these passengers were waiting to take the same plane out that we were, because there weren’t very many planes. We said, “Would anyone like to go in on a taxi or something like that?” They didn’t want to go. We found out that we could hire a bus for twelve dollars, so we said, “How about hiring a bus here?” 139 “No, no,” they didn’t want to go. Then we’re thinking, “Well, that’s crazy. We can afford the twelve dollars,” so we hired this bus. We did it ourselves, so we were the only people riding this bus in to see it. As we went, we saw posters and armed soldiers. I wasn’t supposed to take photographs, but I was able to sneak a couple of photographs of the armed soldiers and of the posters showing the Vietnamese trying to stab the Cambodians. Oh, it was something else. We got to the museum, we went all the way through it, and I got a little nervous. We didn’t know if that bus would still be there, because we couldn’t miss that plane out. That would have been a disaster. So we went out. Thank goodness the bus was still there, so we were able to get back on it. One of the more daring things we did, really, one of the biggest chances we took, was going in there, just going in the first place. Then once we were in there, what an adventure. Then this trip into the museum, through the crowd, through all the armed soldiers and so forth. Fascinating time. We did a lot of other interesting things on that trip, but that’s the one that really I’m so happy we got. Then the idea of going around the world. In my whole life, I’ve now set foot on every single continent and I’ve been around the world. So I figure I’ve done as much traveling as anybody could possibly do. [laughs] [01:27:54] Now, there’s loads more I haven’t seen, but those things somehow are symbols to me of what I could always do. Tracy: Before we move on, anything else to include about those years while Don was chairing Human Biology or any other stories or thoughts? Kennedy: [01:28:15] Well, only the fact that that’s when I wanted to go to work. 140 Tracy: Right, and that’s what I was going to move back to. Kennedy: [01:28:22] Let’s see. Was there anything else? Human Biology wasn’t that different from biology. Our friends were kind of mixed in, and then [there were] always the people that had common interests, because Don’s interests were very wide, so the research and stuff like that just worked. It was really fascinating. That’s Human Biology. I think those are the kind of things that to me were highlights. Tracy: Okay. So let’s go back. We had started talking about the progression of the work that you had been doing, and we had ended with work that you were doing for Bill Kaufman, that you eventually were being paid for half of the time. [laughs] So tell me about where, in terms of your work, where you ended up next. Kennedy: [01:29:12] Well, when I finished working with Bill, I was restless and I knew I needed something. At first I thought, well, maybe part-time work would fill it, but I began to realize that what I really wanted was a full-time job in something where I could believe in what I was doing. It took a while to realize what is it was that I wanted. I guess I really had made up my mind in the summer of 1975, that that’s what I had to do. I had fooled around with thinking of consulting. Actually, darling Marilyn Yalom at one point said to me, “Maybe we should do a consulting job together, have a consulting thing together.” She’s gone on to be so extraordinary in what she’s done. We couldn’t quite figure out how to make that one work, but I always was flattered that she wanted to do that. 141 Well, I was in for a really, really tough time. They didn’t have the help that they have now for people doing that. So, first of all, I had to do a résumé. Well, my friend Audrey Bernfield, was going into career counseling and had been training for that, so she said, “Well, here, I’ll help you write your résumé.” We worked on our résumés actually together. It was funny, because as we were working on our résumés--Audrey and I were close, close friends before this--she was talking about how much she wished she could do career counseling in some place like Human Biology. And I said, “Well, Don’s looking for someone to do that,” and I actually put them together. Don ended up hiring Audrey, and she was fantastic at the job. But meanwhile, I’m struggling. I do remember I put in my résumé that I was flexible, and Audrey burst out laughing. And I was a little offended. “Why?” She said, “I don’t think ‘flexible’ is the right word to describe you.” She was referring to the fact I can be stubborn sometimes. She said, “I think more creative.” Well, later she decided that, yes, in my way I was flexible. Then I started the rounds of personnel departments and things like that, and I didn’t know beans. I certainly know now. I career-counsel a lot of people myself about how to network and so forth, but I didn’t know then. A lot of people tried to help me. I remember Tony Meier sent me down to some company, a Silicon Valley company, to see if they had any need for me, which they didn’t. 142 I worked mostly with Stanford Personnel because I really wanted to work at Stanford. And at this time, I still couldn’t type. My back was still too bad to type. So I said, “Don’t send me to any jobs that require typing, because I can’t do it,” and yet they would send me to administrative-assistant things that would require typing. Actually, the most awkward one was in the Faculty Club, because I knew the guy that ran the Faculty Club, and our daughter later worked for the Faculty Club. I knew him, you know, and he was so uncomfortable to be interviewing a faculty wife, and I was so embarrassed at the whole thing. Then it turned out that he needed someone that could type, which was triply embarrassing. You come home from things like that and your ego is totally flattened, because I went out to so many jobs, jobs I didn’t want. I was interviewing because you have to, but I didn’t want them, and then you’re rejected anyway. [01:32:52] Pretty soul-destroying, I’ve got to say. [01:32:58] A close friend of ours, Howard Hiatt was head of Harvard School of Public Health. He desperately wanted Don to come there and be a professor there. When he heard that I was looking for a job, he had two jobs. He knew me and he knew me well enough to think I could do them, and he asked me to come out an interview. I said, “Howard, we aren’t going to go back to Harvard. There’s not much chance we’re going to move to there.” He said, “Jeanne, treat this like any other job you’re being asked to interview for. Just come out and interview for it.” At the time, my back was really bad, it was hurting me quite, quite badly, and I actually couldn’t sit for long periods of time. And I was little bit 143 worried about how that would play at Harvard. [01:33:49] But I took him at his word, and I went back. He had two jobs for me. One was assistant dean for development, fundraising, and the other was assistant dean for finance-kind of a treasurer’s position. I was totally and completely thrilled to know that he wanted me to interview for them, and I was scared to death--could I even do these jobs? And I remember expressing that to someone who worked there. It was a younger woman than I, because I was in my forties, and she had gotten an MBA. She said to me--and I’ve never forgotten it--”Jeanne, don’t you know that all men know they will learn the job while they’re on the job, and all women think they need to know everything about it before they take it.” She said, “You can do it. You just need to accept it.” It was incredible that Howard gave me that, and it added to my confidence so much, and, indeed, he did offer me either job I wanted. Of course, I knew that it was pretty clear we weren’t moving--I knew that he wanted Don to come. So, of course, we decided to stay on at Stanford. But bless that man for what he did for me and for my confidence. I’ll just always remember that, and I know that he would not have taken a chance at hiring me unless he really believed I could do the job. So that was wonderful. That was a big help to me. But it went on like that, or took a year, almost a year. About in May, I interviewed with Dud Kenworthy over in the medical school for a development job. Now, nobody considered that I had any kind of a career track, because at that time they did not consider community 144 service/volunteer work as anything that you could count toward a job. So I had no track record at all. [01:35:45] So that was what was making it so hard for me. Because I knew the faculty, I knew a lot of people, I knew the community, he saw that I had a lot of connections. As he interviewed me, he actually, in the end, offered me the job, and I started work in August of 1976. But I forgot to say when I was talking about my bad back, at Harvard I had had to interview lying flat on my back. [laughs] I felt quite odd about it, but my back was so bad, I had to do that. Well, the back was also still bad when I started working. Now, when I started working in development, in medical development, I was thrilled. Oh, it was a job--I even had half of a secretary. It was more than I could ever hope for. I’m so grateful to Dud, still am, for that. But I still had a huge amount to learn about working in an office, as well as the bad back to cope with. I had gotten the job over a candidate that was my opposite number in the same office, who was Hispanic. I don’t remember his name now. But he had someone who was Hispanic that he had wanted to get the job. About three days in, he called me into his office, and he said to me, “I know you’re Dudley’s little girl and that’s why you got this job, but there are others that were much better qualified,” or something like that. He was very insulting. He’s the one that I shared the secretary with. I was staggered, and I do remember having enough poise to say, “I’m too mature to be anyone’s little girl,” and leave the room. It was that kind of thing that just--you know, what a way to start. [01:37:31] My secretary, thank 145 goodness, was very, very good. At the end of the time I was there, she said to me, “You’re the first short person I’ve ever respected.” [01:37:53] She was tall, actually. But when you’re short, you learn how to cope and to not take that into account. Some people are prejudiced against short people. I’m not that short--I’m five feet, three inches. At any rate, it was a fascinating time for me. Talk about a strong learning curve. I also learned that I didn’t like to ask for money. [01:38:21] I ran a Friends of Radiology group. They asked me to start a Friends of Pediatrics. And a lot of events, I was good at all of those things. God knows I’d been involved in enough events so I could handle all of that. I loved setting up the Friends groups, which, of course, is fundraising. The first time they made me ask for money, Clarence Heller had made a pledge of $100,000. He hadn’t signed the pledge, but he’d indicated he was willing to do that. So they sent me to get him to sign the pledge. I asked him to lunch at the Faculty Club, and he came. Clarence was a great guy. I was so inexperienced, even with all of Dudley’s help, in asking for this. So finally, he started to laugh and he said, “Jeanne, I’ll take you out of your misery. You want me to sign a pledge for the one hundred thousand dollars, right?” I said, “Oh, yes, Clarence, please.” [laughs] And he did; he signed it. And when I got back, it turned out that I got the credit for bringing that on board. Development is very odd that way, because I hadn’t really--I mean, all the spadework had been done by other people, but I think my novel approach made it quite easy for Clarence to say yes. [laughs] [01:39:53] It was funny. But it was hard. It was hard to do that. 146 The other thing that was difficult for me was calling on people that could be big donors and trying to build a relationship with them. It was easy to do if it happened naturally. Later in life, I certainly kept on fundraising for Stanford in many, many ways, but it was hard when it was my business to do it. Nonetheless, I learned and I was happy to be involved in that. So I started there in August. In February, Don comes home. He’d been traveling a lot to Washington, DC and consulting and doing things like that. He comes home and he tells me, “Jeanne, they want me to be commissioner of the FDA [Food and Drug Administration].” [laughs] I’m like, “Oh, no, I’ve just started this job. I don’t want--” You know what I mean. Tracy: Yes Kennedy: [01:40:43] I didn’t want to go to Washington. I didn’t want to leave California and go to Washington and do that all over again, but he really, really wanted it. Dave Hamburg, who was then heading up the Institute of Medicine, had been a reference for me in my job in development and he had known about my indexing. I can’t remember if I indexed anything for Dave, but I’d been the person, the intermediary between him and Don. Oh, this reminds me. I forgot to talk about Gombe in Human Biology. That was this huge, huge issue, and the kids were kidnapped. Michelle Trudeau [involved but not kidnapped], Carrie Hunter, and Emilie--I can’t remember Emily’s last name [Bergman]. David--was it Riss [Steve Smith]? And one other, I think [Barbara Smuts]. Well, that’s been well documented elsewhere. 147 These kids were in Gombe working with Jane Goodall, and some natives came and came into camp and they actually kidnapped these kids and took them across into Tanzania and held them for ransom. The United States State Department absolutely refused to allow anyone to take ransom for these things. This was just not done. Dave Hamburg and Don, back here, Dave was the one that wanted to go to Gombe to help, because one of the students’ fathers--I don’t know if I should say it, so I guess I won’t say it. I know who it was, but--had the money and wanted to ransom them. Dave went with him to Gombe to set up the terms of ransom. Don was back here to be the place to communicate, so Dave often had to communicate through to me. Remember, no cell phones in those days. If he couldn’t get Don, he could get me, and I’d relay to Don. So he knew me very well. Those kids, oh, my god, what they went through and what happened to them afterwards was so sad and so horrible. Not what happened to them afterward, what happened to them there, and it did affect them. I know Carrie Hunter had to have a bodyguard for a long time. She’s the one I knew. I also knew Michelle Trudeau, who was Garry Trudeau’s sister. It was an incredible thing for them to go through. So this was a huge, huge event in Human Biology. Tracy: Did this unfold while Don was chair? Kennedy: [01:43:50] Chair, yes. So that was part of what we did. We were so worried because we knew them and [wanted] to get them back, and they did get back. We did get them all back. 148 Tracy: That must have been quite a responsibility to at times be this intermediary, giving Don news and information and-Kennedy: [01:44:09] Well, I mean, I was glad to be able to do some teeny-weeny part of it. It was very small, obviously. So now we can go back to Dave Hamburg. He knew that I would need a job because he knew how badly I wanted this first job, and to leave this job would be very hard for me. So he called me right away as soon as Don got the offer. He said, “Jeanne, I’ve got a job for you here at the Institute of Medicine, and if Don wants to go, he’s really needed here, and I have a job for you.” I was so grateful. I still didn’t want to go to Washington, but to have a job working with Dave, who’s a wonderful person, and to work at the Institute of Medicine--he said it was a job doing development work. His resource development person would be leaving, and he needed a new one and he was holding the job for me. So that’s, in fact, what happened. This was all in February. It was April 26th when we left. So my first job, I only worked from August to April 26th, and it was really hard for me to go. But we did move on. [End of Session 3 of 6, interview with Jeanne D. Kennedy, July 2, 2014] 149 150 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PRESIDENTIAL FAMILIES AND STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECTS INTERVIEWEE: JEANNE D. KENNEDY INTERVIEWER: ALLISON TRACY DATE OF INTERVIEW: JULY 17, 2014 SESSION: 4 OF 6 Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is July 17, 2014. I’m here with Jeanne Kennedy to continue our oral history interviews for the Stanford Historical Society. So, Jeanne, from our last session, one thing that I wanted to go back to was how Don and Page and Julia reacted to or felt about your developing career and that taking up more of your time? Kennedy: [00:00:45] Don was always completely supportive. That was a nice part, it really was. He pledged to help more and things like that. Did I say anything about being tired? The thing for me that was astounding was, here I was--I mean, when you have children, you’re doing a lot of community service work, you’re juggling entertaining and everything, I thought, well, I was doing so much, that I would be able to easily handle working full-time. I was exhausted, absolutely exhausted. It was so hard to get up and get dressed, figure out what to wear to work and get dressed, and help everybody else get ready, though they had to do a lot more themselves. I think that was the 151 point at which I made the girls make their own lunch, and I was delighted to be rid of that chore. [laughter] It just surprised me so much. When I got home I was so tired I’d have to lie in bed for an hour, napping, resting, or reading, something like that, before I could get up and make dinner. That was a shock to me, not precisely how they reacted, but I think they could see that it was really hard, and they really tried hard. It didn’t affect the girls that much because by that time they were old enough to more or less take care of themselves after school, and there wasn’t that much time after school. I’d be home by five-thirty, usually. We worked nine to five. So I wouldn’t say it affected them that much. The Washington time perhaps differently, but this time, no. I can’t really recall much of a reaction. They seemed a little bit proud of me, really. Tracy: A hobby that you’ve had throughout your life is photography, and so I wanted you to talk about that a little bit, but maybe also talk about how you managed all of your interests and how you found time for things like photography. Kennedy: [00:02:58] Well, I’ll talk about the photography first because for so many years that was so important to me. My parents started me off with one of those little Brownie cameras that you looked down through, and it took just amazingly good pictures. I have pictures of my parents I took when I was about ten, and I loved that part of it, but I didn’t get serious about it, if you can call it serious. I was never a professional photographer, I don’t mean that. I didn’t really get serious about it until I got my first really good camera. 152 That is, I took many, many pictures, a lot of pictures of friends and stuff like that, and I fooled around with cutting them out and making collages and so forth. But I made pictures really on more instant cameras, which is what they were back then. So in 1968, I got a Nikkormat, which was Nikon’s really good camera at that time, and it had a whole bunch of different lenses, and that was when Leo Holub helped me. He was just darling. He had the same kind of camera, and he showed me how to change lenses and what lenses to use, and it was just a delight. I remember one time--at the time, I was chair of the Committee for Art--we were at a hard-hat so to speak, not opening, but it was a huge party in unfinished Annenberg Hall, but we didn’t have to wear hard hats. It was a very glamorous party with everybody dressed in their best and, you know, just bands and really good food. I think it must have been a fundraiser for the Committee for Art. The graduate students had made plaster statues of people, sort of George Segal-like, and they had them all around, and they were for sale. I actually bought one of a woman sitting on a kitchen chair. It was out in the backyard for a long time until it got molded away from the rain, etc. But they were absolutely great, and they were all around too. So a lot of opportunities for picture-taking, and I had brought my camera, but I didn’t really know how to use it. Leo was taking pictures there too. It was so much fun taking these pictures, and I could do so much more with this camera. Now, this is before there was as much automatic stuff. 153 There was no automatic in this camera. This was one of those you used your hands focusing this, that, and the other thing. You had to do quite a bit of learning, but it was so rewarding. That was when Leo really took me in hand, and he sat with me when I wasn’t dancing, and showed me how to do all these things. That’s when I took my first picture of Leo. He had his head turned away, and Florence was full-faced. I blew it up for him and gave it to him, and afterwards he said, “This is the perfect picture of a photographer.” Did I tell you that was one in a series of Leo pictures? Tracy: No. Kennedy: [00:06:11] Well, since I’m talking about Leo, I will talk about the time that I was taking pictures. That was my first picture of Leo. My second picture was when we had a party in Hoover House for Ansel Adams, and some alumni donors had given an Ansel double six-foot-tall panel of woods and snow scene. It actually has been on travel with different museums since that time. Boy, is this an aside, but one of the donors had actually been the guy that ran into me on his motorcycle somewhere like the corner of Emerson and Forest in downtown Palo Alto, ended up sprawled across my windshield. He reminded me of that at the party we gave for the donors and for Ansel Adams. [laughs] At any rate, that was my second picture. Leo said to me, “Jeanne, please, will you take a picture of me with Ansel Adams?” 154 And I said, “Sure.” And he handed me his camera, and I took a great picture, and Leo gave me a copy of it. So I can show it to you afterwards. That was just a great moment. Then the third picture I took of Leo was when we had a retrospective at the art gallery of all his photographs. He was such a great guy, everybody loved him, and it was really crowded. Allan and I were to the front, right in front of the crowd, actually, when someone stood up and made a speech about him. And Leo stood up to answer, and the way he answered, of course, was to pick up his camera and take pictures of everybody, hiding his own face. As he put his camera down, I stepped forward and held out my hands to receive the camera, and he turned his camera around and handed it to me, and I took it back and I took his picture, and it came out. [laughter] I mean, these are things that just--they’re sort of unbeatable things that must happen to real photographers all the time, and I had some of that. So back to photography. I was really fascinated by doing it. Don had a darkroom, and I never did learn to develop the film. Of course, I took all black and white. I did learn to blow up the pictures and, oh, it was so much fun in darkrooms, watching them come up. I specialized in taking pictures of people, and I was good at it. I took the best picture that had ever been taken of Nancy Packard when she married Don’s graduate student, Robin Burnett, I think his name was. It was a beautiful picture of her. I sort of specialized in taking wedding pictures of the graduate students as they got married. [00:09:14] I got a number of them. I got a great one of Ron Hoy’s wife, Dottie. Neither of those couples are together now, but nonetheless, the 155 pictures were terrific if I do say so. And then I moved on. I loved to take pictures of children. At that time, there was a very famous local photographer that took photos of children. I don’t remember his name, but he would take them in natural surroundings, and I loved that. So I would do that for people. If they paid for the film and the printing, I would just take pictures of their children. And I got huge numbers of pictures. It was wonderful. I remember taking a picture of Sonia Shepard’s new decoration in her house. She wanted pictures of that. So I did semi-professional work. The odd thing about Sonya Shepard, who is now Sonia McClellan, is she went on to become a really fine photographer with one of those big Hasselblad cameras and all of that. But she sort of intimated that I started her on being enthused. [00:10:21] So I took loads and loads of pictures, and I loved doing it. The thing that killed my interest, oddly enough, were the digital cameras. I just didn’t get a kick taking pictures with them. I mean, I still take them, as anyone else does with a little pocket camera, and pull it out and take it. Now that I have my smart phone, I see that they take actually very good pictures, so that’s something I still do, but it isn’t the same. Then once in a while, I get something nowadays where I can pull out my old camera and take a whole roll. For example, my goddaughter, Helena Karasova, was engaged to Jaime Diaz, and she wanted photographs of her with her fiancé, and I took a roll there. Her father also came, and he was the Czech ambassador to Belarus, and he wanted photographs because he hated the formal photographs that they were taking of him in Belarus. So I took some very casual shots of him in the garden, and he loved them, as well as I 156 took some of him with Helena. So this is the kind of thing that got me all excited again, but I’m using that same old camera. We went to the Galapagos and I took that camera, and Joel Simon, Stanford photographer, took the most beautiful shot of me holding my camera, and I treasure that. Then I took pictures in Africa of all the animals, and when Don and I went to the Pribiloff Islands, I hung over cliffs taking pictures of puffins and whatever else I wanted to have pictures of. When we were in Cambodia, I took great shots. This was a real passion for me, and I miss it, but nobody seems to want the kind of old-fashioned film things that actually give me a kick to still go back and do. Tracy: When we left off at our previous session, we had started talking about the move to Washington, DC, and we had talked a little bit about your relationship with David Hamburg and working with him on the hostage situation at Gombe. So let’s pick back up there. Remind me of David Hamburg’s role in getting you a position in Washington, DC. Kennedy: [00:12:55] Well, this was when Don got offered the job of head of the FDA, and Dave Hamburg had had a hand in getting him the offer, because he totally respected Don and they were really good friends. David knew that I would want a job because he’d helped me with this [Stanford] job. So he offered me one. He was heading up the Institute of Medicine, which is part of the National Academy of Sciences. So he offered me a job as their resources director, director of Resources Development, I think it was called. [00:13:29] I really didn’t want to go to Washington, but I was deeply grateful to Dave for offering me the job, which took away one of the things that was 157 really difficult. In the end, Don wanted to go really badly, and in the end, okay, we would go. It was hard because I’d only worked from August to April in my development job, and I had so much still yet to learn, and I hated to let Dudley down, because he’d hired me in the first place. I talked to the kids about it, and Julia said, no, she wouldn’t go. [laughter] For Page, that was the year she was home. She had taken off from college. Page was all very excited about it. She thought it was great for us to go. We had to solve the problem with Julia first. Julia was in [her junior year of high school]. Of course we left in April, so if she wouldn’t have gone to Washington--she would still have a few months of that year to finish schooling and then the next year. She was fighting to stay, and stay with one of her friends, but this was just not an option for her. So I was trying to figure out how to talk her into it. What we figured out was that she would go on a trip with her dad, a big thing, and he would take her around and show her to schools, show her the schools that were available. We’d decided against the public schools because they were not very good, so Don took her to all these private schools. Most of them absolutely refused to have anybody that couldn’t come for two full years. The one that accepted her was actually Madeira, and it was the one she liked best. She loved, loved it, and it was such a surprise, because of course, that then convinced her to come. She opted to be a boarder instead of a day student, which really surprised us, but we figured somehow or other we’d manage the fee. 158 Tracy: So she would have been finishing up then her junior year going into her senior year? Kennedy: [00:15:40] Yes, exactly. Tracy: One point about Julia was that she would have finished high school. She had a year and a couple months then with you in Washington, DC, but then she came back and started at Stanford. Kennedy: [00:16:17] Yes, she did. Well, we took off for Washington in April, and we bought a house with the help of a really good real estate agent. She was a sweetheart, did everything for us. When we first got there, Julia, of course, went right to school, and the rest of us had to live in a really not very nice hotel in Bethesda. They were trying to have Don be close to Rock Creek Park where his office was. But I had to commute all the way downtown, and I wasn’t used to these awful commutes. It was really hard on me. We couldn’t move into our house for a little over a month. The problem was that the guy that was resources development director that David had wanted to leave hadn’t left yet, and so I was doing odd jobs for David in the month before this guy left. Tracy: Do you remember, when Don was offered the position at the FDA, if that initial discussion stands out in your mind at all? Kennedy: [00:17:47] Well, it wasn’t much time. He came back in February, and we left in April. [laughs] Tracy: So it was a pretty quick decision. Kennedy: [00:17:55] I went back to Washington with him, and it was a quick decision. 159 Tracy: So tell me a little bit about struggling while you were in D.C. I imagine that in some way that would have been a little bit of a cultural shift, going from Stanford to Washington, DC. Besides the commute you mentioned, having to stay in Bethesda, were there any other adjustments to the Washington, DC life that you had to make? Kennedy: [00:18:24] Well, I was quite lonely. I had actually two very good close friends that had their base in Washington, but they were both in the State Department and they were both away in different places, so I didn’t have that kind of balance of knowing somebody that was there. I can remember my office in the Institute of Medicine looked out over the Lincoln Memorial, and at times when I wasn’t working and I’d go out for lunch break and go across the street and go up and look at Lincoln and think, “Oh, dear, I miss my friends back there. I miss them a lot.” It took a little while to get into the role. I told you that the director hadn’t left yet, so it took a month for that to happen. The other thing that was really hard was the whole social system. We weren’t part, obviously, of the people that lived in Washington’s social patterns. We would have been had we had our friends there, but we were very much part of the government kind of social activities. The shock was coming out of academic life. If you’re a faculty wife at Stanford, even if you don’t have a job of your own, people treat you with respect and they’re interested in you and what you’re thinking and so forth. In Washington, it’s all about how much power you have. I have to say it isn’t 160 gender oriented. If you’re a woman with power, you’re a woman with power, and they treat you just the same. Perhaps I should start with the first moments that I remember. When Don had to be inaugurated and we had to swear on the Bible--we had to do all that--that was fairly soon after we got there. So Don and Page and I left this hotel, drove down to Madeira, and picked Julia up. Julia was very taken with the South at that point, so she had a bit of a southern accent that she was affecting. [laughter] Very funny. We drove down and we went to--and I don’t remember where it was. We were standing in this huge crowd of people, and some woman comes up and she says, “Oh, Dr. Kennedy, Dr. Kennedy, there you are. Come with me.” She takes him away--Don, of course, didn’t know what to do either-and the woman didn’t know we were with him, I’m sure, but there we are. We’re just standing there. We didn’t know what to do. We didn’t even know whether to follow or what to do. All of a sudden, out of the woodwork--well, I don’t mean that, but just out of nowhere comes Ted Kennedy. He puts his arms out like this, and he sweeps us with him, “Here, you must go with me.” It was so sweet. [00:21:25] Julia had met him before, but I had not. Don had because Ted Kennedy was the senator in charge of the FDA, so to speak, and Paul Rogers was the congressman in charge of the FDA. So Don had met with Ted Kennedy several times, and he’d taken Julia to meet him, and I remember asking Julia what she thought of him. She said, “Oh, he’s just an 161 old guy with jowls.” [laughter] We have to remember that she was fifteen at that time. She had just turned sixteen before we went to Washington. We went up to do that, and it was very moving. Really, it was amazing. The girls stood up on the stage and I held the Bible, and that part was wonderful. Some of the other things were not so wonderful. Later there was a party given by a very famous Washington hostess. Of course, I can’t remember her name. It was totally political. Paul Rogers was there, and I remember I didn’t know any of the other people. Nobody spoke to me. The hostess said, “Hello, dear, how are you?” Before I could say anything, she swept away with Don, which is usually what happened. It was amazing. It was if I were invisible. At the dinner, when we sat down at dinner, neither my right-hand or left-hand gentleman on either side spoke to me. Nobody across the table spoke to me. It was if I didn’t exist. I was the wife of a man who had power, but I didn’t exist. When I spoke, people looked at me as if I were--I don’t know what. Well, who is this? She speaks. [laughs] I was just like, “Oh, my lord.” I was totally appalled by this. So after dessert, we get up from the table, and Paul Rogers, who had been sitting near me and across the table from me and hadn’t spoken, he fixes me with his eyes like this, and he says, “Come with me.” He takes me off to the side and seats me on a piano bench with him, and he looks eagerly into my eyes, deeply, and starts to make a pitch of what he wants me to tell Don that he should do. [laughs] Then he finishes saying it, and he says, “That’s been a nice talk, dear,” and got up and left. [laughs] And I still didn’t 162 say one word. This is the kind of thing it was. [00:24:04] Then it was a party at Eunice [Kennedy] and Sargent Shriver’s house, and that was--I don’t know what it was. We were told to come at six-thirty, with dinner at seven-fifteen. So we came, and we were maybe late by a couple of minutes, like 6:32, and Don was anxious about that. So, after he parked the car, he hurried me up. We go up to the door, and we see caterers in the kitchen. When we get to the screen door, we ring the doorbell and nobody answers, and there’s nobody in there that we can see, because we’re looking at the living room. Luckily, there was a couple from behind us that’s walking up, and they said, “Oh, we just go in,” and we opened the door and we go in. Then they swept us in. They said, “So coats go here,” though I don’t think we had coats. I remember the saying, “Put your coat here,” or maybe they meant a wrap if we had it. “We get the drinks here.” We were the first people there. Nobody was there, nobody. After a while, the room started to fill up with people, and still nothing happened. At nine-fifteen, the Shrivers came down the stairs, and we’d gotten there at sixthirty. I may be exaggerating; it may be a quarter of nine they came downstairs. Whatever it was, I couldn’t believe it. They didn’t much work the crowd. It was just more or less time to sit down. Don was on Eunice’s right, and so I was on Sargent Shriver’s right, and he didn’t speak to me the whole time, of course, because I didn’t have any power. Eunice had said to Don, “Oh, your daughter rides,” and they discussed it. “Your daughter rides. She must come and ride with my boys.” 163 So we go home and we tell Julia, and Julia says, “I don’t want to do that.” [laughs] We really felt she had to. It might be an experience she could always remember. So she did go. She could drive then, and she did go. Her reception was quite cool, to say the least. They arranged it ahead of time, of course. You didn’t just drop in. But she rings the doorbell and nobody comes, and she kind of calls in, “Hello, hello.” Eunice Shriver is writing something, “Oh, come in, dear.” Julia introduces herself, and Eunice says, “Oh, go out and find the boys. They’re out in back.” [laughs] It was so hard on Julia, who was still only sixteen then. She had a terrible time. She did go out, and it was awkward, and the boys didn’t want to see her. Of course, apparently this was a casual thing that we took too seriously, the request. [00:27:05] Toward the end of Don’s time there, they asked us for dinner again. This time it wasn’t in their house, so we didn’t have to go through that lengthy time. We sat down, and, again, I’m on Sargent Shriver’s right. Well, you’d have thought I was the most fascinating person in the world. He fixes me with his eyes and he starts talking. Guess what? He wanted the Institute of Medicine and Dave Hamburg to do something, and he found out that I worked for Dave. [laughs] So I was the most fascinating person for him at the table. [00:27:40] We had other things happen that were kind of interesting things. Califano, who Don worked for, was trained in the Johnson method, which is the stick and the carrot. So if Califano was mean to you, then the next day he’d give Don compliments. If he gave Don a compliment, Don 164 would come home and say, “Oh, I don’t know what’s going to happen tomorrow.” [laughs] Tracy: Oh, my god. Kennedy: [00:28:08] It was really amazing. Don was going to go and get an honorary degree at NYU, and I was going with him. We had planned on going up in the shuttle the night before. He comes home the day before that, very little notice, and he says, “We have to go to a party,” that night. We can’t go [to New York] till the following morning. We’ll have to get up really early in order to get there by ten o’clock. So I was saying, “What? Why? This is ridiculous.” Well, Califano had told him that his presence was required at a dinner given for a New Jersey congressman, Fred--and I can’t remember his name right now. He was a man we detested. We didn’t know him, but we detested him because it had been all over the papers that he was soliciting little boys. Horrible, just horrible. Not to mention that the way he conducted himself in Congress was not--he was a Democrat, of course, but not something that we at all approved of. We wouldn’t have normally had anything to do with him. It was so ironic to be forced to go to a dinner party for him. We drove up in our little beige Plymouth. We drove up, and all the cars are Mercedes, BMWs, and Rolls-Royces--all the fancy cars you can think of, and we drive up in our little car. The young guys that were parking take our car and park it. We walk in--I forgot to say it was at Ambassador William and Deeda Blair’s house--and we don’t know anybody. Fred is right there greeting us, 165 “Oh, so glad you could come.” We had to smile at this man and be polite. Then Deeda Blair swans up with a dress that is literally cut down to her belly button. It doesn’t quite show her belly button, but literally cut down. It was just not a thing I was used to seeing. I think it was glued at the sides, because it didn’t fall apart. [00:30:25] But she says, “There you are.” She takes Don by the arm and says, “Come with me.” Again, I’m left standing in a place where I don’t know anybody and have no idea who any of the people are. Nobody gives us a guest list or anything. And this nice courtly man comes up. Oh, I can’t remember his first name; I think Bill. Anyway, he says, “I’m Bill,” in quotes, “Blair, Mrs. Kennedy, and you’re to come with me.” I’ve never been so grateful to anybody in my life. [laughter] We went in and sat down. Of course, Don is on Deeda Blair’s right, and I’m on Ambassador Blair’s. [00:31:08] There are all these people there, but the nice thing at our table, we had all the kids that had been parking the cars, and I thought this was such a great thing to do. Finally, halfway through making conversation, I still don’t have any clue. Finally I said, “Ambassador Blair, I need to ask you. Why are we here? I don’t know what’s happening.” And he said, “Oh, let me tell you. You and I are here to support Fred in his campaign. Everybody else is paying ten thousand dollars for the dinner.” [laughs] [00:31:54] I’d never heard of this before, totally naïve politically, as you can see. And I was like, “Really?” They were all the milk producers, apparently, from Fred’s state that wanted to [support him]. That’s who they were. So I figured, if everybody here--well, not the kids, obviously-- 166 were paying ten thousand a plate, I’d better be entertaining. So I sparkled brightly from that time on. It was just so funny. Now, the reason that we were there, which I found out from Don later, was that Deeda Blair had some issue. It was a cancer drug or something to do with that, that she wanted to lobby the FDA commissioner for. She had said she would give this party for Fred if he could get the FDA commissioner to come. Fred had put the moves on Califano, who had forced Don. Typical Washington politics. You’d be happy to hear that we went outside, and the kids now knowing me said, “Oh, Mrs. Kennedy,” and ahead of everybody else, they went and got our little Plymouth and drove it up and we were off. [laughter] Tracy: So Jeanne, can you tell me about the job that Page had in Washington? Kennedy: [00:33:05] Oh, yes. Page came with us. As you know, she’d stopped out. She came with us and the whole thing was, of course, she had to work because that’s part of if she wasn’t going to college, she had to work. She started working as a waitress in these different restaurants, not an easy thing to do, but I was very proud of her for doing that. But at one point, Larry Horowitz, who was then--he lives here now in Atherton--Ted Kennedy’s chief staff member. And I saw him at the Institute of Medicine, and I guess he asked about the kids, and I was talking about Page. He said, “Would she like to be an intern,” obviously unpaid, “for Kennedy’s Health Subcommittee?” And I’m saying, “Yes, of course. That would be wonderful.” [00:34:03] So Larry left, and we didn’t know what would happen. I didn’t tell Page. He 167 called Don. Now, this is, again, Washington politics, you see. He asks me, but he calls Don to tell him. He called Don to say that they would like to have Page be an intern. So that’s how she got to be an intern for that health subcommittee. We were just thrilled for her. It was just amazing that she would have this opportunity. She didn’t need to be paid. We were happy to subsidize an opportunity like that. She turned out to be extraordinarily good at it, and she did it for most of the rest of that year, as I recall. She also did it the following summer. They asked her back. I can remember Larry telling me that Page Kennedy could get anyone out of a meeting and on the phone for the senator, and she was incredibly resourceful. You can imagine what those experiences were like for her. [00:35:04] We would go sometimes to the hearings that they would have, and Page would be in the background sometimes. We’d be in the audience watching, so proud of her. It was absolutely wonderful. [00:35:15] Then Julia took to Madeira. I couldn’t believe it. I really couldn’t believe it. But she took to Madeira like a duck to water. She loved it. And she could ride horses there, that was all part of her going there. She buckled down and she studied like anything. She had been a National Merit Scholar finalist, so that helped them to take her, but we were grateful for the fact that they did. Julia was happy at Madeira. She really just loved it, and she loved the headmistress, Jean Harris. Julia graduated in June of 1978. And I think it was a couple years later that there was an absolutely notorious scandal because Jean Harris had a lover, Dr. Herman Tarnower, who was the author 168 of the Scarsdale Diet. He was a cardiologist. She shot him and killed him and was convicted. One hardly ever knows anybody that did something like that, and, of course, the scandal swept everywhere. It put Madeira right in the headlines of everything. Julia was just horrified because she really, really liked her. It made her, needless to say, very sad. Tracy: We know that while Don was commissioner, he dealt with a handful of controversies. Can you tell me about your memories about those big issues that he dealt with? Kennedy: [00:36:55] Well, when we went there, saccharin was the big thing. That had been going on for a while. Everybody here was teasing us about what he would have to cope with. The saccharin issue kind of got resolved fairly early on. Don was the first really respected national scientist to run the FDA, and his job was to try to turn it around. It had been extremely ineffective. The FDA, as Don says, is a slow-moving target that gets hits easily. It was then and to a lesser extent still is really hard to make people realize how important it is. [00:37:54] Needless to say, any bureaucracy is slower than one would wish on either getting drugs to market or on any of the food issues that come up. He had to try to change people’s whole feelings about it. They were angry with the way the FDA went. They felt everybody was stupid there and all of that. I’ve got to say he was ideally suited to turn this around. He’s very good on television, always speaks well, and the FDA got to have really good front-page headlines because of Don. He was clever and witty, and people would quote him. 169 The only problem was, one time there was a media event at our house. A whole bunch of media came to interview him for an hour. It went extremely well, except for one moment when he said something--I wish I could remember now what it was--when he said something wrong. Unfortunately, that was in all the headlines in the newspapers; all the clips on television were all of that one moment. It was a huge lesson for Don, because it’s just so hard to do it all the way. But nonetheless, he was doing a super job. So after the saccharin controversy was resolved, there came nitrates. I remember that because we love bacon. [laughter] And Don comes home and he says, “It looks like we’re going to have to ban nitrates in bacon.” And I’m like, “Oh, no. Please, don’t.” He said, “I don’t know. We’re going to have to, I’m afraid.” So what did we do? We had rashers of bacon every single morning for breakfast, because we thought we’d never be able to have it again. [00:39:47] Because nitrates are what give bacon its really good taste. Again, that kind of vanished and we still have our bacon. Tracy: Yes. I don’t think America would have ever forgiven him if he’d taken away bacon. [laughter] Kennedy: No, no. But I don’t specifically at the moment remember the others, but he was embroiled in things, and we were often in hearings and stuff that I would go with him on. 170 Tracy: That’s right. I wanted to ask you. I read somewhere that he felt like he spent most of his time in these congressional hearings. I wanted to ask you about those memories of what those hearings were like. Kennedy: [00:40:21] Well, obviously, I was working, so I didn’t go to all of them. Tracy: Right. Kennedy: [00:40:24] But nonetheless, for the Institute of Medicine, since these were all health issues, it was all right for me to go to many. So I was with him at a lot, a lot of them. I just remember how incredible they are. The committee that’s holding the hearing is up high, behind a high podium that runs like a judge’s bench. The lowly rest of everybody is down below, and there’s a table. The media are all around the outside. A lot of times Don was testifying when I was there, is what I meant to say. To deal with a large number of people that are elected to their positions and who feel that they and they alone are right and that they must have respect and be answered, it’s hard. It’s hard to deal with all those personalities, you know. [laughs] [00:41:24] He was very good at it. He fielded it here, he fielded it there, and he was very, very good at it. I can remember many other things. We’d always be at dinners and things like that. One thing I learned, as something I still remember to this day, if you need to use the ladies’ room, do so right after the main course has been removed and before the dessert comes. Then you’re back in time for all the speeches, and it’s not embarrassing. [laughs] [00:41:54] Keep that in mind. [laughs] Tracy: Okay. I’ll remember that. 171 Kennedy: [00:41:57] Also the other thing that was really funny is everywhere we went, flashbulbs going off all over the place. It was fine for me because I was just an adjunct. I didn’t have to worry about it. But it was really odd how used you can get to that. That was the time really when the FDA came into real prominence, I think, and I’m very proud of Don for having done that. Tracy: You were in Washington from 1977 to 1979, so I get the sense it was a shorter stay than you had initially thought it might be. Can you talk about your job during that time and what you felt like you were able to accomplish in the years that you were there? Kennedy: [00:42:48] Well, we did, of course, think we were going to be there for four, and that was what I thought going into it. After that first month, I did become the full director of Resources Development for the Institute of Medicine. I had had a development job, [at Stanford] but as you know, I only had it for eight or nine months. I had a lot of Stanford friends in development, and I went back and made appointments with them. I flew back, and I met with all of them, and they were so generous telling me all that they could tell me in an hour of the basic development tenets that I hadn’t been able to pick up in my first job. It was so wonderful of them. They were unstinting in their help. I went back with so much knowledge to absorb. Now, the Institute of Medicine’s development was quite different. Though they had had a resources development director before, there really had been no progress at all. Dave was development for the Institute, and he 172 was unparalleled in getting grants for the Institute of Medicine. He was just amazing. Obviously, he knew much more than I did about getting grants, so as far as grants went, I simply was a staffer doing whatever he needed. But there were the things that I did on my own. If you’re a development person, you have to have some sort of a forecast of what’s going to be needed in the future. So I told Dave I wanted to get a forecast done, and he said, “Great. Talk to Carl.” Carl Yorty was in charge. He was a program director, but the accounting reported to him. So I went to him and asked for it, and he said, “No, we just don’t have time to do that. We can’t do that.” I was discouraged by that, because you have to do it. You’ve got to know what you’re supposed to raise. [00:45:05] So I went back and I just did it myself. I asked relevant people the different questions, and I used the forecast of what inflation might be over the course of that time. The other problem was that at that time our accountants did not know how to put together balance sheets and income and expense statements. They could do the income and expenses, but they didn’t even have a bottom line, and they didn’t know how to do a balance sheet with assets and liabilities. So the first thing before I could do the forecast was I had to show them how to do a financial sheet, which I did. This was very tricky, because I stayed at home doing it all by hand. Back then, no computers to do it with. I showed it to Dave, and Dave said, “Well, you need to take that to Carl.” So I went to Carl again. Now, you can imagine, Carl was not happy with this impinging on his territory. Not many people would have been. He 173 didn’t know enough himself about accounting to know that the accountant wasn’t doing a proper job. But he did take it. I guess Dave must have told him. He did take it to Lou [the accountant]. He didn’t tell Lou, I don’t think, that I had anything to do with it. They did come up with something. It wasn’t quite perfect, and they didn’t follow my outline. I guess Carl didn’t give him the outline, because he probably didn’t want Lou to know I had thought of it. [00:46:38] But at the next meeting of the Finance Committee, which was chaired by Bill Danforth, who was head of [Washington] University in St. Louis. He was a man that I really liked and admired who was chairing the Finance Committee. He complimented the staff on the financial report. Carl accepted the compliment, but did not say anything about what I had done. It’s my first experience of this kind of thing. [00:47:15] I have to admit that I went up to Bill afterwards and said, “I’m so glad you liked that, because I’m the one that designed the finance statement.” It wasn’t precisely what I designed, but nonetheless. I was proud that I was able to assert myself, because I hadn’t been working very long in a full-time paid job. Of course, I’ve worked all my life, but not in a full-time paid job. I had to learn how to be assertive as a woman, and it was not easy for me. [00:47:45] So now I had the financial statement, the next thing had to be the forecast, and I did prepare the forecast. Again, Carl was very annoyed with me. He would not do it himself and he didn’t want me to do it, so I had a problem with a more senior colleague who was not happy with me, but, nonetheless, it had to be done and I did it. Nobody attacked it on the grounds of it being wrong, because I’d been asking the questions of all the right people, including Carl, 174 about all the program costs and so forth. So now that was prepared, and the Finance Committee passed that. So then what can you do to raise money? It turns out that the Institute of Medicine had accounts, had fund accounts, but the National Academy took the interest. So one of the first jobs was to persuade the National Academy to let us keep our own interest on the money that we were raising. The foundation grants and everything could have brought in quite a bit of interest, but we were not able to keep that interest. I pointed Dave toward it, and eventually he got Phil Handler, who was head of the National Academy, to agree to that. It wasn’t very much money as far as the National Academy was concerned. For us it was a lot. Then I pushed David about the idea that you have to have your members backing you, and David agreed. We then went out with the first solicitations to all the members of the National Academy, and it was fairly successful. Of course, those things grow as they get successful, but it was something that I was able to put in place to move forward. They sound moderately simple. They weren’t simple at all. [00:49:37] And then I worked, of course, with Dave on the different grants and was beginning to plan a strategy. But, you know, I was only there two years. I was really happy with the things that David let me do and let me accomplish, and then David used me in a lot of other ways. It was very nice to be part of it. I loved being part of the Institute of Medicine. It was just extremely rewarding, and the people that you met, the people that came in to sit on the different panels. 175 Oh, one of the things David put me in charge of was their annual meeting. [00:50:15] I’d never run anything quite that big before, although I’d run some events, obviously, through my community service. So it was huge, and it was absolutely wonderful what we were able to do. I can remember we’d have it in the big National Academy main floor. At one corner would be the oyster bar. And I was allowed to do all kinds of things that actually cost quite a bit of money, but it was talked about forever, so that was really fun. [00:50:46] Although I preferred the other aspects of my job, that was still part of the things David assigned me. Tracy: What impact do you think your two years in Washington had on you? Do you think that you changed over that time or grew professionally over that time? Kennedy: [00:51:03] I had grown a lot, a lot, and I am so grateful to David for giving me the opportunity. Had I had to go back [to DC] as most women do, and live without a job, I would have just gone out of my mind. I didn’t know anybody, and Don was working so hard. This way, we were both working hard. Don was wonderful. He would meet me at the Safeway, help me do the marketing. You know, he was a huge help. And it was lovely. I have to say that the weather made a huge impact on me. I absolutely hated the hot summers. The first summer we tried to do it without air conditioning because we weren’t home during the day and we got into airconditioned cars. I walked into the dining room. We had a dining room that was just off the garage and was in the basement, but we were on a hill, so things sloped. We walked into the dining room from the garage, and our 176 table had gotten mold on it. That was our first realization that we were growing mold in different places in the house, that you have to have the air conditioning on to keep the mold from wrecking things. [00:52:20] Then I really hated the winters. First place, I’d gotten used to our wonderful California. But second place, Washington shuts down if it snows. So if they have a snowstorm, it is hideous. They can’t get the streets cleared. They’re just not prepared. Going home, I hated the commute, too, because where we lived, you couldn’t commute by their underground at all. I think it’s called the Metro. There were no stations anywhere near us. It was wall to wall, bumper to bumper, forty-five minutes for five miles. And it didn’t matter what time you went. [00:53:08] It just always was. I remember one time Page was waiting at home, Don was away, and Page had come home from college. I’d forgotten to say that she had gotten the real bug to go back to college, and she was able to go back. Actually, I have to correct myself. She only worked in the summer for Ted Kennedy, and she got into Hampshire College. She went back to Hampshire College, and that was really wonderful. It was a February snowstorm, and it took me two hours and fifteen minutes to get home, through other cars slipping and sliding, and you’re worried you’re going to collide. I could still remember enough about driving in Syracuse to be able to drive in the snow and the ice, but most of the people couldn’t. It was scary. [DC in the winter] was damp and cold and miserable, even though it didn’t snow that often. [laughs] So I have to say that the weather had a huge impact on me. When you cannot go outside, it’s 177 really tough. I guess if I’d been there longer, I would have, of course, gotten used to it. [00:54:16] But you asked me how I’d grown. It was the confidence side. I’d been doing a lot of different things and I was learning fast. I was learning to make it in a place where I really didn’t know people, learning to deal with all kinds of the political ramifications of things. David was right in the middle of everything, and I got to see a lot from what he was doing, and it was a great learning experience. I was incredibly lucky to have had that. Of course, when we came back to Stanford, it was a huge boost to have been the resources development director at the Institute of Medicine. Mainly what it was, was learning to do something from scratch, no matter what you had to do to get the job done, whether it was in your job description or not. Tracy: So tell me a little bit about why you ended up coming back in 1979. Kennedy: [00:55:18] Well, Dick Lyman came back to see us, a lot of our friends came to see us, and as I recall, he stayed with us. He said to Don he really wanted him to come back as provost. We said, “But Dick, can’t we spend another two years? We really want to stay our four years there,” and that was true. We really did, even though we knew we’d always come back. But I was in the midst of building something, and I wanted to, and Don, the same. Dick said, “No, we can’t do it. We need you now, absolutely now. You’ve got to come back now. It’s not a question of being able to do it later.” Don was very worried that Dick would leave the presidency after we came back, and if he came back as provost, he wanted to have time doing 178 that. He wanted to have time working with Dick as a provost and not have Dick leave. He promised he was not going to leave. So we said, “Okay,” and we had to uproot ourselves to do that. It was hard to leave, and hard to leave something that you’ve been building. Of course, we also were looking forward to getting back. Now, Julia was back at Stanford, she’d gone back, and she was furious that we were coming back. [laughs] She was very happy there. Didn’t matter to Page, of course, because she would be able to come home there, and that was just fine. [00:56:53] We had driven across the country when we first came to Washington, and, again, we drove back across the country. Oh, no, that’s not right. I’m sorry. We had not. We had sent our cars out the first time. But we drove back. We drove back across the country. The first time we’d driven cross-country was when we came from Syracuse, of course. So we drove back across the country and had a wonderful time. We ended up at Hanna House just as the girls were coming out to greet us and a busload of Japanese tourists were coming up. The provost then was living in the Frank Lloyd Wright house, the Hanna House. Tracy: So you came back to Stanford in 1979. Don accepted the position as provost. Kennedy: [00:57:40] Well, I forgot to say Don would not accept the position until my job was settled. We came together as a package, and Dick, of course, knew that. So Don said, “Yes, of course I will, but we have to find Jeanne a job, because I can’t accept it formally until she has something.” 179 So, bless Dick, he just was wonderful, and I came back to Stanford. Joel Smith was then head of development and he said, “Jeanne, you have a job here anytime you want.” And at that time, I said, “Joel, look, I’ve got a lot of other abilities and things that I’d like to do. I’d, of course, love to be in development. I’m very happy you offered it, but I’d kind of like to find something that would use more of my capabilities.” He was the one that figured out that [I might apply] in the Medicine. Center. Peter Levin, head of Stanford Hospital was the younger brother of Herb Levin, who had been Don’s roommate. Peter had a public relations job listed. Joel sent me to talk to Peter, and we were just looking at what could be done and what could happen. I went back, and on the plane, I composed a whole letter to him on what I thought the hospital needed, which was something that would really connect the community more with the hospital, make the hospital better known in the community, be somewhat of a marketing thing. I had a whole series of different things that I could see the hospital needed. I wrote Peter this long letter, and, unbeknownst to me, he took that PR position that was going to be in the news bureau, and he turned it into a community relations position that would be working for the hospital more under the terms that I had said. This was a huge relief to me, because to have that done, Don formally accepted his job. But I knew maybe three months ahead of time that I would be doing that when I came back, which gave me time to think about it ahead of time. 180 [01:00:09] Hanna House was really exciting. To be able to live in a Frank Lloyd Wright house, it was unbelievable. Now, Jean Fetter met me and took me through it, and I think this is before we came out to move in, when I came back to Stanford. [01:00:25] I didn’t know at the time that I would be allowed to make changes, and Jean kept asking me what I wanted to do. She was wonderful, but I didn’t realize the extent to which--and I knew other provosts knew better. But I didn’t realize to the extent [that I could], or I might have made a few more changes. But the things that I wanted to see changed in the Hanna House. These are such funny things, with a great architect-I’ll have to tell you something. When you walk in the front door, you could see the shower stall on the master bedroom all the way across the living room and dining room, way to the other end of the house. Tracy: That’s funny. Kennedy: [01:01:09] I know. It was hysterical. Now, of course, you could close the bathroom door and you wouldn’t see it, but who leaves the bathroom door closed all the time? And it was the master bathroom which was just utterly hilarious. So I suggested they install a wooden panel. Actually, just installing one panel at the end of the shower solved the whole problem. It just matched the doors and the other wood things. But I just couldn’t believe that nobody had done that. Now, we were the second incumbent since the Hannas had left the house to the university. Paul and Jean Hanna had left the house to the university. Bill and Pat Miller had been there first. 181 I made some changes in the kitchen because they had some open shelves that I covered. And the kitchen floor was in terrible shape. All the floors were covered, so you no longer saw the hexagonal shape the Hanna House was built on. On the floors, all the tiles are hexagonal tiles. You can see them. All the floors have been restored to where they were. The rest of the floors were covered with shag carpeting--not my favorite thing, but not anything I thought I’d do anything about. So we just brought all our own furniture back, and we used all our own furniture in there. But what I did in the kitchen was I had them take the floor down to the original cement, and it went down through layers and layers of linoleum and asphalt and what have you, and then we finished the cement. I’m so proud of that because it was wonderful, and we got that back. I also insisted on having some of the furniture brought back, just to show the Frank Lloyd Wright furniture, two armchairs. I think the little dining room table was already there, and it had an oddly hexagonal shape too. I had one dining room chair brought back, just so people could see it. The chair had a tripod base, not legs, but straight pieces of wood serving as a tripod base. [01:03:19] The only problem was you sit down on it and you can fall over. [laughs] It’s not balanced. You can’t balance. I kept one of them in the living room, and I used to amaze and horrify people that came to the parties by showing them. I’d sit on the chair and I’d just go like this. I didn’t fall, but I showed them how easily you could fall. It was quite funny. [laughs] Tracy: That is funny. 182 Kennedy: [01:03:42] Hanna House had a very low ceiling coming from the front door into the living room. It was so low that David Packard had to be warned to duck his head. You will remember that Wright himself was a short man, and the Hannas were not very tall, so nobody needed to have that. [01:04:02] The house itself, people used to say, “How could you live in it?” It wasn’t simple to live in, it really wasn’t, because there was no guest room. There were no places for the children. There was exactly one bedroom. There was a back building that had, I guess, a maid’s bedroom. It was in terrible shape. I didn’t know that we could fix that up. So poor Page had to stay there, because she had now finished college, and she was in the midst of deciding where she was going next. So she had to stay in this bedroom. Later, Julia was in it, and Page, when she came back, had to sleep in the study on this little hard bench. The other thing was that that hard bench needed reupholstering, and I was trying to find some kind of--well, what I now know is ikat, batik-dyed ethnic cloth that would go with the house. The university facilities people didn’t know what to do with that, so we weren’t able to do that. For other provosts, things were more sophisticated. They did better things than that with the house. As everybody knows, the house had been built with a number of bedrooms for the Hannas’ children, and I think they had three. It was built to change when the children left home--the walls were taken down and where their rooms were is now a beautiful study. Now, that study had very low ceilings, because you’re sitting down, right? The idea was mostly you’re sitting down. But it was low enough that you had to worry a little bit, if you were tall, about ducking. 183 The house was just beautiful to live in. The angles were gorgeous. Getting to know a house like that was amazing. One of the bathrooms, not the master bathroom but one of the guest bathrooms, went all the way up to the roof with a skylight. And, of course, every room was oddly angled. There’s only one right angle in the Hanna House. I don’t even know why there’s one, but there is only one. The fireplace is magnificent, just incredible. And all of the house is supported from the fireplace out. The walls, the glass panes, the pillars that hold the glass walls--the pillars are hexagonal in shape and hollow, but they’re like folded paper. Folded paper will hold something much heavier than if it’s straight. So it was a miracle of design. [01:06:42] The kitchen is something that everyone laughs at. How could I manage the kitchen? The kitchen is very long and thin, and it has these long, long, thin--I call them portholes. They’re just shutters that open to the living room, or close. So you can have it open for circulation, or if you want to hide what’s going on in the kitchen, you can close them. So I like to have them open most of the time, but when we have parties, big parties, we’d have to close them. So the kitchen’s long and thin and not simple to work in, and I got a big kick out of it. I would try to figure out how I could get every single step done going down the kitchen to the end so I didn’t have to keep running back and forth when I was getting a meal. [01:07:30] But it was a beautiful place to be. The thing that struck Don and me the funniest--I mean, this is really funny. We had raccoons on the roof, and what was it Don called them? He had something about their running competition. But they made so much 184 noise on that beautiful copper roof, you wouldn’t believe how much noise they made on it. And the odd thing was that the earthquakes did the same thing. We thought it was the raccoons. The earthquakes rolled across that roof, so before you felt that house shake, the noise of the roof was like a herd of not just raccoons, it was like a herd of cows going over that roof. It was terrifying. And then the house would shake. When the Hannas were worried about the fault he was building the house on, Wright said, “Tell the university who built the Imperial Hotel in Japan.” Well, the Imperial Hotel, I guess, got hit by an earthquake and didn’t make it through. But that was later. [01:08:34] But the Hanna House made it more or less through the earthquake, but it’s the last time anybody lived in it. The other parts that were kind of funny were things such as we discovered a baseball bat under the bed, and it was when Pat Miller was worried about intruders, so she kept a baseball bat under the bed. We’d be sitting at breakfast at the little table in the dining room and look up--this literally happened--and there was a guy with his hands on the window, his faced pressed to the window, looking in at us at breakfast. Many people didn’t realize it was being lived in privately, and they thought of it as an architectural miracle they wanted to see. We were always having busloads of Japanese tourists without an okay come by to look. Don walked over to this guy with his face pressed to the window and said, “May I help you?” You never saw a more startled fellow. It was a little bit difficult to live in a house like that. 185 We did keep the house open for tours every week, because I was at work and it was fine with me to have them tour. It was a little hard to keep picked up, but we were able to manage. Tracy: [laughs] So you came back in 1979. Don was provost for a year? Kennedy: [01:09:51] Don was provost for only one year. But we had to stay in Hanna House after he became president. Tracy: You came here on the understanding that Dick Lyman wasn’t going to leave the presidency, but obviously that ended up being quite different. So do you remember Don being asked to be president and what that was like? Kennedy: [01:10:16] Oh, I remember very clearly. [laughter] Well, first place, Dick announced it [his resignation]. We were not happy that he was doing this, but he obviously needed to, and Don forgave him. Then there was a huge amount of speculation, and everybody was sure that Don was a shoo-in, but we knew that wasn’t true. I mean, they had a national search, and it was very embarrassing for us to have all the talk be, “Well, of course you’re going to be president.” “Yeah, well, what if you’re not?” And you can’t think, “Do you want to be president or not?” You’ve got to wait till you know if it’s being offered or not. That was a very difficult time. I got this absolutely great idea, and I said to him, “Don”--this was in the spring when all this speculation was going on--“Let’s plant a big vegetable garden.” This sounds sort of funny, but nobody plants a vegetable garden that’s planning to move to Hoover House in a few months. [laughs] [01:11:18] It actually worked like a charm, and the funny thing is that Hanna 186 House had a hillside that had been filled with compost with a lot of sun, and it was the best growing spot. We were able to grow things we’ve never grown before. We grew melons. Really, real melons. We grew eggplant, and we had tomatoes by the bucket load. [01:11:38] We had a huge vegetable garden, and I think I talked about the vegetable garden Don had to leave in Virginia. [01:11:45] Well, we had not had one since then, and so I said to him, “Let’s make up for that one you had to leave.” You know what? It did the trick. People, when they saw us doing a vegetable garden, they quit speculating. They figured that we weren’t planning on it, and I was so happy about that. Then, of course, it did happen. He did get asked, but we never took that for granted in the slightest, and we were fully prepared not [to be asked]. He loved being provost, so it wasn’t that he was too worried about it. The only thing you worry there is will you get on with the current president. So I don’t remember a formal asking, but I do remember when it was announced. I think I talked about Dick and Jing’s announcement. If I didn’t, when it was announced for them, there was a wonderful picture of them walking away, hand-in-hand, with Jing in a great big hat. Then with Don, I remember we did it, and the band was there and everything. And the band shouted, “Any requests?” I said, “How about ‘All Right Now’?” And they played “All Right Now.” [01:12:52] It was just a very joyful, fun thing. Of course, Julia was furious. That was worse than provost. [laughs] 187 Tracy: You may have no idea, but I wonder when Dick came to Washington while Don was still at the FDA and asked Don to come back as provost (and made assurances that he didn’t have any plans to leave the presidency), do you think he knew then that he might actually be leaving the presidency? Kennedy: [01:13:18] Well, if you know Dick, he’s a total man of integrity. So I can’t imagine he didn’t have some idea that he needed to leave fairly soon for his own sanity, but I’m sure that he didn’t on purpose say that, knowing that he wasn’t going to stay. By the time he did want to go, and he obviously had talked with Don about it and explained, it was okay then. It wasn’t that he had it well in mind, though anybody might wonder, as you did, whether or not he did. But I don’t think so. I never got any hint of it till they told us either, and we were often at Hoover House. [01:14:04] I used to get put next to Dick because every now and then Dick would not be in a communicative mode when they had a great big party. Development knew that Dick and I got along really well, so they’d always put me next to him so I could cheer him up if he was tired or cross or being curmudgeonly. [laughter] Tracy: Dick announces that he’s going to retire, you and Don go through the search process and the stress of that waiting. As you had mentioned, you ended up staying, even after Don becomes president, in Hanna House for a couple years. Kennedy: [01:14:51] One year more. Tracy: While Hoover House was being renovated. I read your report that you wrote on Hoover House, and I remember you describing the tour that Jing gave you of Hoover House after Don had accepted the position. [laughs] So can 188 you tell me a little bit again about that tour Jing gave you and what you remember seeing as you went through Hoover House? Kennedy: [01:15:20] Well, Jing called up and she said, “Dear, I want you to come and see Hoover House because you’re going to be living there.” So I said, “Okay.” I had seen it many, many, many times and I’d been with Jing alone in it, but I’d never really seen the whole thing. So I go over and I realized, when you look at it with the eyes of someone that has to live there, how much needed to be done. But I had no idea till I started to go over it with Jing. The downstairs, the dining room had huge water damage that had wrecked one deep windowsill and down the walls. The big kitchen was just horrible; it looked like an old restaurant kitchen and it was very ugly. They had made a little kitchen in the butler’s pantry that was totally inoperable, and I liked to cook, so I couldn’t stand that little tiny kitchen. The breakfast room was filled with a huge freezer, available for caterers. There was gold shag rug. Now, I have to say at this point, the house was redone for the Pitzers. It was not done for the Lymans, and Pitzer was only there eighteen months, so for the Lymans, there’s no way they could change anything. I will say it wasn’t something that they were much into either. Jing was saying, “I’ve been leaving this for you.” That was her comment. [laughs] But the house was covered with shag rug, again, not my favorite. I guess it was an era thing. Gold shag rug everywhere, and orange shag rug on the stairs. In fact, the beautiful stone stairs were covered with orange shag 189 rug, and when we took it up, there were nail holes so we actually couldn’t have the stone stairs uncovered then. Downstairs, the Lyman kids who had been living there--you know what kids do to a place. I mean, they do. The Lymans had been there for, gee, I guess it was ten years. The kids grew up there, really. [01:17:25] Oh, and Jing showed me funny things. There was a little cupboard, probably a linen cupboard, without shelves. She opened the doors and it was lined with all kinds of magazine pictures and newspaper pictures. It had been Tim’s hideaway. He could fit in there, and he just covered it with all his own things. It was so sweet. It was really cute. It was funny. In the downstairs, the carpets were that thin gray of worn-out carpet. When we went upstairs in Jing’s bedroom, they lived at the top floor, she had a teacup on her bed catching the drips because the roof leaked everywhere. Downstairs, just off what later became the Queen’s Room, was a huge pipe about ten inches in diameter coming down from the roof into a huge, huge garbage can, a plastic garbage can, to catch the water. And the room itself had such extensive water damage, the whole wainscoting was buckled. [01:18:34] And tile off the hearth. So it was in terrible shape, and I was in despair. I didn’t have a clue how I was going to do it. I remember I went home and cried. This was a huge undertaking. I’d never done anything like that. [01:18:50] All I’d done is redo a kitchen. [laughs] Tracy: I do want to talk about the Hoover House renovations, but before we get into that, I wonder if you remember any other preparations that you went through in order to become the president’s wife? I mean, Jing invited you 190 over and showed you Hoover House. Were there other things that you remember happening to prepare you for those responsibilities? Kennedy: [01:19:17] Well, of course, as provost’s wife, I had to entertain, but I didn’t know the extent to which--I remember one of the big things for me was I was used to cooking meals for people. When it became something I had to do for development, I had to get a caterer, and I’d never had a caterer, and I felt guilty about it. I felt I should be cooking. [01:19:43] I think we must have used some other caterers, but at a certain point I realized that Victoria Emmons could cater. I think maybe I didn’t know that when Don was provost. But that was one of the things I had to learn--how to work with caterers. Really, it bothered me terribly. Now, why it should, I don’t know. But we didn’t have very many parties at Hanna House. We had a few development affairs, and development would help get it going. They were wonderful about that. I was not preparing to be president’s wife because I was working full-time, and I guess I didn’t feel--I didn’t get prepared at all. [laughs] [01:20:27] I had to get the house ready, so that’s a huge job in itself, while working full-time. So I had to figure a way to do that. That was a major piece of preparing to be [a president’s wife]. I was relieved that nobody minded that I had a full-time job. It turned out they did mind. Some of the old guard minded a lot, but they didn’t say so, because they wanted Don to be president. It’s a little hard to say. We had to officiate at things where before we were backup guests to help the president, so I don’t really think that there was much preparation. It was more like jumping in feet first. 191 Tracy: Let’s then go back to Hoover House--tell me about some of the things you did to help get it back in running order. Kennedy: [01:21:24] Oh, my. Peter Bing was chair of the board, and I was talking to him some time when we were having dinner with the Bings, or at least I remember talking to Peter, and he was asking what I was going to do about Hoover House. And I said, “Peter, I’ve got to find a decorator.” Peter was dead against that, and he said, “No, no, they charge so much money, and you can’t do that.” That really threw me, because I didn’t have clue one. Well, how would I do it if I didn’t have a decorator? I didn’t have that kind of knowledge. Also it isn’t that I wanted to work with a decorator. I was scared to death of decorators. I had a picture in my mind, because I had never worked with one. You’ve got to realize, they’re all new to me. [01:22:15] Margaret Dilg, whom I made friends with when I was on the Committee for Art, she knew so much about furniture. She helped me get the dining room chairs, the antique dining room chairs that Don and I wanted, and she was just [great], so I knew she had a lot of knowledge. She was at that time working as a secretary in plastic surgery in the medical school. I asked her out to lunch, and I said, “Margaret, would you be a consultant that we pay to act as a buffer between me and the decorator? Because I don’t know anything and you know so much.” She said, “Jeanne, I have to see Hoover House to tell you. I have to look at it.” [01:23:06] So she went to look at it, and she came back and she said, “Jeanne, it’s too big a job to do that way. Why don’t you second me to 192 the President’s Office, and I’ll do the whole thing for you on a salary, and you will get what I pay for furniture. I won’t charge the markup,” which is where the decorators make their money. That was just wonderful. What a relief. We were able to do that. Of course, plastic surgery was sorry to lose her, but she was wasted as a secretary, I have to say. They loved her because she ran events and everything for them. She got seconded into the President’s Office and was able to start right away. I told Peter, and he was thrilled. He said, “That’s great.” So that made me so happy because I’d been upset. I didn’t know what a solution might be for this. So he was absolutely thrilled, and I have to say she saved six months’ salary with the first rug we bought. Amazing, just amazing. Tracy: [laughs] That puts it into perspective. Kennedy: [01:24:12] Now, the university had put aside some money. The university had put aside a lot of money for what their part would be, which was to do various repairs. They had various things that they were responsible for. We had a budget that I was responsible for. I’ve got to say it wasn’t very much for what had to be done, but we, Margaret and I, just went full tilt into it. Tracy: You’ve talked about wanting Hoover House to have a style that was cozy but elegant. Do you feel like you were able to achieve that, and what had informed cozy but elegant? Kennedy: [01:25:04] That’s true, and that is exactly what I wanted. It surprised me hearing you say it. I’d forgotten you’d read that. It was what I wanted. I wanted it to go back to the feel that it had when the Hoovers were there somewhat. I mean, you couldn’t do it all. I had all the pictures of the house 193 when the Hoovers were there, that were extant. I got them out of the archives. I wanted it to look like a family lived there. I also wanted it to be more like how the Sterlings had it too. It was definitely a house that they lived in, the Sterlings, and I liked Ann’s style a lot. I mean, that was my first acquaintance with Hoover House. So I wanted to make an amalgam, but I wanted it to be a place that Don and I felt at home in. I didn’t want to walk through any public rooms. So my first thing was that there would be something of ours in every single room. No room would be totally furnishings belonging to Stanford. We had to get rid of everything that was there, except there were very few antiques that were beautiful and some other things that we found that we could use. But the hotel furniture was just awful. Obviously, the dining room table stayed, and they had good chairs. They had Chippendale-style chairs. That was after what I think the Hoovers had. I wanted to have Chippendale chairs that were real antiques, but that would be too much. I did get some, but I got them for me. I got one for Hoover House, and I got two for me, but they were, of course, in Hoover House, and I liked that. Other than that, oh, lord. I had to redo the kitchen too. The pantry kitchen itself, I told you, I was not going to use that. That little tiny kitchen was so bad that when you turned the fan on, the gas would go out from under the pot you were boiling something on. So we turned that back into a butler’s pantry. [01:27:07] The big kitchen I made into a kitchen that I could 194 use with these wonderful little tiles that I just loved. It still had the commercial dishwasher, but we put in a family dishwasher and generally made it workable. We took the freezer out--we didn’t have a big commercial freezer. We just used our regular kitchen freezer, trying to just be able to live as people do. The caterers did not need a huge freezer. They were able to do it without that. Tracy: The renovations took a year. Eventually, you were able to move into Hoover House and start living there, but I imagine that the ongoing furnishing and decorating probably went beyond that initial year. How did you manage such a big task while you were, as you said, working full-time? You had other responsibilities--you’re still a wife and mother. I mean, how did you manage all of that? [laughter] Kennedy: [01:28:17] Well, it was having Margaret, because Margaret really ran that whole renovation. She was always talking to me, and I was always seeing things. The other thing that was really wonderful was the university gave me a full-time position to use as I needed it, and it was just amazing. There was no question about it. They just gave it to me, and so I used it. I had somebody working for me in the hospital. It was half-time working for the hospital doing hospital things and half-time my personal assistant as the president’s wife. So I had somebody that could go and do just all these different things that needed to be done. It was just wonderful, and she could do both jobs at once because they were intertwined. That was the greatest thing anybody could do for me. 195 There was a house manager who was there. I’ve got to say that he was somebody who was deeply loyal to the Lymans, and he found it really hard to work for somebody else. He wanted to have too big a hand in the renovation of Hoover House, and he didn’t have the taste to do it. He did resign just as we moved in and left five days before the great big event we gave, which was the graduation reception where all the graduating seniors come to Hoover House with their families. That was a little bit hard figuring out how to manage that, because we did not have a house manager at all. But there was Billie Bell, who was the housekeeper, and so these people were wonderful people, all of them. I was lucky to have all that help, but it was a struggle to get it done. And I couldn’t skimp my job. [laughs] [01:30:21] But when I had to do something for the university, I had to take vacation time from the hospital. Tracy: Lots to juggle during that time. So you were overseeing this renovation of Hoover House. Certainly you were responsible for university entertaining. Were there other major responsibilities that you had either in your short time as provost’s wife and as president’s wife beyond the renovations and the entertaining? Kennedy: [01:30:56] The president’s wife at Stanford is supposed to be--you know how we say we’re all a family at the Farm? Tracy: Yes. Kennedy: [01:31:03] Well, it’s supposed to be--oh, it sounds corny to say the mother, and it’s not that at all. It’s somebody who cares about everybody and who wants to help the university run, never mind help the husband who’s the 196 president, and the president is supposed to feel this way too. The responsibilities you undertake are really more your own ideas. You can do what you want to do yourself. I wanted to entertain. I wanted to entertain at Hoover House and have everybody see what it was. And I wanted to make sure that the most people in the university that I could get felt that they were part of the Stanford family, part of the president, a part of all of these things. So I really worked with Don to figure out what we could do to enhance things. The first thing was the greeting for the freshmen undergraduates. That’s in the fall. We added in all the new graduate students. And for the graduating seniors, we added in all the graduating graduate students. So that was it. The new faculty had always had a party at Hoover House under the Sterlings, but not under the Pitzers or Lymans--it had been held elsewhere-so we brought that back. Because I was in administration, I also added in senior administrative staff, trying always to include more people. [01:32:42] I’ve got to tell you, it’s no harder to give an event for six or seven thousand people than for four thousand. I mean, seriously. [laughter] Whatever it is, huge numbers. Huge numbers, you know, it doesn’t matter. The first year, we had fifty-two events in Hoover House, and I think the comparable situation would have been maybe twenty, twenty-two events in Hoover House before. You start out with a lot of enthusiasm. I have to say after a few years, I did get more tired and we sort of had to cut back a little bit, but we started out strong. I think mostly for me it was balancing the things that I felt were appropriate responsibilities as other presidents’ wives 197 [had done] with my job. I couldn’t skimp the job because if you’re the president’s wife, you’ve actually got to be a lot better at the job than anybody who isn’t the president’s wife. [01:33:42] Never mind the problems of being a woman in a job at a level like that. So there’s no way I could skimp that. So I ended up finding a lot of ways to maximize what I did, but also to help Don maximize what he did without actually having to do everything. So one of the things we did was when people would ask us for dinner, and I would say, “Well, we’re tied up, I’m sorry, but we could come for cocktails,” and they were always thrilled with that part. The thing is, if you go for cocktails, you can see a lot more people. Well, the dinner means sitting down at a table with a small number of people. So if you want to maximize the impact, you go for cocktails and you really work hard at cocktails. I would always take a glass of sparkling water with a lime in it so it looked like I was drinking gin and tonic. [laughs] But I couldn’t. Now, I like to drink, and I like my wine and I like drinks, but you can’t do it in a case like that. I saved it for when we’d go home. Then, of course, we’d go home and I’d make supper and we’d have wine. I had to say no to a lot of things, but since I was the community relations director at the hospital, what I did do was use the house for meetings of community nonprofits that I had something to with. [01:35:11] So we had all kinds of wonderful organizations able to use the house. The Junior League used it. Each year we would have the new actives come so that new people [could be linked to] the Stanford community. So that was a fairly big meeting. 198 I always had the emeriti tea, and it had been a rather skimpy tea before this, but I decided I would make it a very big tea. I know that people when they’re older often don’t want to drive in the dark, so you want to have it early enough for tea, and I would give them enough so they didn’t have to go make supper or go out for dinner. We had really hefty hors d’oeuvres, and the best thing was I decided to have sherry with the tea. [laughter] That was very popular. That was really fun--making the house happy for people and maximizing the kinds of people that came to it. Now, obviously, that was a Stanford thing, not the community service things. But like the Children’s Health Council had meetings. I can’t even remember all the different things I was involved in back then, but each of them I would offer the house as a meeting place. I remember that we had, oh, some fundraiser for one of these organizations, I can’t remember which one, and it involved flower arrangements all over Hoover House. That was how I met Katsy Swan who later did the garden at Hoover House. My role, I think--now that you’re asking me, I hadn’t thought about it before--was how to make the most people at Stanford feel that the house was part of their lives and how to make the community, through the house, feel more connected to Stanford proper. Tracy: That’s fantastic. So in your time at Hoover House there, you’ve talked about events a lot--entertaining was a big part of it. There was one particularly important event at Hoover House, which was the queen’s visit in 1983. 199 Kennedy: [01:37:28] Oh, absolutely, absolutely. [laughs] Tracy: So tell me when did the possibility of the queen visiting Stanford--do you remember that moment? Kennedy: [01:37:40] Well, I do, but I need to go back just to say something. You had mentioned the fact that when we moved into Hoover House, we still had a lot of things to do for it. Well, when you gave these big events like the queen, you were all constantly worried about “would something go wrong with the house” because we didn’t replumb the house. It would have been too expensive. [01:37:58] So the first thing that went wrong, we had a big community thing I think for the Junior League, and everybody wanted to tour the house. The day before, David Voss calls me because there was a river running down the hallway of the lower part of the house, and the pipes had broken. So we had to have the Junior League with a river running through it, and we put planks across so they could actually get into the rooms and look at them while this river was running. [laughs] But this is the kind of thing that would happen all the time. A pipe would burst overhead; it was often to do with the pipes. So it’s just a footnote into it, whenever you had a big event, you had to know that something might go wrong. As for the queen, that was exciting, because it was really a hospital thing at first. [01:39:01] My boss, Sheldon King, called me into the office and he said, “Well, you’re going to be just amazed at this, but we’ve had a feeler from the British consul general in San Francisco and the Queen of England would like to see our hospital, and you’re in charge.” [laughs] 200 So I was like, “Ah, okay.” I was really excited about that, so I got hold of John Beaven, who had been the consul general, and said that I’d been assigned to work with him for the hospital. We talked and we got to know each other, and he was a really nice guy. Don and I are in bed reading about ten-thirty one night, I guess it was ten-fifteen. John calls on the phone, so I answer it. And he says, “Well, Jeanne, you want the good news or the bad news?” And I said, “Uh, I guess the bad news first.” And he said, “Well, the queen is seeing too many hospitals, and she’s not interested in seeing a hospital, but she would like to take tea with the president.” And I said, “Oh, does it include the president’s wife?” He said, “Assuredly.” I said I was disappointed because an opportunity in the hospital to be professional and show what I could do there was wonderful, but actually this was even more exciting. I met with John, and he said, “Well, where are we going to have it?” I said, “Well, in our house, of course.” That’s how I tended to refer to Hoover House. His face dropped, and I said, “Well, I mean the president’s house.” And he still did not look at all like he thought that would work. I said, “John, come and see it.” So he came down, and we went up to see Hoover House. He said, “Oh, oh, okay.” [laughter] Tracy: Oh, this will do. 201 Kennedy: [01:40:56] This will do, right. This will do. Tracy: So at some point it shifted from a tea to a luncheon, which I don’t think are necessarily drastically different, but it was decided you’d have the queen for a meal. In terms of planning, what were the big things you had to figure out early on? Kennedy: [01:41:20] Well, yes, you’re right, and the move to a luncheon was, of course, the queen’s call to do. It was fine, not at all a problem. But then comes the logistics of it, and for a tea, we could have held more people. I could seat ninety. One of the things I’d figured out in Hoover House was how to pack the most people in for dinner parties. I’d done a lot of entertaining, and I knew that the closer you packed people, the better fun they had, actually. It sounds funny, but it turns out to be true. I’d already started figuring all that kind of stuff. To do that, we would have to have three tables in the living room, and we always put somebody important at those three tables, so nobody would feel like those tables were of lesser importance. So all of that was already figured out. But, the problems were who do you invite. I mean, this is an overwhelming problem. Now, we had ninety places. The queen’s retinue, as I recall, took up-Tracy: The number you had was fifteen. Kennedy: [01:42:28] Okay, that sounds right. Fifteen. Thanks for reminding me. [laughter] I should have looked at this too. Oh, it was fifteen, so that takes fifteen off it. Then there were Don and me, and we wanted both our daughters to come. Page was now at NYU, and she was like no, she didn’t 202 have time for that, which disappointed me. Later she was disappointed, too, but she didn’t come. But also the Oliphants, they were part of our family, Joe and Lucy Oliphant. So that’s five more. So now let’s see, that’s eighty. Then the trustees all wanted to come. Well, you start thinking okay, and the first question that comes up is, never mind who wants to come, do you have them with their spouses? A lot of the Stanford people were telling me, no, it should be all Stanford people. But I’m thinking, “Oh, yeah, right.” Can you imagine it’s the guy that is invited and the wife is a real fan of the queen? You can’t split families this way. It just didn’t seem right. I said, “No, no, it’s Don and me. The queen’s bringing her husband. And we just can’t do that. You’ve got to have the spouses.” So that was decided on. Well, of course, that then cuts back the number of Stanford representatives. Oh, we had to have students, of course. So any rate, if you add the trustees, it would have filled all the slots practically, in essence, and you couldn’t. So we had to figure out how to deal with it. This took kind of agonized planning. Don and I really had to do it because nobody else could--they gave us advice but we had to make the decisions. We decided that we would have two trustees and their wives, because we knew who they were: Peter Bing and I think it was Bill Kimball, who was then head of the Board of Trustees. Peter was representing the former trustees that had been there. I think he was still on board, but he was not president. Bill was the representative of the current trustees. Then we had to decide about faculty, because you’ve got to have faculty. [01:44:57] Well, I’ve forgotten now how many faculty we picked, but we had to pick 203 them from the Advisory Board, we decided, because the Advisory Board is elected by the faculty themselves. So we picked faculty representatives. I doubt we had more than two. Then we had to have representatives of the staff, and I know we had two staff. We might have had a bit more faculty. So then there’s all of the students you have to have. I mean, it was just incredible. So we had to have representatives of all kinds of students, undergraduates, graduates. We went down the line. I’m trying to think of what other categories. Oh, donor categories, too.People that were big-time donors. Well, Peter Bing was one of them, and I can’t remember what we did about that, but we made some sensible decision for representation of all of the Stanford communities. [01:45:54] We did get that done--we never heard a complaint that they weren’t represented, but there were many, many complaints that people couldn’t come. Tracy: Right. Kennedy: [01:46:04] Then we had the problem of the students [who] wanted to bring other people, so we said, “No, no, you can’t unless you’re--.” And they said, “Well, we’re engaged.” “Okay, if you’re engaged, you can bring someone.” If you’re just living together, then they wanted to bring the person they’re living with. “No, if you’re just living together, you can’t.” It’s all these little bitty decisions, and, really, realistically speaking, it was me making them. I made them with Pat Boesch, who was in development, and she was in charge of it. Pat was 204 fabulous, so we would make these decisions together, and Don would ratify them. And it just kept going like that. The students got into this thing that they would compete to be the students who were picked. Well, this was hysterically funny, but we couldn’t pick them just because they brought us breakfast at Hoover House. They would send us poems, they would write why they felt they really had to be the person involved. It was wild. I can’t even tell you how many people did it. And we would be laughing and happy to see the students, but we’d say, “We can’t do it that way. It isn’t going to work. You’re wonderful to want to do it, but please don’t because we can’t pick you this way.” It didn’t stop anybody from it. At one point, I forget what it was--I think I just got the idea of having buttons made that were for Queen Elizabeth’s visit. Because we couldn’t fill the need for people that wanted to be there, we bought them for people we had to turn down by letter as a special thing for them. It was not a simple issue. Tracy: So tell me about the menu. There was lots of speculation about the menu. [laughs] Kennedy: [01:47:55] Yeah. Well, also the other thing I wanted to do was have the people that always worked for us. Not to have a fancy caterer. Many caterers offered their services for free, seriously, and fancy ones. We had Victoria [Emmons]. She’s plenty fancy enough. Actually, she was very good. So, of course, the menu was figured out with her. I forget what we had for hors d’oeuvres, but the starting course was a smoked salmon mousse done in the 205 shape of flowers, with pieces of edible potted peas for stems and the leaves. It was a beautiful thing that we did. [01:48:35] We had a chicken dish; I think it was chicken Florentine. I remember it had cream sauce and fresh asparagus. We wanted to showcase California produce. Dessert was my favorite dessert, which I got Victoria to make all the time. It was something I made. Reine di Saba from Julia Child, lovely, a rich, dense chocolatey cake and raspberries and whipped cream. One of the problems we had were the wines at Hoover House. And darling Jack Uephrat at one time said to me, “Jeanne, what do you do about wines?” I said, “We have our caterer pick them.” Then he said, “Oh, this is not a good idea.” Of course, he didn’t know how good Victoria was, but he said, “Not a good idea,” and he proceeded to form a wine committee who gave money to Stanford that they then spent on the different wines. So I had somebody very knowledgeable to pick the wines, and he picked Grgich Hills and I forget what else. [laughs] Tracy: But very excellent. Kennedy: [01:49:40] Excellent, excellent wines, and so we could be very proud. [laughs] I forgot about the menu. So they had a press conference for me. Luckily, I had been subjected to all of those flashbulbs with Don, so I actually was able to face them with equanimity. I came home from work and everybody’s ready and I go into the living room, and all of a sudden flashbulbs and everything, cameras whirring, because there were TV stations and 206 newspapers and everything represented. So as I say, I was lucky I could maintain my calm. [laughs] Then they were firing questions at me, and everything was just wonderful. At one point, they asked me some question that I didn’t know, and I dramatically threw my hand to my head, and said, “Ah!” Of course, the minute I did that, all the cameras went off, and it was the picture that was published a number of places. “Mrs. Kennedy says, ‘Oh, no,’” or something like that. [laughter] I think I did say, “Oh, no,” about something that they’d asked me. They pressed me hard about the menu, and I said, “Oh, no, I’m not going to tell you the menu. I want everybody to be surprised. You don’t tell people coming to your house the menu.” They wanted to know the budget for the menu, and they said, “Do you have a budget?” I said, “Sure, we have a budget.” They said, “We want to know what it is.” I said, “No, I’m not going to tell you the budget.” Luckily, they were very nice to me. I mean, those were the only two things I wouldn’t tell them. Of course, I couldn’t tell the route the queen was going to take because of security for the total thing. But it was a lot of fun, actually. They were laughing because I wouldn’t tell them. They weren’t angry. We had the greatest press coverage. No question about it. Everybody got into the act. It was amazing. And darling Ken Yimm, who I just love, I mean, what a dear. He’s now dead, but he was always a reporter that I liked. 207 I’d known him for a long time. And I think there’s even a picture of him doing an interview with me after the queen’s visit. Tracy: So tell me a little bit about the day of the event. You’d had months of planning and press conferences and all of that. So what do you remember of the actual day? Kennedy: [01:51:58] The day dawned. [laughs] The old novels for kids used to read, “The day dawned.” “The day of the football game dawned cold and clear.” Well, this day did not. It was not clear. It was actually drizzling and raining. You remember I told you about there’s always something wrong with Hoover House? Tracy: Yes. Kennedy: [01:52:19] Well, the day of the queen’s visit, we had a leak in the living room, drip, drip, drip, drip. [laughs] Don was frantic, and I was like, “Don’t worry about it. We’ll just put a--” Well, he was frantic about the worry that it would [leak], and it actually did. I said, “We’ll put a silver wine bucket under it or something.” Actually, David Voss, the house manager then, he pushed a flower arrangement under it, and it dripped into the flower arrangement. [laughter] Oh, dear, oh, dear. Well, I had to go get my hair done, of course, and when I came back, they took pictures of me coming back in my baggy old pants and an old sweater. I walked up to the door to go in, and the Secret Service was already there, and so was the sheriff for Santa Clara County. [laughs] And the Stanford Daily is yelling at me from down the road, and I hear, “Mrs. Kennedy, Mrs. Kennedy, they won’t let us come because we’re late.” 208 Well, we had to build a huge grandstand for the press in the driveway. We had two hundred of the press that came, and they had to be there on time. Well, wouldn’t you know the Daily would be late. The Daily has to be there. [01:53:47] So I go back to the Secret Service guy, say, “This is the student paper. I know they’re late, but they have to be there.” He says to me, “But, ma’am, I don’t know who you are.” [laughter] The sheriff says, “I’ll vouch for Mrs. Kennedy,” and he’s got a great big belly. He looked like the prototype of a sheriff, the guns in the belt and everything. “I’ll vouch for Mrs. Kennedy.” So they let the Daily come. [laughs] They’d just finished with the dogs going through. The dogs went through sniffing for explosives and drugs. I think it was mostly explosives, but I guess they probably could do drugs too. Anyway, everybody had to get out of the house. Now, that’s while I was still at my hair, thank goodness, but everybody had to get out of the house. There are pictures of the dogs going through the media smelling their backpacks and everything like that. So that’s going on, and that was just finishing up when I got back. We had to feed two hundred--well, we didn’t have to feed. What I made the decision to do was I wanted to feed the Secret Service. Well, I had to feed the queen’s retinue that wasn’t seated at the table, and that was about twenty. Tracy: Right. 209 Kennedy: [01:55:07] They were fed upstairs in the girls’ rooms, and then there was the Secret Service, and there were about the same number of them, and they were fed down in the conference room. Then I said, “Let’s feed the media.” We got box lunches for all of those people, and I said, “Let’s put in little half-bottles of wine.” I’m telling you, that made the press coverage of the day fabulous. I had a lot of the media thanking us. Secret Service didn’t, nor did the retinue, but then I didn’t really speak to them much about it. The Secret Service were too busy keeping their eyes out for trouble. But the media, a lot of them thanked me. They said, “Nobody’s ever fed us before.” It was kind of neat. See, it was a wonderful time when Stanford could afford to do these things, and it was great. So, okay, I go and get changed, and I come out. The drip is still dripping. Everybody’s clustered around, everybody’s nervous. Don’s out front pacing. There’s this hysterical picture of him pacing with his hands behind his back, and he’s fussing about the drip. Luckily, it cleared up. Actually, the rain cleared up just before she came, so we were really very lucky to have that happen. [01:56:24] A lot of the staff wanted to be on hand to see what was going on. The butler for the Sterlings, was named Boris and his wife was Essie Boris. I’ve forgotten his first name, but he was always called Boris. He’s long dead, but we kept Essie coming to the Hoover House because she loved to be there so much. She’d polish silver and help out. Of course, they were English, so she wanted to see the queen. The problem was that Essie was given to screaming when she got excited. [laughs] So Billie Bell was detailed to take Essie upstairs to look over 210 the banister and out the windows, and if she squealed, to put her hand over her mouth. [laughter] There was a lot of little stuff you have to be careful about here. [01:57:16] And then Margaret Dilg and Katsy Swann owned the same dress, and they knew that. They thought they had agreed that Margaret would wear the dress and Katsy wouldn’t, but they ended up both wearing the same dress. [laughs] Luckily, they were both [inaudible] that much. But all these little things kept happening. Elizabeth Marincola was detailed to stand at the door. She had to memorize all the names of the guests and try to memorize their pictures, because the Secret Service had said she had to make sure that nobody got in that wasn’t supposed to. [laughs] [01:57:57] Actually, we had nametags for everybody, so that was another safeguard, but everybody was nervous waiting for it to happen. Then, of course, everybody was worried about something happening along the way, because the Irish were protesting somewhere along the route, so Marv Harrington and the police were all on duty. As people were all arriving, they all had to come before the queen came, of course, everybody was excited and happy with smiles on the faces. Don and I are greeting them, and it was pretty good. We were so relieved that the roof had stopped leaking and that it wasn’t raining anymore. Tracy: Right. So she actually arrived somewhere around one o’clock--this is the time that’s sticking in my head from your report. She actually pulls up and arrives in her motorcade and gets out. What do you remember? Kennedy: [01:59:13] Well, I’ll tell you. She’s about my same size. She might be a quarter inch taller, but I’d hate to think so. [01:59:18] We’re very much of a size. So 211 everyone wanted to know would I curtsy. Well, the answer is of course not. I’m an American citizen. I don’t curtsy to the queen. But, boy, that was a big thing, “Would I curtsy?” There are all these rules you have to learn about what to do with the queen. We actually had to have a class for all the people coming, because they wanted it, not because we thought they needed to. [01:59:45] But they wanted it, so we actually held a class to tell everybody what was expected as protocol for the queen. Now, there are things that are kind of hard. You’re supposed to wait for the queen to hold out her hand [before shaking hands], and you’re not supposed to touch the queen. Well, Don’s a toucher, and I watched him all the time. His hand would be like two or three inches from her back as he was trying to guide her through the crowd, trying not to touch her. [laughs] I’ve got to tell you, there’s no way you can be greeting someone to your home and not be the first person to hold out your hand. So I have no idea whether I was breaking protocol, although I had heard I was. I can’t help it. I’m an American citizen. It was my home I was welcoming her to. So naturally, I held out my hand. I’m sure Don did that, too, with Prince Philip. You had to learn how to address them and all of that. In case you want to know, it’s “Your Majesty” or “Ma’am” and it’s “Your Royal Highness” or “Sir,” one or the other. So they came and got out and we greeted them. They were both just so nice. Everything was really lovely. We took them in, and what’s choreographed are their bathroom stops. [02:01:00] They’re choreographed for after cocktails and after the lunch to go downstairs. So we were able to take them right in. 212 Don and I had the unenviable position of having to present everybody to them, and this is a tough job. Sometimes it’s hard to read the nametags. I, of course, out of vanity, would not wear my glasses, which at that time I needed badly to see, even though the nametags are written big. Don and I had to walk a different pattern, an absolutely opposite pattern, so we didn’t follow each other but we still got everybody presented to them. We each had somebody leading us. Pat [Boesch] led Don. I can’t remember now who led me through the crowd on the pattern. Development was so terrific. I mean, the things they did were fantastic. We had people from Reagan’s administration representing them, Deaver was his name. Michael Deaver was representing them. Michael Deaver, by the way, incurred my--I don’t know what you want to call it. Not quite my wrath, but he insisted on inspecting the house. I wasn’t there when he did it, and Pat Boesch told me with some trepidation, “He wants you to remove the table from the front hall of Hoover House because he said it would be a crowd barrier.” She looks at me, and I have that expression on my face, and she says, “You’re not going to do it, are you?” I said, “Nope. You tell him that in point of fact, it contributes to appropriate flow of the crowd.” That’s where we always kept our nametags. [laughs] He was very intrusive that way. So we get them all presented, they’re asked what drinks they want, and we’d been told gin and tonics and sherry. Unfortunately, nobody reminded us that they drank gin and tonics without ice. So they picked gin and tonics. The first gin and tonics got to them with ice and had to be replaced. Great 213 consternation in the kitchen at having fouled up. [laughs] Not that they could help it. The other thing is you’re not supposed to wear the same colors as the queen, if you’re the hostess. Nobody told me what color she was wearing. Guess what? I wore turquoise, and so did she. [laughter] Tracy: Oh, boy. Kennedy: [02:03:54] But there again, much is forgiven to the Americans. They don’t know. [laughs] Tracy: Yes. We don’t know any better. Kennedy: [02:04:03] That’s right. Actually, no one acted that way. I’m making a joke, all of them were just as nice as they could be. Except Philip was a bit supercilious. He spoke to the waiters, when we sat down for lunch-Oh, I haven’t even gotten to lunch yet. The queen is out on the terrace, and they’re drinking their drinks, and the band wanted to play. Well, you know our band. Tracy: The Stanford band. [laughs] Kennedy: [02:04:33] The Stanford band, right. They wanted to play. You worry just a touch about the band, but at the same time, they’re our band, and actually Don and I always loved them. So we made them promise on word of honor that if we let them play, they would not do anything the slightest bit raunchy, no yellow river, no nothing like that. You know that old thing they used to do with yellow river? [02:05:03] With the outhouse. [laughs] So they promised faithfully that they wouldn’t. We still put them way at the back of the garden, way down there, just in case things get out of hand. But they 214 were angels. They played brilliantly. They were just really good musicians, topnotch musicians, and they showed that side. They didn’t show the other side, and it was really wonderful. The queen went to the back of the terrace and waved the queenly wave, the flat-hand wave to them, and their decorum broke a little, and they went, “Yo, Queen!” [laughter] Don thinks they said, “Go, Queen,” but I’m sure they said, “Yo, Queen.” [laughter] She smiled. She loved it. She had the best time. She particularly loved the students, she really did, and you could see her chatting and smiling. Well, okay, we get the signal, it’s time for them to go downstairs for the bathroom break while everybody gets seated. As the protocol is you get seated and then you rise as the queen comes in. So they go down, the appropriate moment of chitchat, come back up, everybody’s seated, everybody rises. The way of seating was a bit different, because we’d have to have the queen seen by as many people as possible. So there’s a big table in the dining room and a little table. The big table can be seen from all of the living room, and so, remember, we had tables in the living room. So we had the queen sit with her back to the fireplace in the middle of the big table. She’s on Don’s right, and I’m across from Don and then Philip is on my right. So we all go in, take our places, and we sit down and everybody else sits down. The first thing I notice is that the table is set wrong. The wine glasses are supposed to be on the outside of the water glasses. Now, this is old- 215 fashioned etiquette. [02:07:14] Nowadays many people do it differently and the restaurants do it differently, but we had always done it that way. That’s what I learned, and that’s the way we did it. They’d been switched. And I found out later why they’d been switched. Some woman at the last minute had taken it upon herself to switch all of the table. We found this out later. I don’t know how she could get away with it. I think that the caterers didn’t know who she was and thought it was me telling her to do it. At any rate, I didn’t know that then. I was appalled, and I’m trying not to say anything to Philip because I don’t want to be apologetic, though I did murmur something when he did talk to me, because I was so embarrassed. But never mind that. I know that I’m supposed to turn the table, and I thought I was supposed to talk to Philip first, but he immediately turned to his right to talk. So I talked to the queen’s private secretary. I hadn’t any idea, but that’s the highest male level in the household--the private secretary for the queen--and that’s why he was on my left. I learned a lot. Lady Susan Hussey was down a couple of chairs, and next to the queen was the Duchess of Grafton, who was the mistress of the bedchamber. I think she might have been mistress of the robes at that time, but at any rate she was one or the other. And the rest, there were a few other English people around that were seated with us. We had wanted to split them all up into all the tables, but the queen wanted some of them at her table, so, of course, we did that. I’m trying to think where John Beaven was. I don’t remember now where he was. He probably was at the big table, too, with us. 216 Okay, so I’m turning the table. The first course is finished, and the second course is coming. I’m keeping my eye on Philip, and when he turns back, he turns to me and he engages in conversation. The other thing is you’re not supposed to speak first to royalty. [laughs] It’s a little hard to be a hostess and not speak first. [02:09:20] Luckily, Philip’s a talker. What I started to say that he was not treating the staff well. He was treating them as rather lowly servants, and it bothered me. So at my first chance, I told him they were students, and the change was marked in him. He immediately started treating them as people, and it was such a relief to me that he did that. I assume that that’s just normal, but I didn’t notice the queen doing anything like Philip did. I actually have to tell you, Philip was a bit arrogant, I thought. He’s a very handsome guy. He likes women, very much so. At any rate, he wasn’t arrogant with me at all, and we started to talk. I prepared my comments very carefully, what would I talk to him about. He was very much interested in endangered species. When I was in the Galapagos, I saw a film of his. And so I asked him about endangered species, and we were talking about a number of things. He knew that Don was a biologist, and I said, “Well, where would you suggest a biologist would go to see species before they actually get extinct?” Now I have to digress because I should have started with this. But Don and I had read a statement in an interview with Prince Philip in the newspapers where he had been at the zoo watching the lemurs, and he had made the statement that he saw it was time for their annual “gang bang.” 217 Now, lemurs are among the most promiscuous of primates, primates being pretty promiscuous as it is. [02:11:13] So Don and I got hysterically laughing because, of course, it was true. So I said, “Where would you go to see an endangered species?” He said, “Oh, I would go to Madagascar to see the lemurs.” Well, I think a look crossed my face, because he looked at me with a puzzled expression, and I thought, “Well, okay.” I said, “Well, I was just thinking of your comment about them at the San Diego Zoo that was reported in the newspapers.” He looks at me and he says, “What comment?” I’m thinking, “Oh, my goodness. What did I get myself into?” Actually, going through my mind is, “Oh, no, what did I get myself into? How am I going to get out of this? What am I going to do?” [02:12:05] I mean, it was only a second of my thinking this, but it was a fairly frantic one, and I thought, “Oh, calm down. He said it, not you. It’s all right. You don’t have to be missish about this.” So I said, “The one about their annual ‘gang bang’.” I could not have said anything better. Philip never removed his attention from me for the rest of the entire lunch. I was not allowed to turn the table. I wasn’t able to do anything. [02:12:34] And his response to that was, he said, “Oh, yes,” and he started to stroke that long chin, and he said, “Only the young woman reporter behind me could have heard that.” [02:12:47] Part of what I’m thinking, too, is I’m looking across the table at the queen, and I’m thinking, “Can I believe it? Can I believe that I am sitting three and a half feet away from this woman I’ve known about since she was 218 very little?” She’s a few years older than I am, and I’ve looked up to her. When I was a little girl, I used to play with princess paper dolls and things like that. Here in the flesh she is, and here I am sitting there, and it was an incredible feeling. It really was. It was nice that I had a second to think that in watching her, and she was having a good time. She and Don were talking away. Mostly I didn’t have much time to look at her though, because Philip had commanded my attention. [02:13:32] But it was a really exciting thing to see. The whole thing was so good. Occasionally I was able to say a few words to Lady Susan Hussey. She was on the other side of the private secretary. It was just fun. I wish, in a way, that we’d had more time so that we’d really have a chance to get to know these people. Of course, it’s not like that at all. Anyway, so Philip is just holding my attention, and I’m not too worried because I couldn’t do much about it. [laughs] Marlene Wine comes up behind me and she whispers in my ear, “Michael Deaver says it’s time to go.” I’m thinking, “You’re not supposed to interrupt royalty. What the heck am I supposed to do?” I glance at the queen, and a little while ago, I’d seen her ask the duchess for something, who handed her a lipstick. She put her lipstick on in public, which my mother taught me you never did, but it really changed my ideas about that. I now realize that she’s always in the public eye, where could she ever put it on, and she can’t go out and have her picture taken without her lipstick on. 219 Don had noticed it, too, and I later found out, had said to the Duchess of Grafton, “Do you think the queen’s ready to go?” No, she said, “Do you think you should go now?” I guess maybe someone had told him that Deaver wanted to go. And she said, “My queen is enjoying herself and I am enjoying myself,” and so there was no need to go. So Don was stuck, if they were telling him about it, too, but I don’t know that they were. They were certainly telling me, because they were expecting me to stand up and close off the conversation. [02:15:24] Marlene came a second time, and I can’t look at her because Philip’s talking to me. With my hand I’m going, “What am I to do?” And Michael Deaver gets up--very rude, so rude. It’s embarrassing to see someone do that. He just stands up, and perforce, I stood up then. Her Majesty and His Royal Highness could see that it was something that had to be done. So I wasn’t really interrupting Philip. Then, of course, it was time to take them back downstairs to the bathroom. [02:16:04] We went downstairs to the bathroom, and the queen uses it, and Philip does what he’s doing. I had my dollhouse there, and I had actually fixed it all up, and it was an old dollhouse that belonged to my aunt from 1907. I fixed it all up, and Philip saw it, and he commented on it. I was showing him the inside of it, and he knew I wanted the queen to look. When she came out, he very sweetly pointed it out to her, and she looked at it. And I have all this marvelous--it was lit from inside, and there’s this marvelous mental picture of the royal rear somewhat extended as she leaned into it with her hands up and 220 her hat brim. She was wearing not a large hat, but bigger than a lot of them, and her hat there all in silhouette. And she said, “Oh, my dear, I had a dollhouse once, but I lost it.” I said, “Oh, ma’am, what happened?” She said, “Oh, it’s somewhere.” [laughter] And I thought of the various attics and basements of all the castles. Tracy: Exactly. Kennedy: [02:17:19] And I laughed. But that was a sweet moment really that Philip cared to do that. So we walked them back upstairs, and we take them outside, and we say the royal goodbyes, and they get in the car, and the queen waves as off they go. [laughs] [End of Session 4 of 6, interview with Jeanne D. Kennedy, July 17, 2014] 221 222 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PRESIDENTIAL FAMILIES AND STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECTS INTERVIEWEE: JEANNE D. KENNEDY INTERVIEWER: ALLISON TRACY DATE OF INTERVIEW: AUGUST 12, 2014 SESSION: 5 OF 6 Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is August 12, 2014. I’m here with Jeanne Kennedy to conduct our fifth session of her oral history interviews for the Stanford Historical Society. Jeanne, we left off at our last session talking about the queen’s visit at Hoover House, which was a very momentous occasion. I wanted to make sure that we covered other events that happened at Hoover House. As you had pointed out, you had a number of prominent people come and visit you during your time there. So I was wondering if we could talk about some of the other visitors that you entertained. Kennedy: [00:00:43] Well, the queen was the first in a series. It was really amazing, because fairly soon after the queen, we had three prominent visitors--I cannot give you the order because I no longer remember--the least prominent of which was the vice chancellor of Germany, not the chancellor. We did not have him to Hoover House. We had a meeting in Don’s conference room, so the president’s conference room, which I attended. 223 I think probably the next one was King Carl Gustaf of Sweden, and I have to tell you I always get it confused between Juan Carlos of Spain, but I’m certain it was Carl Gustaf of Sweden, and he was a darling. We had him to lunch. He could not have been sweeter, more down to earth. There is not much to say about it. It just was a lovely occasion, and having a visiting monarch is a nice thing to have happen at Stanford. But there was no true hoopla about that one--no huge, huge party. I don’t even remember how many people we had, but I do remember that we had the main table filled. I don’t know if we had others around. We probably did. But he was just darling, and I did love him. Now, Mitterrand [Francois Mitterand] of France was a whole other story. He came and there was distinctly a huge amount of organization involved in this. I didn’t have to be so much involved because he was coming for cocktails. He had said that he did not wish to stand in a receiving line, so again, as we did with Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, we had to take him through all the different people. We had a huge crowd. He was accompanied by the French Secret Service as well as our Secret Service, same as the Queen of England. We started out, and the way we were doing it, Pat Boesch again was in the lead, because she was the mastermind for all of these big affairs. Don was behind her presenting people to Mitterrand, and then I was behind Mitterrand presenting people that Don had missed to Mitterrand. Now, when he arrived, he gave us a present of, oh, I can’t even tell you how many bound copies of his memoirs. I mean, it was a set of memoirs, and he left 224 them in the hallway. Unfortunately, many people thought they were a souvenir. [laughs] [00:03:25] So a lot of them disappeared. By that point, I didn’t care. He also gave us a medal, which I actually have, that was his. At any rate, envision the line going through this packed place, and we’re doing the presentations. Again, thank goodness for nametags. I feel this guy pressing me really hard from behind, sort of on the side, and when you’re in a crowd, you sort of give way when somebody does that. Well, I gave way, and this big hefty French Secret Service guy got in front of me, and there I was, stuck. I couldn’t be presenting. Our Secret Service edged him away and said, “Here, Mrs. Kennedy. Get in here.” [laughs] It was funny. The guy was so mad, that he leaned against me the entire time with this huge belly. I’m not kidding. I was furious, and I just leaned back against him and I didn’t allow him to fluster me in the slightest. So that was how it went as we went through the crowd, with me leaning back against this guy who was furious that he hadn’t been able to get directly behind Mitterrand. Then we offered Mitterrand a drink. What would he like? We had been really careful. [00:04:44] Again, Jack and his committee had picked these wonderful wines. This is all 1983 and 1984. It was all exciting stuff. But Mitterrand asked for red, the red wine, and he picked it up and he took one sip, and with a disdainful look, he put it down on a table. Can you imagine anything more arrogant? The whole thing was like that. He refused to speak English, although he had plenty of English. The whole thing was just simply very rude, and that’s the takeaway that most of us had from that, a most unpleasant kind of visit, so different from the Queen and Carl Gustaf. 225 Also, early on we had Al Gore [Albert Arnold Gore Jr.] when he was just a senator from Tennessee. He was this slim, handsome, kind of engaging person. I thought what a doll he was. As I recall, his hair was rather reddish when he was young. I just thought he was adorable, had no idea how he would come later into such prominence. That was kind of fun too. We had Armand Hammer, of whom I don’t remember much except I didn’t like him. He was very arrogant, but I don’t remember much about him. Nonetheless, he was there, and I have a mental picture of me standing next to him out on the terrace. Then we had, oh, Walter Annenberg. This is my story of how I earned the university a million dollars. So Walter Annenberg--this is so funny--came from a rather, hmm, less than savory background. His father, as I recall, was into betting magazines or something, with some hint that he might have been into some wrong kind of betting. I don’t know quite what, but there was a hint of misdeeds, let’s say, anyway, on the edge of criminal activity. So he came from that kind of background. Of course, I don’t have any clue anymore how he earned his money, though Development gave us the usual background on him. The reason we had him was because his current wife had gone one semester to Stanford, and Development thought that it would be a development opportunity. I was trying to think what would my attitude be with some guy like that, and I finally decided I just couldn’t be impressed by his money. So I kind of reverted to my New England roots--those roots that say it’s a nouveau 226 riche kind of thing. I thought, okay, that’ll be what I do. So he came, and that was how I was with him; that is to say, unimpressed by his money, which is not hard to do when you’re in the university. In the university, money is not what counts, despite all the development activity and so forth and the fact we needed it. So it worked very well with him. He was very eager to get my attention. I noticed that whatever he said, all the people that came with him--people always have a lot of their friends--all the people that came with him went, “Oh, Walter, you’re so wonderful. Oh, this is just marvelous.” I thought, “I am not doing that. No money’s worth that.” So we go to the table and he continues to talk. Again, all of these friends of his are just gushing over him and how wonderful he is. But, of course, he’s paying particular attention to me because I wasn’t. It was kind of like a dating scene, you know, playing hard to get. It was really funny. Finally he says to me, “You know what I’m going to do? I’m going to give a million to Stanford in honor of my wife.” I said, “That’s nice, Walter.” I did not gush in any way. I just said, “That’s nice, Walter.” So about half an hour later, he gets up and he stands up and he announces that he is giving two million to Stanford, at which point I decided that I would do the gushing. He sat down, and I said, “Oh, Walter, that was wonderful.” [laughs] So that’s how I earned the extra million for Stanford. [00:09:32] 227 Okay. Now, Jimmy Carter. That happened after we had announced our separation and our divorce. I suppose I probably should talk about that. Don had told me in December that he wanted a divorce, and he was going to marry Robin Hamill. I had said to him, “We can’t do anything publicly now because David Voss and Donna Lawrence are getting married on February 15th at Hoover House, and the invitations have gone out. We can’t wreck their marriage.” He agreed that that would not be possible, that we shouldn’t do that. So we both stayed together until I think it was two days after their wedding. So then after that period, he moved out and went over to the Oak Creek Apartments. Then came the problems of deciding on whether or not we should--now I’m pausing because I’m thinking of one more incident. Did I tell you about Tom Watson and that party at Hoover House? Tracy: No. Kennedy: [00:10:52] I’m sorry. I’m going back. I’m skipping out of order, but I want to tell you about one more of the very best parties. There were two of the very best parties we had at Stanford while I was there, and one of them was a wonderful New Orleans dance. Tom Ford said he wanted to play with his Model-A’s, which is the group he had. He wanted to play at Hoover House. Of course, he’s a big donor, so we said, “Okay.” We had a major event, lots of friends, lots of his friends. We decided, because they played Dixieland jazz, to have jambalaya and dirty rice and all of the New Orleans stuff. It was a huge success, that party. 228 Well, my favorite party of all was for Tom Watson. Tom Watson came to Stanford, and they got all the big-time donors there, and that included Bill Edwards [William C. Edwards] and the head of Standard Oil. Bill Edwards, as I think I said, had contributed quite a great deal to Hoover House. Both Don and I felt awkward with having me lurking around the edges, and I might as well be at dinner. So it was me, Tom Watson, Don, and sixteen other men. That was the best time I ever had. [laughs] Wally Haas was there, and I put Wally Haas on my left because he was an old blue, you know, and he was the only old blue there. So I thought, “I’ll put him on my right.” Tom Watson was at the other end of the table in the position of honor. All of these guys showed off like boys show off for the little girl. They had the best time and I had the best time. It was so much fun. Really, it was just a dream come true. It was a really good time. During that night, I remember the head of Standard Oil, whose name I can’t remember, but he was looking down at this particular rug that we’re standing on, and he was saying how beautiful it was. Bill Edwards was there, and Bill still wanted me to be anonymous about it, but I said, “Oh, yes.” I said, “Given by an absolutely wonderful person who has helped me so much,” but without naming him because he didn’t want to be named. Okay, so going back to the divorce. Tracy: Let me ask you one question really quick. This parade of world leaders that came, do you think it was somehow related to the fact that the queen had visited? Did everyone all say, “Oh, well let’s all go to Stanford”? 229 Kennedy: [00:13:37] I’m pretty sure it did, since they all came that year. Then I don’t remember anybody coming till--was it Yeltsin that came after I’d left? It was Gorbachev. So it seems to me that, well, if the queen’s doing it--I could be just dead wrong. It could be coincidence, but it’s a funny coincidence having, let’s see, three others besides the queen come. Tracy: Were you able to show any of these other world leaders your dollhouse? [laughs] Kennedy: [00:14:09] No. None of them cared. Believe me, Mitterrand would have spat at it. He was not at all--no, none of them. Actually, the King of Sweden, he would have probably been very kind about it, but most men aren’t too interested in your dollhouses. [laughs] [00:14:29] Going back to the divorce. So I told Don that we would have to wait till February 15th, and that was when he moved out, as I said. It was past that time that Jimmy Carter came, and I was still living at Hoover House because I had to split up the house. You can’t split up a house for a divorce without being there, you know. Luckily, I had wonderful Lisa Benton as my house manager then, and she was a perfect darling. David Voss was still around at Stanford, and he was so helpful. They were really wonderful. Everybody rallied around. Ed Russell would have, except he’d already gone to Virginia, and so he wasn’t around. We had people renting our house here at Lowell, and we had to get them to leave. They were not on a lease. Then I fixed up the house for me to move back into, and all of that was a big help. This was not, as you can imagine, a good time for me. It was devastating. It was completely unexpected. I talked to Don about the news release about the divorce, and I 230 finally decided I had to write it to have it be right. I wrote a good release, and it’s around somewhere in the archives, I have no doubt. It was about still being friends, even though our marriage had ended. And that is true, still true to this day. We are still friends. Tracy: Why do you think it was important to include that in the release? What did you hope to communicate through the release? Kennedy: [00:16:14] In a divorce, you think about your children and how they’re going to feel. When you’re married to the president of Stanford and you love Stanford, you’re thinking about all the Stanford people you’re going to affect, never mind all of the community people. And nobody wants to hear about a bitter divorce, and it wasn’t. We were friends, so I felt that that was the most important thing to get across for Stanford, for the university, for us, for the community altogether. So that’s why. Tracy: So when you came back here to your home, did Page and Julia come back here with you? Did they sort of split time between here and Hoover House? Kennedy: [00:16:58] Oh, the kids were devastated, which I was a little surprised, because they were twenty-seven and thirty. I was fifty-four when this happened. So they were really grown. They were devastated because we had been such a happy family. We really were, as far as I know. I had a very happy marriage with Don until the end, and that’s a very good thing to have. But the kids, they took it very hard. I guess all kids do, but you somehow think that they’d be more armored, but they’re not. Nobody is. When you split up a close family, it’s always a difficult thing. 231 Tracy: Thank you for reminding me of their ages, because I was imagining them being a bit younger. So at that point they weren’t living with you. Kennedy: [00:17:49] Well, except off and on. [laughs] Kids do keep coming back. Tracy: In thinking about that this really, for you and Don, was a very private matter, but as you talked about, you were conscious of the Stanford community and their reception of it. How did you manage such a private thing that ended up being talked about so publicly? Kennedy: [00:18:20] Oh, that was really hard. I mean, because I’m working, as you know, full-time in the hospital, and everybody knows in the hospital, everybody knows. Well, everybody knew all about it. It was even the first paragraph in Herb Caen on one occasion, which made me punish Herb Caen by not reading him for a year, I was so annoyed. I know that punished him badly. But it was difficult. I thought to myself, “I have to put on a Teflon surface.” Luckily, I had the job, because I had an absorbing job, and it picked me up at--I got in at seven-thirty or eight in the morning and was there till six or six-thirty, and I didn’t think about anything. Except, of course, patients would ask me about it and things like that. But I just put on a good front and figured that’s the best thing I can do and not show it. I was devastated, but did not show how I felt at all. It was hard, because everybody knew. On the other hand, it was also easy because I didn’t have to explain everything. I mean, everybody knew that he was leaving me and that he was going to marry Robin. It was all out there, so I didn’t have to explain a whole lot. 232 I was a target, and this does happen, I know. I was a target for embittered people, embittered women, I should say. And that was unpleasant for me. I didn’t like it, so I tried to avoid at any point I could being with people like that. It’s just a kind of self-destruction on their parts, and I really didn’t want to be part of it. Tracy: Would they criticize you in some ways? I mean, what were they doing? Kennedy: [00:20:12] No, nobody criticized me, no. I mean, maybe they did behind my back. Nobody criticized me. It was Don that came in for the most opprobrium. Tracy: Not to belabor the point, but when you talked about embittered women, what was it that they were doing that you were avoiding or that was unpleasant? Kennedy: [00:20:38] Well, there are many people--and in this case it was the women that sought me out--men and women, that are embittered by their divorce, that are hateful about their former spouse, that want to tell people. Because they’re suffering so much from that bitterness, they want to tell. They want people to agree with them. They also want to find people that are also feeling the same way. It’s hard to deal with that because I didn’t feel the same way. I didn’t want their bitterness to spill over onto me. Tracy: Can you tell me a little bit about being the president’s wife at a university? In a lot of ways it’s an honorary role, but it’s still a really important role, and one that, for you, had very tangible responsibilities. How did the community handle you leaving that role? 233 Kennedy: [00:21:38] Let me comment on that “honorary” role. [laughs] Oh, man. That “honorary role” usually involves people working full-time. I was the only president’s wife in the whole of the AAUP, American Association of University Presidents, that worked full-time. Only one other person worked part-time, and they were all women at that time. So it’s not honorary. You work really, really hard. So for me, the trick was doing everything I possibly could that was needed, but being able to conduct a full-time job of my own. I always said I was a wife and mother first, I was the director of Community and Patient Relations second, and I was the president’s wife third. That’s what I felt like. I mean, I felt like a faculty wife. The president’s wife was an add-on, let’s say. Now, I forget the last half because I got stuck on honorary. Tracy: I asked how the community handled you leaving the role as president’s wife. Kennedy: [00:22:50] Oh, the Stanford community. Well, that’s a problem. It’s not just the Stanford community; it’s nationwide, if not more. Well, I talked about the AAUP. I thought I should go back to the next meeting to say goodbye to everybody. Don was dead against it, and Bob Rosenzweig was dead against it. They were horrified. I’m like, “I don’t see why it’s horrifying.” Bob has since said to me--well, and so has Don--that they were wrong. They should have done something. So that was one example. I heard nothing from the Board of Trustees except when I spoke individually to them. When we decided to get divorced, Don didn’t want to call the Board of Trustees, and I felt it was necessary. I didn’t call them all because some of the new ones I wasn’t really acquainted with, but I called all 234 the ones I knew to tell them what was happening. At that time, they expressed they were really upset about it. They were in a bind, and nobody knows how to act about these things. I was not expecting anything because I’d never thought about it, but when I thought about it, I thought they should acknowledge what I’ve done as the president’s wife in the way that they acknowledge the president’s wife when the president retires. They don’t have to do anything huge because, yes, it’s an add-on position. That is to say you do work hard, but it’s there because you’re married to the person that’s president. So they shouldn’t have to do a lot, but they should--it’s kind of hard to talk about me. If it happens, there should be a formal recognition of what that person was as there would be if someone resigned. But in this case, I don’t know that it’s any better because it doesn’t happen too often in university presidents’ lives, but I think the thing to do is treat it like somebody resigning instead of somebody being sent off in disgrace and being ignored. Of course, I had loads of friends at Stanford that helped and were really good to me. Pat would get me seats at official things so that I would sit with the people I was accustomed to, at the next graduation and things like that. It’s just that nobody understood how to deal with it. Finally, I was not displeased enough to do something about it. I don’t want to say displeased; I don’t want to say annoyed. It wasn’t any of that. I was hurt. Really, I was hurt. That was what it was. Warren Christopher was, I think, the chair of the board at that time. And I spoke to Marlene Wine, who was my dear friend and Don’s special assistant. I said that I thought the 235 trustees should make some formal recognition, if only a letter. So Warren Christopher wrote me a very sweet letter, but it came a long time after, because I didn’t ask Marlene for a long time. It should simply be treated as an acknowledgement of somebody’s accomplishments in the job. In a department if a faculty member leaves to go somewhere else, they give them a party. I just think you should treat somebody that works that way, treat them as their own individual self for what they themselves have contributed. If a president’s wife didn’t do anything at all, well, that’d be a different matter. But one that worked really hard at it then deserves recognition. A long way to say this, but is that what you were getting at? Tracy: Yes. You talked about initially how you negotiated [the awkwardness]-because you were still, and today remain, a member of the Stanford community. Eventually did the awkwardness and people not really knowing how to handle it, did that eventually fade? Kennedy: [00:27:13] You know, I didn’t see the awkwardness because either people would ask us both--I remember Marian Adams, wonderful Marian. Marian was the person that was responsible for a party that they gave me in October just before Don told me he was leaving me. She and Wanda Corn were in a car somewhere. Marian later sent me something that she had in a letter to her kids about it. She was saying that they should honor me because I was a good role model for Stanford women, because I worked and I was still married to the president but it didn’t harm my career. I was able still to do a great deal of things, and that I had found a good balance. She was just darling. They 236 did, indeed, give me a party, a surprise party, of all sorts of wonderful people and my friends from all around and, of course, concentrating on the Stanford community. They gave me a certificate that was written by Diane Middlebrook and read by her. It was printed by Anne Rosener, so how could you be more Stanford-er than that? The Christmas after Don had married-we got divorced in September, and Don and Robin got engaged in October and married in November of 1987. So in December, Marian and Jim Adams gave a Christmas party, and they asked Don and Robin and me, and I am pretty sure that my insistence on the fact that Don and I were friends was able to make people more comfortable. Now, there were a lot of people--I remember Merv Morris and Roz, they invited me for dinner where I was the only single person there. [laughs] That is not just divorced. All the rest were couples. But what a nice thing of them to do. I still got invited to all the same big parties. When something happens in a divorce or in any breakup, a corporation breakup or a merger breakup, the people go with power. A lot of people go with power, but then a lot of people don’t. In the case of divorces, I know that it’s true. Certainly was true for me. Many people that I didn’t know so well came and befriended me. Then there were people who I wouldn’t go so far as to say dropped me, because nobody was that crude or rude, but who were really interested in the presidency, and that’s okay. But nobody showed me that they felt awkward. I know that it was there, but nobody showed me. The way I counteracted it was simply by being very friendly to Don and Robin. 237 Tracy: Tell me a little bit about when the separation was announced, and as you were going through the processes of getting divorced, how did that impact your position at the hospital? Kennedy: [00:30:36] Well, it didn’t have an impact on my actual position. I’d already had a lot of impact by being married first to the provost and then to the president. When I first came to the job, I found out later that my then-boss, Peter Levin, had announced to the senior administration that I was coming and the job I would have, and that it wouldn’t hurt to have someone who had “pillow-talk with the provost.” I wasn’t very pleased when I heard about that. When he became president, I remember the head of the emergency department, Michael Eliastam saying at one senior administrative retreat, “You know, you should not have this job because you’re married to the president.” I said to him, “Michael, what do you want me to do, divorce my husband? I had it before he was president.” I got a lot of that. I got people saying to me that I’d gotten the job because he was president. I was always glad to say that I got the job when he was provost. I didn’t say what a great help he had been to me getting that job. I mean, obviously, as I spoke before, when you come as a team, people do try to find you a good job, and that was lovely. But it was nice to be able to say I had the job before he was president. So it didn’t have an impact on my actual position, it just was fairly unpleasant at times. It was actually afterwards I realized that it was easier 238 because people weren’t concerned about my being married to the president anymore. At employee banquets and stuff, Don really liked me and he wanted to sit next to me. So he’d asked to sit at the same table, when, of course, they would have seated us at separate tables, generally speaking. I was in charge of a benefit for the hospital. We got some people together from the community, Roz Morris being one of the heads, and we gave an opera show at Buck House. It was a fashion show of what you would wear to the opera, and then we had dinner and dancing afterwards. That was in May just after I’d moved into my house. Don and I sat at my table, and we danced, and we both had a great time. It was a public way of showing that even though we were separated and about to be divorced, we really were friends, and that was good. That had its effect, I think, on people. Tracy: So before we transition to talking more about your position at the hospital, I want to talk a little bit about the indirect-cost scandal that happened in the early 1990s. So this came after your divorce, but it being a big event at Stanford and you still being friends with Don, certainly it was something that you experienced. I wonder if you could talk about your memory of what happened, and your opinion of the scandal or the controversy. Kennedy: [00:34:25] Well, it was very interesting because [Paul] Biddle who was the socalled whistleblower, not only said an awful lot of things in his report, but there was a paragraph about me where he said that I had gotten the job in the hospital as part of the divorce settlement. This may be a way of pointing out that there wasn’t much truth in him. Also, at one point, a contractor on my house accused me of using university money, and I think I’ve got that 239 mixed up with Biddle. Though it seemed to me he said something else about that, too, because he said two things about me. At any rate, I had to go to inordinate lengths to prove that I had actually been at the hospital since 1979 and we didn’t get divorced till 1987. If he was, in fact, responsible for this other second thing--I remember there was another thing he said that I had to go to great lengths about. Either way, when that accusation came that I’d used university money, which I had, of course, been extraordinarily careful never to do, we had to go through all sorts of procedures, through audit and through legal procedures and so forth. The investigation proved that there was absolutely no sign of my having done so. I absolutely had worked for the hospital long before, so that Biddle was disproved on the counts for me. But I was not happy about it. The other stuff that came up there on indirect cost, some of it was during the time that I was the president’s wife. [00:36:34] The only reason I know because I was furious at the accusations. The accusations that covered my time--well, let’s put it this way. Don and I had no idea that Hoover House was being charged indirect cost. An argument could be that the president should know that, but you only know what the people in charge tell you. If they don’t happen to think of it, you don’t know. Had I been aware of it, I don’t know that I would have done anything differently, but I would have at least been able to take it into account. [00:37:12] One of the things that came up was the silver that we bought from Buck House that was charged to the Hoover House account. This is the darnedest thing. It’s just a process problem. Buck House had a pile of 240 good silverware, a lot of silverware sets and flatware, and the house was not being occupied. The caretaker, Dolly--I can’t remember Dolly’s last name-called Don’s office because she used to work for Don. She called and she said, “Listen, there’s all this silver there. You guys should take it to use at Hoover House. It’s ridiculous to have this going on. It’s just waiting to be burglarized.” We thought it was a good idea because we needed it. So we said, “Okay, great.” She said, “There’s some china.” We took some china, too, and some glassware. That’s where we got the beautiful glassware that may have gone back to Buck House. But it’s beautiful, beautiful crystal hand-blown Venetian glass with initials on it for Henry J. Meyer. This beautiful crystal was just enough to use at a smaller table, but it was gorgeous, gorgeous stuff. And we got several things like that, but there was only the silverware that was mentioned. The problem was that the things inside Buck House, as well as Buck House itself, were supposed to be for the benefit of the School of Education and of the Art Department. I don’t recall what happened with the School of Education, but the Art Department absolutely refused to have that happen--to have anything just go to Hoover House without the Art Department getting the money for it. So we did a transfer from the Hoover House budget to the Art Department budget, maybe to the School of Education, too. Certainly, I remember we did the Art Department budget. So it got expensed as an expense of Hoover House, 241 whereas it really wasn’t--it was just transferred to another university component. That was a huge scandal that the university charged overhead for sets of sterling silver. It was things like that that I found a little annoying. Then the Steinway--a beautiful Steinway piano--was water-damaged, and you don’t leave a Steinway with bad water damage. You fix it right away. So I fixed it right away. Some of that got charged to indirect cost. Now, I have no idea what the percentage was for Hoover House. Obviously it would have been fairly infinitesimal compared to the rest of the university, but the point was it was charged. Those were the two things I particularly remember that had something to do with me. I was really quite indignant about it, because to charge somebody for doing what you can see clearly is the right thing to do. You can’t not do it. [00:40:20] Oh, the other thing. Then there was the yacht. That was not me, but I do remember thinking it was funny. Poor Don. It’s like he had a yacht himself personally, the way they accused him. I want to point out that two years or so after Don resigned, Stanford was totally exonerated, but it was a huge scandal and all over the papers. As we all know, if it turns out that somebody’s been exonerated, it’s a little paragraph on page six of the papers. I just want to point that out. However, Katie, who was the house manager then, called me because the U.S. Navy, who were the overseers somehow of the indirect cost investigations--I’ve forgotten the ins and outs of that, but the U.S. Navy wanted to see Hoover House because they were hearing so much about it. 242 Now, they were really on a junket. I didn’t know it at the time, but Katie called me because Robin did not want to do it. Obviously, I really knew Hoover House top to bottom because I’d been responsible for the renovation, and she’d come more newly to it. So I said, “Sure, I’d be happy to.” It was hysterical. There was this big bunch of guys, and they wanted to see Hoover House, and I charmed them just to the nth degree. They were just thrilled, and I showed them all the private passages and things like that. They went away so happy. I don’t know as it made any difference, but it made me pleased that I could do the teensiest little bit to help on the indirect-cost problem of Stanford. The other things I remember were the really tough, tough times. I remember when Don and I were having dinner and he told me this. Remember, this is after the divorce. He told me that he was going to be interviewed by 20/20, and I said, “Don’t. Please don’t.” He said, “But I have to. Otherwise, they will film me going into my office, film the back of me and say, ‘No comment.’” I said, “But listen. You know what the press does. Remember when you were in the FDA and there was an hour of a press conference? You made one mistake, and that’s what was splashed over everything, TV and papers?” He said, “But it’s Stone Phillips, and you and I had him for dinner. He won’t do that to me.” 243 I said, “Yes, he will.” And he did. Don was absolutely ripped apart in that 20/20 thing. I think he got pretty bad advice, too, for the way he handled Congress and Dingell [John David Dingell Jr.]. Congressman Dingell. I think he had gotten bad advice, because I watched Don in the FDA. He knew how to charm Congress at all those congressional committees he sat in on. Tracy: So, Jeanne, let’s talk about your time as the director of Community and Patient Relations. You took that position in 1979. We talked about how you were able to secure that position. To start out our discussion, when you were hired into the position, what were your expectations for what you wanted to accomplish? Do you have any memory of that? Kennedy: [00:44:03] Oh, yes. The thing is that I knew for quite a long while before we came back--maybe four months--that I would have this position. At the time, it was called director of Community Relations. When I’d come back to interview for the position, I had thought out--stop me if I’ve said this before, but I had thought out the kinds of things that might go in a position like that. [00:44:38] I was thinking, “Okay, I’m a director of Community Relations. What does that mean?” And I thought, “Well, it means what are the communities you serve.” If you’re in a hospital and you’re thinking what communities do you serve, there are patients, their families, doctors, employees, donors--all internal communities before you start going to outside organizations and the community at large. Of all of these, the patient is the most important. Because I knew for four months beforehand, I started to read about what could I do for patients, 244 and I read about these patient advocates in hospitals. They were called various different things: patient representatives, patient ombuds, patient relations associates, patient relations representatives. I thought, “Wouldn’t that be great?” A definition of a patient advocate would be someone who is looking out for the interests of the patients and, of course, their families, and trying in every way to make the hospital stay easier and better. It also involves handling complaints. It also meant, which I didn’t know then, that you have to see the staff’s point of view in order to advocate best for patients. There were advocates coming in from outside that the staff resented, and so they wouldn’t help the advocates coming in from the outside nearly as much. I thought, “This is a great idea.” I did some thinking about some of the other things, but this was the main thing. When I first came and started, of course I’m starting from scratch. They gave me an assistant, so that was good. So the first thing I did was a six-month study of what had been done in the patient advocacy area in US hospitals. Not a whole lot had been done back then, but there were things that had been. So I wrote it all up, figured out a budget, did all the things to present a business plan for doing that, and I got the okay from my boss, Peter Levin, to go ahead with that. While I was doing that, I was thinking about the other constituencies. Let me discuss the patient advocacy first because that was my most important thing and really what everything was based on that I did in the 245 hospital one way or another. So I presented this plan and got it approved by my boss, Peter Levin I came in for an awful lot of opposition, and people did not want it in the slightest. The nurses didn’t want it because they didn’t want to have someone second-guessing them. The doctors didn’t want it because they didn’t want somebody second-guessing them. The social workers felt they were the patients’ advocates. I should say the nurses felt that, too. The chaplains felt that there was something being infringed on for their work. It was a very difficult thing to do. First of all, I had a budget to hire somebody to do it, and I couldn’t get someone to give me the money. Peter had an administrator that handled the money, and I had to go to Gary Mecklenburg to ask him for a position. Gary wouldn’t give me one, but I was really too new in any kind of a bureaucracy of this size to know how you operated, and I finally had to give up. He said, “Go to Admitting and see if they’ll give you one of their positions,” which now I know is rank nonsense. I wouldn’t give anybody one of my positions. Why would they? But I didn’t understand at the time. So I decided, okay, then I’ll just do it myself. It was one of the best decisions I ever made because that was what I was really suited for. When I’d first gone into the hospital, I thought, “How will I be? How will I handle being around sick people?” Within about eight months, certainly within the first year, I could see very clearly I could never be the close-in caregiver that nurses and doctors and the technicians are. What they do is beyond price and very difficult, and I could not have done that. But what I could do is exactly 246 what this program wanted: I could go to find out what patients and their families needed, and then I could go to the staff to get it and to arrange for it. It was extremely rewarding, even right at the beginning. I had a friend, Di Roth, who wanted me to hire her to do it, and I didn’t have money to do that. She said, “Well, then I’ll form a group of volunteers who will do this as part of their community service.” And she did. A great group of people. I can’t remember all their names now. The core group at the beginning was just really great. Besides Di, Mary Ives was one of those, and Carolyn Pease, too. I think it was four or five altogether. [00:50:10] We worked on it together as to what to do, and I decided that I wanted to give them as much power as possible because they had to have it to do a good job, so I treated them the way I would treat an employee. I gave them business cards, I named them patient relations associates, because it is always better to have a title when volunteering. Di was the director of the patient relations associates. I’ll talk later about my attitude toward volunteers, but what I did is kind of the kernel of it here. I treated them just as if they were employees. Now, they didn’t work all the time the way an employee does, but they came in regularly, and they were smart women and they understood things. So I really was able to have an extension out on the unit of people calling on patients, because I couldn’t do it all. The best thing in my life was actually doing that, although it was really hard to learn to keep a straight face when things happened to you and to not 247 show anything, no matter how bad the patient was. Then there were a lot of funny things too, and you rapidly come to black humor. The thought that I was able to do this--I did this for four years before I was able to get money to hire somebody. Best thing ever. Four years of experience like that, being the only patient rep in the hospital and responsible for the patient relations associates, it was really incredible. I carried a lot of weight because my title was director of Community Relations. But nonetheless, I was the patient advocate. Now, the other thing that carried huge weight in the community was that I was the wife, first, of the provost, and then of the president and I had come from this community. I’d been in this community since 1960, and I knew all kinds of people in the community, as well as all kinds of people at Stanford, so people knew me. That meant they felt that they could call me for help, and they did. So I actually became, over the course of the time that I was there, the face of the hospital to the community. As I’ve told so many people in talks, you’re either going to be in the hospital yourself or have a family member in the hospital or be visiting somebody in the hospital, because the hospital is part of your life. So to be right there to help was the best thing in the world. Really it was. Tracy: One thing I wanted to ask was, how did you negotiate your relationship with the Auxiliary? Kennedy: [00:53:01] Oh, yeah. I forgot about that. The Auxiliary thought they were the only volunteers in the hospital. They weren’t actually right about that, but they thought they were. However, I liked the Auxiliary a lot. I was nominally 248 the person--I was the administrator to deal with them. I wasn’t really in charge of them because they’re a separate nonprofit. They’re terrific people, but they were pretty turf-conscious. So I went to their president, and I said I wanted to start a patient relations group, and did they want to have it in the Auxiliary. I thought, well, that was the way it would work. I didn’t want it to be in the Auxiliary because I wanted to control the program. I said, “My only two requirements are that they don’t wear uniforms and that they report to me.” She said, “Well, we can’t do that because, in the Auxiliary, we do wear uniforms, and we report only to our board. You’ll have to do it on your own.” I went ahead and did it on her okay. Problem was, that just created a terrific storm. A lot of the old guard, the people that had been president of the Auxiliary, viewed it as a real turf incursion, and that was a difficult time. Larry Crowley was dean of the medical school, and that’s where the hospital reported. The Auxiliary inundated him. A lot of them were married to medical faculty, to doctors. So there was a huge firestorm about it, and I had to be called to account to the Auxiliary to talk about it, but it was not an Auxiliary decision. Linda Meier who was my friend and also on the hospital board, talked it over with me. She decided to set up a meeting of a group that would determine what would happen with volunteers. The hospital had many types of volunteers and we really needed somebody to build our volunteer groups outside of the Auxiliary, that would report to hospital administration. The 249 Auxiliary actually did a fabulous job. They did a great gift shop, they did a wonderful job in surgery reception and North ICU reception. But we needed volunteers for other necessary areas. So Linda called a meeting, with Auxiliary members and other involved parties. In the end, it was agreed that we had to have a volunteer coordinator, and that volunteer coordinator would report to me. It turned out that there were maybe five other groups of volunteers outside of the Auxiliary anyway, including the chaplaincy. But somehow the Auxiliary viewed those as different, and they viewed what I was doing as an incursion. I’ll tell you that the old guard were pretty mad about it. One of them even resigned. However, it didn’t take long before that blew over, and I became a real friend of the Auxiliary and they knew it, and that was really good. I think the best thing that happened was--as I say, I was the official administrator for them--Gary Mecklenburg was going to put them down in the basement--move their office down in the basement--far away from everything, and I absolutely refused. I said, “You can’t do that,” and I got them two beautiful sunny rooms on the first floor. So they were grateful to me, and everything went swimmingly for me with the Auxiliary since. They knew I was their friend, and I was. I was. But you’re right, there was a lot of upset, and it never quite died down. They had an emergency service, and the head of Emergency--oh, I’m trying to remember his name, wonderful person, can’t for the moment. He asked me, at any rate to put volunteers in Emergency. They wanted to have patient advocate-type volunteers, and they said they were going to start their own. I 250 pointed out that if they did it with us, we could hire the people and help them, and we would make sure that the people that were in there were the right people. We would do it with volunteers because there wasn’t any money to pay them. So I said, “We’ll make them part of our volunteer group and have them specifically assigned to emergency.” But the Auxiliary didn’t like that because they also were assigned to Emergency. However, they had specific duties, and ours were different, so we muddled along together there. Tracy: So at first it sounds like you were just trying to carve out a place for patient advocates, but once you had carved out a place for them, can you talk about how the program expanded in terms of what patient advocates provided? Kennedy: [00:58:01] Well, instead of taking that stream, let me talk about the other things I did, because they fold in sort of. [00:58:09] Just to say that, yes, the patient advocates--the patient representatives, we called them--they really made a huge difference. By the time I left twenty-five and a half years later, it was deeply engrained in the hospital, and I’m really happy about that. We never were able to get the money for very many of them. We would have 2.8 FTE or 3.5 FTE, that kind of thing. I have to say I’m very happy, because after I left, they found money for it, and all the things that I did get money kind of thrown at them, which is great. On the other hand, I had the joy of making everything happen in the first place. But, boy, nobody threw money at me for anything else like that. So the other things I did, I was working on the doctors because I thought of them as another community. The hospital had never given the doctors an annual dinner, so I did. I brought it up, got the okay from my 251 boss, and we had an annual dinner put on. The hospital paid for it, and for a long while I ran it and did it as an event. And the doctors loved that. They just loved that. The volunteers had never had a volunteer recognition reception, and I started that. Let’s see. The employees. I remember I did an art show, working with Personnel, of employee art for them. So it was fun trying to think of all the different constituencies and what could be done for them. I started to reach out into the community by doing Lifeline, which is the call system. You hear, “Help, I’ve fallen,” and they press a button. Well, we had one that linked to Stanford, and it was a great success. We were able to charge less because it was run by volunteers till eventually we got paid people. We did Vial of Life, which was also a community thing. The Vial of Life, was used to list people’s medications and was kept in the refrigerator so that, when patients were picked up by paramedics, they could easily find the information. I was responsible for starting the Health Library. That was a wonderful thing. Kristine Erving and Linda Romley-Irvine became my community outreach coordinators, and they went out to determine what the community needed. One of the things needed back then was a health resource center. (It must have been 1987 that we did that.) It was needed because it’s so hard for the community to get information about their health. So we thought we’d start a Health Library, and the Lane Library was thrilled. That was the only library community members could go to, and Lane wasn’t set up to handle 252 the community; they were set up for the medical personnel. Kristine and Linda became the first directors of the Health Library. Now, I said I didn’t get money for anything, but I have to take it back about the Health Library. I did. But what happened was that I went to Sheldon King and told him that it couldn’t be started without $250,000 to establish it and $250,000 operational costs for the first year. He promised me the money. But in order to do it at all I had to get it rent-free. I talked Rosemary McAndrews, the Shopping Center manager at Stanford, into giving us space for free. She was so farsighted. Her boss had finally agreed to give it to us for half price, and I said, “We can’t do it,” because half price was more than we could ever afford. She persuaded him to give the space to us for free. So we were able to get this going, and it was an instant success, and it’s still going brilliantly. It has branches. There’s one in the Cancer Center. The Library was in the Shopping Center for many years, but it’s just moved over to Hoover Pavilion now. It is a huge success. As the patient rep program grew, I started getting other areas that seemed to be aligned. First was volunteer resources, then came the chaplaincy that was passed to me, then came the interpreters. These things were ongoing, but I was able to help build them. It was really so exciting to help build them--with the interpreters there were three Spanish interpreters when I first took it over, and by the time I left, we had twenty-six different languages and I don’t know how many interpreters, eight or ten, in all kinds of languages. It was things like that that were so wonderful to build. 253 Because of the patient advocacy, other things started to come along that you could see that patients needed. One thing was the décor of the hospital. Now, I wouldn’t have thought I’d be in that, but the hospital then had--okay, get this--yellow walls, brown linoleum. The furniture was all plastic in all the public reception areas, either orange, blue, green, or brown. That was it. They were scattered all over and the colors of the furniture were all mixed up. The signs were blue with orange on them. It was the ugliest place you ever saw. One of the things I found was that I was really, really good at putting myself in the place of the patient--seeing it from their eyes. This ability opened me up to all manner of things. I was constantly involved in trying to develop different things that patients needed. To go back to this interior, it was depressing for employees, too. So I started to really advocate for getting the interiors fixed up. I mean, what will it cost to have a coat of paint? At that point I was able to get Margaret Dilg, who was still working at Hoover House part-time, working for the university on places like Buck House and Hanna House. But they didn’t need her that much by that time. So I got part of her time for the hospital. Facilities didn’t like it much. Most everything I did stepped on somebody’s toes. Facility people didn’t know how to do interior design, and they were constantly doing it wrong. They refused to consult Margaret. It was a fight to get changes going. Gradually things started to get better. I got Linda Meier involved in it, and she got deeply engaged in the décor. I’m trying to remember whether 254 that was an outgrowth of the Art Commission or not. At any rate, Linda got involved in it, I think, when we built the extension, Phase I, so that we could get at least the right colors for that extension. This is before we built the huge, big wing. This whole interior decorating part of things, was staffed again by my office, of course, because Linda was involved in it. We had people working with Facilities to get an interior design person, not a decorator, and start really making sure that the whole hospital looked really good. But I was the start of that, and I was always very proud that I did. The Art Commission was another thing. I wanted art in the hospital, and my boss Sheldon King finally said, “Well, why don’t you put it in the hospital.” I said, “Because I need money. I can’t do without money.” So he gave me ten thousand dollars. Didn’t go very far, but then we put some really fun things in. I wanted a Native American exhibition, which we had. I also wanted some African ethnic things, which we also had. We started putting up things that were not necessarily really great art, because you can’t do that on ten thousand dollars, but we had some embroidery, some Chinese embroidered kimonos and different things like that. It was a lot of fun. We did have some really good art, and we got it at very low prices because we had Margaret to help us do that. At that point Linda said, “Hey, let’s have an Art Commission. I’ll chair it and your group can staff it. You’ll be on it and the group will staff it.” 255 So that’s what happened. So we got Helen Bing. Peter actually offered Helen to Linda and to me both separately that he wanted Helen to be on it. Helen didn’t even know he was volunteering her, so she was surprised, but it worked out great. Ruth Halperin, Moo Anderson [Mary Margaret Anderson], Jill Freidenrich, those are all the big names. We also had Donovan Thayer, who later died, and Barbara Rees, a local artist who later died. That Art Commission is still going, though it’s added a lot of new members recently for the new hospital. It was immense fun. They gave all the money for the art. They’d give it into a fund and then they would spend it and pick out the art, and we were able to have the greatest art in the hospital. We took trips to see the art in other places that were really renowned for their art. Cedars-Sinai, as I recall, was one of them, but their installation was not what we thought was appropriate. They would have the same type of art on each unit, so patients and the employees would get bored because that unit would be devoted to one thing. Tracy: Almost like wings. Kennedy: [01:08:36] Yes, exactly. It makes sense for a museum. It does not make sense in a hospital. You’ve got to see different stuff. And they cut the bottoms off posters. That is such a no-no. I mean, that is just not done, and we did not do that. Helen bought a lot of really good art, but she also was the one that bought the posters. We made sure that every stairwell, every space had something in it to cheer it up. People were so grateful for this. It was a marvelous endeavor. And Moo Anderson lent a great deal of her art, her and 256 Hunk’s art, and later she ended up giving it to the hospital. Some of it she gave in my honor, which was just really wonderful. I love seeing that there. When Don resigned as hospital board chair, which he was as virtue of being the president, we got four photographs of the seasons, beautiful ones, in his honor. “Don: A man of all seasons.” Tracy: Another program that you started involved a clown of some sort. [laughs] Kennedy: [01:09:53] That was one of the later programs we started. We wanted to have a humor program. That was at the time when a great deal was being written about the effect of humor on health. Actually, I totally believe it too. So we wanted to start this, and we made some abortive attempts. But then at that time--I have not mentioned that I had met somebody else, and I was with Allan Rosenberg. The staff all knew him, so they knew that he was a vocational clown, and what could be better than being a retired psychiatrist and going to clowning? It was perfect because he wasn’t the least bit afraid of hospitals, and he loved the clowning. So he came as a volunteer for many, many years, and then ended up being paid. The other humor efforts that we made did not work, but he and his puppet were well known on the corridors. On the other hand, as with everything that I did, it came in for some marked disagreement, let’s say. The Ethics Committee came out one time and found him in the ICU reception area. They’d been called, obviously, to someone who was terminally ill, and they were so horrified to see a clown in the family area. What they didn’t know was that the Auxiliary member had asked him to go in because he was being requested by the people in there to 257 cheer them up. But they were so upset, feeling that it was terrible to have a clown in there and not honoring the grief of the families, even though he was there by request. There were people that didn’t think there should be a clown in the hospital at all. Most people thought he should be at Children’s Hospital, but the interesting thing is Children’s would not allow clowns in. As Allan knew, and it was corroborated, little children often are afraid of clowns. You have to be really careful with that. So when he’d see little children, he would have to be incredibly careful not to upset them, and if he did, he would leave. He was very good. If he called on somebody, then he’d say, “Would you like to see us?” He meant himself and the puppet, Rodney, and they’d say, “No,” he’d say, “Sorry for bothering you,” and go immediately. But he was an immense hit in a lot of places. Also on the anorexia unit, that was another place. Probably the place that liked him best was--we called it behavioral medicine or something like that. It was a geriatric unit for people who had some mental problems and some problems just of old age. He was just a huge hit there, too. Another program that I established was the music program. That came after the art program. I really thought it would be wonderful to have music in the hospital. I’d taken some Japanese businessmen on a tour, and they’d given me five hundred dollars, even though this was not a tour that cost money. They donated it to me, and I was thrilled, so I thought, “I’m going to use that to hire somebody to play concerts in the hospital atrium.” 258 First of all, the problem was that the head of nursing didn’t want it. She was dead against having any concerts in the atrium or anywhere. She felt that patients were a captive audience; you shouldn’t do that to them. The fact that most patients couldn’t hear it because it was in the atrium didn’t matter. She was dead against it. She later became the COO and became my boss. At that time, the CEO says to me, “Jeanne, when are you going to put music in?” Altogether it was five years before she consented, but he talked her into it. Meanwhile, I’d been letting the Art Committee know about all these different things, and Helen was gung-ho to have it. She said, “I will sponsor the whole music program,” and she did. That music program grew from concerts to strolling troubadours. Merv Morris also gave me money. He financed that along with some other things. Helen was a major, major backer, as were Linda and Jill and the others. But Merv came along and did it too. We had an awful lot of wonderful donors. At any rate, there were these strolling troubadours. Again, there was a lot of resistance from nursing to having anybody on the units, but everyone grew to love it. We had a guitar player and we had a harp player, among others. Sometimes we had two guitar players. The harp player was so funny because there’s this whole thing of going to heaven where the harp’s playing. So people would make jokes about it, but then there were some people that thought when they heard the harp play, that maybe they were dying. Tracy: Oh, god. Kennedy: [01:15:03] There’s always something that goes on that you have to take into account one way or another. In the main, there were no problems with it. So 259 it was great. It was great, but it took a long time. It took five years to get that music in. With the art, it took five years for the art to get in because of the fire department. We had a new marshal in Palo Alto. Everything I did was not easy. So we got the Art Commission going, but we weren’t allowed to put art in the hospital for five years. We were collecting art because we knew eventually we would be able to because other hospitals could. Why couldn’t we? The fire marshal was this young guy who was someone new and inexperienced so he had to show his authority. I can remember telling him, “Why can’t we have paintings on the wall?” “Because they might fall on someone.” I said, “These paintings will be attached in such a way that the wall will have to fall on someone before the painting does.” Eventually I think Donovan Thayer took a strong hand there, and he convinced him. We were able to start putting the pictures in, but it took really five years for that as well as for the music. Then we started to do Art for Healing, we called it. It’s now called, I think, Art for Health. An artist would go to the patient bedside with art materials and have them paint, and we had a show for the patients’ artwork. There again, one of the shows got in trouble. It didn’t ever even occur to me, but there was a woman that wanted to do the show and she didn’t let me see [her piece]--she was a patient. But she didn’t want her art censored in any way, so I didn’t get it checked. It isn’t that she wouldn’t let me see it; she was working with the art person at the time, the employee that was the art 260 person, and she told her she didn’t want to have it censored. So that person didn’t think that really we would have to do it. Any rate, long and short of it, up comes this picture that we had in the new installation, and I started getting calls from everybody, “You can’t have this.” It turned out the first picture in the series was entitled A Lump of Shit, and it was, indeed, a painting of a huge amount of fecal matter, and it had that title. Of course, you can’t have that in a hospital. I said, “You have to take it down.” She accused me of freedom-of-speech infractions and censoring, all of this stuff. Ahh! But, see, there’s always a problem. Often, they were funny. Another problem in the art was the Surgery Department wanted to have a bust of Dr. Holman, Hal Holman’s father, who I knew had started the Surgery Department. They had a bronze bust of him. Well, this isn’t exactly the art the Art Commission wanted, but I said to them, “Listen. We have to do something because the Surgery Department wants it. It isn’t part of our art program, but we have to place it, or else they’re going to place it.” So I got the okay from the Art Commission, who didn’t like it at all, to put it by the door to the operating rooms. That’s where we placed it, and that was fine with Surgery. They liked that. Trying to get a bunch of surgeons to agree with the Art Commission, this is not easy. My job was often not easy. Then there was a nursing unit--I can’t remember which nursing unit it was--directly opposite the bronze bust. There was a problem. The nurse manager called me. It turned out that they had an Asian nurse who felt it was bad feng shui. I knew about feng shui, but I didn’t know a whole lot about it. 261 She said that her nurses were now blaming it for everything bad that happened on the unit--one blamed her mother’s cancer on it and one blamed her sister’s death on it and one blamed some horrible thing that had happened to her, an accident or something, on the bad feng shui from that statue. I suggested having it not directly facing the unit, turning it to the side, but that wasn’t good enough. She said, “I’m calling in a feng shui specialist.” [laughs] I said, “Okay.” I was able to get the woman’s name and number, and this was what the nurses wanted. Well, you do what the nurses want. I think I even paid for it out of the funds that I had raised for patients. So I talked to the woman ahead of time, and I told her the problem. There wasn’t really any other place we could move it. We’ve got these two august groups, the surgeons and the Art Commission, to agree, and what could she do to help--please, please, please. She came in and we had a full-blown meeting with the nurses. She had a meeting with only the nurses, she met with me and with the nurse manager, and her solution was there are two things that counteract metal in feng shui. The first is fire. I said, “Oh, fine. How can we do that?” She said, “We will put red felt on the back of the base of the statue.” Okay, I could live with that. They turned the statue sideways, too, so it wouldn’t be looking directly down, and we put red felt on it. The nurses said, “No, no, it’s not working. It’s not working. The bad feng shui is still there.” So I said, “What are we going to do now?” 262 She says, “The other thing that will counteract metal is water.” I thought, “Oh, great. Water in the hospital.” I remembered what happened when we tried to put water in the fountain in the chapel. It was an incredible battle, because everyone in Facilities said that that was a bacteria hazard. We were able eventually to get it done. But I was thinking, “How am I going to do this behind a statue?” She said, “Oh, we’ll just put bottled water that’s capped behind it.” Well, that worked. The feng shui was all right with the water. The only problem was that Housekeeping kept removing it. They thought it was left there by accident, and I kept telling Housekeeping, “No, no, you have to leave them there.” But they’d have new housekeepers all the time, so I had to keep checking to be sure it was there. [laughs] So all kinds of funny things happened. People would want the art taken down. It turned out we could not have any body parts in the art. We couldn’t have anything that reminded them of blood. There were other things people objected to. We had a perfectly beautiful Native American weaving of an owl, just a lovely owl, and we had it in the North ICU. It turned out that the patients hated it because it made them think of the spirit of death. So we moved it. That’s valid. We moved it. It’s a beautiful piece, though. We put it somewhere where no one objected. I remember that Jill Freidenrich had a gorgeous, gorgeous thing that was her own that she bought, and she was donating it to the hospital. It was a beautiful painting. It did have a kind of a vase shape in the middle of it. 263 Most people thought of it as an urn with ashes in it. So guess what? She let me have it in my office. I was thrilled with it. We had to fight a lot of these different battles of people not liking things and trying to keep everybody happy. The art that went on the nursing unit had to be liked by the nurses. All of these things were difficult. Sometimes we’d have a band and we wouldn’t know they’d have the electronic instruments, and the noise was really pretty deafening. So, of course, I got called on the carpet for that. Okay, back to the other things that I did. All of them have funny stories, though. So massage, we wanted to put that in. Now, that is something that was darn near impossible at that time to put into a hospital because everybody felt that it would somehow be wrong to have these people working on patients. The way we got around that, making a long story short, was we simply sent the massage therapists on to the units to massage the nurses and the doctors. Those are the two that mostly were against it. So that got rid of that problem pretty quickly. Then we had the problem of the deaf interpreters. We had to hire from agencies, which was incredibly expensive, incredibly expensive. But the agencies did not want you to hire an interpreter of your own and they fought it. We kept trying to hire a deaf interpreter, but the agencies wanted to get the money for it. They said if anybody came to work for us, that they could not work for their agency. So eventually we did get one, but it was just always a battle on each of these things. 264 At the beginning of the time that I was there before the new Children’s Hospital was built, we were responsible for the babies in the neonatal intensive care. Not all the pediatrics were there. Some of it was in a different place, but certainly the neonatal babies and the labor and delivery were with us then. We started the Cuddle Program for the little tiny babies in their tents. It was a wonderfully popular program. When Packard Hospital was built next to us, that moved over. But it was such a great thing for volunteers to do. Then we started pet therapy--again, something that was not simple to start in a hospital because people thought that the pets would bring in germs and everything. But eventually these adorable animals won over the nurses. It is the nurses that you really have to win over, generally speaking. Tracy: During this time that you were developing a position for patient representatives and growing that corps of representatives, and you were introducing all of these patient-oriented programs that were focused on helping them in healing and helping them during their stay in the hospital, I wonder if you saw a shift at the Stanford Hospital in how patients were viewed and regarded by the other staff, by nurses, by doctors. Was there a shift in philosophies about how you treat patients? Kennedy: [01:25:39] Let’s say there is always something going on about that. At the time I came, there wasn’t, but after that, there would always be things to try to make employees do a better job. They call it service excellence. They started calling it patient experience. There definitely was a shift to people wanting to do that, which I figured was my job when I came, but on a kind 265 of a massive scale that was hard to implement across the board. But, yes, I know there’s been a huge shift because I see what it’s like now from the time that I started. So I do know that it’s been there. Most of these different efforts would have a catchy name--I think they still have one going on--and it would be more or less effective. Then it would die off, and then another one would come along and take its place. What it is, it’s usually a shift toward getting employees to treat patients better rather than a shift toward finding new programs to help patients. But when I was doing it, I was the only one thinking of these programs. Sometimes a nurse would come to me and ask me to do something. I remember the chief nurse in the Cardiac Unit called me, or maybe it was the cardiac administrator for Cardiology called me, and they wanted me to put together a volunteer group that would handle smoking cessation for patients because they needed it. It became a JCAHO, Joint Commission on Accreditation for Hospitals Organization, requirement that you have a program for smoking cessation. So our office handled that. We had a very good program actually going, run by volunteers. So occasionally there’d be a new idea coming up, but as often as not, it was because of laws. So the laws got more stringent for getting more interpreters. So I’d say the shift was in the country, really, too, a lot. [01:28:06] Sorry I can’t be more specific. There’s definitely been a shift, but when and how it happened, I think, it has just been slow and gradual. 266 Tracy: But it’s good to know that from your viewpoint, that there were laws that pushed that shift, and that there was a national shift, not just internal to Stanford. [End of Session 5 of 6, Interview with Jeanne D. Kennedy, August 12, 2014] 267 268 STANFORD UNIVERSITY PROJECT: STANFORD PRESIDENTIAL FAMILIES AND STANFORD STAFF ORAL HISTORY PROJECTS INTERVIEWEE: JEANNE D. KENNEDY INTERVIEWER: ALLISON TRACY DATE OF INTERVIEW: SEPTEMBER 2, 2014 SESSION: 6 OF 6 Tracy: Hi. This is Allison Tracy. It is September 2, 2014. I’m here with Jeanne Kennedy to conduct our final session of our oral history interviews. Jeanne, to start out, we talked a little bit about Allan and his involvement in the humor program at the hospital, but we didn’t talk about who Allan is or who he is in your life, so let’s talk a little bit about that. Kennedy: [00:00:25] Well, after I got divorced, I got pitchforked into the dating scene, which was such an amusing thing to do. To feel at age fifty-four that you’re a teenager is somewhat alarming and somewhat revitalizing. It’s an odd thing, but nothing really changes all that much. I remembered my teenage years with all of the ups and downs and everything like that. So for a while, there was a tumultuous quality to being on my own and single and going through this. I had a lot of interesting encounters with gentlemen friends. I had actually learned to live alone very well, to my great surprise, because Don was away so much. I learned very easily how to take care of myself. So that actually wasn’t hard, but this dating business was very hard. 269 Luckily, I met Allan three years out, three years after the divorce, and we’ve been together now for twenty-four and a half years. It was a big surprise to me, because you don’t really expect you’re going to find somebody. But here was this very interesting man, a psychiatrist. He was retired from private practice but still working at the San Mateo County Health Department, advising other psychiatrists and keeping track of some of the regulations, not his favorite thing to do. It just clicked, and it went on. It became permanent, and we’re totally committed and husband and wife in every way except technically. Tracy: Did he start volunteering for the humor program after you met, then? Kennedy: [00:02:33] Oh, yeah. In fact, one of his lifelong ambitions had been to be a clown, and that happened after we started going out together and being together. He was a great clown. We decided to start the humor program at work, and all my staff knew him and knew he was a clown. They were like, “Well, get Allan to come in.” He was willing to volunteer, and volunteered for a number of years, maybe three or four years. Then his last two years we paid him because we were looking for another clown that we had to pay (who we never found, incidentally). We found a couple, but they weren’t really the right sort of--you have to be very careful in a hospital about so many things. I remember that I hated one of Allan’s props. It was one of those rubber chickens. It looks like it’s hanging in a market. He thought it was hysterical, and it is funny. But he brings it in to the hospital, and I said, “You can’t bring that here.” 270 He asked, “Why?” Because he’s forgetting that I’m his boss, not just his love interest. I had to remind him that in a hospital you can’t bring anything that looks dead. [laughs] But he was really good at it and had a very good time, and it was a lot of fun to see him. He’s used to hospitals, he likes hospitals. He was a hit on the geriatric ward. It was a lot of fun, and he enjoyed it greatly. He has now finally given up clowning. He’s run through that particular thing, but he did it for many years. [00:04:17] I should tell you that he certainly has a family that has extended my family reach. Between us, we have six children, ten grandchildren, and four great-grandchildren. I will say the greatgrandchildren are on his side, but I’m delighted because I may never live to have great-grandchildren of my own. It’s funny to think I’m a step-greatgrandmother. We have a great deal of fun with all of our extended family. Of them all, only my Julia and her family live here, so we have a lot of traveling that we do back and forth. Tracy: With Julia and Page, how many grandchildren? Kennedy: [00:05:04] That’s four of mine. Six are Alan’s. [laughter] Tracy: So let’s go back and talk about your time at the hospital. We spent a lot of our session last time talking about all of the programs that you helped to build, so I wanted to think about the growth in a broader sense. So in 2001 I had read that there were 981 volunteers at the Stanford Hospital, and that’s a pretty significant number. I don’t know if you were managing all 981, but from your memory, how did that volunteer corps grow, and how did managing so many volunteers impact your position? 271 Kennedy: [00:05:53] Well, for me, volunteers were essential because you remember that nobody would give me any staff when I started. So I started with a corps of volunteers doing patient relations. The treatment that I did was to give them a professional job and treat them as paid professionals in every way possible. Of course, they worked shorter periods of time, but giving them titles, giving them business cards, making sure that they had job descriptions--all of this kind of thing was just exceedingly important. When I came, the Auxiliary was the only major volunteer group, and there were 350 of them. There was a small group with the chaplaincy and a couple of outside groups that came in to make things like Christmas socks for the children when we had children in our hospital. So when I started my patient relations volunteers, the Auxiliary got quite upset, even though I had checked with them and so forth. It was actually quite a turf battle. It was not one the Auxiliary could win because it turned out that we had these other pockets of volunteers. They thought they were the only volunteers in the hospitals. Well, we had a committee put together by Linda Meier and all of us were on it. We had representatives from the Auxiliary. So it became clear that actually there were numbers of different volunteers coming into the hospital, and there was no one overseeing the ones that were not in the Auxiliary. So we were then able to get a coordinator for the volunteers, which helped immeasurably. I will say, though, that in the time that I was there, we built it to twelve hundred volunteers at its peak, including the Auxiliary. So I was very proud of that particular thing. A lot of it has to do with treating people as 272 professionals when they volunteer their time, not expecting them to just do the most mundane jobs, but giving them jobs that they are capable of doing. [It also means] evaluating the people, not just taking everybody that comes for a particular job, but evaluating where they belong. For that, of course, you do need staff, and I did have staff. At its height, I had a full-time volunteer coordinator and a half-time assistant and some administrative help there. With budget cuts, this went down. At one point we only had a halftime volunteer coordinator, but it’s now built up again. I know they have a full-time position and some administrative help. That’s a good thing, because managing volunteers does take a lot of time. The bulk of the volunteers were within my department because the Auxiliary wasn’t really part of my department. I had the administrative oversight for them, which doesn’t mean much, just that I was a liaison for them. Other than that, the bulk of all the volunteers were in my department because we used them so heavily, since we had very little money. As I had said, nobody was wanting to throw staff at the things I was doing. They are now. Some of them, like the Health Library and the chaplaincy, still have large volunteer corps, but then in some of the other places they don’t want them anymore. So I think that the volunteers have dropped. It’s also more our culture that the volunteers have dropped because so many more women, who were the backbone of it, are working during their younger years, and it’s just harder to get people to come in. Also, you can get people that are working people to come in to volunteer at night, but that means, again, you have to have some kind of oversight and make sure that it works. 273 Tracy: As your volunteer corps grew, how did you handle the challenges of managing an ever-larger group with what it sounds like a similar to sometimes diminishing staff available to oversee them? Kennedy: [00:10:18] Well, we did have diminishing staff in some ways, but we would find another way to handle it. So the answer is delegation, because each section of my group ran their own volunteers. The chaplaincy ran theirs, the Health Library ran theirs. We had a volunteer director who was responsible for placing them in the different places, but the oversight was spread to the supervisors of those volunteers. We did the legislative things. We were the people that pushed the volunteers on HIPAA [Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act], make sure they were tested properly. We had to make sure that they had the same employee checks that were necessary. We were responsible a little bit like the volunteer human resources, which is more what we did, recruiting, placement, preliminary training. Tracy: You mentioned finding appropriate tasks for the right person. Did you ever have people that wanted to volunteer for whom there was no task really that you had that you could match them with? Kennedy: [00:11:30] Yes, of course. Just don’t hire them; in quotes, “hire.” Tracy: Is the Auxiliary still in existence, do you know? Kennedy: [00:11:54] The hospital has just acted to close it out, which is a shame. Tracy: The Auxiliary had what it oversaw and your volunteers had what they oversaw. Did those differences stay the same or did the Auxiliary and your corps get more and more different in what they oversaw? Did they start to overlap more? I’m just wondering how they compared over the years. 274 Kennedy: [00:12:47] There really wasn’t much of a worry. Occasionally there were things where the Auxiliary was working in the Emergency Department, some of our patient relations people were working in the Emergency Department. There were some problems there, but mostly the Auxiliary had their responsibilities and the volunteers worked in individual departments and reported to the department heads or the head of the division. That took care of most of that. There wasn’t the problem of stepping on each other’s turf. That was, of course, by design, because the Auxiliary was limited in what they could do, whereas the different departments could have people doing different kinds of things. The Auxiliary was doing a good job in what they were doing, so there was no point in trying to put other people in it. People wanted to do that, they joined the Auxiliary. If they wanted to do the other jobs, they didn’t. I will say that it grew-Tracy: When we talked about you starting your patient relations associates, there was resistance not just on the part of the Auxiliary, but from other units in the hospital. Eventually that was smoothed over and you were able to integrate them. In a longer-term sense, how did the hospital’s reception of volunteers change over the entire time that you were working there? Kennedy: [00:14:23] Well, the reception of volunteers changed as they became more and more professional. I would not allow them to be identified as volunteers. They [hospital administration] wanted for a while to put a different color on their name badges, and I just wouldn’t allow it. I said, “Absolutely not,” because I did not want them to. The trend is now going to identifying volunteers, they have different badges, they are wearing uniforms and things 275 like that. I did not want them to wear special uniforms because I discovered that the more professional people preferred not to be identified as volunteers because they were doing a professional job. The minute you say “volunteer,” unfortunately, you’ve got an interpretation that is not accurate necessarily. That is to say somebody who’s ineffective, somebody who doesn’t really have the power to do anything to help you, and that’s not true. Tracy: Is a part of this move towards identifying volunteers driven by federal regulations that you have to identify staff versus volunteers, or is it more of just hospital culture? Kennedy: [00:15:39] I’m not there, so I can’t answer that. There are people that interpret legislation differently. I always knew how to interpret it to make it come out the way I wanted it. So I can’t answer the whys of it. I still don’t think it’s a good idea. Tracy: You made the point to me that managing volunteers was one part of many things that you did. It was impressive, your ability to not only grow but professionalize this corps of people that came in and were doing important functions in the hospital. So I don’t want to make it seem as though that’s all you did, but it was a very significant contribution to the hospital. Kennedy: [00:16:25] Well, you’re right, because I now have lost track of how many FTE volunteers provided, but it was huge. I used to do that in my annual reports. I would talk about the FTE that the volunteers provided and what it was in terms of salary, what it would be, because there are certain base values they give to volunteers without specifying the job. So that used to be, I 276 thought, pretty impressive. I was proud of that, and it did mean that so much of our work had a way of reaching out further. The chaplains, because of their volunteers, they could see many more patients and find out where the problems were so that the chaplains themselves could go and solve the heavier problems. In the Health Library, they were able to take care of many more patrons. They had highly, highly trained library associates. They called them library associates. The patient relations associates, again, were highly trained because we had so few paid people that we had to extend our reach that way. As I’ve said before, things are very different now. They’re spending a lot more money on these things I did, so it makes me feel good. But everything that I did, it was, in the end, for the patient. Patient ombuds, patient relations, that was the start of it, and everything after that built on it. Even if it were in the community, the patients go back to the community, and it’s a service you can give, making more of a continuity between their time in the hospital and their regular life. Tracy: Do you feel that from when you were starting patient relation programs and integrating all of these programs to the time that you retired, did the hospital itself change how it viewed its patients? Kennedy: [00:18:29] Definitely. Across the whole country it’s changed. Right after I retired, a New York Times writer was writing an article. A friend of mine told him about me, and he called me, and I was on the front page. That is, my name wasn’t on the front page, but my ideas were on the front page of The New York Times. I was on the next page that it went to. But he said to me, 277 “You know, Jeanne, you’re a huge help, but I can’t say it’s you the whole time.” I said, “That’s fine. Just mention my name once at least.” I guess that was in spring of 2005, and I’ve always been so proud to see that The New York Times was pushing the whole thing that I’d been pushing. Things have changed markedly. Everything I was doing, I was trying to get people to look at the whole of the patient experience, from when they arrived, how everything hit them. When I started, I was the only one that was thinking that way, as far as I could tell, in our hospital. That probably isn’t true. Other people might have been thinking that way, but they weren’t actively trying to change it and make it happen. In the different departments, each department would try to be better, of course, but they weren’t thinking about the whole experience. I think the buzzword now is “patient experience.” In fact, I think they’re even naming jobs “patient experience” this or “patient experience specialist” or that kind of thing. Kind of interesting to see. It is certainly true that, though I was way before my time and had to fight for it, it’s clearly the move that’s sweeping the whole country, and it’s a wonderful thing. We need that. It’s all very fine for me to have had the luxury of being the person to begin it. I don’t know if “luxury” is the right word. The privilege of being able to begin everything. Because I had to fight, but I enjoyed the battle of showing people what was necessary, and to see these things come to fruition is really wonderful. 278 Of course, you will never be able to make it simple for patients in a hospital or make it an enjoyable experience. It’s just not. So you have to do the best you can to make it as best for them as you can possibly do. But patients coming into the hospitals and their families are anxious and worried, even if it’s something minor. Then when it’s something very serious, the support systems can only do so much. Tracy: Something that occurred to me--hospitals are changing how they view patients and, just as you said, there’s patient experience positions. I wonder if any of that filtered into medical schools and how doctors were educated. Did you ever have an experience with Stanford’s med school where you were able to integrate some of that? Kennedy: [00:21:40] Well, it certainly wasn’t my job that got the medical school going, but, yes, the medical school started to really work on it. I just hear things. One of the things they do is they’re having more hands-on diagnoses. They’re trying very hard to get the medical students to learn that. They’re trying hard to get the medical students to understand the ethics, and one of our chaplains got deeply involved with teaching the medical school about ethics for patients. The medical school had one patient, and I’ve managed to forget his name [Jonathan King]. But he was dying of cancer, and he had a whole video made of him doing this and talking about what it was like to be a patient and what it meant. They would show this to their doctors, and we would show it to our staff, too. They were thinking about it and moving toward it, and I’m sure they still are. 279 Tracy: One thing that we haven’t really talked about that certainly would have impacted you was the growth of the Stanford Hospital over that time. Certainly new buildings were added, more patients were integrated, and I’m just wondering how the hospital’s renovations and growth impacted you, if at all. What is your memory of the hospital’s growth over time? Kennedy: [00:23:07] Well, in my time, I came just after they added phase two, which was a first small remodeling job, not really small, but small compared to the next one. Then they built the whole next phase, which was huge. Now they’re building a whole new hospital. It would impact me when there were less complaints. If we had more private rooms, there were less complaints. When I came, we were ten percent private rooms. Everybody wants a private room, and we were the gateway in a lot of ways to people who would request it, and then we’d try to see if we could help them. Well, ten percent is nothing. It went up to thirty-three percent, which was a huge help. We used to have wards that had four, five beds in them, and that changed markedly. I think when I left, there was only one, and I think it was on the neurology unit. They had to have people watched constantly. At any rate, there won’t be things like that in the new hospital. Every single patient will have a private room in the new hospital. So these things are being acknowledged as human needs, and I’m happy to see it. There is one patient, though, that won’t be so happy, and that’s the patient that liked the company. There were patients that really wanted somebody in the room with them, that liked the company. They also thought 280 if something went wrong and somebody was right there, that maybe that could help. Now with the private rooms they’re also building in places for somebody to sleep, bench seats, window seats, chairs that recline. So this is all going to be possible. These are all terrific advances. Tracy: One thing that we didn’t talk about were the Welch Road apartments. Kennedy: [00:25:27] Yes, that was my project. I actually did that. One of our local people came--they’re the Flora Hewlett Apartments, and they are on Welch Road. The Assistance League of Santa Clara County, I think is its full name, came to me. One of their members was married to a guy in construction, and she really, really wanted to find a way to build a home for families of patients. Her nonprofit organization was willing to raise money and to try to see how to get it done. It was a huge project. So I worked with her for quite a while. Took us a while, but we finally got the Hewlett Foundation to give us the money to do it. Roger Heyns, I think, was head of it then, and he really wanted to do it. I found the land, got Stanford to lease them the land at zero cost, if I remember correctly. That was the hardest part because Stanford does not give its land very easily to projects. Raising the money was the hardest, then getting the land was also very hard, but it was “what do you do first?” They didn’t want to give you the land if you didn’t have the money, they didn’t want to give you the money if you didn’t have the land. Somehow, we juggled the balls and managed to make it all work. It opened, if I recall right, in 1987. It was apartments. The thought that went into them--these women were marvelous. They were so knowledgeable, 281 and they were very careful to get the right beds. All their beds are extra long because so many people are tall, and that way you don’t have to worry about just having some apartments that would have room for extra tall people and others not. Really well-done apartments, well furnished. Still going very strong to this day, constantly filled. We turned it over to the social workers to decided who would come there, working again with the Assistance League so that they were happy with it. They’re still running the project along with the place, and the land will revert back to Stanford if they drop the project, so it’s a win-win situation for Stanford. I was asked to try to do that again and just couldn’t manage to do it because I didn’t have anyone else to serve as the champions to help do the thing. Most of the Stanford people did not want these things in their own backyard, I’ve got to say. This was when we were trying to put it into sections of the housing on campus. So we never were able to do another one like that, but that one still is terrific. The Children’s Hospital has one called Ronald McDonald House that’s also going very, very well. These are desperately important. We could use ten times as many--that’s conservative. We could use twenty times as many of these places for people coming in need of low-cost housing where they can be near the patient, and sometimes where a day patient can stay and go back and forth. I was very proud of that project. Tracy: Certainly, families of any patient that’s in the hospital are dealing with a lot of distress. But there are people who fly and travel from all over the world to Stanford for the various specialists and doctors that no one else has. I 282 imagine that the patient population, as well as their families, in some ways are in very unique situations that you may not see in a county hospital. Kennedy: [00:29:35] Oh, yeah. It’s absolutely what happens. Stanford draws from all over the world, actually, and you need to find some way of finding places for them. We were lucky enough to have funds so that we could help pay sometimes. Where social work ran out of funds, they’d come to us, and we’d help pay for patients to stay in these places if they didn’t have the money. It’s not so much of a problem if people have a lot of money; it’s a problem when they don’t. That’s what we’re trying to do, is to make sure that there was lowcost housing. Bless the Assistance League. They still are doing a marvelous job. Tracy: Were there ever any hospital changes or policies that really threw a wrench into what you were trying to accomplish? There have been changes at the hospitals made that have helped overall in your mission of bettering the entire patient experience, but I just wonder if there was ever anything that came up that just became a huge obstacle for you. Kennedy: [00:30:55] Oh, constantly. Constantly. I mean, it was incredible. One of the things would be about volunteers. I remember that we had a woman who had I think a kidney transplant. I may have it wrong now, but at least the idea is the same. She was working at educating patients. She was a volunteer. Our legislative person interpreted some legislation as saying that no volunteer could be involved in the education of patients. I had to meet with her and with the head nurse for the clinic; they wanted to keep her but they couldn’t afford to pay her. She was marvelous at 283 it and she did a brilliant job, so I had to find a way around it. Took a while, but I figured it out. I had to convince the legislative person, because if I didn’t, then she would stop this volunteer from doing her job, which was not going to help anybody. It wasn’t going to help the patients, it wasn’t going to help the kidney transplant unit, it wasn’t going to help her. So I finally said, “Well, what if she used the protocol that the doctors wanted her to use.” Well, yes, that’s all right. If the doctors have control of the protocol, that’s all right. I said, “Well, fine. That’s what we’ll do.” So she went back, she wrote the protocol, gave it to the doctors, they signed off on it. She did a better job than they would because she’s been doing it. They signed off on it, and it was okay for her to continue. Three months later they got a grant and hired her. That’s the kind of nonsense-excuse me for saying that--that I would have to deal with. People didn’t want massage therapists on the units because they were not professionals, and how could you prove they were professionals. Now I think it’s done through the medical board. At the time though that didn’t seem to be possible because the medical board didn’t really want massage therapists on the units unless they’d experienced them themselves, or somehow [thought it] would help patients. So that was something we had to circumvent, which we did. Nobody wanted the patient relations program at all. Nobody wanted that in the slightest, and it was just a long time of proving ourselves and showing that we could be helpful to staff and why it would work. Nobody 284 wanted the volunteer coordinator, as I said before, including the chaplains back then. When I was trying to do Lifeline, which is that “Help, I’ve fallen” telephone thing, the Emergency Department was going to handle the phone calls in, and they decided they couldn’t do that after I had it all set up. So it took me two years before I could start it up again and figure a way to do it. Everything. I can’t even think. I think I said that the doctors didn’t like the Health Library. Just most everything I did somebody didn’t want for some reason or other, and you had to find your way around it. A lot of times, it was legislation. The whole patient rights issue has gotten so cumbersome. If you see now what the legislation says you have to do--and this you can’t get around. The legislation says you have to say these many things. So you have a huge, long, cumbersome patients-rights piece for the patients to read. So my contribution to that was underlining the key phrase in each of these hugely long paragraphs so that a patient had at least a chance of seeing what their rights were by skimming over that. Otherwise, who reads those things? It’s like the HIPAA confidentiality thing. Nobody reads it. You can’t read it. I mean, you can’t. There’s no way. But somehow legislatively it covers your back, I guess. There’s always something going. There’s legislation that they want to have be helpful. I think I talked about Palo Alto had legislation against massage therapy. They wanted to be helpful, keep the prostitutes out, but their legislation was making it so the hospital couldn’t have massage. So we 285 had to change that. They were willing to change the wording so we could do that. But almost everything that I did had this kind of thing. I was exceedingly lucky. I was exceedingly lucky in that I was able to start a job that was my passion, and when something’s your passion, you don’t mind fighting for it. You get a little annoyed sometimes, but you don’t mind fighting for it and winning. I have to say I lost a number of times, too, of course, but I won so much. Tracy: So you retired from the hospital in 2005? Kennedy: [00:36:16] Just at the end of 2004, so, essentially, yes. Just before my seventysecond birthday in January. Tracy: So let’s talk a little bit about what you’ve continued to do since retiring from the hospital. Kennedy: [00:36:31] Well, I thought when I retired that I was desperate to keep on doing something professional. So I have a website, and I am a consultant for health services and nonprofits. What I found was that a lot of people called me because of the New York Times article, and I’d had some other articles, too. I found a lot of people calling me to ask me to do things and willing to pay me. The problem was the things they asked me to do were not the things I really wanted to do, and I discovered I didn’t like traveling. I didn’t even want to go up to the city because I’d have to go up during rush hour and come down. So I decided, well I can afford to do things pro bono and do what I want. So I actually stopped insisting to myself that I needed to make money and prove I was a professional. So now I do a lot of different things. I have 286 done some work to help an awful lot of nonprofits, and minor things, but still rewarding because it’s very worthwhile working with them. Turns out that my résumé-writing ability that I learned over all those years of trying to help people get jobs and help people working for me to move up or get better jobs has come in very handy. It seems to be something that people need all the time, and I’ve done a huge number of résumés with people. It sounds dumb, but it’s not. I’ve just finished doing one, actually, for Katie Mark, who is Jim and Maxie Mark’s daughter. Brilliant girl. How do you get people to put their best foot forward, to look the best they can? Most people don’t know how to do that. They could do it for someone else, but they can’t do it for themselves. Or they’re so mired in the job that they have and they want to change jobs, and they don’t know how to fit [that into a resume]. When I say résumé, I mean CV, the same idea. Just how to put your life on paper in a way that showcases you best. It turns out I’m pretty good at it, so I enjoy that a lot. I’ve done pretty far-fetched ones. A young woman from Nairobi who was moving to Canada, that’s one of the ones I did. I did a woman from Colombia who wanted to change from religious TV to designing fashion, and a guy that was a banker who wanted to move to an arts program. So actually, all of these people are successfully doing what they wanted to do, and it makes me happy because I had a little bit of a role in it. It has to be them, of course, that’s doing it, but it’s actually a lot of fun. It takes good writing ability, good editing ability, and I’m enjoying that. 287 My kids insisted that they want to know more about their genealogy, and I’ve worked very hard. I have a cousin who’s kept track of a lot of things, and I’ve pulled a lot of things in from different sources. So I have a pretty good genealogy of the family going back to the 1500s, which is pretty good for Americans. You don’t usually have the ability to do that. I know Allan can only go back to his grandparents, actually. But it’s still very interesting for him, his part of it. The kids also want to know all the furniture that I have that belonged to the family. I’m a packrat and all my family were packrats, so I’ve got a lot of stuff. They want an inventory, so I’m doing that. That’s not finish-able for me, since packrats have too much stuff. Also, ever since the freezer first came in way back probably the early sixties, I’ve been interested in how freezers can help in cooking. I’m actually known as the “freezer queen.” So a number of my friends have asked me, including my kids, “Why don’t you write it down so we’ll know how to do it.” I’ve been doing that for a long time. I think I’m afraid to finish it because then the project will be over. I actually could finish it up, so maybe now that I’m talking about it I will. I’ve got quite a bit written on it. I like to cook, so I put a lot of my recipes on the computer, and those will go in the book. The book, by the way, you understand, will be vanity-published. My daughter Julia also wants me to include my old wives’ tales. She was asking me how to chop onions, and I said, “Well, you wear glasses if possible, you put two matches between your teeth, and you put running water next to you, and you won’t cry.” 288 “Why did you never tell me this?” she says. “Put it in your book.” So I have a little section on things that work like that. The old wives actually knew a lot. I’m enjoying my reports from my report club, the Current Events Club, which is one of the oldest women’s clubs at Stanford. It goes back to 1905. At any rate, all of us do reports, one report a year, and it better be professional. So my next one is going to be on the lure of the microcosm. I love dollhouses, I love miniatures, and it turns out that that’s not limited to women. Men love them too. They love train sets and so forth. In order to do that, I have to get my dollhouse fixed up. My dollhouse is getting as full of stuff as my house is, and I’ve got to weed it out. So I’m excited about doing that currently. I’m also getting a lot of satisfaction out of doing what we call indexing for the oral histories for the Stanford Historical Society, and the oral histories are exciting. I know so many of the people. It makes it easier for me than a lot of people because I’m close to Stanford, so I know how to find the people, find the right spellings and so forth. It’s not true indexing the way I used to do it. It’s really a listing of subjects, but, nonetheless, it’s a very satisfactory thing to do. So I’m hoping that will continue for quite a while. Tracy: I wonder how, from when you and Don came here in 1960 to today, how has Stanford’s reputation changed? Can you speak more broadly about how as an institution it’s grown over the years that you’ve been here? Kennedy: [00:44:01] Well, I can certainly talk about it from my perspective. I guess everybody has their own. When we finally came to Stanford [in 1960], it was 289 like this golden dream, going to California. Everything so different and so wonderful and so changed for a New Englander, but, nonetheless, a place I loved from the start. Stanford then had a very good reputation, but the East Coast didn’t know that much about it. It wasn’t as easy to travel across the country back then. I may have said this before--I do remember that when Don and I got here, we were like, “Hmm,” because for the intellectual ideas there was a huge lag from the East coast. It probably took a year for the people at Stanford to be talking about the same things we were talking about in Syracuse, New York, which wasn’t as up-to-date as Cambridge, as Harvard had been. So there was a definite time lapse across the country at that time, and all of the kids here seemed to be beautiful blond surfer types. I remember Don saying, “If only we could take a third of CCNY [City College of New York] and mix it in with Stanford, that would be perfect.” So the changes are just obvious. I mean, Stanford’s student population is incredibly diverse now. There was when we came a prejudice against Jews-not a big one--on the faculty side of things. I don’t know about the students. That’s, of course, disappeared totally. The university itself has become far more skilled in fundraising to a place where it ties with Harvard and sometimes beats Harvard. It’s unbelievable. I think a lot of it has to do with the sense of Stanford being a family, and I feel that way about it. I feel Stanford’s a family. I know that not all the students feel that way. Of course, they can’t. But so many of them do that it then spurs them to stay part of that family, which, in turn, builds the 290 connections that lead to fundraising. It’s the connections that really count that keep you moving toward greatness, the protection of freedom of speech, and faculty having tenure is a major protection for that freedom. The ability to have diverse perspectives has grown and grown and grown, although it was always there. I mean, it was there when we came then, too. The faculty were ahead of the students in that sense. They were more liberal than the student population at the time was. These things have increased Stanford’s breadth and position in the world. My granddaughter goes here now, and she loves it so deeply that it’s just stunning to me that she can do that. She lives in Washington, DC, but she doesn’t even want to go home during the summer, she loves it so much here. The thing is that once you’re part of Stanford, it’s hard to give that up. It hasn’t been the truth for everybody. Of course, it hasn’t. But mainly people that leave Stanford want to come back. They may leave for bigger jobs, but they want to retire back here and be back in connection with Stanford. So Stanford’s ability to connect people and have them stay connected with the university, I think is a major part of it. In order to have that happen, you’ve got to have incredible teaching, you’ve got to have incredible research, you’ve got to have faculty that are unbelievable, that can lead the way. Yet you also have to make sure that the teaching of the students is fantastic. You have to put your best teachers there for the students. You have to be sure to keep hiring them, not just go for research and so forth, which Stanford does brilliantly. They really do. 291 So I’d say that it’s been a wonder to watch that. I think they’ve always had the idea about having good teachers for undergraduates, but there are many pressures that can pull you away from that. So I’m proud of Stanford from just a hundred different perspectives. Tracy: What do you feel you were able to contribute to Stanford in the various roles that you’ve played on campus or within the community? Kennedy: [00:48:48] Well, I guess I have to say that I actually never thought that I’d have anything lasting to point to, although lasting is not necessarily the most important thing. I have a lot of pride in being able to look at a building, the one for the hospital’s patients, the Flora Hewlett Apartment Building, and know that without me it wouldn’t have happened. Looking at all the things I did in the hospital--without me they wouldn’t have happened. Oh, they might have happened much later, but they certainly needed me to have them happen. With the university, I was able to influence some lasting things. At one point, they wanted to tear down Escondido Cottage. Don came home to tell me about it, and I said, “You can’t do that.” They were moving ahead to do it, and I was, “No, you have to keep the history.” Same with the Red Barn. They were going to take the barn down. Again, I said, “No. you can’t do that.” I mean, these things were going to happen. But Don, bless him, he listened to me and made sure that they didn’t happen. The museum, I really helped in my own way to make things happen there. I started the docent program, I started the book shop, I was in on the beginning of the Treasure Market. When they wanted to end Treasure 292 Market a few years ago, I fought hard to keep it going. So all of these things have given me those feelings of accomplishment. Hoover House. Being able to restore Hoover House was huge, and though many changes have been made since then, still I had stewardship for those years that I was there and I did well. I was a good steward of what I had, and I loved the house and I loved knowing that I did that. I had a little bit of a hand in Hanna House, changing things there, a little bit of a hand in Buck House later, changing some things there. So I love to think about those lasting things. The things that are less tangible, I don’t know whether they last or don’t last. My work in the hospital did. When I was the wife of the president, I wanted to have people in the house and pull them in, and I did an awful lot of that. I know that made people feel more connected to the president, and therefore to Stanford. But these things come and go as people come and go. I’d say that I’m truly happy with having been part of such a wonderful thing for all these years now. We came in 1960, so that’s fifty-four years of my life, and certainly the major part I’ve been involved here. I am happy about my contributions, the things that I did, tangible and not so tangible, whether they lasted or not. I feel like I’ve just been incredibly lucky with my life, incredibly lucky with both my marriages, with all my children, with my children and grandchildren. These things are just marvelously restorative and revitalizing at all ages, and looking back for me, it’s wonderful in so many ways, and looking ahead is wonderful too...