 L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson Today is April 22, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I m with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at the Oklahoma State University Library. I m out near Hess, Oklahoma, today at the home of Erma and Bob Tucker, and I m interviewing Erma today as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Series. Randy Wilson is also joining us and might chime in a little bit today. Thank you for having me and talking with me. You re welcome. Let s start out by having you tell me about where and when you were born. I was born in Edinburg, Texas, in 1943. Were you the first child? Yes, I was the oldest one. What did your parents do? My parents, they used to work over there in a canning company, a cannery. They were in the valley, and they canned tomatoes and all different kinds of vegetables. Then in the summertime, we would come to northern Texas and southern Oklahoma, working in the fields, hoeing cotton, pulling cotton. So what part of Texas is Edinburg? It s in the very south tip of the state. What were your parents names? 5 E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson My dad s name was Eraclio Alonzo, and my mother s name, Catarina Serna Alonzo. How did they come to settle in southern Texas? Well, my mom was born in Cuero. It s kind of east of San Antonio. She was born on a farm there, and my dad was born in Rosebud, Texas, and that s over there by, let s see, south of Fort Worth. You mentioned your father was an orphan? Yes, he was an orphan. He had a brother two years older than him, and then they had a little sister. They were being raised by their dad, but their dad got killed in a fight or something, so they were orphans then because they didn t have a mother. The little girl was taken to live with her godmother, so my dad never saw his sister again. The two little boys was raised by uncles, and that s all I know about them. What about your mother s family? Oh, my mother s family, they lived there around San Antonio. My grandpa used to work on a farm, but he was a sharecropper. They raised cotton, and they lived there on the farm. They were doing real good there. My grandpa had asthma real bad, so the doctor told him to move to the South Texas where it was warmer over there, so they moved over there. My mom had six sisters and six brothers. She was number seven, I think. What was her nationality? She was Spanish and Mexican. You mentioned her family had originated in Spain? Yes, they came from Spain. Then they came to Cuba, and they lived there for a while, and then they moved to Yucatan. It s the peninsula over there in southern Mexico, southeastern Mexico. Then they moved back over here to Texas. Do you know how they got from the Yucatan to Texas? No. When was that? 6 E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson Oh, what year that was? No, I don t know because we re talking about my grandma s family. My grandma was born in south Texas, also, and she was born in Hidalgo. It s a little town there by the border, and that s where my grandma was born, my mom s mom. What was her name? I really don t know. Felipa Tagiles That s okay. We can add it in later if you think of it. What nationality was your father? He was Mexican, also, I think, but I think he had Indian, also. I m not sure. He had a nose like an Indian. What do you call that? A Roman nose. So growing up, did you speak Spanish in your home? Oh, yes, we spoke Spanish all the time. That was our main language. How did you learn English? Like I said, we used to go to north Texas. We used to go all over the place. We even went to the state of Washington and Montana. That s where I learned how to speak English. I was about five years old, and my dad was working at a dairy farm. Those people had two little kids, and they were around my age, so I played with them. I learned how to speak English with them. I was about five or six, and I got the whooping cough. They took me to the hospital, and I was in there for two weeks, two or three weeks, but that s where I learned how to speak English. And what brothers and sisters did you have? I had two brothers and three sisters. You were the oldest. I m the oldest, yes. How old were you when you started traveling with your family to these jobs? From the time you were born? Yes. And where would you stay when you went to different places? 7 E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker Well, there would be houses where we would live, people s houses. Sometimes they had a nice big garage, and that s where we d live. Would it just be for the harvest? It would be for the harvest time, and then we d move to another place. Did you keep a house in Texas this whole time that you would come back to? We did, yes. We had a little house over there in south Texas. And was it just your family that would go, or was there a group of people that would travel for these jobs? It would be a group of people. About how many? Let s see. There d be about five or six families. How would you travel? What form of transportation? Well, we had an old car, and we had one of those little stoves, the kerosene stoves with the two burners. We d bring our bedding and dishes and stuff, and that s where we d do our cooking, on that little stove. Was there kind of a leader of the group that arranged these jobs or determined where to go? Yes, he was the leader. He was the one that found the jobs, and then we would go with him. Do you know how he would find jobs? Well, I don t know. We would do that year after year, so he would know when the cotton was ready at a place, and so he d call the owner of that land or the cotton. It s ready, so we d get up and go over there and start working there. Then we d leave there and go to another place, different places. Would you ever travel a ways to get somewhere, and they already had enough workers? Yes, but then there was a lot of other farmers that had the same cotton, 8 L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson so we d go with them then. Will you describe the kind of work you were doing, what you were doing with the cotton? Yes, sometimes we would pick it, just pick it. Then you would really ruin your fingers because those cotton burrs would get stuck in your fingers, and you had bleeding fingers. But then we would pull cotton sometimes, and all you had to do was pick it up and pull it out from the Out of the burr? The burr, yes. That was sore, wasn t it? Yes, whenever we were pulling it, yes because you would just pull the thing. We wasn t stripping it. Whenever you re stripping it, you wear cotton gloves and just pull it up, pull the whole thing up. It was hard work. And you would put the cotton in sacks? In the sacks, yes, and pull it behind you. How big were these sacks? They were, oh, I don t know. You could probably put a hundred pounds in it and drag it with you. Then you d have to weigh it to see how many pounds of cotton you had. Do you know what they would do with it then? Were you done with it at that point? After you weighed it, you put it in a trailer, and then they would haul it off to the gin. Did your father get paid all of your family s wages? Yes. Yes. Then, on the weekends when it was raining, we wouldn t work then, but on Saturday, he would give everybody some money. We d go to town and get us some hamburgers and stuff. They were twenty-five cents each then, (Laughs) so it was cheap. What are some other things you would do for entertainment in your off 9 E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker hours? I don t know, just play, and play ball. We would go to town and go to the park and play there in the park. Did anyone in your family play musical instruments? No. Do you remember any certain games that you would play? Sometimes we d play jacks. We d play with baseballs and basketball. So when did you go to school? Well, we didn t go to school. We would go to school when school started, but then whenever cotton was ready, like in July I think it was in July. June, July, maybe. That d be cotton-chopping time. Yes. We would get out of school and come and work, and then go back and go back to school. So we didn t go to school very much. Did you feel very behind? Yes. That s why I never finished high school. I went to the seventh grade. Did you get any kind of schooling at home, or just worked when you were at home? We just worked. I mean work, work. Were your grandparents living nearby? No, my grandparents lived in south Texas. So you didn t see them very often? No. What are some foods you remember your mom preparing? We always had fried potatoes. We had fried potatoes, and beans and corn and stuff like that. 10 L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson Would you eat with the other people if you were traveling on a job? Would you eat with the other families? No, everybody had their own food. Whenever we were on the road coming to work, my dad would stop somewhere, and he d get him a big loaf of bread, and we d get some salami or bologna and cheese and make sandwiches, and sodas and stuff. That s what we ate for lunch when we were working. Were any of the, like, tortillas or Mexican-type foods common? Oh, yes. My mom made tortillas, yes. She d make them out of the flour, make them from scratch? Yes, from scratch. Do you make tortillas? No. What about tamales? My mom never made tamales. My grandma did, but they were always made during Christmas. My mom didn t know how to make Mexican food like enchiladas and stuff like that. She never knew how to do that. She would do, like with hamburger meat, she d put onions and potatoes and tomato and spices, and that s what we would eat, but she didn t know how to make enchiladas and stuff like that. We d eat some tacos, though. At Christmas did you generally spend time with any extended family? Well, if we were in south Texas we did because my mom had all her sisters and brothers over there. When we were over here in the north, we just were out by ourselves. Did your family have any Christmas traditions that you tried to carry on? Yes, the same things, the usual. Have a big dinner and have everybody there. Did you have a Christmas tree? 11 E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker Yes. We had one of those little silver-looking Christmas trees from a long time ago. So how old were you when you permanently located to Oklahoma? I was about fourteen or fifteen . When do you first remember coming to southwestern Oklahoma area to work? That was, like, in 56, I think. So you came back several times before moving here? Before staying here permanently, yes. Did you always come to the same place around here? Yes. Last time, you told a story about coming up here and stopping down the road and going into Tipton? Oh, yes. We had never been to Oklahoma. The first time, this guy, the leader of the bunch, he said, We re going to Oklahoma. We re going to Altus. Okay. We stopped over there in Vernon, Texas , and he said, Well, across the river is Altus. We ll go over there first. So we went to Altus to the gin first, and we were looking for a place to go pull bolls. Somebody said, Well, they have a job over there in Tipton. Well, we didn t know where Tipton was, and so they told us. From Altus to Tipton, it was the longest road that we d ever it was so far. Where are we going? We finally got to Tipton, and we went to the gin, and they told us that there was a house by the railroad tracks where the black people lived. It was a big old house, and so we moved there, and we stayed there for one year, I guess. My dad found a job with a man named Aubrey Wilson. He gave us a job, and we worked for him. We stayed there that winter. On his place? Yes. And is that the Christmas you were telling us about earlier? Yes. 12 L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker Will you tell that story again? The winter was kind of cold and wet, and we didn t work. It was Christmas Eve. We were sitting there, all of us, kind of sad or something because it was Christmas Eve. Well, here comes Aubrey with a big box, and he had a big thing of flour, sugar, coffee, and candy, and a lot of stuff in there, and a big old turkey. His wife, Billie, since I was the oldest girl, she sent me a whole bunch of costume jewelry that she had. All of us were real tickled. She sent my two brothers some harmonicas and yo-yos to play with, and my little sisters some dolls. Anyway, it was a real happy Christmas that year. We were real tickled. So your family moved up here permanently when you were about fourteen or fifteen . At what point did you meet your husband? Well, we were working in Aubrey s field. I think we were hauling no, we were pulling bolls, I think. I knew my husband before. I mean I had seen him before, a lot of times. One day we were pulling bolls there, and two boys would get off the school bus. One of them was real tall and skinny, and the other one was short and dark headed. My mom says, Now, which one do you like the best? I said, I don t know. I like the little short one with the dark hair. I said, The other one is real tall and skinny. And that was the one that I ended up marrying. (Laughter) Who was the other boy? It was Bill Tyrone, Bob s nephew. So what happened on down the road when you When I met him? Yes. Well, he would go by there, and I don t know. He finally asked me for a date. We was going to go to town on a Saturday, so I met him over there in town, and we went to the movies. Do you remember what you saw? Yes, we saw what was the name? It was with Jack Lemmon, something about wine and roses Days of Wine and Roses . I don t remember what the name of it was. I think we went together for a couple of months, maybe, and then he asked me to marry him. I said, Yes, okay. (Laughter) Then we went home and told my mom. I said, I m going to get married. She said, What do you mean, getting married? I 13 L. Wilson E. Tucker B. Tucker E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker B. Tucker E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker said, I m going to marry Bob. My dad says, No. No, no, no. He was against it. He didn t want me to get married. Bob come over one day to the house, and he said, Okay, let s go. So I put my things in my little suitcase, and we went to his mom s house. Then he told them that we were getting married. He got his stuff, too, and we went to town to where his sister lived. I took a shower and put on my I had been a bridesmaid a week before, so I had a white dress and white shoes, everything. I got ready, and Bob got ready, and we went to Olustee. We got married there in the Church of Christ, and then we went to El Paso for our honeymoon. His sister lived there. We ve been married nearly fifty years already. Are you celebrating this year? Oh, well, it s what s this year? Forty-five? Forty-six? Forty-seven. Oh, forty-seven. (Laughter) It s been forty-seven happy years. So after your honeymoon, did you come back here? Did he have a house, or where did you live? Yes, we rented a house in Altus, and we lived there for over a year. Then his mom and dad were, well, they were probably our age now. We moved in there with them, and we lived there for another year, maybe, or two years. Then we rented a little house south of Hess. From there, we moved right here, and we ve lived here all these years since Seventy. Seventy. 1970. And did your parents stay in the area? Well, they bought a little house in Hess, and they stayed there until about 71, and then they moved to Florida. They lived in Florida for, I don t know, twenty years, maybe. Then from there, they moved to Dallas, and they lived there until they died. And what about your siblings, your brothers and sisters? One of my brothers, when they were living in Florida, he died. He got killed there. Driving a tractor, and he turned over in a ditch, and he drowned in the irrigation water. He was twenty-one then. That was like in 1969. Then they moved to Dallas, and they lived there the rest of their 14 L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker lives. I ve got three sisters and a brother still living there in Dallas. Were your parents working in Florida when they moved there? Yes, they were working over there in the fields, too. What kind of fields in Florida? They were working, picking tomatoes and carrots and vegetables like that. So then whenever they moved to Dallas, they were too old already, and they were retired by then. And so what about you? What jobs have you had? Well, in 68, I was working at Southside School over here east by where we live. I worked there three years, and then I got pregnant in 71. That s when my daughter was born, so I quit working. My son was born in 72. I quit working until 85, maybe. I worked again there, and I was a cook there at Southside. Then they closed the school in 91. I went to Altus. I ve been working there all this twenty-one years until I retire this year. And you re a cook in Altus? Yes. And when Southside was closing, did you have much notice? Did you start looking for a job? Oh, yes. Well, see, they hired everybody Southside consolidated with Altus, so whoever wanted to go there to Altus, we got the job. The cooks did and the janitor. None of the teachers got a job, though. Racial question. How was growing up, being in the Mexican race among racial issues going on? Did you feel much, yourself? No, not really. Just kind of a frame of mind thing, I guess. Yes, but when my mom and dad were newlyweds, like in 45, 40s, there was some racial stuff. My aunt, my mom s sister, her husband was in I don t know if it was in Germany or Japan. They were fighting then, and he was in the service, and she had a little girl. She was sick, and they wouldn t admit her at the hospital in San Antonio because she was Mexican. 15 R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson L. Wilson R. Wilson E. Tucker In the 1940s? Yes. My aunt was mad. She said, My husband is in the service for his country, and they won t even allow his daughter to go to the hospital. That was the only thing I ever heard about. We never had any Nothing major? Nothing major like that. While you were traveling around, working different places, if someone got hurt or sick, did you just go to the local hospital, or did you usually treat it on your own? Yes. No, we went to the hospital, the doctor. Were there any interesting home remedies that you recall? Yes. A long time ago, people used to wash their clothes with a rub board, and my mom had a glass one. Well, she was rubbing real hard, and it broke, the glass broke, and she cut her arms right there on both of them doing this. She said she was bleeding bad, so my dad run and got some sugar and put it on there to stop the bleeding, and it did. They took her to the doctor then, but she had real ugly scars here where she cut her wrists. Why did she have a glass washboard? I don t know They were pretty common. Really? Sure. I didn t know there were either, but that s just what she told me. And then when we lived over there at Aubrey s, there were some rats in there. My brother, he had a pellet gun, and that rat was going everywhere, running everywhere. My little sister, she was about five or six, about Brandon s age. My brother, he was shooting at the rat, and he shot my sister right here between the fingers. Well, what are we going to do? We ve got to take her to the doctor. My dad poured some kerosene in there. I don t know why. Well, we took her to the emergency, and the nurse said, Why did you all put kerosene in there? That s home 16 L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker remedies Oh, she got mad. Well, they tried to pull that pellet out of there, and they couldn t get it out. She still has it in there. That girl screamed and cried. Her face was purple, but they still couldn t get that thing out of there. I guess it could ve been worse. Yes It could ve been worse. He would ve probably shot her in the eye or something. That s it. Whenever you got a cold, my mom would put some Vicks on your chest, and then she d warm up a washrag and put it in there under your pajamas or your shirt. That s the only things we did. Did you have indoor plumbing or electricity? No. (Laughs) We had an outhouse. We did have a big old tub, a real long one. We d put hot water in there, and that s where we took a bath. I was the oldest one, so I took the bath first. (Laughter) Then all the little ones were next. We d put it in the kitchen and turn the wood stove on and take a bath there. Would you pump the water and haul it to the tub to get it? Yes, in buckets. When you lived on the Wilson place, did you have a garden? We had some peppers and a couple tomatoes or something. Did you have a car always? Yes. Do you remember what kind of cars? No, not really. We had a real pretty little blue car that we had, and I wrecked it when I was fifteen. (Laughter) Did you get in trouble? Yes. (Laughter) It turned over. It was over there west of Altus. I turned it over and hit my eye, and I had a big old eye like this. That s the only thing that happened. I didn t get hurt, just the eye. How old were you when you started driving? Well, I was driving at twelve, thirteen, but I didn t have a driver s 17 R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker license. Erma, when the cotton season would come around, it seems like more migrant folks would come and stay up there with you guys at that house? Yes, they did. How many people would be there at one time? There was just one house. Yes, it was one house, but it had let s see. It was five rooms in there. It would be us and about five families. You really had to make room for visitors in that house. Yes. Would you sleep four or five people to a bed? The kids, yes. So it might have been, what, twenty people staying there, or more? Well, we had the two front rooms, and the front room was where the kitchen was and the bedroom. We had a big bed and then a cot. Then the kids slept on the floor. So was that fun as a child? Yes. That s all we knew, so it was all right. I can imagine looking forward to it because all these other kids are coming and it being a fun time. There would be like four or five families in there in that little house. Some of them would live down in the cellar. We had a big cellar down there. It was nice and cool down there. In the summertime we would sleep outside. Would you go swimming? Well, we d go over here in the river. It was not too far from the house. Back then they didn t have turkeys or wild pigs or deer like they do now. Man, we would ve really been in hog heaven, having all that meat to eat. We would eat rabbit. We d have rabbit and fish. 18 L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson Were there still a lot of rabbits, around that time? Yes. What about snakes? No, once in a while you d see a snake, but it was just a I don t know what kind of snake it would be, but it wasn t one of those poisonous snakes like we have now, rattlesnakes. So do you consider yourself an Oklahoman? Yes, I ve been here all these years, (Laughs) since 56, 57. Do you have any other stories you can think of? No, I don t think so. Well, thank you very much for visiting with me. You re welcome. I ve got to mention one thing now. Erma used to iron a bunch of clothes. Oh, yes I used to babysit for Billie and Aubrey. The boys, they had four boys. I babysat for them, and then I would go and iron for Billie, iron her clothes and stuff, yes. I would iron for somebody else, too, Naomi McCaskell. I used to iron for her, too. That s when you were probably sixteen or seventeen? Yes, that s how old Do you remember what wages for something like that were? No, I don t remember. I don t know. I really don t remember. Fifty cents for an hour, or something. I don t know. Erma was pretty much the interpreter for your family. Yes I was the interpreter. Nobody wanted to do it. They could do it. My brothers could speak English, my sisters, even my dad, but no, they wanted me to do everything. Because she was the pretty one of the bunch. 19 E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker R. Wilson E. Tucker L. Wilson E. Tucker You think so? (Laughter) She could get results. Yes, I guess. Nobody wanted to do it. Did you ever carry around a dictionary, or was it all just what you remembered or what you knew? That s all, whatever I knew. I was always pretty smart, I thought. Do your kids speak Spanish at all now? No. My son does a little bit. His girlfriend was having a birthday party three weeks ago, maybe, at a Mexican restaurant. Whenever it s your birthday, you put on a big sombrero, and they sing for you. Well, Tommy told me in Spanish, Tell them today is her birthday. Everybody looked at Tommy and me, and I said, Okay. I told that lady, I told her that tonight is her birthday. She said, I m sorry, I m American Indian. I don t speak any Spanish. (Laughter) Danielle, she says, I know what you re saying. Hey, I ve got another interesting thing. At one point, some of the Mexican folks were afraid to work with some of the Indian harvest people. Did you ever hear of that? No. It may have been some other group, but some of the Mexican folks would say, I don t want to work with the Indians. With the Indians? Yes, they were fearful, afraid. I don t know We didn t know any Indians until we moved over here and knew the Fixicos, but that s the only Indians we ever knew. Do you speak Spanish much with people you encounter? There for a while, I wouldn t speak Spanish because my family were in Florida, and I just stayed home, so I didn t have nobody to speak Spanish with. But then whenever I got my job in Altus, there was a lot of Spanish ladies speaking Spanish, so I started speaking Spanish again. Then I started watching the Spanish shows on TV, so yes. You never forget it. 20 What year was it? Probably 57 or 58, (it s another place) we were living west of Altus, kind of south of Martha, and it was in the wintertime. My brother, he got so sick, my brother second to me. He was so sick. My mom said, Well, we don t have any money. Where are we going to go? My dad said, Well, somebody told me that you could go to Clinton, and they have a free hospital there. We got ready and took my brother over there, and he had an appendicitis attack. It was the wintertime, and it was so cold. They admitted him and then did surgery on him and everything. My mom stayed with my brother that night. The next morning, we come in there, me and my dad and my two little sisters, and I was holding one of them. I didn t have a coat, and this lady, a nurse, says, Honey, its freezing. Don t you have a coat? I said, No, I don t. She gave me her address, and she said, I want you to go over there, and I m going to call my daughter, and she can give you two or three coats of hers. My dad said, Are you going to go? I said, No, I don t want to go. So I didn t go. I didn t have a coat that winter, but that lady was real nice, and she was going to give me some of her coats. Real nice person. A lot of nice people. ------- -------..