 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Today is April 23, 2011. My name is Latasha Wilson, and I m with the Oklahoma Oral History Research Program at Oklahoma State University Library. I am in Coyote Corner today, south of Mangum, Oklahoma about nine miles, at the home of Margaretha Schwabe. I am interviewing Margaretha today as part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Oral History Series. Thank you for having me in your home today. You re welcome. Could you first tell me about where and when you were born? I was born June 14, 1949, in a small village in central Germany. The name is Rasdorf. And that is near It s near Fulda in the Fulda Gap, and east of Frankfurt. Were you born in a hospital? No, actually, I was born at home, and I was birthed by my grandmother, who was a midwife. Did you have many siblings? No, I did not. I am an only child, but I had lots of cousins. What were your parents names? My father s name was Alfred, and my mother s name was Clutilde. What were their professions? 5 Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe My father was a professional soldier, and my mother was a registered nurse. And it was your grandmother that was a midwife? Yes. Did your grandparents and your cousins live nearby? Yes, we all lived in the same house. Wow. How big was the house? It was five stories. (Laughs) It was a big house. How were the times around the time you were born, from what you ve heard? I was born in 1949, and I was told things were very, very bad. The child infant death rate was incredibly high at the time and for many years after the war. I was lucky to have been born in a village in the country because we had a garden, and we had at least some food. It was very, very poor, very hard on my mother, my grandparents. Was it common for women to use a midwife in those days? Yes, yes. There was no infrastructure in 1949. It was being rebuilt, but it was really everybody for themselves at the time. Was there much food? There was hardly any food as I remember being told by my mother and by my grandparents. I was a difficult, poor baby, and I had lots of problems. I remember my mother, my aunt, and my grandmother telling me the only food they could get was oatmeal that they had to add water to. There was no baby food. There was no medicine. Were women able to nurse? Rarely because they were malnourished from the war, and it was very hard. They were not able to nurse most of the time. Was your mother a nurse in a local hospital? At the time there were no jobs. There were no hospitals. She was 6 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe working as a maid for the Americans that were stationed in nearby Fulda. She had to either walk to work or get on a bicycle. There was no public transportation, and it was twenty-four kilometers from her house to get to work every day. Do you have any idea how much she was paid? No, but it was very little. She had the benefit and the luck to be employed by Americans, so she would always bring whatever they gave her home, and that fed the rest of the family. Were they pretty well-off, living pretty comfortably, the Americans? Yes, we thought they were. My mother thought they were because they were able to have all the food. Food was flown in for the American soldiers from America. They had milk. They could get, without problems, the stuff that we as Germans could not get. They had meat. They had fresh milk. They had butter. If you were lucky enough like my grandfather to have a cow, we could barter. They could barter for things. Your father being a professional soldier, what was this like after the war? What did he do? He was, of course, discharged from the Wehrmacht. He was a career solider, as had his parents been, his grandparents, his family. My mother was pregnant at the time with me, and my father committed suicide because in 1948 it was decreed that the Germans could never again have a military, and he saw no way of supporting his family. Did you hear of many people doing this? Yes, there were lots of stories of men similar in his position that just had no future, or they perceived at the time that the same thing that happened after World War I to Germany would happen again after World War II. I assume there wasn t a lot of state assistance. There was no government. There was nobody to go to. You had to deal with the military occupation forces in your region. We were in the American zone, so it was pretty much done by them. How many people were living in your home with you? As I was growing up, when I got a little bit older, I remember we had my cousins. There were at least seven children in my age group, two or three years difference, and lots of adults that had been placed there by 7 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe the military because they had nowhere else to go. If you had an empty room, you had to take in these refugees from the eastern countries, so the house was full of people from Poland and Russia and Hungry. As you grew up, how did you help out with household chores? Did everyone living there help with the household? I don t remember. I think we were just in my grandmother s way more than being a help. I remember being sent outside to play more than having to help. I remember having to help hang up the laundry, which we had to do by hand. I didn t do it. I was too young, but I remember watching my mother and my aunt and my grandmother doing the laundry by hand and then hanging it outside. Especially in the wintertime, it was really cold, and having to water the garden by carrying out the dish soap in buckets to the garden and having to water the plants. I remember that. (Laughs) Was there indoor plumbing? Yes. Yes, we did have indoor plumbing. And electricity? Yes. Had that been established for quite a while? Before the war, yes. I think in the 20s, my grandfather already wired the house. Wow. Yes. (Laughs) Did you start school when you were about five? Yes, about six. I was six years old when I started first grade. And that was in the local school? Schoolhouse, yes. Was that a very large school? No, it was not. The village itself was small. We had about 350 people there. There were hardly any children because most of the men died in 8 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe World War II, and there were very few children in the village at that time. Did many people adopt children? There were lots of children, homeless children and children whose parents were killed in the war in the populated areas of Germany, like in Dusseldorf, Cologne, in those areas, that were placed in the village and went to school there simply because there was nowhere else to put them. We had lots of children from those areas. When you say, placed in the village, was there a central home? No, they were placed with families. Did those families receive money to help take care of them, or were they just responsible for I really don t know how that worked. I just remember the kids and playing with them. What was school like growing up? Strict. (Laughs) Strict. Yes, we had a lot of homework. I remember that. We had no sports. What about painting? No. We had art, but art was like we had to learn to read music. We didn t have instruments to play, but we had to learn how to read music. I don t ever remember having an art class where we actually did any painting. There was no paper. There was no paint. There were no brushes. Did you have recess during the day? We did, yes. Did you play games? Yes, like all kids. I think like all children do, we did. After school, were there activities, or what would you No organized activities. After school I went home, I did my homework, and then you went out in the street and played with whatever you had. 9 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe Did your family have a car? No. No cars. When did they get a car? I think my mother got her first car when I was in high school. Were they working on building public transportation? Yes. Was that a high priority? Absolutely. I think the highest priority was building housing for the refugees, to replace all the bombed places, and, of course, streets, to rebuild the bombed streets so you could have a way of getting around. Public buses, public transportation, rebuild the trains, the railroads. Yes, that is what finally, I think, brought prosperity and got us over the hump again. Was your village heavily bombed? No, it was not. I think there was one attack by the Americans by air, and one woman died in that attack because a stray bullet came through the window of her kitchen. Did you learn much about what had happened in the War in school? Was it talked about? It was, but my mother could not get a job, so she left the village and moved to Frankfurt to work as a nurse in the American military hospital. I continued in the second grade in the school system in Frankfurt. At that time, what could be taught in public school was dictated by the military forces, by the occupation forces. I remember that in third grade we were required to watch these films of the concentration camps and of the war. We were shown those films. They were not edited like you see on television today. They were brutal, but they were part of our curriculum. Did you discuss this within your class? No, there was no discussion. There was a script that the teacher went through, but there was very little discussion. It was not talked about. We watched it. We listened to what the teacher told us. We studied it and remembered it. We had tests on it, but very little discussion. I think that 10 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson came much later. What was your personal impression when you were in elementary school of what had happened? I think it was way too gruesome for a child at that age to even take in what you were looking at. I remember the pictures. I can see them in my mind to this day, but I don t remember at the time understanding what I couldn t put it in any kind of context. Did you graduate from high school in Frankfurt? In Frankfurt, yes I did. Was that a large school in Frankfurt? Oh, large, no. My graduating high school class was twelve people. Oh. (Laughs) The children came much, much later, after there were more men around. (Laughs) What did you do after high school? I went to junior college in Frankfurt. I know the German system is different than the American education system after high school. Yes. At what age did you choose what profession you would pursue? You had to choose very early to either continue with a certain way of education, a certain route that you wanted to take, whether you wanted to go into trade school or whether you wanted to pursue the academic line. I, at the time or, my mother, more or less, decided for me to continue to junior college. What did you study in the junior college? Business. When you finished with that what did you do? 11 Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe I had an aptitude for languages, so I went to Munich to the Berlitz School of Languages. What did you study there? I studied English and French. Did you have English throughout your schooling, and French? Yes, in fourth grade you had to take English. It was a requirement. You had to take it. Then depending on your school district, in the sixth grade you had to choose another language. Depending on where you lived and what the school district offered, in Frankfurt you could take either Russian or Spanish. Then, of course, it varied from district to district. Do you think the fourth grade requirement of English came because of the American occupation? I think so. We happened to be in the American zone, so, yes. English was really all of Germany. It was a requirement. You had to learn English. In the media, how was the East German occupation portrayed? We had, at the time when I was going to school, a holiday, a national holiday, called Tag der Deutschen Einheit Day of German Unity . It was celebrated on June 17, and we were constantly reminded that half of Germany was not free. Half of Germany was still being occupied by the Russians, so we were really aware of the impending Cold War and then the Cold War that happened. We were constantly reminded of that. Did you have friends or family living in East Germany? Yes, I did. There was my grandmother s side in East Germany, and I had never seen them, not until I was an adult and the border came down. Would you have communication with them via letters or mail? We did. We had mostly letters and packages that we sent. We did not get very many letters from them. I think they were censored more than the Germans didn t censor theirs. The East Germans had very poor ways of communicating, and they did not advance in the rebuilding as the West Germans did. The village that the other half of my family lived in didn t have running water or electricity until much later. We tried. We couldn t visit, but we would contact them at family events, weddings, funerals, birth. We would write them and tell them, So and so had a baby. We ll 12 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe come up to a certain point along the border. Can you come to your part? Then we would hold up the baby, with binoculars. Or when my cousin, somebody got married in the family, we would inform them. Sometimes they got the letter, and sometimes they didn t. We could always tell. If there was nobody there, they didn t get the letter, but if they got it, they would be on the other side. That was as close as I ever got to the other side of my family. How far did they live from the border? Maybe a third of a mile. And how far did you live? Half a mile. So it was literally splitting you two. Yes, it was. It was like I try to explain to people. It s like living I live in Mangum, and you want to go to Blair, and you can t get there. You can t go there. Or in some cases, the border that was established after the war was your street side is in West Germany, but the other side of the street was in East Germany, and you could not communicate. Was it barbed wire? Yes, it was barbed wire. There was a fence. There was a mine field on the East German side. It was called Todesstreifen, the Death Strip. That was mined. There were dogs there. There were guards there. There was just no way. Lots of people tried to escape, and we lived so close to the East German border that I remember (I think I must have been nine or ten) you could hear when somebody tried to escape. You could hear the mines go off if they stepped on a mine. I mean, we weren t far away. The whole village, when we heard it, we d run up to where the fire was and the explosion was just to see what happened. Who was it? Was it somebody from your family? Was it somebody from your family? Who tried to escape? I remember the Americans had that section of the border to patrol, and they had camps there. They were stationed all along the border. One time, a young man tried to climb the fences, and he hit a mine, and he was not dead. He didn t get killed. He was laying in the mine field there. There was an American major that was telling the Russians and the East Germans that were there, We want to render assistance. We want to render assistance. We want to give first aid. Let us go in and get and they wouldn t let them. This young man was crying, and he said, I am 13 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe going in. I am going in now. I am going to render first aid. I m going to put down my weapon. The Russians, you could hear the rifle, they said, If you do, we ll shoot. And he died. The whole village was there all night. It was horrible. Would you say there were fatalities every week? I don t know if they happened every week. They didn t happen weekly in our part of Germany where we lived, but they happened up and down that whole 800-kilometer strip several times a year. When the wall finally came down and you were able to actually see your family members, did you discover that the situation they d been living in was a lot worse or different than what you had thought? Oh, yes. Oh, my gosh, yes. It was like stepping back into time. My grandmother s birth house was in the village that was in East Germany, and it was like, it was derelict. It was dilapidated. The windows were horrible. It was like stepping back a hundred years. Just unbelievable. Did you have a story about your family in East Germany and a water heater? (Laughter) We had as much contact as we were allowed to have. We had a cousin of mine that was getting married. All during those years and that was with the government, the German government saying, Don t forget your relatives. We always sent packages with socks and coffee and rice and beans, dry goods that they had. They were getting married, and the villages that were along the East German border were really hard hit because there was nothing going on there. They were so controlled, and they couldn t even farm their own fields without having Russian soldiers accompany them. Anyway, they had no hot water in their house, and so they had wanted a hot water heater. So over a period of months, my aunts and uncles would send packages, and in those packages there d be bits and pieces of a hot water heater, a coil they took it apart and sent it to them. So this young couple, my cousin and his wife, put it together in their bathroom. The electricity in those villages that close to the Eastern and Western border, electricity was rationed. They could only have it certain hours of the day and night. They got this hot water heater finally put together, and they were, I guess, so eager to use it they turned it on and blew the electricity for the whole village. (Laughter) It was a crime to have things like that. Instead of being turned in to the East German police, they made a deal with their neighbors because it s a real small village. They said, Well, we ll share. You can come use our bathroom and take a hot bath, then 14 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson we all benefit. So that is what happened. They shared that hot water heater. (Laughter) I have an uncle, that they had the communal farms in East Germany. All private property was gone, and everything became community property. He couldn t even farm his own fields. He was a real good farmer, and he saw how mismanaged that was, that way of farming. He got crossways with the East Germans and spent many years in prison. He was imprisoned. Ultimately, when he came out, he became an alcoholic and ultimately died, lost the farm. It was horrible. I mean, it s just what happened in East Germany during those days after the war and before the reunification. I don t think very many people are aware of the hardships those people suffered. That is now since 1989, East Germany has progressed significantly. Rapidly. (Laughter) But still there are areas of East Germany that I think so. I haven t been back in ten years, but I think the rebuilding of East Germany happened mostly in the city areas really, really quick. In the areas like in my village and the village that used to be in East Germany, (because there were still ties there, they still had relatives) they came along much faster than if you went to the hinterlands of East Germany. I think that rebuilding is still going on, and it s still very expensive to the German government, I m sure. What was your profession after you finished college? I went to work as an interpreter for the American military. Where were you stationed? In Frankfurt. How long did you do that? Off and on, probably, until I married and came over here, so several. Twenty years? How did you meet your husband? He was stationed in Germany with the American military. What year did you move to the United States? 15 Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson In 1986, we were stationed in Atlanta, and then my husband retired, and we moved to Oklahoma. That was his home. So how was your deciding to move to the United States? I was excited. I think I was excited. I was really looking forward to it. On the other hand, I was thinking, Oh, my gosh What am I doing? Is this going to work? (Laughter) I mean, you re always of split thoughts and confused. It was not easy, but I was excited about it. When did you become an American citizen? Nineteen eighty-six. Can you describe that process? I had the advantage of not having to have been here five years because my husband was in the military, so I got an expedited citizenship. I still had to attend citizenship courses, go to school, and then take a written test and a verbal exam by a judge, by a federal judge. What were the courses like? Language, grammar, history, politics, how is the government set up, mostly. Were you pretty good in the language already? Yes, obviously. (Laughs) I had an advantage. So that was a breeze. That was a breeze, yes. That was the easy part. Did it cost much money for this? No, it was all free except for the paperwork, the documents. I think it was a fee of seventy-five dollars, but it was just for the paperwork. Did you have to give up your German citizenship? Yes, I was not allowed to be a dual citizen. Was that hard? 16 Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe Yes, it was kind of an eye opener. For a minute you think, Oh, then it really dawns on you that this is not just something you sign on the dotted line. It makes you realize. It did take me back and say, Oh. But it will be okay. It ll be fine. But yes, it does. I have many friends that live here now who are not citizens because they re not certain. It s just something that all of a sudden you look at your family and your history, and you re thinking but I look at it this way. I will always be a German. I mean, I can t help it, but I voluntarily chose to become an American, so this is my home. This is where I live. How was it coming to Mangum, Oklahoma? (Laughs) That was very different. (Laughs) That was a little no, that was a cultural shock. That was really hard for me in the first two or three years of being here. For one thing, after we left the village, my teenage years I grew up in Frankfurt, and then my working life was in Heidelberg and Munich and big cities. Then coming to a rural area in southwest Oklahoma was very different. It took some adjusting. Did you move pretty early on into this house out in the country? Yes. One of the things I really liked about Oklahoma and that I had not seen anywhere else was the wide open, empty spaces. When you grow up in Europe, not just in Germany, there is somebody everywhere. The density of the population is incredible, so when you come to Oklahoma and you have this sense of, Oh, my gosh Where is everybody? There is nobody here, I thought, Oh, I like this. Everywhere I look, it s mine. I couldn t see very far, but whatever I could see. (Laughter) Yes, that was really nice, so I wanted not to live in town anymore. After living in apartments and houses with neighbors up over you, under you, next to you, I thought, No, I am not going to live in town. I am going to live somewhere in the country. Yes, that was nice. How did you come to name your place Coyote Corner? Well, when we first came out here I heard coyotes before I ever saw them, and I guess that s normal. The sound of them was amazing. I can t even describe it. It was scary, and it was just incredible that there were these wildlife, really wildlife-wildlife, not in zoos. There were so many coyotes in this part here, and I thought, Yes. They were here at night, during the day. I could hear them. I couldn t see them until much later. That s why I named this Coyote Corner. We re also out here in rattlesnake country. (Laughter) Yes, those I had to learn to live with, but I give them their berth if they 17 R. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe give me mine. (Laughs) They are beautiful, but they scare me. I walk a lot, and when I walk the section lines they blend in so well that I walk along, and I see what looks like tree limb in the middle of the road. I think, Well, I ll just go get that out of the way, so you don t hit it when the farmers drive over with their pickups. Then it turns out to be a snake that s in the sun. I tend to give them a wide berth. If you find one on the front walkway, what happens? I just go out the back door. They like my warm doorway. It has happened that when I have come out first thing in the morning, they ll be all curled up laying right there a few feet from my front door. I tend to just leave it be and go out the garage door or the back door, and ultimately they leave. Except for one time I was trying to get rid of one because it was by my water hydrant, and that thing was pretty aggressive. I thought, Okay. I left it alone, too, and it went away. Do you consider yourself an Oklahoman now? Yes. After twenty-two years, yes. Some people even tell me I talk like one. (Laughter) I don t know if that s true or not. You re getting there. (Laughter) I m working on that. What does Oklahoma mean to you? It means a lot of things. Like I said, coming from a small country, it means freedom, in a way. I have some reservations about all these freedoms that Americans always talk about. I think sometimes too much freedom is not necessarily a good thing for everybody because it tends to make you very selfish. I feel sometimes like we as Americans take too much for granted. Our individual liberties tend to overtake our responsibility to our community. We re too independent. Yes, there s nothing wrong with independence, but you tend to overlook that what is good for me as an individual and as an American is not necessarily always good for my community or for my neighbor or for my city or my country. I don t know if this is American, but I think sometimes when we have all these liberties and all these freedoms and all this space, that we don t cherish it and take care of it as we should. I have come across that a lot just here in my own community, environmental issues, individual rights issues. Yes, I should be able to 18 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe play my music at midnight as loud as I can because this is my right, but is it really good to be able to do that? Am I forgetting that my neighbors might not appreciate that? Yes, you can throw your trash out in your yard because it s your yard, and it s your property, and it may be your right, but is that really good for the town, that you re able to trash your yard? I wonder if we kind of have lost our balance sometimes by insisting on our individual rights as Americans. And possibly have lost a sense of community. Yes, yes. We have so much here in America and in Oklahoma to be so grateful for. We have all this wildlife. We have all these open spaces, and we should remember that and treasure that and be more willing to give up a little bit of our personal freedoms. It s worth it to me. Do you have anything else that you would like to talk about? Oh. (Laughs) I kind of said I think I have adjusted. I like living in Oklahoma, but I also treasure my heritage, and I think we should remember that all immigrants have a culture and a heritage to treasure. I think we can only benefit as a society if we listen to them and accept them as different. I think you can always learn something, and it only benefits all of us. Have you been back to Germany much to visit? No, not as much as I like. (Laughter) What are some things that you hold onto from your German culture? Food, as much as I can, obviously. (Laughter) We try to cook and keep some of the those things, some of the traditions. Christmas is the hardest holiday for me to be away from home, still, after all these years. I like the German Christmas traditions a lot. Christmas markets? Christmas markets, Christmas dinners. The celebration of Christmas Eve is our Christmas, on the eve of Christmas. The time of the Advent. We start first of December to light the first candle on the Christmas wreath, and then the next Sunday will be the second candle, then the third Sunday, and on Christmas the Christmas wreath has four candles. It s those little traditions. And New Year s Eve celebrations that are so big in Germany that are not so important here in America. Christmas Eve is not as much of a holiday as it is in Germany. 19 L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe On New Year s Day, what are some things you do? We do lots of fireworks. We greet our neighbors. We have lots of drinking and good wishing and drinking to your health and your neighbors. Those Christmas traditions vary so much in Germany from region to region to region that you could be in one town and have a certain way of celebrating New Year s Eve or Christmas, and then you go down the road five miles, and it would be a totally different tradition in that town. In our village, for instance, we live in the mountainous area. On New Year s Eve on every mountain around the village, there would be a man with a gun, and at midnight they would shoot off the guns on the top of the mountain around the village to prevent evil spirits from coming into the village during the coming year. That s some of the things that are local, very local. Do you celebrate Easter? We celebrate Easter, yes, yes. We don t have a ham. Where we live, we would have a goose for Easter. Well, I think that s all the questions I have. (Laughs) Thank you very much for visiting with me. You are so welcome. Was your village eight hundred years old? The village that I was born in and stayed in is over twelve hundred years old. The church in the village was built in 800 and is still standing and is still being used. It is the only church in our village, and it is shared by the Catholics and the Protestants on Sundays and any other time. Is your family Catholic? Yes, yes. The village I am from was called in the Black Region of Germany because we were mostly Catholics. One of the things I noticed when I came to America was the multitude of churches in small towns. I couldn t get over that. I didn t know the concept of all these different churches. I think Mangum has something like seventeen churches. We re a town of 2,900 people. Yes. I wondered why that was, why there were so many different churches in a town. I have my own theory about why that is. (Laughter) 20 R. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe Were the Protestants Lutheran, pretty much? Yes, yes, yes. And actually, my village is only about a thirty-minute drive away from the church where Martin Luther put up his dogma. I ve been there many times. Is that Erfurt? Divoch Bergen, yes. Then your school was just right next to the church? Right next to the church, yes. The only religious instructions we got was one hour a week, and we had to be separated, the Catholics and the Protestants. You went to your class as Catholics, and the Protestants went to their class. We got one hour of religious instruction a week, and that was it. We had no sports in school. Anything you wanted to do, you did after school on your own. It was not supported by the government or by your school. At the time you were growing up, how was the Nazi party viewed? There was none. There was none. There was absolutely none. And people made a point to Not discuss it, yes. I realized living with my aunt that there is a part of her generation that, like she says, Well, we didn t see Hitler, and we didn t support him, but somebody did. There were millions of Germans who did. Whether they did it voluntarily, or whether they chose to see only the good things that happened during the Hitler time, well, there is a lot of explanations for things like that, but it was part of their life. She and her siblings, my mother and my aunts and uncles had no choice. When they were growing up, you became a party member, and that s what you did. They organized things for them, and there was not a question, Do you want to do that? Would you like to do that? No. They had to. I think it s hard for that generation to admit, Yes, we did it, and we even enjoyed it. Like she enjoyed being sent off to the schools that the Nazis had for them in Russia. Why not? They had nothing else. My grandfather joined the Nazi party in 1933. He was one of the very first ones in the village to do so, but it was because of what they promised. They gave them hope. If you could not support your family or cannot feed your children, and you have no work, and your wife is malnourished and cannot breastfeed her child, then if somebody is out 21 R. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson there that tells you, We can change that. We are going to change that, it can happen anywhere. It s something that happened in my country, but it can happen in any country if it gets bad enough. I think that s maybe a hard concept for a lot of Americans to understand because what war was ever fought on this country s soil? You had your Civil War. You had the war of independence, but a war, a total war, is something, I think, we as Americans have really not experienced in this day and age. Until you do, you don t know what you are capable of or what you will do to survive. Did you ever hear much about the Jewish culture, like why there was a grudge against the Jewish world? Remember, I was born after the war, but from my grandfather and my aunts and uncles that lived during that time, in our village, small as it was, had several Jewish families. The neighboring village, Geisa, had a big Jewish community, large Jewish community. My grandfather was a businessman. He was a master carpenter and a building contractor, and he had lots of dealings with Jewish people. I think in small towns it didn t really matter. They grew up together. They were raised together. Most of them, (and I have to keep it local in my village) the few Jewish children that were there went to the one school that was in town and took their religious instructions from the Jewish parents at home. It was that way in Geisa, in the next village. I don t think it was anything to be Jewish until Hitler made it something, until politics and Hitler made it something. What I ve heard is, of course, only through my family. The few Jewish families that were in my village did get deported. Nobody knows where to, but yes, they were taken, and they were deported. The community in the next village was totally gone. I mean, they all were deported, and they have not come back. There is no Jewish community in those villages again. People did talk where they went, what happened, but you have to remember, I think, in the early years of the Nazis, there was not much information given out. Did you ever understand why they didn t like the Jews? I think it was political. They needed somebody to blame to achieve their own goals, and what was easier than somebody that was different than you? They were different. They dressed different, some of them. Some of them dressed like regular people, but some of them did dress different. I think some very smart people decided to use them as a scapegoat. And they just wanted the German people to be in Germany. 22 Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe R. Wilson Schwabe Yes. It s hard to imagine that a whole country would go along with it, but it s it s not understandable to me. I question my aunt s generation, my mother s generation. How could this happen? How could you not see this? Did you see this? Why did you not do something? And then you have to remember that they had lives. They had families. They had I don t know. What could you do? What could you do? There were people who did something, and what happened to them? I think it s a communal fear that slowly but surely crept into your subconscious, maybe fear for yourself, fear for your family, for your children. It s always easier to attack the way of least resistance. I mean, I don t know. I didn t live it. I tried to understand it, especially since we were confronted with that whole thing in school from a very early age on. I don t know. It s hard. I ask myself, How could this happen in my country? Did you ever hear much about Nuremburg, the trials? Oh, yes. It was publicized, yes. We had to watch the movies, the documentaries about it. Yes, we had to study it, absolutely. We had to learn all that history every year, every school year. Yes, we did. We were fully exposed to it. I think it was only in the later years, the children of my cousins, they questioned more. They stand up more and say, Wait a minute. They questioned it. We, on the other hand, being the first postwar generation, we did not. We didn t question anything. We just learned what we were supposed to learn, but my cousin s children, they say, Now, wait a minute. There had to be other things that were good in those years. We, as a generation, I think, did not go out and wave the German flag. We did not sing the German National Anthem, but they do. The younger kids, the younger generations, they do. When we had international soccer games that we all went to and the Italians would wave their flags, the Spanish would come to Frankfurt and play Intakt Frankfurt. Yes, the Greeks, the French, the British. We didn t. We went to those soccer games, but we did not. And I, as I continued to watch the soccer games in Europe, in the last ten, fifteen years, all of a sudden those kids, they wear the German hats with the German colors. They wear the German flags, and I am glad to see that. It s time. It s been a long time. Those children should not be burdened with that national guilt they put on us. I ve always said, as we got into the first Gulf War and then the second Gulf War and now the ongoing war in Afghanistan, as a German, when we were growing up, we were taught by the allies, the occupation forces, 23 R. Wilson Schwabe L. Wilson Schwabe You will never again be a military nation. You will not ever carry a gun again. You will not have an army. Then they finally let us have a so-called German army. Then we got into this global war, I think you can almost call it, over oil or whatever it is they re fighting for over in the Gulf. They wanted the Germans to participate, and the Germans said, No. We are not going to fight. Then they said, Well, how come you are not participating in this war? And I always thought to myself, They taught us to be anti-military, anti-expansionist, anti-colonist. Now they want us to fight, and they are mad because we are not going to take up weapons? But you brought up a whole nation of pacifists. That s what the powers to be wanted after the war. They wanted us to be anti-military. Now they are amazed. How come you re not sending troops? How come you re not participating? I say, Well, you shouldn t be surprised. This is the way you wanted us. They need to study their history. Yes, yes. (Laughs) That is interesting. The tape is nearly out on this one. (Laughter) Good. (Laughter) ------- -------..