 Finchum Richardson Today is June 15, 2009. My name is Tanya Finchum. I m with the Oklahoma State University Oklahoma Oral History Research Program and we re doing an interview today with Faye Richardson. This is part of the Spotlighting Oklahoma Project. We re going to talk a little bit about a lot of things today. Thank you for letting us do this. Let s start by having you tell a little bit about your hometown and where you were born. Where I was born? I was born in Noble County in the little town of Sumner, Oklahoma, which is nine mile east of Perry on Highway 64 and then two miles north. There was a small grocery store there. At one time they had a bank. My mother said they went to school at the Christian church in Sumner, before the new school was built and completed. She told me the day they got the new school finished they walked up there to the new school on February 14, 1921 in single file very, very quietly and they never were as proud as they were that day because they had a brand new school to go to. And did you get to go that one? I went to the same school. Her and Dad completed eighth grade there. And how did they come to be in Sumner? Her folks were German and they came from Germany. I m not sure how they came. My great-grandparents are buried six miles east and two miles south of Perry in the old Lutheran cemetery. One time we were cleaning the graves there and I asked her, What is this, Mom, on the front of the tombstone? She said, That is the Lord s Prayer in German. Their name was Tuetken, T-U-E-T-K-E-N. My mother s parents were John and Emma Tuetken, and there were four girls in her family. 5 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson And they came before statehood? I m not sure when they came. I just know that my dad s family came to Oklahoma in 1908, and he was born in 1901 so he would ve been seven years old. They came in a wagon from Kentucky with their two daughters and two sons. My dad said when they crossed Osage County he asked his dad if he could walk beside the wagon because he had never been able to see that far. He said, I ll never forget looking out across Osage County. And from where? They came from Metcafe County, Kentucky, around Edmonton and Glasgow. There s a little country church named Missionary Mound, and the church is on one side of the road and on the other side of the road is the cemetery and most of them are relatives from my dad s side of the family. I know that Ray s mother s relatives were Cherokee. There was a famous chief that she used to talk about, but nobody thought she knew what she was talking about. One time we went to Granny Richardson s sister s funeral down at Haileyville, Oklahoma. One of the cousins said, Let s go over there and look at the squaw s grave. (This is the way he talked.) And Ray Faye s husband looked at him and said, What? The squaw s grave? Yes, it s your grandmother s grave. He said that there was one member of the family who had taught the Cherokee language on the reservation. Later years when the Historical Society contacted him and wanted him to come back, he didn t remember enough of it to help them. He left the reservation to marry a white woman (this is what the cousin said) and she was a lawyer s daughter and he didn t want anything more to do with the Cherokee. He had forgotten the Cherokee language by this time. Then Granny Richardson s family was from the Gatlinburg area, right? Right. In Tennessee. Okay, do you know where Cades Cove is? I do. Among Granny Richardson s family was a family named Oliver and when you go to the little church there, you step out the back door, and as was the custom in those days the cemetery was right there; Ray and I went back. We ve been there about five times now; we took his folks back one time. When we stepped out the back door, I said, You know, last time we came here, they mentioned the Olivers. No, they re not 6 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson any kin to us. And I said, Well, I think I ll take a picture or two of these tombstones. And later we went over to visit an older cousin and he said, That s part of the family, Ray. They gave their land to the National Park Service so they could preserve it . So that was pretty interesting. My great-grandfather fought with the Union army. I have the papers showing where he mustered in and mustered out in Louisville, Kentucky. What was his name? His name was George C. Smith. He had fought with General Sherman s forces and marched to the sea with them and was injured later and got out of the Service. I thought that was pretty interesting. We drove over to the Chickamauga-Chattanooga Battlefield across from Lookout Mountain and went into a building ; I saw a library sign. You know how I enjoy the library. I walked up to the lady and I said, Would you have any information on my grandfather who fought with the Union army ? She said, Yes, we probably do. Do you know his regiment or anything? Ray went out to the car with me and he said, You won t find anything on that, it s been too many years. I said, She may have it. I went back in there and I showed her all the information I had and what regiment he was in and everything. He had mustered in and out of the Union army at Louisville, Kentucky. She very carefully explained to me that I couldn t handle the book, which I knew, because I worked with preservation here at OSU. She came back and made a copy for me and then she made a copy of the front of the book in case the boys ever needed that copy. My middle son said, Oh, I m not really interested in anything that old. Just a month or two ago he said, Mother, you re going to be 71 in July. Do you have that information where we can get to it? I said, I have it somewhere here. Well you better find out because I want a copy. So it is important to the kids, it s important. And that was your grandfather? That was my great-grandfather. My dad s mother was George C. Smith s daughter. Great-grandfather. My daddy s mother s father, so it was my great grandfather. You didn t know him, it would ve been too much age difference, right? There was quite a bit of age difference. Part of the family on the Howell 7 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum side, the Smith girls had lived in Tennessee. If you know your history on that Tennessee Valley Dam Authority, a lot of the people lost their farms. And that s how the Smith girls came to go to Kentucky, the Smiths lost their farms there, so they went into Kentucky and met the Howell boys. That s how they ended up Smith girls married Howell boys. (Laughs) All of them or just some of them? Two of them did. Two of them. And then the Howells came to Oklahoma? Yes, because then Isaac Howell, my grandfather, and my grandmother Cordelia Vaughn Howell are buried in the Sumner Cemetery southeast of Sumner, Oklahoma. Grandpa Howell had been to Oklahoma once and they wanted to come back. They came with their children the second time in 1908 . Dad s sister and brother are buried there and that s Dad s only brother. He was, I think, 92 when he died. My parents and my husband Ray and some of dad s cousins graves are there at Sumner. So your maiden name was Howell? Howell. H-O-W-E-L-L. And then your parents had how many children? My parents had four daughters. They had Delcie, who was born December 28, 1933 . May and I were born on July the 18th, 1938. And Linda was born November 3, 1949 . Growing up as a twin must ve been interesting. Oh, it was fun. Mom tells told us she breastfed us. And she said that finally they did have bottles and she gave us one and we d hit our bottles together and break them so she had to watch us all the time. She finally separated us. One got to be in her arms and the other one got to lay in the crib. (Laughter) She had some interesting stories to tell. I think we kept her going. I didn t think she d ever have another one after she had us, but she did. It was fun growing up out there. I drew a picture of the home place where we were born. It was just down below the railroad tracks. The little town of Sumner was south of the railroad tracks and we lived down north of the railroad tracks by a small creek . About how many people would the town have had at that time? 8 Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson I don t know. Not many. There might ve been 40 or 50 then. Because Sumner used to have a hotel and they had a cotton gin, and there was one service station, and the Christian church, the Baptist church, and the school. Had a pretty good sized number of kids who went there. Then there was a German settlement that was west of Sumner and that group came from Willow Creek School. They came to Sumner and I remember when they came over there to go to school, I think I was probably in the third grade. They didn t like that because that was their community. The little communities were based around the activities, the churches, the families, just kind of stayed together. It was very important to them and they didn t like that. Just like we didn t like it in the 60s I guess it was when they closed our school out there and it s been vacant ever since. 1964 was the last graduating class, forty years after the first. Consolidated? Consolidated. The school we went to was Sumner High School and it was the largest independent school district in Noble County. The rest of them had one-room schools, but we had all 12 years. In those days each family had several children and there was several students in each class. Grades one through eight had four rooms and the high school had three classrooms, and a large study hall with a library. The small communities didn t want to close their schools but the small schools were closed because of the state required daily attendance. And how many were in your class, your individual class? When I graduated from high school? Seven. Five girls and two boys. The senior class who graduated before us had twelve in their class. And you managed to have a basketball team? The boys and girls teams, twelve players on each team, were selected from four classes: freshmen, sophomore, junior and senior classes. . One year only one senior graduated. That was later on after we got out of school. Would you have the same teacher for all subjects? We did in the first through sixth grade class. In the seventh grade we had more than one teacher. They called it the seventh and eighth grade 9 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson room and we had the teachers coming and going then. We stayed in the same room, but they came and went. So that was a big deal. (Laughs) So do you want to talk a little about playing basketball? What was it, three on three or how was it Three on three, yes. Three guards on one end, three forwards on the other. The forwards could shoot from behind the free throw line, or further out, but at that time that only counted as two points. Now it is three points. We played in a big gym built by the WPA. You couldn t cross center court or the center line. No, you lost the ball if you did that. Even if your toe went across the line. (Laughs) And we played a lot of teams. We played Kaw City northeast of Ponca City, Oklahoma. Now that town is under Kaw Lake. I remember going up there to play the tallest girls that we ever confronted. Then one of the fun things was going to the invitational tournaments. We played at the Norhtern Oklahoma Junior College Invitational Tournament at Tonkawa, Oklahoma. Anyway, that was fun going to Tonkawa, and then we played at several schools in our area: Ralston, Marland, Hayward, Carney, Glencoe, Douglas, Eureka, Quay, Mulhall, Orlando, Morrison, Pawnee. That was a lot of fun going up there. It was a big deal to get to go to other schools and go to the basketball tournaments. How would you get there? Bus. We had our own busses. My dad usually drove us. My dad drove a school bus for 32 years in that community and he always drove the bus to our games. He retired from driving the bus and farming when May and I graduated in 1956. Was that his primary job or did he have another? No, he was a farmer. We had milk cows, pigs, chickens, cotton, alfalfa, corn Mom and Dad picked the corn by hand. And guess who got to chop the weeds out of the patches. We did. I ve used a hoe more than I want to use a hoe. (Laughs) And we picked our cotton by hand. Did you have to pick cotton yourself? Yes, we did. First we picked the cotton out of the bolls. After the freeze hit, we would get a hold of the bottom of the stem and just pull up on it to get the cotton bolls . Makes me think it really hurt your hands. We didn t have gloves. Nobody could afford anything like that. But 10 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson there were watermelons planted within the rows and if you got down to the end, you could bust a watermelon and eat that. (Laughs) That was fun. I remember chopping the weeds out of the corn, and the cotton, and oh my Daddy kept those hoes sharp and if you took the hoe and cut your toe, we didn t even think about going to the house, we stayed right in the field and kept working. And this was in high school or even younger? We were out in the fields working when we were pretty young. Eight, nine years old probably. One time my cousin and I and May decided now if we chop all of these weeds out and we take a lot of this cotton out (you know how a child thinks) we ll not have as much cotton to pick. And so our daddy caught on to that right quick and he said, Now I ve been noticing, he was sharpening the hoes at the end of the row and he said, I ve noticed, you re still thinning that cotton out. We can t have that. (Laughter) He never did gripe at us, it was a lot of fun to go to the field with him. Do you want to hear what kind of thing we had for our water? Sure. We had big, gallon-size jars and Mom would wrap several layers of newspapers around the jar and then wrap a gunny sack around the jar and then she would take a heavy piece of thread and sew it on by hand. How would it get cold to start with? A guy from Perry would come out and bring a block of ice according to whichever size you wanted. It was one of those old wooden ice boxes. The icebox was on the back porch and the guy would carry the block of ice in and put it in the icebox. May and I always liked to sneak out there and get us a little bit of ice. And Mom, she always hear us when we did that. She could hear us doing that. (Laughs) Of course, we were chipping the ice off so we could get a piece and take off riding our bikes because we loved to ride our bikes. It was a wonderful place to grow up. And in the 30s you were just little. I was born in 38, so I was about eight or nine when we d go to the field. I know we were nine years old when May and I both got a bicycle for our birthday. And we went to Kentucky to see Dad s people. We saw the barns where they stored the tobacco, it was fascinating. We d never saw that before. The neat old barns were stacked full of tobacco. They had a smokehouse. I remember going to see a cousin of Dad s who lived way back in the woods . We had to walk down in there because there 11 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson wasn t any road going into her place . We walked down through the forest and as we started down into a beautiful area there was a stream that went clear down through there and the grass was real green. We crossed a little rocky creek and the smokehouse set over there on the hill to the side. It was so nice. She lived down there and we didn t see how she could live there because there was so many vines and everything around the porch her name was Virgie. And you want to know how we got there, to Kentucky? We rode in a 1938 Chevy. Did I ever tell you about going through the Smokey Mountains? Oh, we got to go there. We left after we visited Dad s cousins for several weeks in Kentucky and went to the Great Smokey Mountains. Our car got hot. I remember Dad said, Roll the windows up, there could be bears here. And we re thinking, Oh, there s not any bears. Well later on we did see one around the bend of the road , but I remember May and I just sitting up looking down there in that rock bottom creek thinking, Oh my gosh, we hope one doesn t attack our daddy. But the funniest thing, Delcie was five years older than us. That would ve made her 14 or 15. There was a window in the back of the old car and the curtain had little scallops on it and a little fancy tassel hanging down. May and I d reach up and we d pull it down. Delcie would reach up and pull it and let it flop back up. She thought it was an old style and she didn t want that curtain back there. (Laughs) But it was fun. It was fun going through the Smokey Mountains. I think I ve been through there now like I went again this summer and I think it s been like six times, I ve went through there. It sure is pretty. I see why you liked to live there in Gatlinburg. I saw the chair lift that Ray and I rode in 1958 and then we took his folks back in 1959 . His mother rode, but his dad wouldn t get on it. He said, You all can go up there if you want. I ll wait right down here. (Laughs) I did get to go to Pigeon Forge this last July and Dolly Parton was the parade marshal. It s changed a lot. It s really nothing like it was when we went there years ago. It was more peaceful and quiet and I kind of hate to see it taken over like that. But the public wants to see it. So when you graduated from high school, what d you do next? What did we do? We went on a senior trip and went back through every state that had any historical thing in it. I remember our first stop was Onondaga Cave in Missouri. Then we went to Chicago and drove along 12 Finchum Richardson Finchum the Gold Coast and rode the elevated train downtown and went to a planetarium by Lake Michigan . We all had relatives who lived in Chicago and we stayed with them two days. The last night in Chicago we stayed in a motel. From there we went on up to Canada and my uncle had a brand new car and John Gorton, our superintendent of schools, who was our sponsor, had a brand new car. We had 800 to go on this trip and we drove to Chatham, Canada and everybody got to drive while we were in Canada. Mr. Gorton, the sponsor, said, So you can say you drove outside of the United States. Mr. Gorton sent Ray down to get the girls. The girls were always late getting ready to go the next morning. Ray came down and we said, Well just a minute, we ll open the door. And he said, You don t have to, the key is in the lock. We were secure all night long, we thought. We left the key in the lock We drove to Niagara Falls and from there we drove all night until we arrived in New York City at five o clock the next morning then we slept in the cars until the hotel opened . We ended up on Manhattan Island. We stayed in the Times Square Hotel. The next night we went to Radio City Music Hall to see the premier showing of Grace Kelley in the movie The Swan. The Rockettes performed there and our sponsor, John Gorton, wouldn t let us sit on the front seat, but him and the boys did and he passed the binoculars around. We didn t know that he had those, but it was fun. The girls went shopping at Macy s, one of the largest stores I d ever been into. This store had an escalator, the first one we ever saw. We stayed on Times Square so it was easy to walk to different things. We went to Madison Square Garden, to the UN building, and took a boat around the island. We took a subway over to where we had to get off and then go in a boat, to the Statue of Liberty. At that time they let us walk clear up into the head. I know I had trouble breathing as we walked up because it was so high. That was really interesting. And we went to see the Dodgers and the Cincinnati Reds play at Ebbets Field. What a trip. While two of the girls and the sponsor went to see Guy Lombardo, the rest of us didn t want to do that. We walked to the subway and went to Ebbets Field . When we got over there we were right there by the stadium. And I m not sure that might ve been the stadium they tore down the last few years. They tore one down recently. And that would ve been 56? When did you graduate high school? 13 Richardson Finchum Richardson That was 1956. May of 1956. We were gone 14 days and we came back through the Smokey Mountains, and every state back east that we could go through. It was so much fun. Sounds like it. So when Ray and I got married in 1958 we knew where we wanted to go again. I ve been back there with my folks. We never did get to take our boys, but someday they ll get to go I guess. But that s what attracted me to this vacation this summer, because I knew they were going through the Smokeys again, so I enjoyed that. It was so nice. In 1949 my parents took us to Mammoth Cave and the Onyx there in Kentucky. Now us younger ones were too young to go into the Mammoth Cave, but we got to go down into the Onyx. I don t know if I would ve liked Mammoth Cave because people had to carry lanterns to go down in there. They wouldn t let younger children go in so we got out of that. Now I don t really like caves. (Laughs) I did then, it was fun. But I remember, I had never seen a jeep before and Dad s cousin had a jeep. We got to ride in the back and we thought that was pretty neat to ride in the back of that jeep. One reason we wanted to go back, Dad s mother had twin sisters. Their names were Robina and Eugina. And they wanted us to come back. They said our dad was their favorite nephew. We went back there and the one little old aunt lived way back in the woods; we drove through a rock bottom creek to get to her house. I mean this is back in 1949 and as we drove down through that creek, we re thinking, What is a rock bottom creek? And I remember we went by a big old two-story pretty house and we ended up back over there and her house looked like it was made from boards cut at the saw mill. It was so neat. I remember going to her house and she had a spinning wheel upstairs and the screen door kind of hung lopsided, but it didn t make any difference. The hospitality there was just wonderful. It was so nice to go see her. She lived there with her son Matt. Then later we went a long ways around to a cousin s house. That evening we were sitting on the porch I loved it back there, it was so quiet. And all at once someone said, Yay-hoo and she was hollering this out and us kids were wondering, Well who in the world is that? We never could figure out how she got over there in the dark, it was pitch dark. But they lived there all their life and they knew where to go. Nobody had cars. We drove back in a 1938 Chevy. (Laughs) But they didn t have a car . I don t know if somebody else in the family had cars and helped them or what. Daddy s cousin was a lawyer there in Edmonton, Kentucky. He d been a lawyer there for a long time. 14 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson So they didn t have any desire to move west? I guess none of the rest of them did. But Grandpap also had another brother that was a little bit more adventuresome, is what my older sister says, and he went to Arizona. There is a Howell back there, and somebody discovered, that is his brother. Someone was checking the relatives, seeing where they went and everything on the internet. They found one and they called him and it was my grandfather s brother. My grandfather s name was Isaac Edmond Howell and hers was Cordelia Vaughn Smith Howell. She had a little bun on the back of her head, oh she was so sweet. And Grandpap lost his eyesight before May and I were born so he never got to see us. They lived west of the grain elevator there at Sumner and people would come and go all the time bringing wheat in, and we would take Grandpap out and all three of us would set on a bench and we would tell him who was driving by. They just lived right up from the railroad track and the little elevator where the wheat trucks would come around there and circle around. Mom told us to always tell him what the flowers looked like cause he couldn t see a thing. May would be on one side and I d be on the other side and we were just talking all the time. (Laughs) I think he enjoyed it as much as we did. It was fun. So a train came through the little town then? Uh-huh, daily. It was called the Doodle Bug, it came from Tulsa, Oklahoma. I don t know if it just went to Perry or what, but I never did get to ride it until I was older. May and I graduated from high school and got back from that senior trip, we were gone for like 14 days and we didn t have any telephones and we didn t have any electricity for a long time either. We got our electricity when I was probably in the sixth or seventh grade, and that was really exciting because we could finally go upstairs to our bedroom and the light was on. That was pretty exciting. And the room down below had a wood stove, which kept our bedroom warm . My job was to haul the wood in, in a little red wagon. Sleet, snow, rain, you name it, I was out there doing my chores. Now my sisters, they milked the cows. They said I had it easier and I said, No, you did. I was on the outside. Well we had to milk the cows, Yes, but you were in the barn by the warm cow and you got to stay warm. I didn t. (Laughs) And I remember pulling my stocking cap down and then I could look down and see the ground. Oh it was so cold. Because we didn t have gloves or boots, you just put on your coat that you wore to school each day. We didn t have a lot of extra money to do that. But May and I loved to go down to the creek and help Dad when he was cutting wood. And he d stack it up like an Indian tee pee. He started at the ground and 15 kept stacking wood . My job was to go out there and get those things off of there and hope they didn t fall. I d haul two or three loads in because Linda was a little baby then and Mom couldn t go out and leave her there. We didn t have an indoor bathroom. It was outside. And that s another story. There was an old rooster and he would come and chase you down. (Laughs) And you had to be real careful when you got in there. There was a little hole over there on the side and you could watch as he went around to the back . Then we would make a wild dash out the door for the fenced in backyard. If you wanted to save your life you had to run fast to get up there, because he was scratching and he d take off after you. (Laughs) One day we were at school and our dad was working in the field driving the tractor which had the auger under the seat . Mom was always saying, Now those overalls are too old to patch. We can t do that anymore. And he said, Well I can still wear them. He was thankful he had the old overalls on that day or that auger would ve pulled his leg in further than what it did. It messed his leg up a little bit, but it healed. He never did complain about it. But he came home and the story was Mom thought he got rid of the rooster because the rooster jumped him. When we complained about the old rooster chasing us Dad said the only reason the rooster got May and I was because we chased him. We said, No we don t. He just does it. And really actually I think we did pester him. (Laughs) But I can just see him now, just kind of scratching the ground and after you he d go. Well, he hit Dad s leg that had been injured on the tractor. And Mom said that he killed him. He killed the rooster. (Laughs) We never heard him say that he killed the rooster, but he did I m sure. Because he decided it was too dangerous to have him around. Oh, and no running water either. We had running water, I did the running. (Laughter) I went clear down to the barn and I pulled the little red wagon with two cream cans about 25 inches tall. I think I had to make two or three trips because we had one big house for the chickens that laid eggs . Then the little baby chicks were in another one. I had to make sure that they all got water. I always swore that when Mom went out to check those troughs that those chickens drank that water so she d accuse me of not bringing enough water. (Laughs) But it was fun living out there, it was good. I said to my husband one time, We were so poor. And he said, No we weren t. We were rich and didn t realize it. Oh, and the garden. It was a huge garden. We had blackberries, grapes, sweet potatoes, turnips, corn, tomatoes, green beans, potatoes, onions, everything there was imaginable out there in that garden. Mom loved to 16 Finchum Richardson cook and bake. She would be up early on a Sunday morning one of my favorite memories is hearing Mom as she d be whistling to the tune of some church song and had the radio on we didn t have any TV until I was about in the seventh or eighth grade. That was pretty exciting for Mom because she always listened to Arthur Godfrey on the radio and she didn t know what he looked like. I can remember her saying, Ooh, that s what he looks like, when she was watching the TV. That was pretty exciting when we got a TV. And all of the men liked to watch fights on Saturday night. Us girls didn t like that, but the guys thought it was something to watch that. The Tillman house right up the road west had 10 rooms in that house, I wish I had a picture of that old house. It had a long staircase going up the stairs. The outsides doors had oval shaped glass in the center of the doors in the living room. It was one of the first ones to have lights years ago. They called them carbide lights . The Garvie family purchased the Tillman home and tore it down and built a new home there. We d sneak up there in the rooms when one of my cousins lived there, because we liked to go up and look at the things up there. In later years, I liked to draw people s faces and I think I probably learned it from there because we could go sneak in and look at those pictures. There was some pretty neat pictures of people. Someone had used a pencil to draw their faces. And I thought that was neat. We rented the Lambert Farm northeast of Sumner and lived on that farm for 17 years. And 14 years out of those 17, our crops in the lower farm area were flooded with water and we lost our wheat. But up there where they built that big new house that I was talking about, that wheat would make 50 bushels per acre. Dad always said it made up for what we lost on the bottom land. And that s a good amount? I don t know, is that good? Yes. It was and they had some corn up there too. I remember there was an old windmill up there and I always wanted to get in that tank. I thought it didn t have any bottom, because Mom warned, Don t get in that tank So we never did get in that tank . There s a family cemetery up there with the Tillman family graves. Mr. Tillman lived there and her son lived over at Tulsa, Oklahoma. My dad would go over and check on her daily to make sure she was okay. That s how neighbors used to do, they d check on everybody. If we didn t see somebody, we by and checked on them. Now they might be there several days and nobody pays any attention. But I liked the little community because it was, like my son Bill said, the small towns were based around the school activities and the churches. How did we get to 17 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson know about deaths and everything? It was mouth to mouth, somebody would tell you. News spread through the community in no time. My dad thought it was a disgrace if someone didn t leave the field and go to a neighbors funeral if we lost a friend in that community, he thought that was horrible. That was something you didn t do. You just weren t supposed to be out there working on the day of someone s funeral. It just wasn t right. I don t think we have all that anymore. But yet it shows up when our soldiers come back to our towns and communities. I m glad I m from Oklahoma. You watch the films and all the school children turn out with flags and everything. That s pretty neat. That is. When they bring them home, that helps the families. And I think that s great, everybody backs everyone up. And we always said, Well, in our day, you couldn t have went to town on Saturday night and got into trouble. Somebody would ve known it before you got home. (Laughter) But the town of Perry was built on a square. I think you ve been there, Tanya. And there were two theatres, a skating rink, and there was maybe five doctors downtown. It was a thriving community in its day. There was a place called Kramers downtown, the Vogue, I believe, and the M W grocery store s down on the square, oh one, two, three, or four drug stores downtown at one time. Now we ve got one drug store downtown after Wal-Mart came into the community. And a library too downtown. We ve got our library too. I forget what year that was built. You ve done some study on that; that was pretty interesting. Did you use it much growing up? Would I use it? I will when I retire. Did you use it while you were growing up though? No. I didn t. We had a library at Sumner school, but we just didn t go to town unless we needed to get the groceries and everything on Saturday night. Mom s parents lived in town and I remember Grandma and Grandpa lived about two blocks from the fire station. This was exciting. It was Christmas time and when we went to town at Christmas time, they had the stores decorated. The courthouse opened clear up into the top of the courthouse and they always decorate the square . Santa Claus was always there. Every year Santa comes to his house in the courthouse park and talks to the children at Christmas time 18 and hands out treats. Well this particular year when we went in, Grandma said, Come on, twins. You go with me. She very proudly took us up to see Santa come in over the fire station in a helicopter from the north . We really believed he came from the North Pole. And he might have. (Laughs) I never did know the true story on that. But she was so excited, she d always take us down to the courthouse but that year she took us up to the fire station because she wanted us to see him come in on the helicopter. She probably wanted to see it too. They lived on Social Security and Grandma, took in ironings and it really hurt her when they came one day and told her that she couldn t make money ironing like that, that she d be making too much and couldn t get her Social Security. So she had to quit ironing. That wasn t good. She should ve stayed busy because she liked that, it was fun. Saturday nights when everybody went to town, the cars would be parked on both sides of the square around the courthouse park. Both theatres were open then, that was pretty exciting. They used to have the opera house there in Perry next to Foster s Drug Store. I don t remember that, but Mom and Dad did. I thought of my grandfather so many times how he fought to free the blacks. And in Perry I remember going to the courthouse one time and I got a drink and somebody laughed at me because I was getting a drink. Well, they had what they called the black fountain and the white fountain. We ve come a long way since then, but I said, Why couldn t I drink from the black fountain ? Mama said, It s the same water. That s just the way some people think. Then we had a man that had a grocery store up by the Perry theatre, his name was Mr. Tallaiferro and he was a colored man and Daddy always liked to go in and visit with him, he was so nice. We had three lumber yards at one time in Perry. One was up on the other side of the Perry theatre and it burnt one night, nobody ever knew what happened to it but it caught fire and it was gone. But we had a lot of fun. And a skating rink, oh that was so much fun. That s where we went on Saturday night. We had to figure out first which way the guys were going when we went to town on Saturday night. (Laughter) Mom would wash and iron every Saturday. She didn t have a modern washing machine like they do now, she had one of those she had to step on the foot pedal to get it to start. I remember going out and trying to help her start it. But when she hung her clothes out there they were so pretty and white. We had one of those old bailers where they put the blocks in to separate the hay into bales . My dad would cut the hay and they my sister Delcie used the tractor to run the buck which carried the hay up to the baler. Two guys using pitch forks threw the hay up on the platform and Dad 19 Finchum Richardson using a pitchfork would push the hay into the baler. The baler had a piece on top of it that would push the hay down into the baler. The baler didn t have a motor. Well, my sister and I, our job was to poke those wires through that s the reason there was a little round thing on the end of the wire and we would push the wires in and out to the other side of the wooden blocks. Then our uncle would be on the other side, he d catch the wire and using his hands and pliers would tie the ends of the wires together . And the girls had to do that too, huh? Yes. We had one cousin, he would come down there but as soon as we got enough bales of hay stacked up where there was some shade, he got a toothache. He had to go lay down. (Laughter) We had a big hay barn. There was a large metal roller on the baler and tractor. Dad connected a long rubber belt between the two. This is what kept the baler parts moving. Dad always warned us, Stay away from the belt because if it breaks it could hurt you. We never walked over that belt. There was a big old rope about 2 inches wide hanging from the top of the old barn. We couldn t wait until they got that hay stacked way up there in the top. The rope was tied onto the rafters up there. We went to town on Saturday night and we got to watch Tarzan. I remember him flying through the trees and everything. Okay, well we got this idea: well once Dad gets that full of hay, we d jump down through there. May and I and our little cousin would go up there and we d take off wooooo flying out through the door and swing back in. Well, my uncle came in one day, got his pocket knife out and he decided that was enough of that, one of us would get hurt and he cut it down. We didn t like that. That a big rope, had a great big knot on the end and we could put our legs around it and take off just like Tarzan did. So where do kids learn that? The movies and the TV. (Laughs) But it was fun. And then the fun thing was going to a movie on a Saturday night when they had the serials. Because we had to wait until we left the theater wondering how it will end next week, to see the end . We had an experience there one night too. I looked up and I said, Mom, why are those people way up there in that little window up there in the top? That is for the black people. Why, Mom? Mom said, Because some people think that way. I thought that was terrible. Now when they did desegregate the schools, what year was that? Dad and Mom moved to town in 56, my little sister started to school and Dad and Mom told her to treat everybody right. She got made fun of because she was sitting by one of those kids and Mom told her not to pay any attention to that. But Blaine School in Perry was an all-black 20 school and they wanted to keep their school just like we did ours out there at Sumner. They couldn t. It s probably been better that they ve done what they ve done and switched. History keeps going and sometimes it s for the better. But they still have their school reunions in Perry. Someone sent a letter to the local newspaper this summer and named some people who treated her well when she went to school in Perry. So Perry wasn t one of those that blocked them out. Our community was pretty good about that helping everybody. I can remember playing Blaine School one night and I think it was for a Polio benefit, we always went there every year. We had this lady at Sumner who called herself the Mayor of Sumner, Oklahoma. (Laughter) She always would get together with the superintendent over at Blaine School. Perry High School, public school, didn t have a women s basketball team, but we did. Mom said that they didn t want a team because Sumner used to beat them real bad. (Laughs) But anyway, we d go play those people down there and I said to a little lady here in town a while back, Okay now, who was that standing on the sidelines? I said, Ernestine, were you one of those basketball players at Blaine School? Standing on the sideline, even the coach was singing and clapping her hands and singing a-doo-a-wat, a-doo-a-wat and this music going, they were jumping up and down. We were so puzzled we couldn t hardly play ball that night. And she just started laughing and said, Yeah, I think I was one of them. But we really had a good time. It was fun when we went over there and played ball. It wasn t the kids that protested the blacks and whites being together I don t think as much as it was some of the older adults, maybe, I don t know. But the mentality of it all wasn t very good. I m glad they got it changed. My sister had just moved back to Oklahoma City. This guy was interviewing her for a job and he said, Where did you go to school? She said, Perry, Oklahoma. She looked at him and said, Well, where did you go? And he said, Probably a place you have never heard of. It was Blaine School and his dad had been the superintendent of the school there, Blaine School at Perry. I thought that was kind of neat. She told him, You probably don t even remember where I went, or something he said to her. And she says, Well, yes I do. She said, I was starting to school that year when you started going to school with us. I thought that was kind of neat. She said he was a good principal. I m glad they have their chance, they should have. My dad never did talk about the blacks. Now, I didn t know until later years that our grandfather fought with the Union army. He marched with General Sherman s forces to the sea. I thought that was neat. But I noticed on the questions you gave me, you were wondering how times have changed. It used to be we would be in 21 for weeks at a time when it rained and we couldn t drive out because the roads were so bad. They ve worked on a lot of things and they ve improved many, many things now. I m glad we have the telephones, I m glad we have the bathrooms inside. I m glad I don t have to go out and pump water when it s freezing cold. (Laughs) It s fun. I remember the old tractors and everything, they didn t have rubber tires. They had those big old metal things. It was so much fun. The school programs at school were just wonderful. Most of our teachers came from Oklahoma State University. Mrs. Ward, my third grade teacher, Mrs. Lycan, my fourth grade teacher, most of the coaches. They all came from down here, from Oklahoma State. Oklahoma State was still Oklahoma A M then. The first time that I ever got to see this Edmon Low Library was at night. We didn t have a prom, but we had our junior-senior banquet down here in the French Room over here at the Student Union. Our sponsor had graduated from here and he said, Now when we get through here, I want you to go out the West doors and look at the new library. It was the most beautiful site I d ever seen. The library was all lit up. If you saw a picture of the library lit up at night, it s pretty from that direction. I never thought I d be working down here. Never thought I would be here. I remember we were wearing heels because everybody else wore heels. I didn t like them very well, I would have rather had a pair of tennis shoes on, but we had to be like everybody else. (Laughter) I made the dresses for our banquet. I don t know why, but I always got into the part I made our shorts when we played basketball, I made our shirts. But May didn t like to sew or else she thought, Faye does it, why should I do it? (Laughter) I remember when we went to the little Baptist church. It was right across from the filling station there in Sumner. Dad would have to go early. The Howells had to be there before anybody else did, because Dad had to get all the gas lights pumped up. Gas lights are what we had in our little church, for the lights. I remember those little bags they tied around the bottom of the light . Oh I loved to poke it with my finger and it would fall apart. That was a no-no. Dad didn t like that, he had to buy some more of those to put on the lights. Oh we didn t do it at church, but we did it at home. We thought it was fascinating, just because they said, Don t touch them, they ll fall apart. They had to be on there because when the gas came out, Dad struck a match there and they would light up . They were almost like electrical lights, not close though, not like they really are. But we had to be there early so Dad could pump up the lights and put wood in the stove so we d be warm. They had a big old potbelly stove and a great big old teapot. Mom would go up there and make hot chocolate. Our ministers came from OBU 22 Finchum Richardson Oklahoma Baptist University down at Shawnee, Oklahoma . Sometimes when they had a revival it would last maybe two or three weeks. And they built a brush arbor outside and that s where they put poles up and laid tree limbs on the top. We would have the service outside. They d even move the piano out there. The whole community could sit at home and listen to the music at either church. That was a great time to grow up like that. The young people always sat in the back. They didn t like to be down in front. But sometimes we got moved down front because we were too noisy. That was embarrassing. (Laughter) I remember one preacher, he would holler, All right, Charles. Get down here. That was embarrassing to his son, but he didn t do that very often after that. But it was fun. All the windows were open and the bugs were coming in, but it was fun to go to church like that. We always sang the old songs. Now they have a lot of newer songs and I wish they d go back to some of the older ones, but the young ones like the more modern songs and that s okay. It s the same thing. Well after the church service, you went home and then cooked or had your mother already cooked? She prepared the meal before going to church. Mom usually was the one that took the preacher to our house. That s when you sit at the table with your hands in your lap and you got looked at when you put your elbows up on the table. That s where we learned our table manners. (Laughs) It was fun to have the preacher. I remember we had one couple, Blanche and Bob Morgan, they came from Hawaii. That wasn t part of the United States then, and I ve got a film that one of his sons had made. He interviewed his dad because his dad was there when Pearl Harbor was bombed and he tells his story and then his wife talked too. Both of them are deceased now, but it s a neat film to look at. He met her over there. Blanche s story was, He was wanting to date me and nobody dated me unless my dad got to meet them. She said, We were Catholic. And here comes this Baptist sailor, and Dad wasn t too fond of sailors . And he comes in the house, and she said, I thought, Oh I don t know how this ll go. But they got along very well together and she ended up married to him. And it was neat. I hadn t seen her for years since I was probably eight, nine years old when they left. But I just thought that was so neat because she was from a different part of the country than we were from. We met a lot of people through church, the missionaries that would come. We didn t have problems like some of them do now with different churches. If the Christian Church had bible school, we went up there. 23 And if our church had bible school, all those kids came down to ours. That s just the way we did it in a little community. It was so much fun to live out there and do what we did. Now, when Dad first started driving the bus, his bus had tarps around the side. He said, And if I hit a mud hole, the girls would be raising their legs up and yelling because the water would get sprayed up into the bus. (Laughter) And I remember one bus, it was very unusual. There was one row of seats on each side and we faced the center row of seats. Well, these seats on the side were with their backs against the windows. Well, now that bus was fun to get on because the roads were real bad my dad didn t think it was funny, but May and I, we were little and they wouldn t allow us off if somebody had to get off and push that bus. They used to call that old dirt out there gumbo where it d roll up around the tires and we couldn t go anywhere. He would back up and you d have to go forward it took a long time to get to school. That s what we all wanted to hear, that we wouldn t get to school until about noon. Because then we turned around and we left about 2 o clock. We were probably out of school by at least 2 o clock on a bad weather day . But I remember one time we were east and south of Sumner and we had to go pick these people up and the road was real bad. And when the big ones got off, they told all of us little ones Get over here, that s the direction the bus was sliding. Get over here, see they wanted it to do that so we d have to get out of tests that day or something, probably. I remember when we all hit the deck and went over to that side, and the bus just kept sliding over and Dad, he was trying to give it the gas, trying to get out. You wouldn t even dare let a kid out and do that now, but they were country kids, they were high school kids. Us little ones couldn t do it and they knew that, they told us to get over there. We didn t realize what we were doing at first, but we were helping the bus to slide in the ditch. (Laughter) Our dad, when he looked up in the mirror like this he had a big mirror up there, we re going down the road, I saw what you kids were doing today. What were we doing, Daddy? You got over there and you made that bus go further off in that ditch. (Laughter) It was fun on the school bus. It was a lot of fun. You learned how to get along with people because no parents got excited about anything, you know. Kids were disciplined to the point where my dad never had any trouble with anybody. He told about one guy that grew up there, his dad said, Now John, he did some things he shouldn t have yesterday so I won t let him on here at the house and you don t let him on at the school. He s going to have to walk home for a few weeks. Dad always teased that guy about that as he got older. He said, I felt terrible not letting you on, but your dad said not to let you on. So it was a lot of fun, there was so many things out there. It was 24 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson fascinating. You know they actually had a train come through, it was called, the Freedom Train. But May and I were like in third or fourth grade and we couldn t go down to the railroad track. They had a big display, I don t remember if it was about the Declaration of Independence or what, but they wouldn t let us go down there. Delcie got to go, we didn t like that. It was a special train, it went cross-country so kids could see it. History kids. It was nice, they said. A passenger depot or a freight depot? Joe Dawson and his wife owned the Sumner Store and the Post Office was in the southeast corner of the store. The mail came in by train. The train, called the doodle Bug, came through Sumner twice a day from Tulsa to Enid and back through to Tulsa. Sometimes my sister and I and a friends of ours would walk down to the depot with Joe Dawson who carried the sack of mail on his back. He looked like Santa Claus carrying the mail over his shoulder. Joe would put the mail bag on a pole beside the railroad track and as the train slowed down the conductor would come out on the back of the train platform and using a long pole would reach over and hook the mail bag and take it into the train. Watching for the train to come through on the tracks was pretty exciting for us kids. You saw him do that? Yes. We thought it was neat to go down there and see that. He never missed? No. There was an old grey wood depot down by the railroad tracks and I thought it was fascinating to look in there and see all those benches and everything. It was a good sized building. On down the track a little ways west was a big cattle yard. There was a big corral. That s where people used to bring their cattle and send them by rail. Any of that still there? No. The old wood corral and chutes are gone. But May and I remember the place real well where we were born down there and where we lived. Mom said May and I were only four years old and she said, There s no way you can remember it. I did draw a picture of the house. She said, How could you have done that? I said, I remember it, Mom. And she told the story about the Mayor of Sumner, was going to town one day and stopped down there below the school ground when she saw these two little blondes walking down the side of the road. We 25 Finchum were only four years old and we had left the yard and were walking up the road . She stopped and said, Does your mama know you re on this road? Uh-uh. Do you want me to take you home? Uh-uh. May and I, she said, stood there holding hands. We weren t going to go with her. Well, where are you going? We re going up to see our sister, Delcie, at school. The WPA had built that big rock wall down there and we could go up steps there. We were going to cross the road but she wouldn t let us. And she finally got out she said and put us each one in, she thought, When I put one twin in then the other will get out, but she got us both in and she takes us down there and our mother was frantic because the house was right there by the creek. She thought we d went down there and she didn t know if we were drowning or what, she didn t know where we d went. She said, Oh my, what one didn t do, the other one would do, and she said she was so glad when Melva drove in with both of us. Well, where were you all going? We were going up there to see Delcie. We didn t like school when we started. We were always with our mama and we didn t want to go. (Laughter) That was after we moved over to the other farm when we started school. But I didn t like it. We didn t have TV. We didn t have things like they do now. But I remembered the rooms and everything. I drew the pattern of the inside of the house and showed her where it was. She said, How could you remember that? And I said, Well I remember it. I drew it just like it was. I showed her where the kitchen door was and everything. She couldn t believe that, and a big old elm tree out in front and one of those great big windows on the living room looking out toward that big elm tree. It was so much fun living there. She told us years ago about this guy that would come who used to come from the railroad track. He would come every year and he would sharpen her knives for her. He made the deal with her. He needed food to eat, so if she gave him food to eat and he would sharpen her knives. She said when we were born, she had to walk down to the windmill and get water because there was no running water in the house. She never gave us a bath at the same time because they had a lot of superstitions about kids if there was more than one born and we were the only twins in the area. Dr. Francis said, The chances of you being able to raise them is small, but if you don t give them a bath in the same water they ll probably live. Mom said she never gave us a bath in the same water until we were a few months older. (Laughs) We had our home remedies when it came to sickness or accidents. Like what? 26 Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Oh there was a guy who we called KKK Bailey and he would come by selling liniment and I don t know what all. Mom put it on us when we had a sore throat and that was supposed to cure it. If we stepped on a nail, Mom would put some kerosene in the wash pan and we would keep our foot in there until it quit. They d throw the kerosene out and then they d go back and put more kerosene in there. We never had a sore foot. They knew how to take care of us when we couldn t get to a doctor when we had a sore throat we gargled with warm water . What about bee stings? I don t remember ever getting stung by oneI guess we didn t have any around. I wondered that too. What would they do? Didn t go barefooted too much. We did go barefoot all the time and we stepped on a lot of nails. One year the big barn we played in, blew away. My dad built that barn back. He built a hay shed there, and a garage. Everything s there except the two-story house now. Oh and our games, we played Annie Over. Two people Annie Over. One person would stand on each side of the two-story house and the person who had the ball would loudly say, Annie Over Here comes the ball They would throw the ball over the house and sometimes the ball got stuck in the gutter pipe and we would run inside. One would get Mom distracted so she wouldn t know we were going upstairs. She said, Stay off the roof. We crawled out on the roof. We didn t have but one ball, and we didn t have any money to be buying another one and whoever was the bravest would go up on the roof and get the ball, throw it out into the yard and run back down. We had more fun. We had a rope swing in a big tree. As we were swinging down out goal was to kick a can. I don t remember what the rules were but we always said we had miniature golf before anybody in the big towns did. We had little tunnels under the cedar trees and we had gallon cans buried and we used sticks to hit the balls. We had more fun. And we said in later years, Mom, did you know that we d go up there and get that ball? There was a closed-in porch on each side of the house, on the south side and closed-in porch on the north side. And we d think well she couldn t see us she won t hear us. But she said, Oh I knew what you were probably up to when one of you stood there talking to me and the other one took out up the stairway. To go in the old attic room, it wasn t finished but the windows could slide to the side and we could go out on the roof and get the ball out of the gutter pipe . We didn t think Mom knew about that all those years. You probably wonder about our food. We had pigs and Grandma and 27 Finchum Richardson Grandpa Tuetken would come out from Perry and would work til late at night. Oh, I remember, they all worked together when they butchered the pigs and they cured it themselves. Dad had a big box with a lid on it and he put Morton s salt on the meant and rubbed it down. It was the best bacon and ham. The garden had everything imaginable out there. Mom never went to town to buy food when she had the preacher out there to eat, there was always plenty to eat. Did a lot of canning? A lot of canning. She could go down in the cellar and get her green beans, tomatoes, pickles. I remember I went over the cellar with my bike. I was old enough to know better, I was probably eight or nine years old. I hit the big crock. She had those big huge crocks and they put the sauerkraut in there or pickles. I think it was sauerkraut probably that was in there. I hit it and it broke in two. I got a scolding for that. (Laughs) There was a pear tree out there. We always climbed up in the pear tree and got pears to eat. Until we discovered a snake one day and we decided we didn t want to go back up in that tree. Oh, the thrashing crew, were you ever around the farm when they thrashed? It was like a circus coming down the road. Paul Pancoast, of the Sumner community, owned the big thrashing machine. I can t remember, I guess the horses pulled that too because there was a tongue on it and then you had all these guys with their big hay racks. They d each have about four horses on each team coming and us kids were so excited. We would go upstairs watching out the window to see when they d come over the hill because we didn t want to miss anything. It was so exciting. Mom was preparing food for them. Oh, it was a neat time. Now, I gotta get to my story, what I really want to tell you. Our uncle would give us a quarter a piece if we went down to the barn and pumped the horse tank full of water. That was very important because those horses worked. Those guys went to work early in the morning and the horses was supposed to have plenty of water. Okay, we figured this out. The only way he s going to pay us our quarter is if there s plenty of water in the tank, if it s full up to the rim. So one of us would stand there and we d pump so many licks, we d call it, on the old pump while it was going into the tank. The other one stayed by the tank and shooed the horses away because we didn t want them drinking that water because if he came down there and found it only half full we didn t get our quarter. So one day we were pumping water and was running the horses away. Our uncle Ike comes over to the fence, What do you two think you re doing? We said, We re keeping the horses away because we want to be paid for pumping this water in here. The poor old work horses 28 needed rest and they needed water. We were keeping them shooed away We kind of got told about that and I don t think we got our quarter either. That was our job to go down there while they were eating the big meal that Mom prepared and we were down there keeping the horse tank full of water. If it wouldn t have been full, he wouldn t have given us our quarter. We had an old bull named Bolliver, and our cousin and May and I would go down to the cow lot and pester him. When he got mad he would put his head to the ground. Our goal was to leave this fence over here and run over to that fence and jump over the fence before the bull could get us. Can you imagine? Our mother would ve killed us if she d known we were doing that. (Laughter) Three little girls down there, we had a ball. It was fun. Until Dad discovered that same, Dad said, What do you think you re doing? And we said, Oh it s fun, and he said, Well I better not catch you doing that again. We didn t go to town and buy feed. We had all that feed in the barn. It was all stored there in the summer time. We had wheat and oats and hay. When Dad decided to grind feed, we helped carry the grain out to Dad. He would put it in the grinder. The grinder had an auger and it would move the feed up into the granary sometimes we had to go in and use a scoop to push the grain away from the auger so the feed could keep coming down. That was a dusty job in that granary. I hated that when he said, We re going to go down and grind feed today. I need some help. He put a little bit of hay in there, and corn and I don t know what all. We did not have the money to go to town and buy things. I don t even remember giving anything at church except a penny and I d kind of hold my hand up where nobody could see. I don t know why I needed to be ashamed of it, everybody else was doing the same thing, but that s how you felt. We played marbles. Delcie was going with Ted then, who she later married. He had these beautiful marbles that we thought was so pretty. We d never seen them before and they had those little fancy things inside, the glass marbles. I don t even remember how we played it now. But CML Curriculum Materials Library down here used to be across the hall from where I work now. I d go over there and get their books sometimes just to read up on that because those were some of the games we played. We played hop-scotch. But back to the marble game, we got pretty good at it. We had a large marble called a shooter, well we d be collecting his marbles so he called a halt to that. Because May and I got pretty good at it and we d take his marbles. (Laughter) We built a golf course in the front yard and there was little holes everywhere under the 29 cedar trees where we had things that we had to go through on course and hit that ball in order to get back. And we had rules. It was fun doing that. Later someone built a miniature golf course on the north side of Stillwater. We had a mower, but it was a push mower. That s not too much fun when the grass gets high, trying to go through there. I planted some irises this last weekend, and I thought now I remember when we were little girls, we moved them around all over the farm and never did kill them. Someone said, Are you planting them at the right time? I said, I don t know, but when May and I did it as kids, they grew. I told my son that, I said, We planted them everywhere on the farm, every one of them came up so I figured it was okay to move them. We had a rabbit at one time, but I think we forgot to water him and he died. It s been a long time. We had dogs and we had cats. Oh that was exciting when the cats were in the barn. We went way down between the bales and moved the bales, it s a wonder the bales didn t cave in on us. We could ve smothered to death. But we weren t afraid. Now I think of the snakes and the rats that could ve been in the barn. Another thing we liked to do, was go to the hay barn. That east side was open, so it was warm in the winter time because that sun shined in on those hay bales. We d take our comic books down there. And guess what kind of comic books my sister and I liked to read. Anything with western stories Dale and Roy Rogers, Gene Autry, Sunset Carson, I can t remember the other ones, but we always liked the western books. As we got a little bit older we had little stories like love stories or something and our brother-in-law had quit playing marbles with us because we outsmarted him and we got his marbles. Then he started trading comic books. He would bring a big stack, so we soon found out that if there were any of those little books that he didn t like, he wouldn t trade us even up. We mixed our new books in with the cowboy books . He came back one night and said, Now I ve figured you two out. You figured out that if you mix those love stories in there with those cowboys, that you ll get an even trade here. And he said, Well you re not going to do that to me anymore. (Laughter) He quit bringing us books. But I think they only cost five cents or a dime. It cost ten cents to go to the theatre down by the drugstore. But the up-town theatre, the Perry theatre cost us 15 cents and later on 25 cents to go there. After we were a certain age, we had to pay more money to get into the theatre. May and I passed a long time for a younger age and finally she asked us how old we were and we had to tell her. Didn t think we better lie. (Laughter) There was a guy do you ever remember hearing about Buster Keaton in Oklahoma? Well, they had a premiere 30 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson showing of his movie one night. Ray and I were going together and everybody was out looking for tickets for that because he used to live in Perry, Oklahoma and his movie would be showed there that night. It was a big deal there in Perry, it was fun. Each year Perry has a big celebration in memory of the Land Run of September 16, 1893. We have a Lange parade with food and entertainment in the courthouse park. September the 16th? Uh-huh. September 16th celebration every year. I thought, This year I will be retired and I can go in and take more interest in all of it. It ll be fun. Sure. So when you and Ray were dating, what sort of things did you do? We didn t date in high school because I was going with guys from Perry. (Laughs) He told me about that later. I got back from the senior trip, we d been gone 14 days and we got that phone call to come in for an interview at Southwestern Bell Telephone Company. So May and I both were hired. She started one day and I started the next. And later on, Ray said he was going to school at Okmulgee Tech, the automotive mechanics school. He had went to school down there a year, two or three years, I guess. He brought his mother into town because she never did drive a car, so he d bring her into town to do her laundry. That s when they used to have the big laundry places in town where people could wash. And he said he walked down to the pay phone at the nearest station that s outdated now, there s no pay phones. The younger ones don t remember the pay phones . Mine don t. Ray walked down there and he said he looked down at his shoes and he thought, She s a pretty good looking gal. I m not going to call her. I don t think she ll want to go with me. I just have these old shoes on that I wear all the time. He turned around to leave and he thought, Well if I don t call her , someone else will. He called and I happened to be on vacation, May and I and our uncle went back to Arizona to see our dad s sister and her husband and we spent a week or two out there. We had just got back and I happened to be home that evening. I was so excited because Ray Richardson called me. I met him when I was in the seventh grade. He moved from Tupelo, Oklahoma to Sumner. They worked for a farmer out north of Sumner, so that s where they lived and he went to school there. We didn t date then but we always visited together all the time in school. I remember the first time I ever met him , It was hard for an old country gal to introduce herself, but I thought he was a cute guy, so I went in. Only him and the teacher were in the room and I thought, Oh well, I don t care. Mr. Cherry s in here. He s the guy that taught science. He was a former OSU student and I 31 Finchum Richardson liked his science classes. Ray told me later, During that time I was worried about Wayne. His oldest brother had been sent to Korea right after he had graduated from high school and they hadn t heard from him. He crossed Korea four times on foot. But Ray was always staying in on the noon hour. I walked over there where he was at in the back of the room, I said, My name s Faye, what s your name? And that was so awkward for me because we weren t used to doing that. And one day he told me his name was Ray, another day he d say Raymond, and another day he said Ralph, and another time he said something else. I don t remember what all he said, he was a tease. (Laughs) He was a cute little guy and I thought the world so I was pretty excited when he called me to go on a date. We dated probably about two years I was 20 years old and he was 21. We were married August the 29th, 1958 and we went back east in October . So during that time did you work at the telephone place? I worked for Southwestern Bell Telephone Company from July 1956 to December 1959 . I worked Information, Long Distance, and Local. We were trained in first aid and everything because if a mother called in I remember I was only 17 (I had to have a work permit to go to work) and I remember the first time I was ever on a switchboard, never had even talked on a phone hardly and here I am a telephone operator, and I m thinking, Oh my goodness, I ll be on there by myself tomorrow, on a switchboard. Each operator had a place to plug in her headset and the chief operator could plug in with you and that was because sometimes we had difficult calls or emergencies and she could help you. I was scared to death sitting in front of her desk and having to do that. The switchboard was a long board with holes for all the telephone numbers. We were trained to scan the board for incoming calls and used a long cord with a plug. We used them to plug into the holes and pick up the incoming calls. We put the plug in at an angle, so we could tell if anyone had already picked it up. We would say, Number, please? They would give us a number to ring or ask for long distance or information. We said, Thank you One moment please. I will transfer you. We were trained for emergencies telephone companies aren t like this anymore, but if you had a fire or emergency, all you had to do was pick up the phone and say, I have a fire. We had several of them. That summer in 1956, the fire station was down the street and fire trucks were going every hour on the hour that year. People would drive into the field and the wheat was real dry. A hot muffler would cause a fire to take off right quick. I remember there was a plug-in outlined in green red, and all we had to do was just plug in there and the firemen answered the call If they were real excited, we had to help them. Like if 32 Finchum a mother had a child, you had to know what to tell them if the baby was choking. I m 17 years old thinking, Ooh, this is a big responsibility One night someone told us how we can dial Honolulu, Hawaii direct. Well everyone had to dial at least one time so we could hear the operator in Hawaii say, Honolulu, Hawaii. Monday morning the chief operator called five operators at a time over to her desk and everybody s wondering, What s going on? She said, Someone has been dialing the Honolulu, Hawaii number and we cannot have you doing that That was our part in history and it was exciting. When we worked Long Distance we would dial the number for the customer and if it was a person to person call we would ask for the person. Some small towns had operators who operated switchboards in their home and when they answered the switchboard, we asked for the person and they sometimes said, I don t believe he s home right now. I think he went to so-and-so or wherever. We had party lines. Did you ever talk on a party line? There might be people picking it up and listening to your conversation. That was something. It was so noisy sometime we couldn t hardly hear. Party line had numbers like 1139 and 2F. We rang 1139 and then rang this one twice, and that s how they knew it was for that person that was number 2 on the line, the best I remember. Then we had a pencil and it had a little round thing on the top to dial phone numbers. Using a pencil we recorded the time the call was placed and other information. When the call ended we pulled the ticket and stamped it. Each ticket was filed in order of when the call ended. We inserted the ticket in the timer to stamp the time on the back of the ticket. We had to collect the money for calls made on pay phones . I can t remember now how much it cost to just dial somebody right in our town, it wasn t very much, maybe a dime . We could tell if it was a dime, a nickel or a quarter. Nobody could figure that out, but we knew. They tried to pass a penny off for a dime but if they put in a dime it went ding ding and a quarter was a clunk sound and a nickel sounded different. Now that s hard to believe, but that s how we did it. Our headset set on our head and these great big things on each ear and we couldn t hear what the other operators next to us were saying, but you could direct your attention to the customer coming in talking to you. It was really neat. They kept us well-informed, once or twice a week the chief operator would take four or five at her desk and tell us about new things that were going on. It was really a good job. One dollar an hour top pay in 1956. Eight hour days? 33 Richardson Eight hour days, yes, it was an eight hour a day job. I worked split 10:30 s. I worked 10:30 to 12:30 and then I worked 5:30 to 10:30 at night. I really didn t like that because we d just gotten married. And Ray didn t either, he worked at Ditch Witch. When I worked nights, I was up there by myself and it was kind of spooky upstairs in this big room and there were several vacant rooms . One day the chief operator came over and said that I didn t complete a call. One reason there s two plug-ins here, like if I m placing a call, you could stick your plug-in for your headset and I could get up and the customer never was aware somebody else had taken over the call and was doing it. We had to be there when we were supposed to be there. If we went on a break, we had to be back in fifteen minutes so we could relieve the other girl. And I liked it. I liked, Number please, thank you, one moment please. Information, thank you. We would transfer you to the Information operator and she would find your number. Now they don t say thank you And that was unheard of in those days. She was out of her desk and plugged in with you immediately. I heard what you did, you did not say thank you. I don t think she ever had to get on to May and I about that, but she did some of them. And when you got through, there was a certain way you had to fold your headset and put it in a little compartment. There were strict rules up there. One time when I was a little girl, I saw them walk the picket line and I thought when I got hired up there, I don t want to do that. They had signs and were carrying them. They used to do that because they wanted higher wages. But my vacation time was good. I worked that one night up there and there wasn t anybody up there but me. When we worked nights someone would call in and ask us, Will you give me a wake up call in the morning? We had notes on the switchboard reminding us to call them at the requested time. We didn t mind doing it for them. The chief operator knew. That s just the way we helped the customer in those days. Groups would come through to tour the office to see what it looked like. The office had one big switchboard and any operator could pick up an incoming call on the switchboard. The operator plugged in at an angle because then if it made a certain sound she knew that was a busy line. If a customer asked for a number and the line was busy we said, The line is busy. I believe the numbers on the board continued through the 1600s. The switchboard was about twenty feet long. Now when we call Information and ask for a number we get a recording telling us what the number is. Back in 1956 when the customer asked for Information, the operator had to transfer you to Information. 34 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson How long did you do that? I worked there for two and a half years. Then it went dial and my sister transferred to Stillwater and worked for seven years. Time marches on and each generation makes improvements and leaves their mark on the next one. What d you have to wear? We had to dress up. The chief operator and assistants wore hose and heels, we fixed our hair and everything. We didn t just go to work like they do now sometimes. (Laughs) Everybody dressed up. There wasn t anybody coming in there to see us, but that s the way it was. So there were oil businesses around Perry? The whole square was full of business. I liked working at the Southwestern Bell Telephone Company. Then it went dial and that s the reason they started taking out the little offices. I had a chance to transfer. They told me I could go to Okmulgee and different places. I said, Ray, I ll do that and you can finish your education. He didn t want to do it, so I didn t transfer. We hated to see it go out, because it was a good place to work. It was nice. I never had been able to buy clothes for myself and I did then, that was pretty exciting. But I remember all those fires in the wheat fields. I was from the farm and I knew how bad that hurt the farmers that year losing their wheat crops. When it s dry enough to cut, if they get a fire out there, it takes off fast. Especially if it s a windy day. When did they move from the farm to town, your parents? They moved just before my little sister started to school, 1956. But he still farmed, you just lived in town? They finished the crops that summer and sold the farm equipment. When he went to town, he helped build houses. Daddy was a carpenter. He never went to school to learn how to do that, but he knew how to do it. He built the cabinets in Mom s kitchen and they built brand new homes, him and another guy. They worked all the time building. And he was good at it. Just got tired of farming? He was beginning to have health problems. My dad died on October 8, 35 Finchum Richardson 1963. He was 62 years old and our middle son was six months old. He was tired and had a hard time breathing. I think he had heart trouble but he just didn t want us to worry about it. But there s a lot of neat things going on in Perry, Oklahoma. They built a new jail this last year. I have a nephew that works there and it s really nice. They had an open-house and everything s stainless steel in the kitchen. They have a room up above and they can look down and see all these jail cells. There s no way anybody could escape that jail. They have new technology now, they re off of the square well about a block and a half, and they can see clear down to the City Water and Light office so if anybody escapes down there they can see them. They re not going to get away. (Laughter) I don t like closed-in spots and I said to my nephew, Well, I don t think those beds look very comfortable. They didn t have mattresses on them, I guess they put mattresses on for them when they come in, I don t know. But anyway, I said, How about this door? You said it s secure. If a prisoner escapes you can lock it up immediately. You re not going to get me in here and then lock this door are you? And he said, No, I m not. But he said, We can lock them in a split second. They have like five TV s in one area and they can scan all the cells. If somebody did try to do anything, they can catch them. I wouldn t want to be in there. But it s better than having it up on the courthouse roof. So it s pretty interesting. And they ve built a new school since my kids were little. And now out on 15th Street they have a brand new middle school and there s another school being built out there. So Perry s making progress. That s a good sign. What brought you to OSU? What brought me down here? I needed to go to work. We were in the construction business and the oil business slowed down , Ray was laying pipes in the oil field and everything, and I worked for our construction company from1975 through 1988. Our company helped set up rural water systems, laid water and gas lines in Oklahoma, Texas, and Kansas, we laid sod on Highway 412 and on the school ground now called Frontier School, located east of Red Rock, Oklahoma. I decided one day that I would come down here and take a test with the Oklahoma Employment Office. We had one electric typewriter when I graduated from school. I could transcribe, take shorthand, and type at 80 correct words per minute. I come down here without practicing on an electric machine and I went over there and made a 60 but I had like 10 errors. The University at that time doubled the errors. That wilted my feathers because that made 20 mistakes. I thought, Why did they double it? And so I go back over here to apply for a job and they said that they doubled their errors. I thought, Well this is not going to work, and I 36 was determined. That s what gave me the determination to go back to the Employment Office, if I could. So that afternoon I knew one of the guys that was part owner in the Stillwater Typewriter Company over here. So I go over to Stillwater Typewriter and I said, Do you rent electric typewriters? That sounds funny now, because everybody s working with computers. But I went over there and I got an electric typewriter and two big reams of paper. I went home sat down at the dining room table and just type, type, type, type, type. That s how our typing teacher in high school taught us. You don t worry about the mistakes, you type as fast as you can and then when you slow down you ll be able to do better. So I began typing. I had paper all over that big dining room table. Ray came in and some of it was probably on the floor, I don t remember, but I had paper everywhere . He said, What in the world are you doing? and I said, Well, I didn t do too good on my test today at the Oklahoma Employment Office, but by golly I m going to. I set there all that evening too, typing. And finally, I used my little clock that I had there and timed it and I thought, I m getting this okay. So I went back and I made a 60 and I had two errors that day. But they doubled it again and there was four errors and I didn t like that either, but they talked to me that time and said, Where would you like to go to work? I had to go to a bulletin board in the hallway in Whitehurst and look at what was up there and then go in and tell them what job I wanted to apply for. And they asked me questions like, Do you want to work in an office? You have a good enough typing score, you can be a secretary for somebody. All I could think about, That s what I ve done for several years for our construction. The next question, Would you like to work in a group atmosphere or would you like to be a secretary? And I said, I d rather be with a group. I didn t tell her why or anything. When I found out they doubled my errors, I didn t like that very well but I was determined I was going to stick with it. But anyway, so that time all I could think of was that big beautiful library building. And I d been in there recently . And I said, The library. And she said, Well I m going to send you over there then, because they ve got a job that s available. I asked her what it involved and she said, Typing, and there was, I think, one typewriter in the office when I came to work. I ve been here 20 years now and everybody has a computer on their desk now . But I forgot, before I went for that test, I had left our construction office two or three nights a week and came to Meridian Tech out here. I had taken a computer class through Meridian Tech. One of our high school teachers taught it there in Perry and I had done well on that, but I wanted to come down here and find out a little bit more about computers. I went 37 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson back and forth two nights a week I believe it was, or maybe three, down to Meridian Tech. And it was called an Open/Exit class for adults where we could come in and type as long as we wanted to, but they told me to come in at least two hours or three hours in the evening. I liked that and I got used to the computer. I went to the Employment Office down here and that s when I got the 60 with 2 errors, but they doubled it and it was 4 here on campus and when I came to work, Marian told me one day, Well we re not worried about speed, we just stress accuracy, and she said, You ll pick that up, and she just put me right at ease. She trained me here in the government documents department and there was one computer over there on the west wall when I went to work. You can t imagine all the things we had to do. We had to put a disk in and I forget what all. Now you just turn it on, put your password in and you re in there. But it used to be different. And it s been 20? Twenty. I started July the 25th, 1988. So this July would ve been 21 years. I ll be 71 in July and I thought, I ll wait until next summer, and then I thought, Oh it sure would be nice to be home on the farm, doing my thing. So I ve already applied for my retirement. I know the department s been lucky to have you for those 20 years. I ve had fun. John Phillips is a good boss. Connie Kirby is too. Well, everybody up here s just super. And you ve been great with the students. I enjoy meeting the public and helping them. And in the spring when these new students come in, I told John, No one should have it in their vocabulary to say, No, we don t have that piece until we pull it up in the computer and check it, because they re young and they check it and they may not get all the materials they need. Or, some of them come in and they automatically think, Well government documents, they ve used a microfiche up here at one time. I ve had this happen many times, they come in and they show me something and I know it s not in here, it s an older piece and I know it s out on the shelf somewhere with a Jackson call number but I don t tell them that, I just say, Well, I don t have that in the microfiche room . But if you don t mind, I ll tell you how to type this in and we can check this on the computer and see if we can locate it . You kind of have to educate them, we don t want to treat them like they don t know anything and I ll go back out there with them and they ll type it in. This time I show them how to print that sheet off so I know whether it s Jackson or SCUA, Docs or it s in here. Because 38 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum they used it one time up here and it was microfiche they think they re supposed to come to the microforms room. Everybody should have that figured out, but not everybody does sometimes. All the librarians specialize in different areas and I even told my grandkids this, if you don t find it with one, go to another. Somebody will help you find that. I think that s very important to help them, the students are first. That s why we re here. I ve always enjoyed it. That s always been my thing. They re first. And we never want to act like we think, Why don t they know this? I go into many places and get treated that way sometimes and I don t like it when they do me that way. Customer service is first with you, sure. We have to show them. We can educate them without being bossy. We can be a big help and they appreciate that. I ve got a note or two where people have written things. That s going to be one of my scrapbook projects. (Laughter) And a student showed up here not very long ago, Tom Marshall, you remember him? He came up here. That s the big payback, when they come back to see us. Sure. That s fun. Well you ll have to be sure and come back and see us. Yes, I need to get my permit. I ll have to go get one so I can park on campus. Come back and park wherever you want, huh? Especially the basketball games. I told my sister and her husband to have those orange shirts ready. We are going to the games. We don t have anything else to do, we are going. They said, Okay. They like to go too. It s fun. We probably need to wind this up, don t we? Probably so. Well thank you for spending the afternoon with me. I don t know if I answered everything the way you d like to have it answered. You did great. I m glad you ve been in my life for the past 10 years. 39 Richardson But in the little community, everybody knows you, everybody would help you. It was a time of growing up. We rode our bikes anywhere we wanted to. We had all the freedom we needed. It was so much fun. You wouldn t want your little girls out riding like that now the way they drive so fast on the dirt road and you don t know who they might encounter. But that was a different time, Tanya. The doors of the house were open, the windows were open, and somebody would ve heard you. There d be somebody out in the pasture. Now we go out in the country and a lot of times we don t see anybody. But in those days, there was someone out in the pasture doing something or they re working in their garden or they didn t live far from you. The people that lived a little ways down the road from us, her mother had diabetes and they didn t have a phone. We didn t have a phone, and Mom and Dad slept on the west side and there was a window open always in the summer time because we didn t have air conditioning. We all survived it. It s okay. The kids come to my home and they want to know why I don t have the central air on. I said, Well I didn t grow up with all that and I don t have to have it all the time. I like my windows open sometime. But now when it gets hot, I ll turn it on. But anyway, Betty would yell, Alma and the first time she yelled, my mother jumped up out of that bed and knew that Mrs. Cromwell and Betty needed her . And Betty still talks about that. We didn t have a phone, but we knew one another was there across the road. And us kids would usually come running down the stairway to see what was going on and Mom said, Oh Betty needs me over there, I gotta get over there. And that s how neighbors were. We were always there and was willing to help one another . We called it Armistice Day; now it s called Memorial Day. Every year on Armistice Day all the students and teachers would leave our classrooms and walk out to the front of our school and stand quietly with our feet together in a straight line, no one talked, as we put our hands down to our sides, and looked up at that big flag on top of the building while someone rang the big school bell several times. The teacher told us to look up at the flag and remember what the stars represented and remember those who fought and gave their lives for us so we could have our freedom. We walked out in silence and returned to our classrooms in silence. I ve never forgotten it. That really left an impression on my life. My sister teaches school and she still has the second graders repeat the flag salute . And I said, Does anybody ever complain about it? And she said, I ve never had a parent complain about it, so why is that so important not to have that? And they re wondering what s wrong with our teenagers. They re just kids and they like to have their mom and dad together and sometimes they can t and it s just a different world. 40 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson I always had my Mom and Daddy there. That s just the way it was. And every meal when we ate our meal together. My job was to set the plates on the table. I remember I always counted all five plates and put them out on the table and the silverware. That s because I didn t milk the cows. They were down there milking the cows. Mom fixed the meal, and then I got to the house before they did so I had to make sure the table was set. (Laughs) So you carried in the wood and fixed the table. Yes, I carried the wood in. You re not kidding. That was quite a job. And fed and watered the chickens. Oh. And I liked to go to the baby brooder house because they had a little heater little chickens would gather underneath there and it was warm in there. We had a wood stove, but our room was upstairs and any time we woke up, it was warm up there because that heat went up. If we got sick, our dad, bless his heart, him or Mom one would get up, usually it was Daddy. And he d say, Well, I ll fill the stove up and I ll keep you warm. I don t know what else to do, and if you had a headache he would put a warm towel on your head. But if you were sick, like a toothache or something, he was right there for you. He got up the next morning and left early when it was dark to drive that bus. I don t remember him ever being sick and laying around in bed. He just, he was always up and going. The first barn on the Lambert place was destroyed when a tornado came through and hit it. Grandpa Tuetken and Dad walked down the next morning in the dark to do chores. One of them carried a lantern and he said, The barn is gone. Walking up to the west side they found the whole barn had been hit and found a baby calf standing inside of an open granary door which was laying down on the around. Dad built the barn back and it s still standing. Oh and you asked about the cowboys. I loved going through the Cowboy Hall of Fame every year or two. And the Historical Building. You mean the History Center? No. When I was in eighth grade we went down and toured the Historical Building and Capitol located in the large grey building on the southeast corner across from the Capitol building. A few years ago they built the History Building and moved the materials over there. I ve been through parts of it. The Winnie May is hanging there in front of a large glass window with the Oklahoma Capitol building in the background . 41 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Isn t it? That s the best view in town, I think. I would like to go for another tour of the State Capitol Building. Well, you ll have time. I intend to go back down there. I ve been through it. It s fun. Went through with a bunch of sixth and seventh graders one time. There s a tunnel that goes from there over to another building over there. I remember they had the children s artwork on the walls down through that tunnel. Someone told me when I was older, said, There s no tunnel under here. I said, There is, it goes to the parking lot or a building over there. Pretty neat. Did I tell you on our trip we went through Washington, D.C. Ray and I and May walked clear to the top of the Washington Monument? I couldn t do that now. We walked up and we walked down. They probably wouldn t let you do it now even if you wanted to. No, times have changed. David Faye s son took his children to see the Washington Monument in Washington, D.C. He lives there in Pennsylvania and they go up there quite often. He took them last summer and the guard was getting ready to close it down. David asked him if it would be possible for the kids to walk it because their grandparents walked it and they wanted to do it. And he said no. Then later on David said, We were hanging around there waiting for Shelley David s wife to get through looking at some things and finally they got ready to go down and he called them over there. He waited until the other people left and then he came over there and told them to come and walk down with me . Reese was probably in fourth grade then and Rachel was 11 or 12. That ll leave an impression on them. Mm-hmm. They enjoyed it. Because their grandparents got to go, they wanted to go. Well do you have any special memories of this place the Edmon Low Library ? Of this place? Oh the students that s came and went. It s been fun. And the things we ve done to John through the years, (laughs) when he goes walking on the trail Appalachian Trail . That s a lot of fun, the things they think up. It s all got special memories. I always loved to see the new students come in the spring or the fall and the librarians would bring up them here on tours and I think about what the future might hold 42 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson for them. And we have part of it. We re in the middle of it. I think it s neat. And you have three children? Three sons. And how many of those came here? Two. David and his wife, Shelly, and Bill and his wife Shonna graduated from here. My nephew John graduated from here, two granddaughters graduated from here and their husbands graduated from here. Jennifer has the Master s now and she teaches Math at the University of Central Oklahoma and her dad, Bill, graduated with a master s degree. Nine people in my family have graduated from Oklahoma State University . And then Heston is here. Or did he graduate? He s here and he ll probably graduate next year. So OSU s been good to you. Uh-huh. And Gina, you know she went to France. I don t know if I told you this or not, Tanya, but her husband joined the Army and he d just completed his basic and there was some kind of incentive for married couples to join the Service. Gina is going into the Navy and she likes scuba diving. And I said Christmas night when she told me, And what will you be doing? Will you be on a ship? No, I ll probably be on land. I said, What will you be doing? Well, you know the ships come into dock. Before they come in to dock, I will be one of the scuba divers out there, getting to check and defuse bombs. Gina, you mean pull the wires? Yes, Grandma. And if you pull the wrong one you re gone. I thought, Oh, I don t need to hear this. And my middle son, sitting over there and none of my kids have been in the Service because they weren t of age to go to Vietnam. And he says, Well, you guys, I think it s just great. We need people like you all to defend our country. And I think it s great because if people like you didn t volunteer, we wouldn t be sitting here enjoying our Christmas evening like we are tonight. And I thought, Well that s nice of you to say, but I don t know. I think I m going to do a lot of praying for this girl. (Laughter) I m glad they re doing what they want to do. She s in Colorado right now. And he just got through with his basic and he s at Fort Benning, Georgia. She may go to Illinois or Michigan. I don t think she knows for sure yet. 43 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Did she learn to scuba dive in Oklahoma? She went back and forth to Little Rock, Arkansas taking lessons with her aunt. She had to pass tests. And I thought, Oh my God, I m thinking, This murky looking water. My granddaughter down there trying to defuse a bomb. I knew what she meant. They re going to be pulling some wires. Well yes, if it s a live one. I thought, I hope you can see what you re doing. But she s excited about it. She wants to do it, so power to her. Got some of that adventurous blood that brought the Howells to Oklahoma. I think so. It came from Kentucky. We ll blame that side for it. (Laughter) Maybe her daddy Bill too because he said, Well Mother, there s not a whole lot we can do because they re of age to sign up if they want to, and I looked at him and I said, Bill, you taught them to do that. He s been to Israel and Tel Aviv and South Africa, he goes back and forth over there. And I thought, Oh my goodness, yes you ve got a big part in it. Gina spent a year in France one summer working and Heston spent the summer over in Spain and enjoyed that. He s got a girlfriend now, so I don t see him as often as I used to. But he comes every now and then. It s nice to have him on the same campus though. It is. Stop by and see you. I ve enjoyed watching the kids go through school down while I ve been here. And I ve known a lot of other people that went through here too and I ve enjoyed it. I had no idea what all it would entail, but I remember when I was a kid sitting in the Study Hall. A big room where you went in there between classes or when you didn t have classes, you went in there and studied. The school library was small and one of the students was our librarian. I admired Roberta, as I observed her work; she could help us find the materials we needed for out class assignments. I could tell she enjoyed her job. She was always smiling I liked to check books out and look at them. I was just intrigued with this place. I still am. It never quits surprising me with what we can find in here. I just think it s neat. I like it. I intend to come back and look at some books when I have time to look. There s books down here on the fourth floor, where the women in older days lost their husbands out on the frontier. They kept diaries of what they did and how they raised their children. They worked hard to keep their land. After the husband died, the mother 44 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson was responsible for the family and the land . Sometimes they were way out on the frontier without any close neighbors . two of my daughter-in-laws have gardens and can preserve food for their families. David likes what he is doing. He is the director of sponsored programs at Penn State. Shelly, David s wife, has a doctorate degree and teaches in HES and does research at Penn State. David was a summer intern for Senator Nichols in Washington, D.C. during the time of Colonel Oliver North s hearings. He enjoyed working there. David has a master s of science degree in Family Economics and Planning. He gave us a copy of his thesis and said, This has got something in here about you all. It is titled Reverse Mortgage Potential in Columbia, Missouri. The acknowledgment says, To my parents, Ray and Faye, without whose sincere support and optimistic outlook on life I would have never attempted to pursue this degree. To the rest of my family members for their truly genuine support and caring. I used to go down on the fourth floor and look at thesis books . I used to love to go down there and look through those because I always thought I might find one of my teacher s theses. And when I go on vacation I always go down and look at the travel books. We should have made you a librarian 20 years ago. I know, if I would ve known how neat that was, I would ve done that. John used to drive from Stillwater down to Norman. He taught the Library Science classes. I don t know if he went just a few days a week, I can t remember, but he used to go. And something that always has intrigued me is the Patent and Trademark books. I used to re-shelve books out here and that was fascinating. I went over to the Trade and Development building when we were over there. You have a natural curiosity. In order to work in a library, we need a natural curiosity and we need to be willing to help. You know anybody can learn it if they want to. I don t know if very many students are still applying for a library science degree . I think, but it is more computer oriented. Maybe so. John s theory is they can find it on the computer, but they may not be getting all of the materials that they need. 45 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson I d say he s right. And I ve learned to say Did you want something this old or would you like to have something more current? They don t think of that sometime. But sometimes they want the older materials too. Right there behind you there s a drawer that says Farm Security Administration Photographs. Have you ever went through those? Those are neat. Yes. Very, very neat. And the NASA pieces are over here. There s probably some good 1930s stuff in there. There is. And the Okies traveling to California when the Dust Storm hit. It s pretty neat. To me it s just fascinating. And Connie and Nelly have been cataloguing the IIS. Nelly went back to South America. Now Sheena s helping Connie catalog. They re about to get to the end I think. The statistics in the Library Documents are amazing here. I know. I love it. They re going to miss you. I ll never forget when I first started down here. John had me out at the reference desk and was going through all these Jackson numbers and I looked up at him very seriously one day and I said, Am I supposed to be able to remember all this? Oh no, I m just giving you an idea of what s out here on the shelf. I was sitting here thinking, I don t think I ll ever learn all this. And then it dawned on me one day, EHO is housing, EHE is health Now I think it s pretty simple ECP s commerce, EDE s defense, FN numbers are NASA, EIN s Interior, it does make sense. Ellen Jackson, was the one that figured all that out. Yes. I think it s pretty neat. I ve seen the time from one computer to all these computers. And we even check out books with the computer now and I think that s just great. Lot of changes in 20 years. It s great. Oh and the Homecoming. I love the Homecomings. (Laughs) I love to get in the middle of all that. 46 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson The Walk Around? Yes. I didn t go this last year, but now in October David and his wife are coming. And he said, We haven t been to the football stadium so we ll probably take in the game, and I said, That s good, I ll be a retiree, I can get the tickets at a discount price. So I m going if they want to go. He said, We re going to take in the football game. All of us. And I thought, okay. Orange, orange, orange. Yes. Orange all the way through. Especially around my OU family and friends. (Laughter) Yeah, it s fun. They razz us and we razz them. But Delcie s son-in-law works with the team and when anybody s injured, he s out there helping them up. Jimmy s been doing that a long time. Got some kind of degree where, I forget what his title is, but he helps them. So there s Delcie, May, and Faye, and who s the fourth? Linda. Linda Jane. She s the school teacher. Right now her and her husband are on a history tour in Maryland. I said, You know this is kind of neat, David just called tonight and he just got back from Washington, D.C. Why he was right up here by us then, she said. But he didn t know they were up there. And her daughter-in-law has now got her Doctor s degree, medical doctor s degree. They re moving to Allentown, Pennsylvania. She did her internship up there or something. And she always wanted to be a doctor and President Obama spoke at her graduation in Tulsa this year. I thought that was kind of neat. They were surprised that he came down for that, but I thought that was nice. Because he is trying to take care of some of the health needs, I think. He has some good ideas. I think so. You noticed all these referring to videotapes ? Sometimes I wonder why they aren t there s a lot of interesting things up here that school teachers could use and sometimes I wonder why it s not over in CML. But I guess they got their reasons. Because there s a lot of things you could use in the grade schools. We have some good titles up here. See that one World War I: The Homefront, World War II: The Homefront. There s some great things up here. They re probably put out by a government agency so they re here. They re really neat. And there s one about the firemen over there. 47 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson So you re still curious. Mm-hmm. (Laughter) I even asked to take a video home one night so I could look at it. It was something about the library. Well you should just stay around another ten years, Faye. I know. It would ve kept my mind going, right? You ll find other ways. I did get a paper the other night, It s not too late to cancel out on your retirement. And I thought, Oh I don t think so. Just visit the Carnegie Library in Perry. I ll go there and visit. I like to help up at the school if they need books repaired. Sure, volunteer. I d go up there and volunteer. I read somewhere this past weekend in my literature that I collected through the years, or maybe it s the letter I just got from OTR S Oklahoma Teachers Retirement System , you cannot go to work within so many days once you retire from this university, from OTR. You have to wait so many days. Wait a year. I was thinking, Well I might get tired next winter and I might go up there and help them. I used to be a Homeroom Mom. I think I was the cheerleaders Mom. They were always hollering Mrs. Richardson They were so cute, be down on the wrestling floor and they d be hollering at me if they needed something. I knew they either needed some change or a safety pin, there was a reason, or they locked the keys in the car and we had to find a way to get in there. (Laughter) I taught some of them in Sunday School and I loved working with the kids. Used to go to Falls Creek, the last group I went with there was 80 boys and girls, so I wouldn t want the whole responsibility of cooking for them, but I wouldn t mind being a helper sometime. Our church has a bus now and they re going to different places. She told me the other day that it s filling up fast for the Branson, Missouri trip in October. Well, sign up. And that seemed pretty worthwhile to think about because I met a friend 48 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson of mine and she told me, Nobody calls or anything. She said, What are you going to do when you retire? I said, Oh, I might travel a little. There are one-day trips, three and four-day trips. There you go. I don t always like to call people because I don t want to bother them, but sometimes they need friends same as I do sometime. They do. I ve got another friend that I call on Friday evenings a lot of time, I ll go by and say, I m over here at the park across from your house. I don t like to go in on somebody when they re not ready for me. I thought you might want to go out for a hamburger or something, And she ll say, Get on over here, all I have to do is change my clothes. Let s go. (Laughter) So, you know, you gotta reach out. And my sister May will say, I just don t see doing all that. I wouldn t call anybody if they didn t call me. And I said, Well you either sit there and you think about it or you get out and do something about it, May. Someone has to initiate. Mm-hmm. I said like my friend, she s the one that brought it up, If you ever go on another one of your trips, call me. So I m going to call her about that trip. October s a good time to go. It would be a nice time to be in Branson. And she said, Two, three days, four. She said, My folks are fine, I just live out there with them, but she said, They re fine, I can leave. And I thought, She needs to go like that. She s a very nice lady. So May and Rich are riding their bike. The day after my retirement party at Barbara s, they took off. And the last I heard from them they re in Cody, Wyoming and they re going up to see a friend of theirs in Canada and then on to the west coast. So even though you re almost 71 years, it s all up here. (Laughs) It s true. You re as young as you feel. Yes. I ve got my bicycle and it s hard to ride it out in the country and Richard has a used car lot in Perry, he said, I ll give you a key to my building down there and you can bring your bike in and then you can ride here in town. And I said, That d probably be just as dangerous as riding out on the dirt road the way they drive anymore. He said, Yeah but there s a lot of streets in here that s pretty calm and you d enjoy it 49 Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson Finchum Richardson more than being out there. They just go by you real fast and the dust is just flying and that s not very enjoyable. I ve got a little granddaughter Leslie that just turned four years old and I want time with her. She s lucky to have you. Oh she s a sweetie. She let me know that she was four years old and she will be going to school before long. Now you have time to do things with her. Every time he son Gary comes over to mow the lawn, he gets his rider out there and I just let him do it. First I was saying, Let me mow it, I can do it. But now I kind of appreciate that. And she ll come over and she ll say, Grandma, Grandma, and she comes around and she wants me to walk around on the farm with her. We have a lot of fun together, it s fun. I thought, I don t want another grandchild to grow up and I don t have time for them. Well that s good that she s enjoying the land too. Getting that connection to the land. They have a cabin down on the creek. It s just a little house built on stilts . They can go down there camping and everything. Her daddy built it when they had the first girl, and now Bailey s a sophomore in high school and little Leslie likes to go down there. They have a basketball goal down there and they have ropes in the trees yshe can swing on, and a hammock, and they just have a good time. Then there s a slide that comes out of the tree house on the side. And a little sand pit down here so they won t get hurt. She just has a ball. (Laughter) And her dad rides the horse and she thinks she belongs out there with him. So I have fun watching her do things. I think you have fun at about everything you do, Faye. It s all an attitude. The Lord helps you every day. You have the best attitude around. I told Janey Williams the other day, I don t know, with the way the economy is, maybe I shouldn t retire yet. She said, Oh Faye, you know the guy upstairs is going to be there to help you. She is right. It helps to have somebody around you that encourages it. She has troubles with her eyes right now, and she said, You know who s going to help you? and I thought Uh-huh. And I really enjoy being in my yard. I love to be out there doing things. 50 Finchum Richardson Finchum Get to it I guess. Enjoy all you want. Thank you for the interview . It s been fun. It has been fun. I hope I answered some of your questions. You did very well. Thank you. ------- -------..