 Dorothy Markeyt Now, don't hesitate, if you want me to stop, or follow another line of thought. M.F.i Let's begin with your family background and how far back your family goes and southern traditions. Markeyi Well, the family goes back on both sides, as far as we know, to the colonial days. Naturally, there are different myths, or stories, that come down. My father's people came from Wales. There were evidently two brothers who were rather poor, as I guess that everybody in Wales was. They landed, as far as we know, we don't bother much with all this genealogy, but as far as we know it was in the l620s or 1630s, somewhere in there. They raised tobacco in Tidewater, Virginia. They are supposed to have done well, raised a banner crop. For this they were given land, plus thirty slaves, and went up into the area of Piedmont Virginia where their descendants still are. My relatives are still farming the land up there. It's named Tophill, which is in King William, next to where Katherine and Grace Lumpkin are. They are in King and Queen, aren't they? My mother's people had a different tradition. They came from England. He is supposed to have been the younger son, Barham. Because of primogeniture, where the older son got everything, he came over. Our legend says he threw the coat of arms overboard and cursed the King of England ... I think this is just a myth. [Laughter] The Barbaras settled down in the lowland region and 2 became planters. There's a small town in Tidewater Virginia named Barhamsville. Grandfather Gary had a farm, Tophill. They had very few slaves. I don't know if they really got those thirty slaves or not; I hope they didn't, but anyway, that was the story. My grandmother Anne Roper Page-Gary wrote that up in a letter that we have. She got it from hearsay, I suppose, from the family. As you know, many people in the South, and everywhere, love to have these "nice" family traditions that they can go back to. But the Garys have been farmers a long time. I have my Grandmother Gary's certificate of graduation. She graduated from the Buckingham Female Collegiate Institute. It is signod "I858." (This is six years before Smith and Vassar opened.) It's in the oldfashioned script with the "s" as "f" and so on. It says that she gets this certificate for "unblemished moral character." She majored in the classics and Latin. Anne Page Roper came down to King William, after she graduated, to teach. That's how my grandfather met her, and they married. The tradition again is that there was some opposition on the part of his family, why, heaven knows, except that she had been raised by her grandparents and was an orphan. Too often, I think, there is opposition in family marriages, which later, they accept very well. During the Mar Grandmother Gary taught her own children, and kept the farm going. Being Virginians, both sides of the family fought on the side of the Confederacy. Grandma had kept the farm going; they made candles, soap, raised crops, and sheared the sheep. Even in my time they got the wool cloth back from Richmond, made blankets. She had a spinning wheel that I remembered seeing as a little girl. She died rather early, so I didn't see her using the wheel, but I do remember 3 the candle and soap making and so on, which was carried on later by my Aunt Mary for years. This is what I am not quite sure of, but I'm very proud of it and I hope it's true: Grandma not only opened a little schoolroom at Tophill (because in the South in those days, the schools in the rural areas were very bad, if they existed), so she opened a school in her house for her children and for some neighbor children. She also brought in the black children and taught them. Of course, that was illegal then, certainly taboo in general. But she said that God intended everybody to be able to read His Bible, and therefore, they should learn to read and write. She was that kind of woman. When I was a little girl, and being very stubborn about things, my mother would say to me, "You're just like your Grandmother Gary." [Laughter] M.F.t Did you ever meet her? Markey: Oh, yes. She died when I was about seven or eight. My father took me in to say goodbye to her, He later told me that he regretted this, because, you know, it is quite an experience for a child. But I wasn't sorry that he did. I liked her very much. But she was very quiet and reticent, didn't talk a lot. She would say, "You are a big help, child," and that pleased me. Up there, you could do all kinds of things that you didn't in the city. You know, help peel the apples and pears, put them on the roof to dry, then store them in cloth bags for eating in the winter. We'd help get the vegetables in, and so on. My brother Barham, who was just a couple of years younger than I, would collect eggs with me. We had this job when we would go up there to stay, about six weeks in the summer. Collecting the eggs was fun, to see which of us got the most. Not that we got anything for it; it was just fun. Grandma was a strong character. Everybody, I think, thought that of her. To some extent, the tradition of her did come along, I think. Now, my mother also had her traditions. She was raised in Norfolk, and the Barham family was land-poor. Grandpa had lost everything. M.F.: When did they lose the land? Markey: After the Civil War. Both grandparents fought in the South, on the southern side. Both were officers. Grandpa Gary belonged to the guerillas, "the raiders", they called them up there, you know, in the mountains. I think they raided toward Washington. Grandpa Barham was also in the war. He was a scholar; he looked like Maxim Gorky in his grey uniform and moustache. Mother told me that he had quite a fine mind. I only knew him a little; he died early, too, at least from my standpoint. He taught Latin, I think it was, some subject, in high school in Norfolk, after he lost everything. After he moved into Norfolk he first went into the peanut business with some partner. He was no businessman at all. The partner got it all. So, Grandpa just didn't have anything. There were five girls and one boy. (Six children died.) My mother told me that the girls would have two party dresses among the five of them. They would go to parties by taking turns in these dresses. They were all almost the same size. Mama had quite a giftI have several of her pictures aroundin painting. That was all right up to a point, you know. But as she grew up, she was supposed to learn much more about other things, cooking, sewing, and all the traditional things that go with girls raised with the idea of having their own home in time. Mama's art teacher wanted 5 her to study in New York. Her art teacher went to Grandpa and talked about it. Grandpa was horrified. He said, "Where do you come from?" "The Middle West." "Well, we have a different tradition here. Our daughters will be here, in our home, until they want to make their own home." He wouldn't consider it. Mama cried a little, but then she forgot it. I mean, seemingly forgot it. Then she did go to a local Norfolk college. This was very unusual, as you know, in that period in the South. My Grandma Gary, to go back to her, graduated in '58. Smith College and Vassar College were not even formed then. This academy that she attended disappeared during the Civil War. They never re-established it. My mother went to a local college. Her name was Willie Alberta Barham. She went to college in Norfolk, stayed at home, and went during the daytime. She got enough training to go over to Newport News and teach art and English in a ladies' boarding school, "Mrs. Harmon's Boarding School for Young Ladies." Since she had to travel eight miles across the water, her brother came with her. It wouldn't be proper for her to travel all alone. It was such a narrow, southern tradition. She was supposed to have married a young lawyer in Norfolk, you know, but she didn't want to; the alternative was that she had to earn her living by "working outside the home." So, she went to Newport News to teach in Mrs. Harmon's boarding school. My father, Benjamin Roscoe Gary, was a young doctor there. He was very young when he first went down there to open his office. He finished medical school at twenty-three. He had worked his way through. Grandpa had loaned him some money which he paid back. He had been practicing in Newport News for two years. They fell in love. By the end of the 6 year they were married. My mother's people didn't care for that too much, because he was from the hills, you know, the mountains and a farm tradition. He didn't have all the polish, I suppose, that they thought was proper. But they came to be devoted to him later. Grandma Barham thought that there was nobody like my father. He was able to be very good to her, in many ways, as time went on, both as a doctor and as a son-in-law. You ask the first thing that I got from my mother. Love of books and painting. You asked if she took part in women's club work. She did, very much so. But earlier, even while she was in Mrs. Harmon's school, she became active. Mrs. Harmon treated her and other teachers in a way that they couldn't take. There were several other young women, four or five, who were also teaching there, and away from home. This Mrs. Harmon turned the lights out at ten o'clock. She let them have young men callers only twice a week. The real insult, from their point of view, was that she took butter away from them at meals, and she also took away the front door key! They said the idea that they should be treated like servants, when they came from some of the best families of Virginia! They had to go in by the back entrance, like the "coloreds", as they called them. So, the young girl teachers talked among themselves. Each wrote a letter home to her parents, asking if they could please come home. This happened to be right during the middle of the term. They got letters saying, "Yes, we will come for you." So, they faced this woman, Mrs. Harmon, with this, and she cried. "How could you dear girls do this to me in the middle of a term?" So, she returned the butter; she returned the keys. I heard about this as a child. And 7 later, teasing her, I said, "The first strike that I ever heard about was from you." [Laughter] She didn't think of it in terms of a strike, but, of course, that was exactly what they were doing. Then, the other thing about her was her painting. She gave it up for quite a while when we children were little. Then in later years, we persuaded her to go back to it, in a serious way, not just an occasional thing. She got a great deal of pleasure out of it, painted up until near the time of her death. She never wanted to commercialize it. Friends would ask her to do a picture for a wedding present, or something, and she would do that, but she said that if the family enjoyed her paintings, that was enough. In the club work, I think, hers was a rather good pioneering effort ... I was interested that you even asked about the club work, because evidently that was rather general with women who could have some help in the home. As the children got bigger, they could have a little time. I have a cookbook here that they got out in Newport News. It is called "The Woman's dub Cook Book of Newport News." They got out the cookbook to raise money to pay on the mortgage for the club building that they had bought. Mama helped edit the book. Every one of these old recipes is signed. Some of the ads in that book are the funniest things in the world. Old laced shoes . . . corsets on carefully draped bodies. I was little when they did this. I remember also Mama writing a paper on Dickens for their literary section. They really got quite a little bit out of it, I guess. Later she had a group of women friends who would go and paint together by the river, four or five of them, just sketch in the 8 afternoon. So, in that sense, she was active. She was quite a reader. She liked Shaw. I was introduced to Shaw, as I remember it, through her. Of course, at home we had just endless books. M.F.: Did your mother work in the suffrage movement at all? Markey: No, and neither did I, I'm sorry to say. It just didn't seem to be part of our tradition. I was going to tell you something about the books. Our house had a fireplace and bookshelves to the ceiling on either side. My father, which is interesting to me, had, of course, grown up in the country and had taught school there one year, earning money to go to college. He went to the University of Maryland Medical School. But he never had time to do the kind of reading that he wanted. He concentrated on the kinds of things necessary for this medical course. By the way, his family didn't think that he would make a doctor because he was very shy, to begin with. He used to crawl up in a locust tree in the yard at Hilltop when relatives came. He'd watch them play croquet, but not join in. As a boy he was very shy. He didn't seem that way to us when we knew him. My younger sister can hardly believe it, but he was. Once he overheard his father and his father's brother, his uncle, talking about him. They said, "Ross? (His name was Roscoe) Ross will never make a doctor. He is too shy with people. Now if it was his older brother, George? He might." My Grandmother Gary believed in my father doing this. She wanted him to do it so much (she was the one who graduated so early from this little institute), and so he did. M.F.: Who was in the family? Markey: He had one older brother, and one younger, and three sisters. 9 There were eleven children in both families. Five of them survived; six died. They were born in that Reconstruction period. The women had their children much too fast. Conditions were very difficult; they didn't know what they know now about birth control, feeding, and all. One brother died of typhoid. Most died of pneumonia, and things that later we had remedies for. I was going to tell you about my father and these books. While he was waiting in Newport News for patients. ... He was just twenty-four then; this was before my mother got there, two years before she came. It was a shipbuilding town of Irish-American, Scots-Irish people. And here was this doctor, a young fellow with red cheeks; he was a good-looking man. They were just scared to go to a youngster like that as a doctor. Many of them had superstitions from the old country about doctors. So, he would sit in his office, waiting. No patients came. He had a little basement office, his room and his office; everything was there. He would sit there waiting for patients. They didn't come. So, he decided that he would make some use of this time. He had no money; he was still in debt, and paying it off to my grandfather as he could. He didn't even have a bicycle to begin with. He walked to make calls. He went out to patients in the countryside, the farming people. Also he grew a moustache to try to look older. He decided that while he was sitting in his office, waiting, he was going to get books. He had never had enough chance to read. So, even though he was in debt, he ordered books on time, from a Richmond firm. I have them here: Dickens, Thackeray, Scott, and George 10 Eliot; also a Library of the World's Best Literature, in twenty-four volumes. So, these books were available for me as a child. I learned to read at four, they don't know how. Mama said that I would come and ask, "What's this? What's that?" Anyway, I learned to read. Our daughter did the same. (Also our son, Ross, five years younger.) We didn't believe that she could read, but she did. We tested her* I thought that maybe she had memorized the stories, knew them by heart, you know, but then when I tried her on something that she didn't know, she could read. So, here were all these marvelous books, and I read many of them. Too old for me? That's what they thought. They found me crying over Silas Marner, so they took it away. My aunt said, "You know, this is much too old for you. Wait until later." We also had Stoddard's Lectures from Around the World, too. So, I took those books and I took the volumes of the World's Best Literature. I figured that when I had finished with them, I was old enough. I hid books under the pillow and read. But that was a marvelous thing, as a child. I was oldest of the four children. I had a brother two years younger, Barham, and my sister Bert, who is up here, is younger; then there was an afterthought baby, Betty Page, who came along when I was in college. My mother felt disgraced by that, you know; there's such a false tradition of shame over something like that. She was raised in that tradition. She didn't know, she told me, how babies were bom when she married. Daddy had to explain all kinds of things to her. She didn't explain to me, either. When I started to menstruate, I didn't know a thing. She 11 bought me a book, took the napkins and put them in the bureau drawer. "If you have any questions, come to me." Of course, I never would. M.F.: What about with your father? Wasn't he much more open about that sort of thing? Markey: Well, yes, except for the tradition of a man and his girl children. M.F.: It didn't make any difference that he was a physician? Markey: Not then. Later I could ask him all kinds of things, but you see, at twelve? Mama was very much a part of the old tradition in those ways, and of course it was passed on pretty much. The books, however, were a great thing. That is about as much of a background as I think maybe you want? M.F.; So, they set up a house in Newport News. Did you grow up in the same house? Markey: No. Daddy had taken a basement apartment. They were married and lived there. I was born there. It was on 28th Street in Newport News. My mother felt, and her family felt especially, that this was no place for a rising young doctor and his family. Especially not to raise a child in a basement! You know, it was one of these long houses with the furnace in the basement of the house. I think that Daddy took care of it in the early days, too, for the family upstairs. Mr. Barclay, a jeweler, lived in the house. Of course, my mother thought that it was a total disgrace, to live below anybody. Then, after my brother was born, Daddy built a house on 33rd Street, sort of "uptown." The jeweler's house was on 28th. The home that I remember was on 33rd Street, five blocks above. Oldfashioned houses, 12 you know, where the little alleyway was about sight feet, so that the middle rooms were very dark. Even in the daytime, I would turn the light on to read. We lived on 33rd for quite a few years. My sister Bert was born there, and my father practiced there. By then "everybody" was moving out farther, upriver. Mama wanted to build up nearer the James River, you know, where you could see the river and it was quieter, you didn't hear the noise of the shipyard. My father liked the noise of the shipyard. They built ships day and night. She didn't like it. So, we moved up there in the twenties. He built a house right on the riverfront at 6100 Huntington Avenue, later a big highway. We lived in that house up until Daddy died in 1944. John and I always went home at least once a year after we married in 1925, and usually in the summer and every Christmas. We were way up in Minnesota, then in Wheaton, Mass., teaching college, but Daddy would write and say, "This may be our last Christmas." John said, "You know, Dorothy, he's been saying that for about eight years?" I said, "Yes, but you never know when it will be the last one." So, we always went home. [Laughter] It was painful for me, in a way, because the relationships in town were so traditional. You know what they are; you've learned all that, I'm sure. Very little was doing in the late twenties that seemed to be breaking through. When I was in college, or senior high school, they set up a Joint Committee in Newport News. It must have been through the churches. We sat separately, on two sides of the aisle. I went. I was young and didn't take much part, but I felt I could be there. The blacks would bring to this community committee questions, such as they needed sewage in their part of town, 13 or they needed a high school. Then this white minister and another in the group would go to the city fathers, the Council, and try to get some of those things. A few things, they did get done. Our town, like many southern towns, had been gerrymandered. The black section, called Rockets, was attached to the county. After the Civil War, they had done this in order to have the whites control the main little town, the seaport which was on the waterfront. The county seat was in Warwick. If people in Rockets were going to vote, they had to go all the way up to the county seat to vote, which was about twenty miles, in Warwick County. How many men could do that? Of course women could not vote. M.F.: But all men were allowed to vote, by law? Markey: Well, I think that they were supposed to be able to vote. There were many ways of keeping them from doing so. This was one way; they just ruled them out of town. So, most of them just didn't go. Of course, there were the poll tax, and other intimidations. The Ku Klux became active again after World War I. Daddy told me once about how they came to him to join. He said, "No"; he didn't think that kind of thing was needed and didn't want anything to do with it. Professional people, I suppose, would be the quiet ones who would help give the money and let the others go and do whatever they thought to do, if there were any uppity people around . . . ALso, I know in Alabama, some of the white workers would belong to the Ku Klux. Later, during the thirties, some of the working people broke away. They said that they had understood that the KLan was to enforce good morals: if a man beat his wife, they went and scared him, various things like that. 14 It tended to be a very small aspect of the whole thing. I remember that book, The Clansman, was at my Grandfather Gary's house. That was a terrible book. Have you ever seen that book? M.F.: Yes. Do you think they read it at the time? Markey: I don't know. I know that Grandmother and Grandfather, none of them, all four, would talk about the War. They had married right before the War. Grandma Gary, whom I asked once about the War, said, "It wasn't right. God didn't intend any of His children to be slaves for other people. But it shouldn't have come to war. Now, Granddaughter, ask me no more about it." So, that was that. She never defended it. But, of course, they would all talk about states' rights, and that they were invaded. And of course they were invaded, naturally. But to me, I should think that this period in American history would be the most difficult and bitter of times. In some states, not in our particular area but in Maryland, Kentucky, Missouri, families were divided. You know, one brother would fight on one side and one on another. We knew a woman in Yonkers, Grandma Garrett we called her. She came from Missouri. She had been a young woman in those days. Her brothers, one a doctor and one a businessman, one fought on one side and one on the other. I guess that they never talked to each other again. So, we never had anything as sad as the Civil War, I guess, from the overall standpoint of the country, until Vietnam. M.F.: What about your parents as individuals? What about their views on race? Markey: Well, my father was very humanitarian. M.F.: Did he treat both black and white patients? 15 Markey: Oh, yes. He also served on the staff of Dixie Hospital, which was in Hampton, as a volunteer. He went over and helped teach colored interns. But he was a man who liked things peaceful. I suppose as a little boy he grew up during that period that Ellen Glasgow describes in Barren Ground, and he wanted an order to life, and peace. He also believed in this business of knowing your place. But he was humanitarian. When he died, many black people came to the service in our home for him. He was the oldfashioned type of doctor who went whether you had the money or not. In fact, I used to help make his books with him later on. It was kind of a standing joke with us, because the house calls would be in his books, his visits that he had made. He would look at it and say, "Make it for so-and-so." I would say, "You went there six times. A visit is three dollars, and here are six visits, eighteen dollars. You told me to put down ten?" "Well, they don't make much; do that." And he would leave it that way. He did it all his life. He never refused anybody, as far as I know, and was just a very kind person. A family doctor then was almost like a preacher, you know. They would confide in him. If the wife was having troubles with the man drinking, they would come to him; also if they were having trouble with their children. In some ways he was very progressive-. For example, he had three girls, and he wanted all of us to have a good means for making our own living. He took it for granted, of course; it was partly maybe from his mother, because his own sisters also went to college. They went to Radford State College for Teachers. He said that he had seen enough in his work where a woman was left a widow, or with a man who was hurt in the 16 shipyard. There were a lot of needless accidents. Maybe her husband just proved no-account. She had to raise these children, and had no training. She had a hard time. So he was always for us getting a good education, and that was a very good thing. But he was narrow-minded about his daughter becoming a doctor. Later I decided that maybe it was sort of hero worship, I didn't really want to. Because if I had wanted it hard enough and long enough, I would have found a way. But, of course, I couldn't have done it financially without some help from him. M.F.: When you were a child, you wanted to be a doctor? Markey: Yes. I think because of him. I had travelled with him. The bicycle was gone. Now he had a horse and buggy, and I used to sit there, or later on in the car. Sometimes I'd go in, depending where we were. I saw a lot, both sides of town and all that went on, because a child uses her or his eyes, and can see quite a lot. His relationship with people was generally so good. I just liked it, the whole thing, and thought that it would be great to be a doctor. But when I raised it? My brother was there with us in the buggy one day, and I raised the question. My brother laughed and said, "You can't be a doctor! You're a girl." (There is a whole scene in my next novel, just completed, about that.) It was quite a shock, when I found out. I said to my father, "My hands and my head are just as good as my brother's. Why can't I?" But he said, "You know, daughter, a woman's life is a very good life; there are a lot of good things. You can have a home and children. And if you want to teach, you can." Of course, that was taken for granted. He said, "But not this." The 17 irony for him was that my brother didn't take it, either. He didn't want it. He didn't like a lot of the grimness and the hours that my father put in. Because he would go day or night, until the day he died. Whenever anybody called, he would go. M.F.: Did your father want your brother to become a doctor? Markey: Oh, yes. He counted on it. That's what he was indicating to me, that he was to be the doctor. If I had been a boy, as I was supposed to have been. If I had been, as he told me, "Your mother and I thought that you, our first child, would be the boy. Then you could have been the doctor." It just seemed to be so ridiculous, to me. M.F.: Was it bad for your brother? Was he under lots of pressure? Markey: I think that he must have been. M.F.: Did they accept his not becoming a doctor? Markey: Daddy wouldn't want anybody to. . . . To him, it was almost like a dedication, you know. If my brother didn't want it, he wouldn't try to make him do it. Later, I got over the thought of this. I mean, I don't know if I ever would have. ... I would have had to give more thought to whether I had the "call" for it. My father began to do quite a bit of operating. He wanted my brother to be a surgeon. [End of Side A of Tape i] M.F.: So you got over wanting to be a doctor? Markey: Well, you know. ... Yes. In college, my roommate was studying to be a doctor. She did become a doctor, Emily Gardner. 18 As I told you, it was permissible for her because she was going to become a medical missionary, and that never appealed to me especially. [Laughter] Anyway, I specialized in music, took piano all through college. ALma Barham, my aunt, my mother's youngest sister, was a very good musician. She studied with Hoffman and Snabel in Germany for a while. She was like a Chekhov!an character. A fine spirit, so gentle, wistful. She died quite young. She died while I was in college. She overtaught and -worked. Anyway, through her, I had developed my interest in music. During college I helped her teach music, to some of the younger pupils, when I was home on vacation. I didn't like it, because too many children were being made to take music by their mothers. There is no point in that, just the ones who really want to. I wouldn't say that there is no point, because I think that you become literate, by being able to understand something about great music. That is a great thing, and every child should have that much. Emily, later, the doctor in Richmond, asked me about this. Many of her parents were asking her if they should have their children study music. She wanted to know what I thought. I said that I thought up to a point. If they are not forcing their children, it was a good, thing because at least they will always get more out of music than if they hadn't studied it. But beyond that. . . . M.F.: Did your aunt live in your home? Markey: She did for a while. You see, after my Grandfather Barham died, Grandmother Barham came over to live with us, and Alma. She was nine years older than I, that's all. So we were really like sisters. We stayed in the same room part of the time. The other 19 sisters married, but Alma never did marry. As I say, she was like a character in Chekhov. She was an attractive and a nice person. But she could never quite bring herself to marry, didn't ever find the right person. She worked so hard and wasn't too well. She developed pneumonia. She died while I was in college. M.F.: I was asking about your parents' views on race. We didn't talk about your mother. What was her feeling? Markey: She accepted the traditional pattern in the South. At the same time, she once told me that she thought it was a big mistake. But she never acted on it. The family lived in the traditional way. They never opposed me, if I had a friend. ... I know that when I was there at the house once and sick, this black friend, a YWGA secretary, called up and asked about me, and Mama reported the conversation and accepted it. But it was always. ... I guess that it never went very deep. That's one thing that we began to have quite a few discussions, not to say arguments, about. The things that Shaw stood for, she was quite willing to stand for, in discussions. But many of his ideas that could be carried into life, she wouldn't want to do. My father didn't like Shaw at all. He thought Shaw made fun of things that shouldn't be made fun of. He said that Shaw compared himself to Shakespeare. "Nobody but a fool would compare himself to Shakespeare!" [Laughter] In fact, didn't Shaw once say that he was greater than Shakespeare? M.F.: I think he did. [Laughter] Markey: Yes, I think he did. M.F.i I was going to ask if there were servants in your home? 20 Markey: Yes, there was usually one who cooked and did housework, part of it, and answered the phone, the doctor's bells, if Mama or I or somebody else wasn't there to answer. This beautiful woman that worked for us whom I remember, when I was growing up, Belle was her name, she was all colors of brown, beautiful shades of brown, her hair, her eyes, her skin. I used to love to watch her knead the dough. She had a fine voice. We used to sing in the kitchen together, all the different hymns and folk songs that she knew, spirituals mainly. For some reason, she and I were in much closer touch and understanding at the period when I began to rebel as a child, with this doctor business and all. I created a scene because of that (which I tell about in the book). I was punished for it. Belle was the only one who understood why I had. Belle told me that as a girl. ... (She was older; she must have been ten or fifteen years older. I don't know exactly.) When she was a little girl in the country, she sassed a white boy because he stoned her pet chicken. "My Grandma whipped me." I said, "Why did she whip you? You were right! He shouldn't stone your chicken." "Well, my Granny taught me, no matter what, you don't sass a white." So that had been knocked into her. In one sense, the sense of a denial of life and the injustices and the yearning for things that you didn't get, for me and with her helped us to identify. She came up to see me, and I. . . . Well, I don't know if this is literally true, but in the book I have made the little girl make the horse run away with her brother and her in the buggy. The horse did run away with us, but I didn't actually make 21 him run. But in the book I did as a rebellion, to teach my brother who was teasing me because I was a girl wanting to be a doctor. I had teased him earlier that he was a crybaby. (Daddy had gone into the house to see a patient.) The horse ran away. Anyway, I was punished. (You know, it is sometimes so hard to keep truth and fiction apart.) Actually I was punished, because I used to go down to the waterfront where I wasn't supposed to go. It would be risky. But I would go down, by myself, to the waterfront. The James River was very wide there, about seven miles wide, almost like the ocean. It had whitecaps and so on, and I loved it. I would go down there and get rid of this feeling of being tight inside. But it was supposed to be risky, and you just weren't supposed to do it. So I was punished for going down there, I was in my room alone, sent to my room; that was the kind of punishment that you got. My brother came up to bring me hot cornbread. I didn't let him in. He left. Then later Belle came. Of course, she always came to say goodnight, before she went back to her children over in Rockets. She came up and brought a tray and sat by me. I told her that I wasn't hungry. She told me this about the chick, and somehow I knew that she could understand, sense, what I was trying to do, why I reacted the way I did. My parents really couldn't. It bothered them, naturally, that here was a child who was rebelling, and from their point of view there was no reason for it. [Laughter] It troubled Daddy a great deal, because he was devoted to all of us, and Mama, too. Mama came up earlier. She cried and asked me why I did these things, and I didn't know. She made me 22 cry and I just hated her for that, because my brother used to say that all girls did was cry. I hated myself. So I went down on the riverfront, A girl that I knewErna was her namewho came from the Irish shantytown, came along. Erna was taking supper to her brother working on the pier. He was a docker. I went out with her, and we talked about rollerskating the next day. We had contests in school. So that really helped pull me out of it, as far as the immediate thing was. But I stayed by myself a long time. I didn't talk ever again to my mother much about things. Because once she made fun of me . . . I've never understood why a parent would. She was a kind, lovely woman in many ways. I think that it must have been part of this bad, southern tradition of women, and the family feeling "poor but proud." So they criticize themselves and their own children. She would make fun of things. One day a neighbor's cook, not Belle, told me not to play cards, that it was bad. So I wouldn't play cards with my brother, slapjack and things. Mama found it out. She told my Aunt Mabel, and they were laughing about it. After that, I never would talk with her about anything. I did play cards within a few weeks. M.F. i How old were you then? Markeyi I don't know, nine or ten, somewhere in there. I don't remember exactly. Later Mama and I came to understand each other much better, and be friends. I was the one who really got her to go back to the painting. I could see how restless she was, especially when we began to grow up. We were in our teens when this young baby came along. She needed an outlet. She had a talent that she had more or less ignored. And all of her sisters, that was to me a very 23 interesting thing. . . . These four sisters, every one of them. I mentioned Alma a little bit, that she was like a Chekhov character, you know. All these fine things that never really found their way out, and sadness that was sort of suppressed, but each one of these women was like this. Mama's older sister, Maude, became a Christian Scientist in order to find a way out of the situation. The younger sister was just like a woman in The Little Foxes, who tried to live through the man. When she couldn't live through the man, she became a very powerful, willful, and rather destructive, I thought, woman. So the woman question, for me, without being very concrete, developed very early. It was just obvious that you couldn't follow the path that any one of them was following, really. But at the same time, in college, about the vote? We listened to this woman suffragette, but we didn't do a thing. Florence Boston Decker, a close friend, chaired that meeting. We were polite to the speaker. We listened. But she went, and we never did a thing. We didn't form a chapter, we didn't raise a dollar, which is disgraceful, but that was the way it was. It just wasn't what "nice" southern girls did. M.F.i Well, as far as your mother was concerned, how did your father's career affect her life? Other than his being gone night and day. Did she get pleasure out of what he was doing? Markeyi To a certain extent, yes. And of course she did have her club interests. Her thought was to live through her children and her husband, which is a traditional thing. That is why she put such pressure, on me especially, to conform. She had a pattern in her mind of the kind of way it should be. She thought that I would be destroying 24 my own happiness in the future, if I didn't follow this. Also, that every daughterany child, but particularly daughtersowed everything to the family. They were the joy of the home, played the piano and did everything and had a nice life. Then they would form their own home. The thought of going out to work, if you didn't have to? Now, she had to in her time, and only did it for a year. Jessie, her youngest sister, became a secretary, the one who became such a stiff, rigid person. She resented having to work. Mama didn't resent it; she liked the teaching, liked the children. But for her girls? She had the traditional idea that all of us should conform. Now my younger sister Bert was in a much better position. Two ways: one in that I broke ground; they took it more for granted in her case, you see. Secondly, she was just a sweeter, nicer person. [Laughter] M.F.i She got along much more easily with them? Markey Yes. She knew how to. . . . I don't know how to say it. We used to tease her and call her "Pollyanna." Bert could always see the good side of things, and make her peace with them in a nice way. Although she had principles, somehow she didn't come into confrontation on things, the way that I seemed to. M.F.i Were you close to her at all? Markey: Oh, yes. She was the one who comes up here. She came up to visit me in college. She wanted to. She and her husband and John and I have been together many, many times over the years. Almost every year. I think that Bert said to me, I know my cousin did, in regard to some of my ideas about the South: "You've lived out of the South too long?" She said I thought things should move faster than 25 they did. You have to make some adjustments, when you live down there. You may not find that? But when you have children, you find that you have quite a problem. That is the reason that we never would raise ours in the South: at least earlier, children either learn to accept the general mores to fit in, and they are going to make their friends that way. Or, if you give them a better concept and outlook on life, then they are going to have a tough time. At least, that is the way we thought. We tried it out in Maryland, one year or two, and the intense enforcement there of things seemed to be very important. Not in the University, or in liberal circles. New ideas were more common there. My sister, Alberta Gary Jackson, is very active in the United Nations and in the Florida League of Women Voters. They picketed Wallace in the sixties when he came, which I was glad to hear. M.F.: Did she sort of follow in your footsteps, as far as going to college and going out. . . . Markey: Well, in our family, college we took for granted. She went to Hollins and graduated from there, and has kept up her association with friends there. She got her master's degree at William and Mary. She took courses, then got married to Jess Jackson, and taught in a little college in Maryland. I think that it was a woman's college in Mary]a nd, Her husband, an engineer, joined a Baltimore firm. They were hit during the Depression. He was laid off. She kept on teaching, but the college didn't pay salaries for a few months, because they didn't have the money. They had a rough time of it. M.F.: But she kept up her own career? 26 Markey: More or less, except when the children were small. She didn't teach then, but she did a lot of community work, church work, League of Women Voters, and Girl Scouts. She went back to teaching after the younger one, the boy, was in high school. She began to teach again and continued to teach in Jacksonville University until she retired. Her husband, Jess, had a good engineering position, until he also retired. He's active in the U.N. M.F.i What about your second younger sister? Markey: Well, she is in California. She was one of the first of the generation who didn't go through college. [END OF SIDE B OF TAPE l] [Note: First half of Side A of this tape is inaudible due to faulty tape] Markeyi Betty Page, my younger sister, went to Westhampton College, my college, which I think was a mistake. (They kept throwing me up to her.) She dropped out of college in her second year, and took a secretarial course. She is talented with the piano and music, and likes that. She is good as a secretary, but has never found it satisfying, so she dropped it. M.F.i Is she married now? Markeyi She was married. She has a son who is grown, Gary Orlin. He's a physicist. She and her husband are divorced. I guess they got a divorce; they separated a long time back. She is not too 27 happy. We hear from her, and it is a sad thing. Both my sister Bert and I write her a good deal and help her out in any way we can. But it must have been the beginning of that period when students began to be disaffected, Betty Page went to William and Mary for a while, Of course, she was able to live at home. She didn't have to work if she didn't want to. She was the only child there. She didn't have those kinds of pressures to make her do things, and she just didn't . . . My brother, Barham Gary, was a lawyer and did well at it, I guess. He lived in Maryland, in Annapolis. We were very close as a boy and girl growing up. When we got into adolescence, we veered. We always cared for each other and sort of respected each other, and he would defend me anywhere he was. Once I heard a story; his wife told me this. I had a piece on "Men in Chains" in The Nation about chain gangs in Virginia. They were at a dinner party, and someone asked, "I wonder if this woman knows what she is talking about?" Of course, I had written it under my pen name, Myra Page. Barham said, "Of course she does! That's my sister." He didn't need to do that, you see. His wife told me about it. Of course, maybe he liked the shock value a little bit, too. I don't know. [Laughter] M.F.i When would this have been? Markey: That was in the thirties. Sometime in '31. It was about Virginia chain gangs. Virginia still had them. Of course, I had researched it and knew the material. I heard from Virginius Dabney, Editor of the Richmond Times-Dispatch, about it. He wanted to be sure it was true. I didn't know Virginius Dabney personally. He was 28 related to Emily Gardner, my doctor-roommate, and of course he and Florence Boston Decker and the families there in Richmond were all very friendly. So I guess that he knew about me. He wrote. I told him where I got my information, and that's the last I ever heard of it. I had also seen chain gangs in Richmond, while in college. M.F.i Was the church an important part of your life as you were growing up? Markey: As a girl. Most of the New Testament, as I mentioned, the ideals and the vision of brotherhood and peace that is given there, that was important. I taught Sunday school for awhile. I remember coming home one summer from college. The principal of the Sunday school came and asked me if I would teach. I said, "Well, what are you on now, the New or the Old Testament? The Old Testament, I can't, because I don't take it literally anymore. If it is the New Testament, I'll do it." So I did. Evolution was still rather new. That didn't fit in with the whole concept of some of our traditional ideas of how the world was formed and all. I remember in college that many of us went through the throes of trying to reconcile evolution, science and religion. But that didn't bother us too much. Mainly, it was the principles of the New Testament. It was in college that we first got a chance to know black people, students, girls mainly, at the summer YWGA conferences. That's also where I met Katharine Lumpkin, down at Blue Ridge, N.C. Up there in the beautiful rarefied air, you know, so many things seemed possible. When you get back into the routine of everyday life, it isn't so easy to carry through. We were able at Blue Ridge to be friends, ignore color lines, also to have discussions. 29 There was a black woman secretary. ... I use the word "black" now, but they always used "colored" then. She came from the national YWGA board to our Blue Ridge Conference. Later we decided to invite her to our college to speak. I was active in the YWGA. In fact, Florence had been president; then my roommate was president; then I was president. They were later presidents of the student body. I was on the Student Council, but I was never president of the student body. I worked on the literary magazine. I won a short story contest. You asked about that, so I could tell you right now. For example, we were more or less pacifists, and were very much against the idea of going into the First World War. Professor Lough gave us, as required reading, Lord Bryce's report, which she accepted at face value, probably. It told about all the atrocities that the German army was committing on the Belgians, cutting off hands, slashing women's breasts, making the Iron Cross and burning it into old men. Anyway, her point of view was that we should join the War. She was a relative and admirer of Lloyd George. M.F.i Tell me her name again? Markeyi Dr. Susan Lough. They pronounced it "lock", as they often do. She persuaded us, or tried to persuade us. She had been a very liberal woman in many ways, very human. She had made good relationships with all of us. If we had to take a faculty person as a chap^erone, we always chose her. She would invite us up to her room once a week, Friday afternoons, and we would have Irish tea and cookies, and read The Nation and The New Republic, which were not allowed in the library. That's how we got to read The Nation and 30 The New Republic. So this was one side of her. Along with it was this business of "We should be willing to come to the aid of England and France. Because of the terrible things that these Germans are doing." The Lord Bryce report was later exposed as false. It was given us as required reading. So, after many throes and all, when Wilson actually declared war, we decided to go along: to "save the world for democracy." Well, I had questions about it all along. My roommate said, "Why do you always have to have so many questions?" [Laughter] I remember that Florence, Student President, brought up from the basement an American flag and put it up. We had a ceremony in chapel when Wilson declared war. It was going to be a war "to save the world for democracy," you know, and "the war to end war." It was supposed to be taken literally, and a lot of us did try to. I had written a poem before we were in the War, called "The Deserter," in which I had a German soldier who tried to get out of the German army because he believed in peace. He was crossing through No Man's Land, and both sides shot at him, the French and the Germans. A sort of romantic thing, of course; I had no experience with anything like that. There was another poem with something about a white cross, I don't remember. They were kind of idealistic, not based on much reality. My roommate thought that the War would end very quickly; we would save Europe and everything. So that's the way it went. M.F.: Her name was. . . . Markey: Emily Gardner. Her family came from Franklin, Virginia. M.F.: And she went on to become a physician? 31 Markey: Yes. She had already made up her mind in college. She was taking pre-med courses, specializing in science. She very much wanted me to go on with music, and thought I was giving in too easily not to do it. I was well over being a doctor, by then. Most of the girls were planning to teach a year or two, until they got married. Teaching was the one profession, more or less, to go into, unless you were going to be a missionary; then you could do almost anything! Like be a doctor. So Emily had been put through college by a wealthy family in her town, the Camp family, very active in the Baptist Church. M.F.: What family? Markeyt The Camp family. You know the Union Camp people, the lumber people. One of the Camp girls, Betsy, was in our class with us. The church had helped finance Emily. Her father was a clerk in one of the Camp stores. They had a store there. The Gardners were one of the so-called "fine old families", but had no means. Emily was brilliant, and it was obvious. So they financed her, and also financed her through Women's Medical College in Philadelphia. M.F.: But she was to go to be a missionary? Markey: Oh, she must be! That was the only way. She was going to be a missionary from the Southern Baptist Church. But she never did. I think that she was very sincere about it, earlier. Then she began to do graduate work. She came up to do her internship at Bellevue. Then she went to Vienna and did graduate work, specialized in pediatrics, and came back to Richmond, which she loved. She had a very tough time, because they weren't prepared to take a woman doctor, 32 even then, and this is already the thirties. But Dr. Henry Decker (Florence's husband), and others who were friends and also all in the same church, helped her a great deal to begin to get patients. Finally, she did build up over the years more patients than she could handle. But she never did anything except pediatrics. She wouldn't do gynecology or anything like that. M.F.i She refused to do gynecology? Markey: Yes. Well, her specialty was children. Henry told me that obviously when a woman was ready to leave the hospital, and even earlier, when she was going to have a baby, if Emily would have practiced gynecology with pediatrics, as quite a few doctors did, it would have been much easier. But she didn't want to, until the woman was ready to leave the hospital with the baby. And a lot of mothers didn't feel the need of a baby specialist. They would want to stay with the old doctor. Emily became very good, and had the old college connections. She went on the College Board of Trustees, too, and the church . . . They are all very loyal to each other, and very powerful in Richmond, the Baptists. Emily Gardner later became Vice President of the Virginia Medical Society, the first woman to be elected. Henry Decker, a leading doctor in Richmond (Florence Decker's husband) said other doctors there had come to respect and like her. She died early, at fifty-six. M.F.i What about some of your other friends in college? Florence Decker, you mentioned? Markey: Florence Boston Decker. Florence was older. She came 33 from Warrenton, Virginia. She was the daughter of a widow of a Baptist minister. Of course, the pension that her mother got was very small. So Florence had begun to teach very early. She first went to one of the more or less free teacher's training schools, Radford College. I think that one of my cousins, Anne Roper, was there with her. Then she began to teach, and later transferred into Westhampton. She worked one summer with Dean Keller, getting some credit by reviewing some of her English literature reading, so that she could take this course exam at the end of the summer. She entered as a junior, when I first knew her. So she only had two years in our college. She was already engaged to Henry, and they both planned mainly Florence's plan, and Henry went along with itto go as missionaries to China from the Southern Baptist Board. Florence was very firm and open in her convictions, in a very nice way. She made friends easily, and was very firm. I found in her much more companionship, in terms of trying to find answers to race relationship, than through anybody else. Emily Gardner never fully agreed with my thought on that, you know. She was very humanitarian and agreed to a certain extent, but she never fully accepted the idea of integration. Florence did, i.e. the ideal of brotherhood, from the very beginning. She was the one who went over with Dr. Lough to Bon Air and made contact with Virginia's reform school for girls, "State Industrial School for Girls." Florence was the one who followed up on that. Now, our experience there was to me a very interesting thing. It was the first concrete evidence that I had ever had, that if you believed in 34 people and gave them an opportunity, they would change, that they had it in them to change. Before that I had been thought of, at least around home, that I was too idealistic, that I was like Don Quixote fighting windmills, and so on. These girls at the Farm were taken off the streets in Norfolk and all over Virginia, but the Norfolk area was the one that I knew. They had been either five-and-ten-cent store girls or waitresses, and their pay was ridiculously low. And of course, especially as waitresses, they were exposed to sailors and everybody coming in who wanted to take advantage and have brief affairs. So a lot of these girls did. With some of them, it had happened in their own families. The uncle or their stepfather had raped these girls, and that had started them this way. Anyway, the situation was very terrible up there at the Virginia Reform School. They had a woman in charge who was unbelievable. She said that the girls were wicked; they should have no contact with each other, because all they could do was contaminate each other. So she didn't allow them to talk, at least not visit with each other. They had work brigades, kitchen, barnyard. This "reform school" is at Bon Air, Virginia. It is still there, as far as I know. This woman in charge, Mrs. Grimm, she was very oldfashioned and rigid in her religion. She had a pin on that said, "God is Love." We didn't know her; we only knew her successor. We heard all about Mrs. Grimm later from the girl inmates. She made these girls kneel down, wherever they were, at noon, and pray. She also was very superstitious. She told them that they were evil, that dancing and cards and everything was 35 wicked. If they ever danced, they would go to hell on the dance floor. This showed up later. These girls, most of them had very little education, and were also very superstitious. All kinds of women prisoners were there, the old so-called "hardened" women, and these young girls of fifteen the sixteen. The first thing that the new Director, Mrs. Peterson did. . . . She was called in from Connecticut, where she had done one of these first projects with a so-called reform school and been successful. So the Virginia state legislature called her in, because these girls did terrible things to each other. They threw lye; some of them would swallow lye, and some of them tried to commit suicide. They all ran away. So they had to round these 120 girls up. That was such a scandal. The state didn't know what to do. So they fired this woman, the one with the "God is Love" pin. She had taken the girls' clothes away from them. They had to wear sacks; they didn't have any individuality or anything of their own. The Virginia legislature called in Miss Peterson, and this is when we got into the picture. One Sunday Miss Lough in church sat next to this Miss Peterson, who was new in town. Of course, she was isolated completely, because Bon Air didn't like the school, and didn't want to have anything to do with anybody that was connected with it. But she and Miss Lough made friends over the hymn book. She said that what she wanted most for these girls was to have some normal human contact. The first thing that she had done was to separate the girls from the older "hardened" ones. She gave them back their clothes. The other woman had had their heads shaved. She let their hair grow. 36 She started a school, because until now there was no school. Miss Peterson set up a grade school, mostly. The girls still worked on the farm, or in the kitchen or so on, but she cut out a lot of this false type of religion, and the girls adored her. They just worshipped Miss Peterson. She also began to have trusties. She had the windows and doors unlocked in dormitories. When we went up to visit Miss Lough, one Friday afternoon, she had Miss Peterson there. There were only about five or six of us girls. Miss Peterson talked with us and said how much these girls needed just to be with other girls. So we thought that was a very nice idea. Florence Decker, Emily Gardner and I, and I don't remember the other girls, went over with Miss Lough to Bon Air to meet the girls. We found it very exciting, because first of all, each girl now had her own room. Locks and bars were off the doors and windows of their rooms. It was open, and they each had their own. It was almost like a cell, their tiny room, but they put their own things in it, and little pictures up, taken from magazines. Several of the girls were making things for Miss Peterson. I remember one girl was making a pillow. Another was crocheting something. She showed it to me and said that it was for Miss Peterson. You could see that they had a nice relationship. Soon after Miss Peterson first came to Bon Air, she decided that the girls should begin to live a more normal life. Since they danced outside, they should dance here. So one Saturday night, she had somebody play the piano. There was a trained nurse there. Miss Peterson danced with the trained nurse, to start it off. The 37 girls were all astir, because this other woman had said that if they ever danced, the floor would open up and the Devil would come. I guess they did actually believe it. Gradually, the girls moved closer. By now they had their own clothes, and their hair had grown. They came out on the floor, little by little. They began to dance. Then one of those awful electric storms came that Virginia has. It knocked the lights out. Miss Peterson stumbled over the girls, because they were all lying on the floor, screaming. As she stumbled over one of the girls, the girl yelled, "The Devil's got me! He's got me!" It's so pathetic, and yet so funny. So she went and got a penny for the fuse box, and they were able to get the lights back on. And from then on, of course, things got better. They really saw that these things they feared weren't true. By the time we went to Bon Air they were all quite relaxed. We played basketball together that afternoon. The next thing, later, somebody said, "Let's invite them over to our campus? We will have a basketball game with them." When the Dean heard of this and the church Elders heard of it, of course, that was the end. They said that it was scandalous. When the parents and preachers would hear, "Our innocent young girls, being associated with these women!" it would be terrible! This was our junior year in college, and Florence's last year. War had started. Florence went over that summer and worked as an intern in social work at the Farm, now called "Cherry Farm." She told me that still, when these girls would get desperate, they would swallow lye. The thing was that they didn't want to leave. Before, they ran away. Now, this 38 life with Miss Peterson was a new environment and everything going well. They didn't want to go. They begged to stay. Sometimes they would do something to be sent back. But Miss Peterson's contract was not renewed. She was only there a year. There was too much opposition and. . . . M.F.: A lack of support. Markeyi Yes. So it was not renewed. I never followed up on her, but I think that she must have been pretty well known in this period of the prison reform movement, so called. But that convinced us, you see, that these girls who were considered such outlaws, such pariahs of society, were girls mostly like us. One girl was put there in spite by her stepmother. She was working in the office. Miss Peterson discovered her and promoted her, gave her office work and so on. But this girl, her stepmother didn't like her. . . . [END OF SIDE A OF TAPE 2] M.F.i I was going to ask you about Westhampton College. Was it coeducational, or a girls' school? Markey1 It was what they called coordinate, which means that there are two undergraduate schools, a man's college and a woman's college. They are each independent, but they have many joint faculty. We used the big library together. We thought it was a very good system. In fact, in the last few years, when they asked us about consolidating, most of the women alumnae voted to have it be kept as a coordinate school. M.F.i Did you share faculty? 39 Markeyi Many, we did. They would come over to our classes. Then, in later years, especially for the seniors, I think they began to have joint classes. In our day, our classes were all separate. We had many of the same faculty, the same math teacher, the same science teacher. They went back and forth. M.F.i Had there been any discussion of your going to a girls' school? Markeyi Not that I remember, except that Randolph-Macon was also trying to get students. I had an older friend who went to Randolph-Macon, and that was the only other choice we thought of. I never thought of coming to a northern school! Or anywhere outside of the state. So Westhampton was new, and Mr. Tabb, the Treasurer there, was a friend of my father's. He came to our home and offered a part scholarship. We took it. M.F.i Was the church at all a part of your life in college? Markeyi Not the church as such, but the YWGA. I went to church, from tradition, with my Baptist friends on Sundays, but I took no other part. I did go over and teach music in a settlement in Richmond. I forget the name of itit was across townand there I got to see some of the conditions, of what slum life was like. In other words, I began to see that it wasn't just Newport News, but Richmond also had this type of "sugarbottom," as they called it, where all the sweetcrackers and other things were made. These people were all very, very poor, and deprived in every way. One of my mother's cousins was a plant manager, I don't think he owned it, of the Southern Biscuit 40 Company there, in Richmond. During college, we made trips through the plant. Cousin Basil was president of the Sunday school, and on Sunday he would weep, being so moved by stories of the Old Testament and the New Testament. And I was embarrassed, because the girls would laugh and look at me. But in the week he was a very different man. He was in charge of this factory. He seemed to have absolutely no feeling for these women and girls who were racing to put sugar cookies into boxes moving along on a conveyor. When the noon whistle blew to stop, a lot of these women's hands didn't stop. Cousin Basil was nice to me and to my friends, but he had no feeling or sense of responsibility for workers at all. So I thought that was very hypocritical. I had very little sympathy for him, and I didn't like the orthodox church very much. In Newport News our minister was pious to a fault. He was caught in Richmond with a woman. Both he and his wife were very strait-laced people. The Methodist Church, you know, rotates ministers every two years or so. Some were nice, but some weren't. Anyway, I didn't take to it. But in the YWGA, we really enjoyed it. M.F.i Did you do industrial work or interracial work or both? Markeyi No, I taught music in this settlement. M.F.i Oh, that was what you did through the Y? Markeyi No, I did that just because. ... I don't know who asked us, but they asked girls, and a few of us went over there and did volunteer work once or twice a week. In the Y we didn't do anything much, except we raised money for a Friendship Fund to help the men hurt on both sides of the War, mainly the Allies, I imagine. We did a few things like that, and had speakers. We invited this YWGA secretary we had known down at Blue Ridge at the student conference. Miss Burroughs was black. She wrote and said that she was going to 41 make a tour of some of the southern colleges. She wanted to know if she could come to us? So Florence came to me, and we took it up. My roommate, Emily, was very much against it. She said, "You're crazy, you shouldn't ask Dot to do this." Florence said, "I'm not asking it of her. I'm asking it of myself. She will decide for herself." So, a little later, we decided that we would invite Miss Burroughs. It was really pathetic, and ridiculous now, but the girls would ask each other, "What do we do? Do we have to shake hands?! Where is she going to eat? And what do we call her?" Florence was very straightforward and very good about it. "You call her 'Miss Burroughs.'" The girls said, "We've never called a colored person 'Miss '!" Anyway, they were very ill prepared. Some of the girls went by us in the hall as if we had some disease that was catching. Finally Miss Burroughs came, and she was very good. She had written us that she didn't want a big thing; she wanted a small group to talk with. She slept over in the guest house and had her meals there. She didn't come into the dining room. The meals were sent to her. When she traveled on the train she traveled Jim Crow, because that was what was allowed then, M.F.i Do you remember her name? Markeyi I'm not sure I would have the right name. Of course, the YWGA records would show. My memory, but it may be of somebody else, is something like Burroughs. When she came, about eight or ten of us went over to the YWGA cabinet room. My roommate, Emily, did go, too. She agreed to come, although she was not interested in 42 this aspect of things, really. Florence was there, and I was there. Miss Burroughs began by turning to us, saying, "My friends. Because I think that by asking me here you want to be friends. . . ."and she won us completely. It was marvelous. M.F.i There were only eight or ten of you? Markeyi Something like that. Very small. M.F.i Did you have any faculty support for this? Markeyi I don't remember any faculty. Miss Lough may have come. We did this through the YWGA, and through contacts with the national YWGA student group. M.F.i I guess from what you said that there never were any exchanges between Westhampton and black colleges? Markeyi No. In recent years they did have an exchange student from Africa; not from this country, but from Africa. M.F.i Just in recent years? Markeyi Yes, very recently. But they have never repeated that, to my knowledge. It isn't integrated to this day. I mean that officially it can't not be integrated, or they wouldn't get federal funds, but they don't have black students there. They have them at the University of Virginia, as you know, but the University of Richmond doesn't. It's behind. M.F.i One other question that I wanted to ask, what other activities were you involved in other than the Y? Markeyi Well, student government activities and athletics. I was on track and basketball teams. Also we had a joint literary magazine. Now, 1976, the men's college does have some black students. 43 I think it was called The Literary Messenger. But I'm not sure, because that was the name of Poe's magazine, and I doubt if they would take that. Anyway, it was the literary magazine and I was assistant editor. It was for both colleges. The man, of course, was editor and I was the assistant editor. That is where I published this poem about the deserter, and this other one about the White Cross. It was a pacifist theme. They had every year a contest in short story writing. There was a course in short story writing that Dean Keller gave. I submitted a story which, to my surprise, was chosen as the best one. The best one went into the annual of the college at the end of the year. I wrote one called "Warum". I used Schumann's little piece which he called "Warum," meaning "Why?" of course. It was about the questions that I had been asking since a little girl and hadn't gotten any answers to. That was the theme. For my character I took something very foolish. I took a young man, a violinist coming over as an immigrant, playing music in the steerage, and then in this country. I don't know how it ended. I'm sure it was quite sad; he was unemployed. Anyway, the Dean liked it; she said that it had vitality. She told me, "You must learn to write about things that you know about." I thought to myself, "I know so little. And what I do know hurts." [Laughter] But she did encourage me, thought that I could become a writer. She was a very stern, reticent woman, so that was quite a bit of encouragement to me. In athletics, I was on the hockey and basketball teams and the track team. I never was the shining light, but I would be runner-up and I enjoyed it. This woman I told you about, our coach, Fannie Crenshaw, was an 44 outstanding athlete, a world athlete. She held seven records. She had an influence on all of us. She was our teacher, and very strong on discipline, being good sports, and so on, high standards. And so was Dean Keller in the academic field. So it was really a very good experience in many ways. When we went on to graduate workthose of us who did, and a good many didwe didn't have any trouble at Columbia or Chicago University. That was because we had gotten a very good foundation. The high schools that we came from were uneven, you know. M.F.i A lot of you were from different backgrounds, as far as high schools went? Markey: Well, I was from Newport News. Emily came from Franklin, and her high school graduated them in three years. So she was only fifteen and a half, I guess. I was sixteen when I went to college. [Laughter] I was seventeen later that fall, as a matter of fact. So we were young. Some of these schools were only fair. The Richmond schools, I guess, were better than the others. But on the whole, college, I think, was a pretty good experience. Mainly, we began to find ourselves, be able to talk things out among ourselves, and vote on campus issues. At home, you were just there; everything was decided for you. We did some things in high school, too, of course. I had a very good high school principal, as a matter of fact. He was a German-American named Dutrow. I still remember him. He called me into his office and told me that I could write. I did write, again, some foolish things. I did one for the graduation annual about a girl sitting at the piano. And it was supposed to be "Life," I 45 guess, looking over your shoulder, guarding you, and directing you, and so on. But anyway, I got away with it. Everything "way up in the air," and nothing real until I began writing certain things closer to home, especially about nature and about the river. Otherwise, it was just "way out." M.F.: What was your relationship with your parents like while you were in college? Did it change much? Markeyi Well, I began to get some independence. But it always felt like a dual life because on the campus, you were able to sort of be yourself and choose your activities and choose your friends and everything. And back home, I was supposed to go to a lot of dances, help some at home, and enjoy sports on the river. I helped my father a little with his books, and that was about it. M.F.i How did you get your first job when you left college? Markeyi This was when America went into the War. I went home for the summer. I had some kind of work, mainly around the family, My youngest sister was really a baby; I was supposed to babysit for her, which I did, I had to. The summer before, my mother was pregnant with her; I wasn't allowed to bring friends into the house, She was so ashamed of being pregnant. She was quite upset. I found out later that she had a tumor; that was why she was upset. She was afraid the child was going to be born defective. But she didn't tell me that, and Daddy didn't tell me that. If they had, I would have had some reasonable explanation. But as it was, I just felt everything was wrong about all of this. I stayed with her that summer before the baby was born. It was born in the fall. Then, to 46 come to the War, I helped with canteen work on the piers. Then I got telegrams from both the dean of the college, and from a principal in the Richmond schools; the men had been called up and gone into the War, and they needed teachers. Would I volunteer? So I took the job in Richmond in a junior school and lived with the family of a math professor. His daughter, Beth Gaines, had been one of my classmates and a good friend. So I boarded with them. (I had chosen a "proper background," you see, that especially pleased my mother.) I taught in the junior high there. Florence Boston, who wasn't yet married, also taught in this high school. We had a horrible principal; he is one of the worst men that I have ever seen, very inhuman. He prided himself that he had never praised a teacher. "If I don't criticize you, you can take it for granted that you are doing all right." And they marked us, just like they marked the children. Every month, we teachers got a report card. We were graded on content of your class, the way that you presented it, methods, and discipline. You got failure, or satisfactory, or excellent. You got those grades every month. M.F.i Did he come around and observe the classes? Markeyi He came around, yes. He certainly did. Of course, I enjoyed teaching English literature and historybut grammar! English literature and history were a cinch, because I liked them and the kids liked the stories. Grammar was a headache, for them and for me. And of course he came in on me during grammar! He told us, when we had our first meeting in the fall with him, "The main thing is, you are to keep command! You are never to get on the level with your students. 47 You keep your distance." And so on. We didn't quite follow that. (I wrote quite a bit about this period in my new novel.) Partly because of the experience we'd had in college of seeing these other girls who'd change so under different circumstances, I decided to just make friends with my students. I violated quite a few of the principal's instructions, because I took them on hikes. We had always gone on hikes in college along the river. We would climb the young pine trees and swing in them, up and down. It was marvelous, singing "Rock-a-My Soul" with a whole bunch of girls. So I took these children out to the river. They were from the Sugarbottom area. They had never done anything like this. I wasn't supposed to do anything with them after school hours, evidently. I didn't "inquire." Anyway, the principal called me in, finally, and told me that I wasn't to do this. I hadn't understood his instructions enough. We teachers called him among ourselves "Old Sourpuss." [Laughter] So I decided that I couldn't fit into the public school system indefinitely. I finished the year; I didn't go back. M.F.i You said that most of these children were from the Sugarbottom area. Was this white industrial workers, primarily, or black? Markeyi White. The schools were still segregated. M.F,i You were in a white school? Markeyi Yes. A working-class white school, mostly. Florence and I, when we walked home, would pass the school with the colored children. They would come out and we would say, "Hello" and they would say "Hello," but they wouldn't talk to us. I knew from my 48 other experiences in Newport News that they would just say, "Yes'm" and "No'm." I talked to Florence about it. In college we had at least had a little experience, where we could really come together and be human beings together. I said, "Do you ever think that it will change down here?" My father didn't think so. She said, "Oh, it will. Look what happened when we were in college." I said, "Yes, but what has happened since then?" Then I went home. The end of the War had come, and. we were thoroughly disillusioned. This young man Elliot Braxton, whom I had known well, was killed over there, also a son of the old watchmaker. He was a marvelous character. He was a survivor of the French Commune, who'd come over to our country and settled in town. He was a friend, a patient of my father's. He was an old man when I came to know him. He had all these clocks, and I used to listen in as a child when he and Daddy would argue about Victor Hugo. Then sometimes they would argue politics. This man's name was Hauser. It was German-French, I guess, the borderland area. He had taken part in McKinley's day, before I was born, in saving a black young man who had knocked down his boss on the farm because he didn't pay him. The Ku Klux and people like that came after him. Hauser sheltered the young man in his watch shop. Later he got him on one of the boats, and got him up to Boston. When the KKK came searching for him, they called out, "Frenchie, give us the nigger!" He said, "Search the place." They looked, and couldn't find him. Then he said, "Now, get out!" My father and Mr. Hauser were always friends, although they were very different from one another. They had a great 49 deal of respect and liking for each other. Daddy said to me later, after a visit, that this Hauser wouldn't change. It was after World War I that I knew him, and came to know more about him. He said, "They still look on me as a foreigner." He had lived in our town forty years, all told. He was a young boy of seventeen at the time of the Commune, He escaped from Paris and went to Switzerland, Some friendly people there took him in. He learned his trade, and eventually got here. He married an American girl who was very traditional southern; and his sons didn't go along with him. He couldn't talk to them about his past, because they weren't proud of it. It just seemed to be strange to them. When I finally got to know him it was marvelous, because I thought that it was great. He tried his best to make contacts in our town. He subscribed to The Appeal to Reason. He would take that around and stick it in places like warehouses where he thought somebody, especially a colored man, might get it and read it, (I bring all this into my book.) He was a marvelous man. He lived until he was quite old. He claimed that his people, who lived in France,practically never died. His grandfather had been gored by a bull or he would still have been alive; he lived past a hundred. They all had great vigor and great size. You know, he was almost a mythological character as well. He was hit by a car and that's how he died, when he was well into his eighties, I guess, or nineties. Mr, Hauser taught me the truth about the War, Also this young man fi%m Texas who had come back from the War front. He had been covering the Versailles Peace Treaty for his paper. He came through Newport News. He told me that it was like pigs in a stay, 50 and how disillusioned he was. We had all tried to accept Wilson's ideal of "the war to end war" and "the war to make the world safe for democracy." I went to see Mr, Hauser. His son had been killed. He said that his son had died for nothing. He understood all the economic, political and social background of the War. So both of these friends disillusioned me. The City Council raised a Memorial Arch in town. On it was a tribute inscribedi "They have not died in vain." As far as I know, it is still down there by the river, an archway that stretched across the avenue. Then they had put all the names of boys who had died in two columns. Of course, three or four of the boys I knew quite well. Hauser's young son, whom I didn't know particularly, was one of those killed. So they held a memorial service, and I was asked with other young people to take part. I didn't mention this, but I had worked during the War with the Red Cross. We did canteen work that summer, giving coffee and rations to the boys who were going over. So when they had this memorial service, they asked a lot of us to come, because we had really worked hard. We would go down to the piers, work a few hours, and then come home, sleep a few hours; then we would go dance at the canteen. They had both the Officers' dub and the Servicemen's Club, and we girls would go dance at both. It was supposed to be doing your patriotic duty. We enjoyed the pier work, because it gave us a place. That is something else that is so insidious and dangerous in times like war. It gives certain people a place in society that they wouldn't otherwise have. We girls up to then had no function, you see. We had no function until this war came along and gave us a place. We were serving our 51 country; we were having an exciting time. My father didn't like it very much, because we were down there all kinds of hours. We had to wear a photograph and use a pass on these piers. The ships were camouflaged. The boys would march down past us, onto the ships. We'd give them a drink of coffee, a bar of chocolate, and wish them luck. Or they would ask us to wish them luck. That was it. But at least we had a function. We had uniforms; we had a tag. The Red Cross took us down on the pier, then sent us back home in one of their Red Cross vans. Sometimes it would be two or three in the morning, because naturally the boats would sail out past the Capes, and they would want to go while it was still dark. The Germans did have submarines nearby, and some of our boats were hit. After the War, I think there was a whole generation of young people who were disillusioned. Ours was the first generations of disillusioned young people. We felt that we had been taken. M.F.i Being in Newport News, you were probably a lot closer to it than many people were, being able to see people shipped off. Markeyi Oh, yes. That's true. I don't know whether we lost more people, because you can see statues around here, and everywhere, and lists of people who died. Ours was really a small town; I think that there were only thirty or forty thousand in those days. So a boy's death was a personal shock. I think that if this old watchmaker had not been able to explain so much to me, however, I might not have gotten it all straight. Between being disillusioned, and seeing some kind of alternative to our present society, Mr. Hauser was a socialist. His uncle had been in the Commune, and he was just a 52 young boy that went along. But he had never forgotten this dream, when he said, "Our people stormed the heavens." M.F.i That was really the only kind of political experiences you had in Newport News, or influences that you had there? Markeyi That's true, except this experience of sitting in on a local joint white-black committee. They were asking for sewers in the black part of town. And a high school. Then, in our town, for some reason it happened that the black longshoremen organized first into a union. You see, my father had so many contacts, since a lot of these men were his patients, so we knew many of them individually. After the longshoremen organized, they went to the whites and got them to organize a local. They were separate locals, but they worked together. I think that happened in Norfolk, too. So there was an element of the union movement, and of course craft unions in the shipyard. We heard about these terrible accidents. There were some craft unions, but nothing very big and that was all. Most of what I learned was by hearsay. I remember seeing the ships tied up in the harbor because the men had walked off the ships. M.F.i Did your parents have any opinions or ideas about unions? Markeyi Well, my father thought that unions were right. He believed in unions, and a lot of his patients were union members, of crafts of one kind or another. But in their place, again. You didn't do anything beyond it, M.F.i He was a real supporter of the Organic Society of the South. Markeyi He was, and I always explain it to myself in terms that they lived through such hard times after the Civil War, when he was a 53 young boy. And his mother and father, earlier. He just hated war in all fashion. He always hated war, and the destruction of the human body. He knew how much it had taken to bring these children into the world, to try to raise them and then to have to see them shot up. He was reluctant about the First World War, but then he decided that maybe Wilson had something that would help end all this business. But that is as far as he went. He supported the war against Hitler. M.F. i This would have been the summer of 1919 when you were home and working for the Red Cross? Markeyi No, because the War ended in 1918. It must have been the summer before that, the summer of '17. I was still in college. You know, the war ended in April of '18. When I went home that summer of 1918 the disillusionment set in, with the young men coming back. M.F.i This wasn't your senior year in college, it was just before that? Markeyi Yes. I graduated in '18. M.F.i In '18. Oh, I thought that you graduated in '19. So you came home the summer of 1919 after you had graduated and taught a year. Markeyi Yes, and had this disillusioning experience. I was going to say that they tried to get us to come down for that patriotic demonstration to celebrate the end of the War and victory. I wouldn't take part. Because I said, "It's not true. They did die in vain." Of course, that was difficult. The minister questioned me, said that I should go home and pray and so on. It was kind of a scandal for my family. And while they never pushed me on things, I began to feel that I would have to break away, sooner or later. Because I would just get them in trouble over things that they didn't believe in. I couldn't go but so far with them; I knew that sooner or later, I was 54 going to get out. Then in the fall of '19 I went to Columbia. Friends in Richmond were going to go. M.F.i You remember their names? Markeyi Oh, sure. One was named Elizabeth Thompson; she is now a corporation lawyer in Richmond, very conservative, very segregationist. A nice person otherwise. She was one of the first women to go up to the University of Virginia to take her graduate work in law (after she took a master's degree at Columbia). The men stomped on the floor, and the professors were very sarcastic. Elizabeth was one of the first women to graduate from the University of Virginia. They were only allowed in the graduate departments. And the one decent person to her, she told me later, was my brother, who was there as a law student. He would at least come and talk to her, which may have cost him some. The men at the University were very, very bitter about it, and determined to get rid of the women. I think there were eight or ten women in the graduate school that year. She stuck it out and made a record. But she said that the professors would say, "Miss Thompson, if you can by any chance answer this kind of question, would you say so?" It was just a sarcastic attitude, as sarcastic as they could be, belittling their abilities and so on. But the women stuck it out, and of course today both men, women and blacks are all at the University. M.F.i Who were your other friends? Markeyi One girl named Janet. She married a man named Fontaine. Janet Walker was her name. We were very different; we just happened to want to go to New York. We shared a little half-way apartment 55 in that place called "The Flying Flame." [Laughter] M.F.i This was an apartment house? Markeyi It was an apartment house at 114th and Amsterdam Avenue. Downstairs they had a little touch of Greenwich Village, this cafeteria. Somebody from Greenwich Village had painted purple and green flames around the walls, and called it "The Flying Flame." We called it "The Crying Shame." [Laughter] We just had a really exciting time in the Big Apple. We took courses, but frankly, we were just tickled to death to be in New York, getting to see the museums, theater, and the whole life of the town. We really had quite a year. I took political science courses with Giddings, and anthropology with Boas. I went over to the journalism school, and also took short story writing. And as the year went on, the courses that I had signed up for (I had majored in history in college as well as English literature), led Professor Giddings' assistant, a man named Tenny, to tell me, "You've got all the classwork done, if you will write a thesis." So it was just as casual as thai. I said, "O.K." I didn't go to get a master's, not as far as I consciously know, but I got it. M.F.i What did you write your thesis on? Markeyi There was a project going on at Columbia within the Sociology Department, a study of the American newspaper, a realistic study. It was divided up into sections. Several people getting Ph.D.'s were the head of it. The sections were very limited, and cut down. I did work on the scare headlines, the big headlines in New York papers that began in the period of the Spanish-American War, 56 when they first ran these big headlines. So that was my job, to go down to the 42nd Street Library, get all the files and study when this Yellow Journalism started, in which newspapers, and so on. It wasn't too hard to do. [Laughter] M.F.i Did you meet a woman named HoIlls Randsdell? Markeyi Her name is familiar. Eleanor Obit is the one that I remember I met there. M.F.i Mollis Randsdell was in the Journalism School for a while. Markeyi She was? Yes, her name sounds familiar. I didn't find the short story course satisfying at all, because students were very much oriented to making either The Saturday Evening Post or Collier's (or maybe one of the quality magazines like the Atlantic, which was very much in the background) . . . [End of Side B of Tape z] [Notei First fifteen minutes of Side A of Tape 3 is blank] M.F.i I wanted to ask you one thing. Why or how did you choose to go to Columbia in the first place? Markey: Because these two girls from Richmond were going. Elizabeth Thompson's mother came down and talked to my mother, and we all talked it over. Mrs. Thompson went up to investigate the place that we were going to live. M.F.i So it was all sort of checked out? Markeyi Oh, yes. Some of us at Columbia went over to Union Theological to hear Harry Fosdick and Harry Ward. We found them fascinating, almost more interesting than what we were getting at Columbia. Then we sat in on John Dewey's classes some; he was at Teachers' College. He was a terrible lecturer, but a very wise man. 57 He would look out the window and talk. But we would hang onto his words, because he had something to say. Then, also in Giddings' classes, Professor Giddings, do you know his name in sociology? He was quite a big name in those days. He had a main lecture hall. There must have been two hundred students in that room. He would come in and lecture for two sessions of forty-five minutes each, and there would be a little break between. That was our main course in sociology. His theory of history, I had never heard beforei that history is a series of struggles between classes, then there is a compromise. That is how he had worked it out, you see. Every class would struggle with another class, a lower with a higher, and there would be some kind of change; it might not be a revolution, but there would be convulsive change. He used, of course, British history a lot. Then there would be some kind of a compromise that would come out of it, he said. So, in other words, he frankly said that he accepted Marx's idea, the interpretation of class struggle as the basis of history. But the solution was a different one. When he came up to modern times, he said that the middle class was going to be the one that would come out of our life in the United States, in the struggle that was going on. He had in the back of the class a Russian Jewish East Side boy who chose to challenge Professor Giddings on his interpretation. Giddings was very critical of the Russian Revolution that had just happened a few years before. The student was a rather emotional type; his voice was a little loud. So he didn't win people from that aspect, but there was a certain validity that Giddings evidently felt. He said to him, "Well, you have this idea of the Russian Revolution, 58 and I have my idea. But there is a man back here, a YMCA secretary who was in Petrograd. He will give us a report in the next class." So he did. Now Giddings was very good in that way. The professors believed in exchanging ideas with students quite a bit. More than I had ever seen before. So this YMCA man came. He said that there was quiet in Petrograd; he had been there on assignment for the YMCA. There wasn't all the blood running in the streets, and whatnot. Of course, the civil war had started by then, I guess. It was 1921. He gave that picture. Then I went with this young man and one or two other students down to the Rand School and heard Scott Neering speak. Also, Anna Louise Strov was just from Russia. So that was exciting. Here was a concrete alternative to the old ways, although it was "way over there." Others thought that the Tsar had been so awful that maybe they were justified in rebelling. M.F.i In 1917, when the Revolution was going on, had you been aware of what was happening? Markey1 Not at all. The newspapers were terrible. You just thought that after all, the Tsar was so wicked and wrong, that maybe they had to do that, but that was all we gave a thought about. But I'd found many books in our little local library in Newport News. I found not only Dostoevski and Chekhov and Tolstoy, but I also found Gorky's Mother. You know the book, of course. It was like a whole world opening up. Here were people, you know, from the ground roots, and this ignorant woman, she couldn't read or write, but she had this feeling for her people and so on. I found this book earlier, before I went up to Columbia. I think it was earlier. It could have been the 59 summer afterwards. Then this. So that is about as far as I went. M.F.i When did you get engaged? Markeyi Well, it was one of these kind of taken-for-granted things. Russell was in high school with me. His family lived a few streets away, and it was just sort of being thrown together and romantic business, you know. I had gone with several boys, as most of the boys had gone with several girls, but we finally kind of settled in. He took it and my parents began to take it for granted. Both families, I guess. He got a scholarship and went to the Naval Academy. There were many given in our area. I shouldn't call it a scholarship, you know. They take examinations and then the Senator or somebody in the state has them appointed, providing they make a good enough grade. He made it. He wasn't a brilliant fellow, but he was a good plodder. So he had gone into the Navy, and I didn't like that at all, being a pacifist. Later, you knowit didn't come out at the beginningbut later I told him, "What is the point of being in the Navy unless there is a war, preparing for war?" Otherwise, from my point of view, it had no function, which may be very much of a young, stern way of looking at it. But I did. So he got out of the Navy. He was an ensign. He resigned and went to work in Norfolk. While I was at Columbia, he was still in the Navy. Of course, the ships came in once in a while, and I saw him. But obviously, as I began to get more and more interested in these ideas, and he was a traditionalist, it just began to be obvious that we couldn't be together. He was very anxious to build a house in Newport News, and we would live on the river. I suppose that after travelling a lot, that was his idea of 60 what life should be. So we just finally broke. M.F.i Had you shared with him, during college, any of the changes you had gone through, or any of the. . . . Markeyi Well, he was off, you see. He would be at Annapolis. Well, maybe somewhat, but not in general. He listened; he was a follower, I guess you might say. He would accept a lot, just because he wanted to keep our relationship, I guess. So, in that sense, I didn't have as much respect as maybe I should have had. No feeling of real interchange...