 KIT GRUELLE: In fact that is exactly what I’m going to do when I leave here. I’m going to go find some purple glitter. I’m going to fairy dust everybody with purple glitter this afternoon. COCO WILDER: You could do the glitter bombing thing. You can go in and just like ( ). [talking simultaneously] KG: I could totally get credit for it. This was Coco’s idea. It was such a good idea. CW: Oh my gosh. We’re going to get you arrested. I heard that like you can’t inng like the coat hangers anymore, or it’s something that like, you know how--? KG: I’m not surpIised. I've got them drawn on my placards which I’m going to wear today. But I’m not surpIised. I was going to get a ﬂoppy hat. But really what I think we should do is rather than coat hangers, I think we should make little bitty sperm because really that’s what it’s about. It’s about sperm worship and just have all these little lost speImies trying to find their way into some woman’s uterus. CW: [Laughter] I mean, wasn’t there a lady who put in like an amendment that was like a woman has to be present if a guy is buying Viagra. KG: Viagra. That was in Ohio. CW: Yeah. Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Gruelle 5 KG: And then I think instead of sending them, instead of sending them coat hangers we should be sending them turbans because they’re turning into the American Taliban. So I mean we need to have fun with it because if not, it’s going to give us all strokes. So we’ve got to figure out ways to have fun with it. CW: That’s yeah, that’s important because otherwise it’s like just what do you do. If you go insane, it’s like I don’t know. It’s hard. But gosh, for this I guess ( ). Okay so, my name is Coco Wilder and I’m here with Kit Gruelle who is an activist in the Violence against women movement and documentary ﬁlm maker. It is July 8th, 2013 and we’re in Chapel Hill. So I just want to thank you for taking time out of your day to come talk with me. KG: Happy to. CW: And I guess to get started, I was wondering if you could just tell me a little bit about your childhood. KG: About my childhood. Let’s see. I was born in Miami, Florida, given up for adoption, raised in a pretty much upper class family. My grandfather from my adopted family created Raggedy Ann and Andy. So there was a fair amount of financial stability that came with that. But there wasn’t a lot of internal stability. And there were some real bad experiences that I had with my adoptive mother who really wasn’t at all interested in being a parent and told me later on that she had never wanted to be a mom. And as a consequence of the dynamics in our home and also it was Miami and it was the [19]6OS and there was a lot of anti-war stuff going on and I got very caught up in that, and very quickly became the daughter that they did not want. They wanted me to be quiet and compliant and obedient and passive, and I was none of those things. Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 6 So when I was sixteen, Ruth primarily, but my dad too started inviting me to leave home. So I finally did when I was seventeen and lived in a commune in Miami for a while and then left --because I’m just not a city person-- left and went to the North Carolina mountains where we’d always spent our summers. And I had dropped out of high school and had gotten involved in drug related activities, mostly because it was political but also because taking drugs makes pain go away. It’s just that simple. And so I came up to the mountains and fell in with a crowd up there and was taking drugs with them. It was a different reason there. I mean for the mountain folks it was really about getting high. I did that for a couple of years but realized that it was a dead end street and that wasn’t what I wanted to do with the rest of my life. So I stopped doing drugs and then I got married and got pregnant quickly and had my first son. But his dad wanted to keep on partying and I finally said to him, I said, “You’ve got to choose. You’re either going to sober up and be a parent or you need to go.” So he left. And then I met my second husband Jack who was the husband that was so Violent, and we were together three years, three months and twenty days. We had a little boy to gether, and it was, then he wound up being killed in an accident. But that marriage is why I do what I do for a living because he was just extraordinarily Violent, extraordinarily controlling, and I think until people have lived with that kind of Violence, they just couldn’t even conjure it up. And so after Jack died and I moved down here, I got involved in the battered women’s movement. And that’s kind of, it was one of the key moments of my life was seeing the ad to become an advocate and going through that training. All the missing puzzle pieces just came together. So it’s a long answer to what my childhood was like. But and there were parts of it that were wonderful. I had a very close relationship with my aunt, Alberta Murphy, who was a lesbian, decorated war hero, a concert cellist, a nationally Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 7 recogmzed social worker, an activist, a brilliant, kind, loving wonderful person who at an early age started to slip me the New Y orker and say, “Here darling read this and call me and let’s talk about it.” It was like this covert thing because my adoptive parents weren’t at all interested in cultivating whatever I had in my brain. But Alberta seemed to think was something up there. And she just wanted, she wanted to kind of dig around in there and see what came out. It’s so interesting that the New Y orker really became a touchstone for us. And it thrilled us both, and it continues to thrill me to this day. And it also is more than a literary magazine. It really is symbolic of my relationship that I had with her. So I have to put that in about Alberta and because one of the things that I found in working with battered women is when you’re living with Violence all the time, you don’t have the luxury of thought because you’re having to try to predeterrnine what the abuser’s needs are going to be, what his mood is going to be, if you’ve got everything right, is the food prepared correctly, what kind of mood is he going to come home in, and we lose so much intellectual fire power from women because they’re afraid all the time. So it’s one of the things about doing domestic Violence work that I pull from my own childhood and my own adult experience. CW: How old were you when you started doing like these exchanges with Alberta and her magazine? Like what did you talk about? What kind of articles did you read? KG: Oh she would just, if I'd go see her, she was running protective services of Miami. She knew that things weren’t good at home and she’d call me baby girl or darling. So those terms of endearment were really important. And it wasn’t anything specifically in the magazine. She’d just say, “Read this and see what you like and call me and let’s talk about it.” So it was the idea that she believed that I had the capacity to think and that she was interested in what I thought that was such a gift, and it’s one of the things for me that’s such a joy over the years Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 8 working with battered women is to look at them and say, “Tell me what you think.” And to realize that they have, that that’s been removed from their lives, maybe because of this relationship that they’re currently in or maybe they’ve never had anyone care about how they think about things. So to me it’s one of the wonderful things that we as advocates can do is give battered women time and space and interest and a curiosity of how they have thought about and processed their lives. CW: Yeah. Can you tell me more [about] what were you doing before you became involved with the women, with the movement and then how old were you, you were talking about these two marriages and then finding the classified ad? Can you take me through that period? KG: Sure. Let’s see. I moved to the North Carolina mountains on my own when I was seventeen and then spent a few years just really kind of self—destructing or trying to self destruct and then it just dawned on me that that was not the way to go. And so I got married when I was twenty and had Matt three weeks after my twenty-first birthday, and his dad was gone within a matter of months because like I said he wanted to keep on partying. And then it wasn’t long after that that I met Jack, and he was like all abusers, incredibly charismatic and swept me off my feet. And it was just incredibly intense the things that happened, just awful, awful, awful. And then all of a sudden he was dead, and three weeks before he died I tried to commit suicide. I took an overdose of pills. I knew that it was going to take either me or him dying for the relationship to end because he had been in the United States Marine Corps, and he would routinely pick me up by the throat and tell me that there was no place that I could go to get away from him. He was trained by the United States Marine Corps to hunt people down and kill them. And I should just forget about ever trying to leave. Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 9 And so I think what people fail to recognize is that battered women to a degree are hostages. They might not be hostages in the classic sense like with a gun permanently held to their heads, but bit by bit the abusers hem them in through words, deeds, actions, and then the physical Violence is kind of the punctuation mark. It’s, “okay I expect you to do X, Y and Z and if you don’t do X, Y and Z, this is how you’re going to pay for it.” And I just learned it well from being with him and living up on the side of a mountain, and I wouldn’t wish that life on anybody. But the other part about it that we address in the film is it muddies the water when the person who is committing these horrendous acts of control, abuse, Violence, intimidation is someone that at some point in time you fell in love with. It just makes it really hard because fundamental relationship dynamics are, you fall in love with a person, and there’s a period of time when everything is wonderful and then as time goes by the person you’re in love with might have a bad day or you might have a bad day. But it’s just kind of leveled out somehow, and that’s the dynamic that is maintained. But with an abusive relationship it starts out intensely wonderful and then after a period of time goes by, then the Violence starts or the control starts. Women have a hard time reading it and understanding exactly what’s going on. And then there’s an assault, and then the way the relationship changes is it goes from being one where it’s good all the time with an occasional bad act to constant bad acts with an occasional good day. And women learn to get to the place where they are craving that one good day out of every siX months or whatever. And that’s how we lose women, when they have to reconfigure their lives to think that their relationship should mean that for three hours once a month he’s nice. Then the rest of the time he’s Violent and abusive. Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 10 And I've studied this by sitting cross-legged on the ﬂoor and listening to battered women all these years and sitting with them in emergency departments and sitting with them in courtrooms and talking to judges and talking to cops and talking to prosecutors. It’s just this hidden world that no one’s aware of until they’re in it somehow. And I don’t know. We’re just losing so much great stuff to domestic Violence. And that term even is wrong. It’s so cleaned up. So I don’t really want to call it domestic Violence anymore. That just allows people to treat it as if it’s just this little insignificant thing when it’s not. I’m sorry, long answer. CW: I was going to ask, but I am interested in you saying the term domestic Violence cleans it up. The range of terms like battered women, domestic Violence, intimate partner Violence", how what do you think the impact of that terminology is and what language do you think should be used to describe this? KG: Well, I think the term allows people to conjure up this notion that it’s nothing particularly bad or that what we have happening in this country doesn’t compare with what happens to women in the Middle East. And on a lot of levels that’s right. What happens to women in the Middle East is hideous. But for example several years ago in North Carolina a man nail gunned his wife to the ﬂoor and then cut her throat. He then killed himself. She then pulled her feet loose and ran. Also in North Carolina several years ago a man held his girlfriend down and carved the word mine in her stomach. I mean these are acts of terrorism. And it’s furmy, I was listening a few weeks back, on Sunday afternoon I was listening to public radio. And they were doing a piece on Byron De La Beckwith and Medger Evers murder, and they were referring to Byron De La Beckwith as a white supremacist. And on the ride home I thought, “Wow, I wonder how it would change the discussion if we referred to batterers as male supremacists and just start saying this because it’s what they are.” They have a strong sense Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle ll of entitlement just like white folks did in relation to black folks. They have a sense of superiority, which white folks did in relation to black folks. They think that things are supposed to go their way all the time, which is the same way it was for white folks in relation to black folks. They expect women to be compliant, which is the same way that it was with white folks in relation to black folks. And so that night I posted a thing on the Private Violence Facebook page and said, “You know, what if we started referring to these guys as male supremacists?” And it’s just lit things up because when you kind of deconstruct the behavior, it’s the exact same thing, but we just cannot allow ourselves to really think about it because there are, it’s just so engrained in us that women are inferior and that women are supposed to be controlled. I know when I interviewed Gloria Steinem for the film she was talking about the historical stuff around the anti-slavery work and she was talking about how they were fine with having this underground railroad to free slaves. But then when people who were concerned with husbands beating up their wives said, “We’ve got to get this woman out of here,” Gloria said that everyone said, “Oh no, no, no we can’t do that. That’s just taking it too far.” And so it’s kind of amazing for me that this is 2013 and we’re fighting these battles over sexual Violence against women, physical Violence against women, women’s reproductive rights. I mean women are still by a sigmﬁcant portion of the population regarded as inferior to men, and I just wonder linguistically what do we have to do to address this. What’s it going to take? How many dead women do we have to pile up before we realize that we’ve got blinders up or we’ve got our fingers in our ears and we’re saying la-la-la or both? I guess after all these years working with battered women and seeing the challenges they face that are, the initial source is the abuser. But then the state and the various agencies and institutions that she has to interact with to try to get Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 12 help, it’s like they drive the getaway car. The abuser commits the act, and then the state allows him to get away with it. So I really don’t know what it’s going to take. I hope the film is going to make people stop and think and say, “I wonder what goes on in my community. I wonder how battered women are treated in my court. I wonder how the prosecutors handle these cases. I wonder if law enforcement treat these crimes seriously. I wonder if DSS [Department of Social Services] is punitive towards the woman rather than towards the abuser.” CW: How have you seen the criminal justice system like changing, in like how it treats these crimes? What do you think their role should be? KG: Well, one of the problems is thinking that the response should solely be a criminal justice response. I mean it is a crime. It absolutely is a crime. But because it happens in the context of a relationship many, many, many battered women don’t want their abuser to go to jail. They just want him to stop. They want him to go back to being the way he was when they first got together. And I think one of the problems that we’ve sort of created is thinking that the criminal justice system is going to be able to manage him socially to get him to go back to being the way he was initially. If he doesn’t want, if that was an act and probably eight times out of ten that was an act, it was the grooming process. So he doesn’t want to go back to being that nice guy again. He wants control. He wants to be the dominant person in the relationship. So thinking that dangling a jail sentence over him is going to be the remedy, it’s not. It has to come internally. So I think that our criminal justice system overall has at least started to recogmze that crimes against women are in fact crimes. I remember years and years and years ago working with a woman who was being beaten up in the K-Mart parking lot over in Durham. And somebody called the cops and she was under a car, and the cop showed up, and they dragged her Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 13 out from under the car and screamed at her and said, “Aren’t you embarrassed to do this in public? Take this home.” So it was hands off. I worked very closely with law enforcement in Chatham County, and I’m happy to say that I think the Chatham County folks really do a great job. But to be fair to law enforcement this is a frustrating crime to have to deal with because of this emotional link, this bond that the two have. I think for me the thing that makes me the most aggravated is we’re still stuck in this rut of saying, “Why doesn’t she just leave?” And that, number one, is a Victim blaming question. Number two, it’s the wrong question to ask. Number three, it’s taking the focus of the attention off of him, the offender, and putting it on her. And number four, we don’t do this with any other kind of crime. I mean when women are beaten up or sexually assaulted, we blame them, just period. But one of the things I've started saying when I go do community ed stuff is, “think about the last time a bank got robbed in your community. And law enforcement showed up to investigate the robbery, and they got the evidence and the interviewed people, and then when they were done with the investigation, they probably didn’t go to the bank president and say why did you keep all that money here. Didn’t know you were going to get robbed? Do you like getting robbed? We’ve been out here four or ﬁve times already. Why do you still have your doors open? I can’t believe, you must like this. Do you like to expose your staff to somebody showing up with a gun?” But we don’t do that. We just don’t. But for some reason we just reﬂexively blame women for the Violent acts of men, and that just, it’s so juvenile. And it’s so sexist, and it’s so wrong because when we do that we’re basically giving him a green light and saying, “Carry on. Keep on going on with your Violent and controlling behavior.” We’re just going to dump all the responsibility on her. We require her and the children to leave their homes, leave their schools, leave their jobs, leave their family, leave Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 14 their pets, leave their friends and go hide out in a shelter. And even that doesn’t guarantee her safety. So we expect battered women and children to reconfigure their lives completely around his Violence and rarely sanction him with any kind of comprehensive sanctions. So that’s the area. So we’ve addressed the law enforcement piece, but I think now it’s time to address the larger sort of social response to gender based Violence and start to ask a whole new set of questions. CW: I want to get back to that--but what was your initial work in this movement look like? You said you found an ad to be an advocate. How did you start and like how did you get to be where you are right now with the social movement documentary piece? KG: There was an old paper called the Spectator that was published here a long, long time ago, and I just saw an ad in the back of the paper to do advocacy work for battered women. At the time I had barely even self-identified because in the mountains nobody talked about it because almost everybody was in an abusive relationship. So it was what it was. But then when I came down here, I just got around people that had a bigger way of thinking about things. And I saw this ad and the women’s center that was here down the road on Rosemary Street, Darlene Wells was the director, and I went to go talk to her and she said she thought it would be a good idea to do that. And so I signed up and went to the training, and it was just earth shattering for me. On the first day we spent the day looking at the Power and Control wheel, which divides domestic Violence up into the non-physical and non-sexual forms of abuse like coercion, intimidation, using the children, ﬁnances all that sort of stuff. And I not only saw my relationship with Jack just spread out there in black and white, but I also was able to understand that dynamic in the home where I grew up. And it was just astonishing. So the ﬁrst thing I started doing was being an on-call crisis line advocate, and then I started going to court up in Hillsborough and just Interview number U-lOO4 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 15 seeing how the little manipulative tactics by attorneys sort of play out in domestic Violence cases and understanding the vulnerabilities and then also seeing how poorly our laws reﬂect the seriousness of this crime. Seeing how badly women could be beaten, how much they could be stalked repeatedly and the offender arrested but given a hundred dollar bond and he’d be back out on the street just like that. So it just, the more I sort of got into it, the more politicized I became. And the more I realized that there was so much more to it than just the relationship between a woman and her abuser, that it was the woman, her abuser, and society. And it was just, doing this work and the Orange-Durham Coalition back in the mid-eighties, it was intense work, a lot of stuff going on, and then I remembered, I had started going to therapy, and I was remembering who had helped me when Jack was alive and who hadn’t helped me. And one of the people who had helped me was a patrol officer and one of the people who did not help me was my ob-gyn who I went to see when Jack punched me in the face one time because I thought my jaw was broken. So I went to the folks at the Orange-Durham Coalition and said, “You know we need to be talking to other people that are interacting with battered women,” and they were all slammed so they said, “Great, go do it.” And I met up with a group of medical students who were interested in doing a proj ect to respond in the emergency department to battered women. So we wrote up a twelve-hour curriculum, and we did it over at Duke and UNC and it was strictly voluntary. Medical students could come if they wanted to and not come if they wanted to. Well, a lot of them showed up, and then they carried a pager. And when a woman would show up in the emergency department and the treating physician or nurse suspected there was domestic Violence, the medical students would be called in. And it just, things just started to come together in all these, it’s just like I saw this bigger universe and realized that there were a lot more people Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 16 that should be ﬂuent to some degree in Violence against women issues than just as us advocates because law enforcement were seeing them; paramedics were seeing them; doctors were seeing them; clergy was seeing them; librarians were seeing them. And so I just started kind of trying to get out in the community as much as I could, and I just worked with a ton of groups and schools and agencies in the Triangle area to get them to understand the role that they played, not that it was their job to fiX it because nobody can fiX it. Nobody can. But if there’s a more consistent message from more people in community, then she’s not going to feel quite so isolated in this relationship, and he’s going to get the message from other people besides us and courts that his Violence towards her is not acceptable. So and then twelve and a half years ago my son, my middle son Jason had been paralyzed, and I was out of work spending time with him and looking after him, and when it got to where I was able to go off for an hour or so, I went over to some friends’ house to pull weeds in their garden because that’s therapeutic to me. I was like “I’m going to go pull weeds. I’m going to go pull weeds.” It was just hard to see your kid permanently injured like that. And while I was pulling weeds I don’t know it just popped into my head that most people don’t know what domestic Violence is all about. They hear a story on the evening news about murder or murder- suicide and they just make an assumption that this is what it’s about, those poor uneducated women and they partner up with these guys, and the guys beat them up and they reconcile with them and then they get killed. And that’s kind of summed it up. And so I just thought we need to tell this story in a more comprehensive way. And I had been teaching in California and working with a sort of training component, and the woman who did the training ﬁlms is a documentary film maker, and so I called her and I said, “Inez, how would you feel about doing a film about the battered women’s movement?” Are you, can you still pick--? Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 17 CW: Yeah. [break in recording] mow my lawn but not now. KG: But and Inez when she was in graduate school and worked on the film The Eyes on the Prize and or Eyes on the Prize and so when I called her and I said, “How would you feel about this?” She said, “I think it sounds great. Let’s do it.” So when I got to where I could travel again, I went to San Diego and Inez and I sat down and she said, “Write up the names of the people that you think should be included in a film like this.” So I just wrote about probably thirty names, people to do it from different sort of arenas, law enforcement, psychology, academia, activism, survivors, --the whole nine yards--, and journalism. And we raised some money and brought a bunch of people out to Mills College and did the initial set of interviews at Mills College. And then we were kind of moving along for a while, and then the money ran out. And trying to get interest in a film about domestic Violence I found was incredibly challenging because most people just don’t want to talk about it or they think they’ve got their mind made up, they already know what it’s about and never want to know anything else. They don’t want their own belief system challenged. So I worked with Inez for a while longer, and then another woman Katherine Salino came in and the money of course. People in the movement were excited that the film was going to be done because they wanted the story to be told. The people outside the movement were just, “I don’t want to talk about that. I don’t want to watch a movie about it. I’m not going to give you any money. Go away.” But I was still doing direct services with battered women, and every time I’d sit down and talk to a battered woman I’d just think, “My God, she’s so strong. She’s so bright. She’s so confident. She just happens to be partnered up with a Violent person who’s trying to do everything he can to diminish her life. But in the midst of all that she’s still hanging on.” [laughing about a noise—leaf blower] CW: I think we should be okay, sound wise. Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 18 KG: Okay. This is the way it always works. I know this from working on the film. I mean, you can be in what you think is the best place in the world, and then it will be sirens or something like that. So anyway, after, in 2007 Katherine kind of said that she couldn’t do it anymore because it was just too, it wasn’t consistent. There wasn’t any money coming in. I didn’t blame her. But for me, I’m an advocate. This is my life’s work so I couldn’t walk away from it. And then we got connected with Cindy Wade, and Cindy Wade saw the value in working on the film, and then I guess it was three years ago, maybe four years ago, Cindy was at a Clinton Global Initiative function and she saw Gloria Steinem and told Gloria about the project, and we had a little twenty-two minute what we called trainer’s edition of the film. And so Cindy sent, Cindy sent a copy of the twenty-two minute film to Gloria, and Gloria got in touch with Cindy right away and she said “This is the best thing I’ve ever seen on domestic Violence. What can I do to help?” So then she came on as executive producer, Cindy’s executive producer. And then she came to Chapel Hill at the end of February in 2010 to do a big fundraiser and it was just a fabulous, fabulous success. And then I wound getting real sick for the last half of 2010. We picked things back up in 2011, and now here we are. We’ve just gotten word that Sundance has chosen us, one of they said there were over 800, they said there are 800 ﬁlms submitted from eighty-seven different countries. I don’t know how many films they chose, but they didn’t choose many. So we’re very, very humbled and excited, and I’m hoping that the film will launch a real organic from the grassroots up discussion about gender-based Violence and the interconnectedness between Violence in the home and Violence in the streets and Violence in our country and Violence around the world because it does begin in the home. It really does. So I feel kind of blown away. Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 19 CW: Yeah, why was, why did a documentary particularly that format seem like the most effective to effect this kind of change? KG: Well, I’m a big reader too. But I think documentary film can bring people together. I know what a profound impact Eyes on the Prize had on how people thought about ciVil rights work. The film that just came out The Invisible War about sexual assault in the military had a big impact. So there have been, documentary films throughout my adult lifetime that--I don’t know there’s something about hearing something come out of someone’s mouth combined with sort of the contextualization of the issue in a way that people who don’t do the work can’t see. Like in Deanna’s case, the woman who’s in the film, you see her photographs because I take her pictures to the medical school because I taught at the med school for twenty-one years, and I would hold up Deanna’s photograph, and I would ask the medical students what they thought Robbie was charged with. And universally they said this is an attempted murder case. And when I’d say to them, “No, actually he was charged with one count of misdemeanor assault on a female.” And it just made their jaws drop because people just don’t understand what our laws do and do not say about gender based Violence. So I think doing a documentary film is going to make people, they’ll see the images. They’ll see what the laws say. They’ll see how our state, how the state of North Carolina just shrugged its shoulders and continues to shrug its shoulders around this crime, and maybe it’s going to led to an honest and open discussion about patriarchy, about misogyny, about what our laws reﬂect, which is patriarchy and misogyny. And then these legislators who claim to care so much about the fiscal health of this state will realize that when they turn their backs on battered women and children, we’re going to pay for it sooner or later. They’re going to pay for it horrendously, but we as a state will pay for it too. So that’s why to me documentary film, it’s just so, it’s so important to do it this particular way. I could sit down and write a book, I Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 20 could write probably a three thousand page book about cases that I’ve worked over the years, and it would curl people’s hair to see how our courts respond or whatever. But documentary ﬁlm can be just real compelling. CW: When you were talking about the resources and your different groups of people you approach in trying to relay like experiences like your work in the Triangle. You live the mountains. KG: I live in the mountains, right. CW: You referenced earlier that like in the mountains people don’t talk about it because it was a reality for a lot of women. Do you think women in North Carolina, what are the unique like challenges and experiences for women in the North Carolina mountains and like do they have the same resources as women in the Triangle? KG: Yeah, and it’s changed a lot. I mean, when it was happening to me there was no battered women’s shelter, there was no battered women’s program or anything like that. Of course this was over thirty years ago. And I do think slowly but surely it is changing, and now there’s great programs up in Asheville and Haywood County and some of the surrounding counties, but most of the women that are working in these programs are working for minimum wage and a lot of them are working many, many hours without getting paid at all just because they believe so much in doing this work. And I was asked a number of years ago to go do a talk at North Carolina Central at the law school, and it was going to be a large audience, and I knew there were going to be people in that audience that didn’t care about domestic Violence. It just, it just hadn’t occurred to them that they should care. But pretty much everybody claims to be concerned about fiscal issues. Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 21 And I have a very dear friend, Bob Trinkle, who was working at the capital defender’s ofﬁce in Durham, and I called him one day and I said, “Bob, how many of these guys that you’re representing grew up exposed to domestic Violence?” He said, “All of them.” And so back in 1992 I think it was the Duke Endowment did a study to find out how much it cost to adjudicate one death penalty case in North Carolina. In 1992 dollars I think it was 2.6 million dollars per case from the date of the murder to the date of the execution. And I was going over to Central to do this talk I looked on the Department of Corrections’ website to see how many people we had on death row and at the time it was 213. So you multiply 213 times in 1992 dollars 2.6 million, it’s a lot of money. And that’s only the capital murder cases. That’s not the first degree; that’s not the second degree, that’s not the manslaughters. So this is why to me them wanting to close down battered women’s program or not fully fund them or whatever, it makes me want to say to them, “Do you have any idea how much you’re costing the state by making a decision like that?” We could be preventing so much anguish, grief, Violence, repeated criminal behavior, gang related stuff, teenage pregnancies, teenage runaways, high school dropouts. I mean you name it. When you sort of go back to the source of all that stuff, almost invariably it’s Violence in the home. And I remember reading one of the FBI proﬁlers talked about how domestic Violence programs were the best anti-crime programs in the country and it’s true. Because if you can stabilize a family, then the ripple effects go out forever and ever and ever whereas if you turn your backs on them, then shame on all of us. So I just, I’m just a huge believer in prevention. I see these domestic Violence homicides, and I see the ripple effects from those, and I, when you look at how they play out, I’d say eight out of ten out of the women who are murdered in this state, they could be prevented if we would just pay attention to his escalating behavior and attach Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 22 the appropriate sanctions to him whether it’s an ankle bracelet, whether it’s putting him in custody under a high bond, whatever. But women’s lives could be saved if we’d just pay attention. CW: Yeah and I guess like sort of reminding me thinking about the word private in your documentary, and I guess like the fear that like it’s a private issue, but then it affects the public and--. KG: It does. CW: I guess that being frustrating and how you, when you’re relating to women like because like as you talk about they’re all socialized in this like supporting, how do you convince them that like, this is, this matters, their experience matters and that like they have a right to feel safe and like--. KG: It takes time. It takes a lot of time because for so many women the process of that subordination process starts on day one. I’ve got a lot of nurturing genes in my body, and also I’ve had the experience of being loved and cared for unconditionally. And my Aunt Alberta even when I was doing the most off the wall stuff, when I was doing drugs and living on the streets of Miami and whatever, instead of judging me, she would just, because she knew what the bigger picture was she’d just say, “Darling I’m sorry you feel like you need to hurt yourself, and it’s such a gift to have one safe place in the world you can go and not worry that someone’s going to say why are you doing this? And why are you doing that? And if it was me I’d do this and if it was me I’d do that.” Which automatically puts up a wall and based on my own experience as a battered woman, as a high school dropout, as a druggie, as all these things, I have been in many instances prepared to be judged. And what has made the biggest difference in my life is when I interact with someone and they don’t judge me. So I know what a difference that makes to Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 23 battered women because they’re used to him, the court system, his family, his friends, her family, her friends, “What did you do to piss him off? You should’ve known better. He seems like a nice guy to me.” Which automatically puts the responsibility for what’s happening on her shoulders rather than on his. And I don’t know. I just [feel] really strong about creating that safe space where women can come and talk about things they feel the most afraid to talk about, the most ashamed of, the most guilt ridden about and do it in a way that is absolutely non- judgmental and provides them with the kind of nurturing and support that they deserve. I mean, there has to be fertile ground. If there’s not fertile ground, they’re not going to grow and I know that. Thirty years of this work tells me you’ve got to as advocates create that fertile ground and that safe space. That’s what I love about being an advocate. CW: Did you feel like anyone did that for you ( )? KG: Yeah. Yeah. Alberta did when I was growing up. I mean, I could always go to her and then when I became an adult, I spent as much time with her as I possibly could. But I remember my family doc out in Hillsborough who I’m just real, real, real close to when my daughter Noel was born, this is my third child of third different dad. Richard had left; Jack died, and then I remarried and her dad left almost immediately, I mean literally left almost immediately, and then when I had her, I was living in Hillsborough, and I had heard about this family doc, Artie Axelbank who everybody in town really thought a lot of. And I knew that I wanted to find somebody to take care of me and the kids, and so I called and I said I’m going to have this baby. I don’t want to stay in the hospital a long time because I think the hospital is for sick people, but I need to find a doc that’s going to sign off on that, on me leaving right away. He said, “Sure. Sounds good to me.” So he actually was not there when I had Noel, I had her real fast. Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 24 But anyway, when I took her in for her ten day checkup, I walked in. I had my baby girl. I was so excited that I had a daughter. I love my sons, but I really wanted to have a daughter, and Artie was taking our family history. And my history is complicated and it’s ugly. And I dropped out of high school when I was seventeen and I had a drug history and three kids from three different dads, and so for all intents and purposes I would be a good target for somebody to judge. But he didn’t do that. And I remember as we were kind of going through stuff and I was just sort of very timidly saying things because I expected that he was going to come down on me somehow, but instead he’d say things like, “It sounds like you’ve lived a interesting life,” I’d say something and he’d say, “I admire how you think about that.” Here was this doctor telling me that he admired how I thought about something. And I remember walking out of Artie’s office and I just leaned against the wall, and it was like something shifted inside of me because we live in a society where there is a lot of hierarchy and Artie leveled that playing field. It didn’t matter that he was a doctor and I was a patient. As far as he was concerned we were equals. And it was profound to me. It was profound. I’ve told him a hundred times. He’s almost never willing to take credit for the gift that he gave me by being so kind and so humane. But it was what it was. It was a pivotal moment in my life to have, to have a doctor treat me with the kind of respect he did. And when I would go to the medical school to teach this class on domestic Violence to all the first years, I would say to them, you know you might be the best teclmician in the world. You might be the best scientist in the world, able to diagnose an illness. But remember that you’re working with human beings and those human beings are coming in with complex lives. And if you treat them humanely, that’s going to do as much to advance the healing process as setting the bone just right or writing the exact right prescription. I mean I’ve just, I just really believe that. Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 25 CW: ( ) I admire the way you think about that and then how women in abusive relationships can’t think, dropping out of high school. I read that you went to school, college at App later in life. Why, like what was that experience like? What made you decide pursuing a degree was something that should happen? KG: Well, I just, I mean when I moved here to Chapel Hill from the mountains you could, you can’t fall off the sidewalk without rumling into someone who’s at least got their master’s degree. And I was tremendously, tremendously ashamed that fact that I was a high school dropout, and after I had Noel I just went over to Durham Tech and got the books and took the test to get my GED. But I had always been told when I was young that I was stupid and that I wasn’t college material. And but then Alberta my aunt would say to me, “No darling, you’re smart. You’re smart. You’re smart. Don’t let your parents tell you that you’re not. You’re smart.” And then the New Y orker thing would happen. “Here darling. Read this New Y orker and then let’s talk about it.” And then it felt like my brain was really starting to wake up in this whole new way, and I started taking classes at the community college and doing pretty well. And as I did well in the classes I started to think, “Maybe I’m not stupid. Maybe I can do this.” And then I got the chance to go to Appalachian, and [pause] I remember walking in there. There’s this old woman with a backpack and all these young students, and they were looking at me like, “Who is this old person in class?” But the majority of the professors were amazing. And because I was in the sociology department primarily and because I’d done what I did for a living, they like wanted to hear stories from the street because they knew the textbooks say one thing, but let’s hear how things really are out there. And so they were just astonishingly supportive and encouraging, and I wound up doing really, really well, and as I was going through, you’re supposed to pick whether you’re going to do marriage and family or whether you’re going to do deviance or blah, blah, Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 26 blah or whatever, but all my papers that I was writing were on gender based Violence. And so my advisor Amy Page called me one day and said, “You know maybe it would be good for us to do an individually designed program so you can just concentrate on it and just do it.” So that’s what we did, and I graduated last year with a cum laude. Both my parents are dead. But there was a very high degree of satisfaction of just knowing that I had transcended that kind of thing that Ruth primarily had wrapped me up in that made me believe that I was just too stupid for school. So it felt real good. It felt real good. It’s part of a process of people starting to believe that they can think. And they can be appreciated for what they think. And like Dearma the woman that’s in the film, she’s in school at Appalachian now. It’s like women and their brains and the opportunity to be free and to express themselves and to not have to worry about being afraid all the time. It’s just, it’s just this untapped potential. And if there’s anything I can do to help to help women find that kind of freedom then I want to do it. CW: Well, there are a lot of questions but like a lot of things have just kind of come up mostly. Do you consider yourself a feminist? KG: Absolutely. Absolutely. But I also consider myself a humanist because I’ve got two sons. And when Jack, when my husband died he was, we were down at the funeral home, and he was just lying there in this casket and Jason was fourteen months old at the time, and he was climbing on Jack’s body and sitting on his chest and I said out loud to Jack even though Jack was dead, I said, “He is not going to turn out like you did. If it kills me he’s not going to turn out like you did,” because part of what I saw when he would have his hands around my throat and I was looking in his eyes was just this, it was like a wild animal. But he was of that culture, that hypermasculinized mountain culture, and then it was combined with a lot of really bad family Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 27 stuff. And even before I got into really studied all this stuff it just occurred to me that when the egg is first fertilized that there’s male information and female information, and I wanted my sons to have access to all of who they were. So I tried to raise them to be whole people. So when I say yes, I’m a feminist, I am a feminist. But I also believe that part of why the world is in the shape that it’s in is we get so pigeon-holed based on sex. Boys are supposed to behave a certain way; girls are supposed to behave a certain way. Ifboys behave in a way that is what’s considered a traditionally female kind of behavior like if they cry or whatever then they’re stigmatized somehow. Same thing for women. Women are called bitches if they behave in a determined and forward manner. That just was not acceptable for me. I put my kids in Friends school because I wanted them to have that Quaker experience. My oldest son Matt has three kids now, and he is absolutely a spectacular daddy. He’s loving, he’s sweet; he’s kind; he’s funny; he’s gentle and he’s a big strong guy. He’s a big man. He’s siX-foot three 230 pounds, very physical, very athletic. But he’ll sit on the ﬂoor with the girls and they paint his toenails and then they’ll go out and play soccer and his little boy Miles is going to grow up to be a whole human being. So for me my activism is centered as much around trying to create an atmosphere where men can shed some of the skin that’s been draped on them, that hypermasculinized you’d better be a hard ass all the time. Because I think they lose a lot when they get into that mindset. I know over the years I’ve seen families where the man is abusive and Violent and controlling, and in his mind he equates fear with respect and they’re not the same thing at all. And when he dies, they celebrate. So what I’ve tried to say to men that I’ve interacted with over the years that are controlling and Violent is you think you’re family respects you because they’re afraid of you, you’re wrong. They’re just afraid of you. That’s all there is to it. But again that socialization process starts on Interview number U-1004 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill Gruelle 28 day one, sometimes starts even in utero. So [this recording stopped abruptly at the 1:03 222.3 although the interview did not appear to be over]..