 WILL HOGGARD: A11 tight. So I’m here with Miss Laun'e Fuchs the founder of Ladyslipper. We’re here in I guess the new office building warehouse, something like that, with a lot of boxes and everything. But I’m just going to ask Miss Fuchs a few questions and see what happens. So yeah, how did you get, just generally speaking, how did you get the whole idea to even start something as big as what Ladyslipper has become I guess? LAURIE FUCHS: Okay. Well, it wasn’t really an idea to start something big. I never thought it would become as big as it did. And as you probably know it was bigger, we probably had our peak years in the mid-nineties by then. And so it has really done an arc in the size. But I began as a young woman, long time ago, in my twenties, and I had recently moved to Durham from mral southwest Georgia where I lived in a very interesting community that was involved in a lot of local economic work, and it’s something called Koinonia, some people— WH: Koinonia, what exactly— LF: Well, I was a community that was founded in the [l9]40s, an interracial community back when that was a really weird thing to do and a risky thing to do in southern Georgia. And that’s a really long story. So Iwon’t go into too many details, but just to say that there were a lot of economic development projects that were, that spmng up there in farming and sewing and pecan products, bakery things. And it was also one of the endeavors that was happening was building housing low, housing that was in order to remedy some of the really dismal housing situations locally. And so houses were built using local people and as low cost in as low cost a way and the houses were sold with no interest loans. This became, this was the sort of blueprint, the people who were doing this then moved into town, and it began Habitat for Humanity. So that was the beginning of that. So many interesting organizations had their birth at Koinonia. But one of the things that helped me being there was whatever ideas we had or needs we saw, we were encouraged and had to just go ahead and do sort of follow the ideas to the best of our ability to really be serious and focused and do that. WH: Okay. I was talking with Mrs. Barb about a little bit of background about you like a while ago. Is this the same, she said it was like, is it the same like as the commune I guess in south of Georgia or something like that? LF: Yes. Yes. It wasn’t exactly a commune because it wasn’t like, there was also a commune movement at the time that was more of a back to the land, the [l9]60s and all that. This really had started way before that and I think not that [l9]60s communes weren’t seﬁous, but this was not a drugs rock and roll kind of a place. It was really a social justice oriented organization. So and I could talk for the whole hour about that, but I know we are not here to do that. But anyway, so I moved to Durham. I was ready to move on to something else. Ihad become interested in feminism. I had thought about, Ihad, there was a magazine there called Win which was sort of the War Resisters League publication, and there was a very interesting conversation going on with women who were involved in the peace movement and feminist movement and the early lesbian/gay movement. There was like a lot of writing and conversation and things like this in the magazine. And I would be running the printing press late at night, and I would just be reading the magazine and thinking wow that’s really interesting, fascinating. And so I started wanting to know more about those ideas and somehow or other--. And so that was also the time of just the early second wave feminist movement where there are a few women’s bookstores starting to open, and we had a little consciousness raising group there at Koinonia with some of the women, some were married; some were single. We were just exploring what did feminism mean. What were the ways that we didn’t feel really good about some of the sexist practices that were both happening institutionalized there and were happening in relationships and we could see them sort of in our culture and things like that. So anyway I got a hold of somehow or other, there was a nonproﬁt book service, and it was called First Things First. And First Things First meant partly they were listing the women by their first names because of the tradition where the last names were came from a man. And sort of in the same way that immigrants were given an anglicized name or slaves were given an owners’ name, women were always from a tradition where the father gave the last name, and then the husband gave the last name. The woman had no identity aside from that. So in this magazine, it was sort of just a newsprint ﬂyer. It was a listing of books of, that spanned maybe not just current literature but older than that too. And it was just a really important resource to me personally because I could order them from them if I had any money, which I didn’t have much of or go to my local library and Check out books. And I would go in there with that reading list and find things even in Americus, Georgia. And I could also take them if I found one of the few new women’s bookstores I could go in there and buy myself a book or two. And I started reading these feminist, feminist ﬁction and non-fiction, and it was just, it was just a very amazing exciting time of ideas that were just--. So that’s just some background. Okay. So then in the music world there were a few performers who were coming into my awareness. Holly Near was one who someone saw her up in Durham and came back to Georgia with an LP [Long Play record album “Vinyl”]. And we listened to this, and we were just amazed. It was just so political and so personal and powerful and not, it wasn’t just sort of—-. There was folk music and there was important--. There was jazz and blues and other genres of music but this was more, it was just so personal and so—I'd love to have this album. Where can I get it? So we would have to wait for the performer to come again on tour somewhere because you couldn’t fin --. That was the only access. There was no internet; there was no download. That was the only access. Okay, so then when I moved here the very young movement of women’s music was just beginning, and artists would come to town every once in a while. And they would be feminist, and they would, some of them were lesbians, and this was just like we were very excited. Most of us were doing living like on almost nothing and wanted to be involved in various kinds of cultural, political, social oriented work. This was like exciting. So then we, Iheard about this national women’s music festival. This is the one we were just talking about where they are going to do A Rainbow Path performance. WH: Okay. LF: They’re doing this performance this June, but this festival has been going since 1974. It was founded because at the college, I think it was University of Illinois, there was a music festival happening. There was a woman student there that looked at the roster, and every performer was a man, every last one. She said how about some women, and they’re like we don’t need to, no, we’re all set. No reason for that. WH: This is before, she asked that before I guess everything was like set up or that was while they were planning. LF: I think they were planning. She could not get any—. WH: Yeah, gotcha. LF: I don’t know exactly at what point she tried to get involved. But whatever it was, there was no way. It just struck her as really imbalanced. So she decided she was going to have a women’s music festival and she just planned one and invited probably some pretty big name artists and just sought, waited to see who would come and had, had a festival that people just loved and responded to and it sort of built year by year, a lot of energy. WH: Is this the same one that Miss Barbara was talking a while ago about I guess, there was a festival going on and you decided to post pamphlets and stuff on the cars and then it rained? LF: That was the, yes, that was the Michigan festival, and that’s the first year of Michigan was [l9]77, was [l9]76, [l9]76. So yeah, that’s a funny story. WH: Well, if we have time, you would like to share. LF: Yes, we can definitely talk about that. So anyway, went to the national women’s festival the third year they had it just because some friends were going and we drove up. And just absolutely loved it, and there were all these wonderful artists who had no distribution. There was no way to get their music. Some had been performing for a long time like MalVina Reynolds had been a folk artist for years and years. Pete Seeger recorded some of her songs. She was there and lesser known artists and a lot of participatory kinds of things where there were jam sessions and round robins and workshops and very exciting stuff. Some women had LPs, and some had little cassettes they had made themselves, no distribution. So I thought I would like to maybe start, start something like a First Thing First was for books. How about we do something for music because it’s insane. This is what I want for myself. I think that was really the key. This would, this was something that I needed in my own life, and I knew other people who needed this in their life, and it wasn’t, it wasn’t any where to be found. So I thought, okay, I’ll just set up a little something with these artists to buy a few of their recordings and I’ll put out a ﬂyer or a little newspaper or something. And I think I was working at a print shop already, and that was kind of key because I had access to create pamphlets and ﬂyers for things. WH: This is all like the beginning of Ladyslipper. LF: Yes. So I also had the idea at the time I was going to do a crafts catalog and market women’s crafts, and so I was making a little booklet. Ihad solicited some craftswoman to see if they wanted to go in sort of like a cooperative thing. And it turned out Ihad some pages empty. They were folded. So I thought well, I’ll just start this little music things right now right here. Four empty pages, I’ll buy some and write a little description and put these out and send these little catalogs out and I did that. I was working, there were some other women who were working in support on this. My partner at the time, Joanne Abel, she was working with me. So in the very beginning it was two of us, and because of my printing job I could go in. I could hand draw the things. I could make the negatives. I could shoot the place. I could run it on the press, just for the cost of paper they let me go in after hours and do this. If I had had to pay for this printing, I probably could not have afforded to do this. It wouldn’t have happened. And then there was another woman in town and she was the OliVia distributor. And they had just started up their distribution network for recordings by women, and they had an idea for there to be an all women’s label with all women engineers and performers and that women would have control of every part of the process. It was a great idea and it was very oriented— WH: So what was the name of the lady that started this again? LF: Well, that was OliVia Records. WH: Oh okay. Yeah. LF: They had started already. They started in [l9]74. Seventy-four or [l9]75, there were a couple of labels, women’s labels and lesbian oriented labels that had started in about [l9]74. Maybe even there were a few things that came out on forty-ﬁve rpm [rounds per minute] even in [19]7 3 or something like that. So when, let’s see the sequence, in the endeavor that we called Ladyslipper, one of the labels I wanted to have in the Ladyslipper catalog was the OliVia records. They had maybe four or ﬁve releases out. That was only part of what I wanted to do but because I had other labels. I wanted to represent that the OliVia distributor did not represent. So she and I started working to gether. Her name was Kathy Tomyris. She and I also already worked together— WH: I’m sorry, do you recall how to spell her name? LF: Yes, K-A-T-H-Y first name, T-O-M-Y-R-I-S her last name. WH: Okay. Thank you. LF: So she was the OliVia distributor. We started working together. And a graphics, a women’s graphics collective, and also she had started to produce some local concerts. And there was a concert collective that she and I started working together in called ( ) Productions, and we started working together to bring a variety of women artists in concert to just regular venues and worked on a concert for women in prison, and there were various projects that we just thought were fun and exciting and interesting to do. So at a point not too, not too much later than that Kathy and I started working together in Ladyslipper. Ladyslipper hired, first hired her 10 and then she and Ibecame partners in Ladyslipper and kind of merged in her OliVia distribution and the labels that Ladyslipper was representing. She worked, she was a typesetter. She— WH: I’m sorry. So when you say Ladyslipper hired her, do you mean that you hired her or you guys already had a pretty good framework of how the whole thing was— LF: Well, we didn’t really have a framework. WH: Okay, okay. I was just wondering. LF: I think when we hired her I think we didn’t have a legal entity at that point. We just figured that if she and I worked together, we could scrounge up $300 a month for her to work full-time doing this. We just sort of said we would figure out how to do it. When she started working with me, we did go ahead and start, we set up, did our tax thing, like our partnership. That’s when I guess we became something legal. We didn’t like draw up legal documents or—-. Okay, we were just--. I think a lot of people now are sort of more serious about a business. We weren’t thinking of it that way. We were thinking of it as an activity, as a volunteer activity is really how we thought. When she wanted to do it full-time and she wanted to stop having to do anything else and just have her subsistence living which $300 a month was going to cover, we just said, okay. We’ll try this. WH: Okay so— LF: So we did. And that’s when, so she was a typesetter. So she was working at somewhere in Chapel Hill that she had access to the, she could use the typesetting equipment, and she and I went in there one night, and well me just backtrack for a minute. So in addition to Olivia records and women’s music, the lesbian oriented women’s feminist music that we were doing, we also wanted to incorporate women from a wider historically deep and rich background. Women who had been already doing, taking control of their own careers more or less. And 11 Mary Lou Williams was a one of those who was really important through all the jazz era and Hazel and Alice from the mountains of North Carolina. And we started trying to do research on what, what other women had been recording pretty much on their own terms. We went to two music libraries and UNC was one and Duke music library was another. We said we’d like to check out, borrow all the recordings by women that you have. And each library, and I kid you not, had one or two women in their whole collections. I am just really not kidding you. Bessie Smith was one that I remember they had. And for these university libraries to have nothing in them. We had no idea how dismal this was and how underrepresented women were. It was just ﬂabbergasting . So then we would start investigating folk catalogs, and we would just ﬂip through page after page, and there might be 200 recordings in there and there might be one or two women out of 200. It just, there was so, the opportunities for women even in the independent music world were so limited. And at the same time there were, there was a boycott going on of Warner Brothers. And I just want to talk about this for a second. It was called Women Against Violence Against Women, WAVAW was the name. And women were, it was a whole campaign because the advertising that was happening in the major label world was indicative of the attitudes. One of them was “I’m black and blue from the Rolling Stones and I love it.” That was the ad message that you could see on a billboard, that you could see on a poster in a record store. It was just really demeaning and horrible. It was just romanticizing and glorifying women as somebody to slap around, a sex object. Women who wanted to go into, have a career would meet with a major label executive and be told you have to wear this little short dress, and you have to have this picture in this really sexy stupid way and not, so maybe this is all obvious and known to everybody, but it’s really different now. It’s just—okay. 12 So back to the story of that first catalog that we produced together, Kathy Tomyris and I, that Barb mentioned. We decided we were going to this Michigan women’s music festival together and it was the second year. So we went to her typesetting place, and I was sort of say some text and that she would type. And then we’d go over to my printshop and take the galleys that she’d generated and slap them down as a paper and work them together in a darkroom and shoot the negatives in the place and run them on the press and fold them and collate them. And we worked all night so we had these two boxes of our first real catalog. We had done some ﬂiers before but this was the first Ladyslipper catalog. Took them to this festival. There was nothing organized there for vendors, and then the last day we thought we’d go to the parking lot and stick them under people’s windshield wipers, and then there was a huge downpour. So they were peeling them off. And we had no idea really what was going to happen. But we were oriented towards the individual woman who would go home or find our ﬂier and want to order music. Instead what happened there was a little bit of that, but instead what happened was a deluge of women’s bookstores started contacting us. Women’s bookstores were not just bookstores. They were community centers and they were like lifelines. It was just the beginning of this huge movement that be gan just about then until there were hundreds and hundreds of women’s bookstores all over the country and the world. But in the very beginning they would write to us. They might send a postcard or they might call and say we want to order this music. We’d say we don’t have it wholesale but here’s a, we’d hand write out a letter. Here’s a list of suppliers where you can buy them too. Then we got a little smarter and mimeographed that. Then we said, they still wanted to buy from us so we said okay we can give you a ten percent discount, but here is where you can get a better price. Finally it just dawned on us that we just need to be a distributor of all of this because they wanted, there’s a huge need. Why don’t we just go ahead and get set 13 up as a distributor for all of these women’s labels. Meanwhile women were coming to festivals and women were learning how to do sound engineering and had a, have a label and record their own. And it was just, there was, it was like you went into a desert field, and all of a sudden it rained and just wildﬂowers and beautiful things of every kind sprouted up and started to grow and take off and become a rainforest. It was just, so— WH: Okay so Miss Barbara was talking and said you guys bought that house in what was it, [l9]95. LF: In Durham, yeah that building in [l9]95. WH: So where, so where was I guess everything situated until about then like when you said stuff was blooming? LF: Well, yeah it started in my home, mine and Joanne’s home. And ﬁrst it was just a few inches of the living room shelf. WH: So in Chapel— LF: Pretty soon it was the, that was in Durham on Clarendon Street. And pretty soon took over the living room and then took over the dining room and then took over all the closets and upstairs. Then we had to move to a bigger space. By this time Kathy Tomyris moved to California. So we found a replacement for her, the OliVia distributor in Columbia named Liz Snow agreed to come and take Kathy’s place. So she moved up to Durham, and she’d been working at my house. It was, we had the idea to incorporate somewhere in there, and a friend of ours really encouraged us to become non-profit because she thought our work was really worthwhile, and she thought we could be eligible for grants. She was in fact a grant reader for National Endowment for the Humanities. She said what you’re doing is just, we give grants to people all the time. I don’t think they’re even doing something—I think you would really 14 qualify for this. We were also producing concerts. So we went ahead and, we incorporated officially as a nonprofit, and got our tax exempt status and provided all the documentation for all of this. And we went through a process of this. Do we just want it to have it be the concert arm and not the distribution, but really it was all for the same purpose. It was to provide access to and information about the recordings by women and we were digging into history and all, it was going all over the country and the world in terms of artists that we were interested in and providing the service for and lots, we were going to festivals and conferences with our catalogs. They started getting bigger and bigger, and libraries started ordering from us and that was, they would order a lot. Like they would say like we want these 100 titles from you. That was just so really gratifying because that’s sort of one of the absences in the begimIing where there was even if you wanted to study thism there wasn’t a way to do it. So after we outgrew my little tiny apartment we moved into Liz’s house which was a bigger house. And we were there for a while. Then in 19, somewhere in the [l9]80s we moved to a building on the corner of Gregson and West Chapel Hill Street, which was called--. It was 602 West Chapel Hill Street Building, and then right next door to us was all these social justice organizations like War Resister’s League and Institute for Southern Studies and Prison and Jail Project and lots of people doing lots of really great org—community work and so we were just right there. And we were there until we outgrew that. In 1990 we moved sort of across the street. Oh and we outgrew it and somebody else bought it tripled our rent, left us ( ). So we couldn’t stay there. So we went to Vicker’s just sort of across the street. We were there for ﬁve years. We were busting out of the seams there and in [l9]95 we bought the building on Hillsborough Road. And that was about the time that the whole it was about the peak of what was happening for us in mail order and 15 distribution, and we had become a label during the course of that. Partly and do you want to hear about how we did that? WH: Yeah, definitely I was about to ask that. I was just typing to make sure I knew my next question. So yeah. LF: Okay. Well, there was an artist who we had, well we had started doing what we called sub-distribution before this. That was when artists who could not keep up with packing and shipping just sent us all their stuff. They just couldn’t deal with it. They were touring or they were whatever. So we would set up with this whole network of distributors. We did the shipping, billing. We publicized their work in the catalogs. Got them into the distribution networks and all that. The next step was women who could not keep up with their manufacturing. They just didn’t have the money saved. They got paid for their music and then they spent it and they couldn’t repress it. So we started doing manufacturing for artists because they weren’t business--some of them weren’t business people. Some of them were really good at business. But some were just not and not there to do the day to day organization. They were creative. They were writing music and touring and off doing that. And so the way we got into manufacturing was just sort of, I guess it happened when an artist just said so I'd like you to do this. What do you think about that? We’re like sure, that’s fine. And so by this time our staff had grown, and we had staff people who were just handling that. So there was an artist named Kay Gardner who had been planning this really major release. Well, actually that’s not the very ﬁrst thing that happened, and I can just jump back for one second. There were a couple of releases that were going out of print, and the artist and labels were closing, folding. They had, they asked us somehow do you want to take these on as like a license. We said sure we’ll do that because we’d already been manufacturing. So we had 16 a few sort of not minor releases exactly, but they weren’t, they weren’t big for us. But we got our feet wet I guess in that a little bit and starting to deal, these were LPs pressing plants how you do that. You have to have a test. They made, you had to take this piece of plastic and listen to the whole thing and mark the times when you heard pops and crackles and the glass master and whatever they were called. I can’t even remember now. But we learned that process then. But anyway this artist Kay Gardner was planning this really major release and she was planning it for, fundraising for it like a year or two. She was going to call it A Rainbow Path. We said, “Okay Kay is it ready now?” Well, I don’t quite have the money raised. Well, I don’t quite have the money raised. So finally after two years of us just being really excited about this release, it was a music and healing release. It was right at the beginning of the genre. The genre really was, it hadn’t happened yet, but there was kind of interest in that. So one day we just said if we record, “Would you just like us to record this for you if—“ and she said, “Sure.” So we said, “Okay we’ll do it.” We had no idea where we were going to get the money. We got together a recording budget. We needed $20,000 or more than that. We were going to do the recording, the manufacturing, the promotion, the whole thing. So we had no clue how we were going to finance it, but we went out to the community and asked for loans from friends and supporters, and we raised the money, and we thought we really hope we can pay this back. And we put this release out and it was just very magical. We sold over 10,000 copies in six months. And that was just a very, very amazing number for an independent release. It went up to number, the New Age music genre was just like it hadn’t, it was just like the first couple months where it had a name. And there were, this recording went to number two in the New Age music genre. So anyway, that’s how that happened. 17 Then in the, we got very excited by that and so we thought well, let’s keep doing this. This is great. Pretty soon we learned that not everything happened that way with every release. Even though we thought things were really wonderful and worthy. It didn’t mean that that finances were going to, that we were going to be able to recover the recording costs thereafter. WH: Yes, ma’am. Well, I guess with that though didn’t it, it pushed, I guess, how do I say it. The new category of music and all the things that you guys had been doing at that point were you seeing it as a beginning to like be a women’s movement this is, that’s something that triggered it or you’d always seen it I guess as being a part of that, the women’s music movement for— LF: Well, this was part of the women’s music movement. But it was also sort of, there was another, there was the women’s music in the performing artist sense. And then there was something else that was starting, which was called the women’s spirituality movement and that was women getting together for a less male dominated spiritual experience and using music and ritual and circle songs and chants and a very feminine, female not sort of a religion of a male god in the sky. But something very internal, being more in touch with the earth, nature, ﬁnding out about goddess religions of the millenniums past and incorporating all of that. And so there was a lot of, there was a lot of crossover that was starting to happen in genres. I’ll say throughout, even before this was happened there were, there were genres of music that were sort of being crossover things. There was the women’s music movement, but there was folk music. And established genre like that that was incorporated. Then there was blues as a genre, and there was a lot of really feminist blues women who really wrote really feminist lyrics and did really, so there were compilations coming out with that, both genres. They fit both genres, and then there was for a while a really amazing movement of reggae music 18 with women who were writing very feminist lyrics. So we, as genres sort of became into popularity, they sort of peaked and ebbed. We would start taking on in our distribution. So women’s music was not, it wasn’t that there was way that you can deﬁne it by, these are the artists that come to the women’s music festivals. But who was coming to the women’s music festivals was broadening. A lot of the artists, some of the stores had women’s music bins. But many artists were in other bins in the music stores. So it was, it was defined, but it was also sort of a part of a bigger picture. And there were artists that belonged in two or three different categories. WH: So I guess like wit this thing, was it more like all women together or was it something more like this music movement, like the lesbian women dominated that and then like, I don’t want to say--. Was it different groups that dominated this particular aspects of I guess the whole movement like let’s say something with music and then there’s like the whole movement as a whole. Am I making sense or not so much? LF: I’m not so—I’m not sure what— WH: It’s hard, I’m trying to--. I can’t pinpoint it exactly. I just want, I guess what was the, what were the exact dynamics I guess of the women’s movement like I guess as far as who ran--. LF: Who ran the women’s movement? WH: Yeah. I mean know women but like— LF: Well, I think there were different aspects of this part of the women’s movement. There was certainly the bookstore and the literary, the written word. That was separate but part of it. There was the music part. The women’s music and cultural movement was something that we talk about and there were a lot of performers that were in this that weren’t music; they were 19 comedy or dance. Other kind of performance, the performance arts I guess were happening at the festivals. Also there were women’s writing conferences, and there were lots of women’s presses being formed and publishing huge numbers of books. WH: Yeah, I’m sorry. So like how did the music movement differ from the women’s movement like exactly? What were, was everything like meshed. Was it more of a blend or more of like one thing’s like this way and one thing? Do you get what I mean? LF: I think there was some blending and some not. There was also sort of the political arm of the women’s movement, and there were the more established organizations like National Organization for Women for instance would have their conferences, and there were lots of other organizations that were—I mean there were hundreds of different kinds of women’s organizations happening, and so there were certainly people--. There was women’s Visual art movement happening, and that was sort of the movement unto itself but involved in the women’s movement also. But I could personally don’t know that much about it. WH: Oh okay. But where do you feel like because I know Ladyslipper I know you guys, there was like music label or is a music label but with all the concerts things and stuff like that that you used to do and garnering people together. Where do you feel like it fit more I guess as part of the women’s movement or part of the music movement? LF: I would say that Ladyslipper was really part of the women’s movement although I wish I could say part of the music movement as a whole. And I think the women’s music movement has had a real impact on what happened with women even lots of people never heard of the women’s music movement, lots of people. And to some extent it’s sort of an unacknowledged, many political and social movements have their music component. So and they sort of move into the more of the mainstream consciousness of this, it was this movement 20 like the ciVil rights movement had a real music component. And there’s some documentation of the music that’s happened. I’m not sure people really think about the music that much. But to separate the movement from the music would be really hard because it was so much a unifying, empowering support for the struggles. And for the women’s music movement there was a similar for many, for many people there was a real empowering support that people derived from just having the expression, having the hope and the, just the I guess empowerment is the best way to talk about it. And there’s some documentation of it but not as much as I would like to see. People know about the effects of the folk movement, all these parts of it are, all these musics, all these kinds of music are part of the longer history. There’s a context for all of this. And I think, I think to some extent there was a dismissal. I know for a fact, not to some extent. To a big extent there was a real dismissal of what this was in sort of the mainstream arena. People, do you remember the Lilith festival or have you ever heard of this? WH: It sounds really familiar. LF: Okay. Well, I guess it was, Idon’t know ift was [19]90s or [19]80s or when it was, but these mainstream women decided they were going to do music festivals that featured women artists. Because they got tired of wanting to be on a bill, two women’s acts together and someone saying, oh we already have the woman act there. We can’t have two. As if lots of men’s acts weren’t two, and they got tired of that, and so they decided to have a festival. So it got a lot of mainstream publicity, but it was publicized as the first women’s music festival completely ignoring the fact and they knew it. They knew there had been a ten or fifteen year history of women’s music festivals already happening. And it was just really infuriating to have mainstream media covering it that way, And even when we would submit a correction to someone and say excuse me but could you be accurate in your, give some credit. Give credit to 21 the Lilith festival, that is fine. But give credit that there was a whole groundwork that was laid by people before, before the Lilith festival could come to be. WH: Yes ma’am. Yes ma’am. LF: So the women’s music festivals deserve huge credit for keeping that going. There was also, I just want to mention a huge network of women’s music production companies. There were hundreds in like every metropolitan area and college town and these women were bringing artists to their towns and bringing in thousands of people and doing this as volunteers. They would say they broke even. If they said they broke even, it meant the artists got paid and the hall got paid and the technicians got paid. The people who produced the concerts never got paid. So it really ran on a lot of wonderﬁil volunteer effort. I just have to put in a plug for them. And then I guess over time a lot of groups had sort of the burnout, and the venues started getting smaller and pretty soon the internet came in, and the big box chains put the independent stores out of business and Amazon helped put a lot of smaller stores out of business. That’s, I could talk for hours about how that decline happened, but I think you hadn’t asked me that question. WH: Yes ma’am. Well, I guess seeing how Chapel Hill, the Triangle area as a whole is today is very progressive and very accepting of a lot of things. Do you feel like Ladyslipper and the movement and everything that you guys did has a big part in that or how do you feel like that affected a lot of the change that’s been going on. LF: I think that when we were really active here producing concerts, I think it was really a reciprocal relationship that we could do that here because of all the progressive people and organizations and support that we got. We worked with a lot of student organizations as co- sponsors, some other organizations locally to put events on with community church in Chapel Hill was a great venue. We worked at the Cat’s Cradle sometimes, UNC. We did shows at 22 Memorial Hall and smaller halls there. So I think people have sometimes talked about Ladyslipper as if we made it happen. We, give us, I mean I think we should, can take some credit for pulling things together. But I also think we were also reﬂecting what was happening already, and there was as way that the events we did gave a cohesive place for people to come to and feel a part of their community. But there were other, there was a women’s newsletter that was happening that was really important then to publicize things, and there was a real give and take with lots of women came to volunteer at Ladyslipper to make things happen and so it was--. When things like that happen, it’s really a I guess a synergy of some kind. WH: Okay. Well, I don’t have to ask my next question. But yeah, I guess so being with all this stuff that all the great things that I guess you’ve done. How do you feel like that’s, how to say it. Do you feel like—I need to ﬁnd my question. Ikeep trying to memorize it, but yeah, like how did your upbringing I guess get to, get you to where you are now, and looking back on it, what do you think are some of the biggest things that made you such, I guess so strong in like your beliefs as far as feminism and everything is concerned. LF: That’s an interesting question. Well, let’s see. I guess I come from a family of atheist Jews who argued things and ideas. Ideas were good. They were pretty progressive politically. Probably I don’t know whether my mother was actually a card carrying socialist back in the day. She could’ve been. I’m not sure. But they were of the, of that generation where I would say there were a lot of, a lot of Jews of that generation for some reason and a lot of other people too. But so they were always certainly Democrats and interest, some interest in, they were strong union supporters, and I guess my father was in a teacher’s union, and so that would’ve been their that background. 23 My mother went and got her master’s degree probably at a time when not a lot of women were pursuing that. She was kind of, she was kind of feminist, and in her later years she really had, she was a big supporter of Ladyslipper, and she would join a women’s center and women’s groups and just liked to have that kind of dialogue and interest in things. I didn’t have a background that said go out and do something you’re interested in. My background said go to school, go to more school, go to more school be a teacher, get tenure, be set. Iused to kind of wonder about that because my mother had gone to all this school, and then she got married and she didn’t use anything that she went to school for. So that sounded kind of silly to me. But I really hated school. I despised it. I tried to do independent study projects instead of having to go to class, didn’t really like them. I did not, I think in my school I was the only person who didn’t go to college from my class, immediately. Then I, I'd enrolled in a school. I didn’t go. I enrolled in New College Sarasota, didn’t show up. WH: Was there any reason or you just weren’t— LF: I hated academic requirements. I thought I wanted to experience things, and I wanted to do things. I saw no point in having a degree for no reason. I thought if I ever need that for something I’ll go get it. But I didn’t, didn’t interest me. So it was pretty counter to that upbringing. But when I went to the Koinonia community that I mentioned, that was, I went, okay Iwent, I enrolled in Friend’s World College then. That was like an accredited school. I was going to actually go for and get a degree by going around the world and doing work project in each continent like the Peace Corps. And it was great that there was something like that. But I went to Koinonia as my first in-country extended volunteer project, and I loved it there and I didn’t, I ended up dropping out of Friends World—they raised the tuition. I didn’t want to have to go into debt, take a loan. I didn’t want that. So I went back to Koinonia. Like I said the 24 attitude, whatever I think I got a lot of really good things there. I was there between ages eighteen and twenty-three. So Ithink that’s where I got that kind of educational background that said, you want to, if you envision something just do it. And so— WH: Miss Barbara was telling me a funny story about, I think she said something like the guy from Habitat for Humanity or something was like trying to make passes or something. I can’t remember. LF: Oh you can’t even put this in there. WH: Yes, I’ll take it out. I’ll take it out. LF: Yeah, take that one out. WH: I’ll take that definitely out. Okay. I apologize. LF: Was it in hers? WH: Uh no. LF: Okay. Well, actually you can leave it in there. WH: Okay. Are you sure? We can definitely do away with it. LF: You can leave it in there. I mean that was another thing, another thing in the culture is that we didn’t talk about that. We got there, and we were, women, things were happening to us. This was like part of the beginning of that women’s movement and feminism and how many, how many men were getting away with the kinds of sexual harassment and nobody talked about it. And we were, we didn’t even have a word for it. We didn’t share it even among us our, but sometimes we did, but we didn’t even, we were sort of, we had a little bit of outrage but not even that much. My younger sister came down there. She was sixteen, and she got manhandled by someone in a position of authority there. And this is like, this is like child molesting as far as 25 I’m concerned. We didn’t call it that. So yeah, you can leave that in. And it wasn’t by that person that you mentioned. But and Ihad a few of those experiences. WH: Yes, ma’am. I apologize for opening that can of worms. LF: That’s okay. WH: But I appreciate it. I got a pretty good View and ideal about everything I feel like show me like a lot, I learned a lot in this hour and some change. I think if I just want to thank you a lot for your time. I really did learn a lot. I can’t express that enough. LF: Well, good. Ithink what you’re doing is so great and one of the ideas that we’ve just throwing, people are doing this in so many arenas. It’s great. A while back here’s a Vision we never thought of. Do you know Story Core? Do you know what that is? Oh this is a great oral history thing where people, they have these, I think the Smithsonian is archiving this stuff. But they set up these booths and people come in for a few minutes, and it’s on audio and Video, and they tell their story, whatever story they want to tell. They have them in like Grand Central Station and they had booths, I think they had a Story Core booth down at Brightleaf or at, not Brightleaf but that thing downtown that has a little river going through it. You know what I’m talking about. I can’t remember what it’s called, the cigarette thing. WH: Maybe. LF: Where the ( ) operates from. It’s like in downtown Durham anyway. I’m losing my vocabulary. But we did think we should just go around with a microphone and talk to thousands of women who have been in the women’s music arena and just do an impromptu interview and just put everything. So we started with some artist interviews. Did you find them online or— WH: Yeah, I’m editing those right now. 26 LF: Okay. Well great. Great. That’s wonderful. But this kind of work is really important. So thank you. WH: Thank you. Are there any last things that you did want to add? LF: I’m sure I’ll think of lots of things I forgot to say. WH: All right. I’ll do my best to get you copies of this. LF: Oh good. Well, thank you so much. I enjoyed it WH: Thank you so much. You too...