 Kelly Gibson: My name is Kelly Gibson and I am interviewing Ruth Zalph on June 8 in Carrboro, 2013. So, Ruth, could you tell me a little bit about your childhood, your background, and perhaps events that occurred in your childhood that sparked your interest in activism? Ruth Zalph: Well I was born in Brooklyn, New York and I spent probably from the time I was about six or seven in Manhattan on the Lower East Side, and that was before and during the war years. I remember my mother was very actively engaged in working at the settlement house, Henry Street Settlement, and volunteering. I used to go to the settlement house and take classes when I was, oh, eight to seventeen before I went away to college. My mother was a lifetime member of WILPF [Women's International League for Peace and Freedom] and she sparked my interest in world events and what was happening. But I remember going to elementary school on the Lower East Side in 1941, when I was eleven years old, and had a dog tag, and being told that we had to practice in case we were bombed by getting underneath our desk. That really left quite an impression on my mind that Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 5 things were dangerous, and what was this war all about? Another thing that I remember was saving grease from bacon and bringing it to the butcher shop because they said that they used that in making munitions or something like that. It seemed very odd to me that they wanted us to save this. “Bring your cans of grease. Buy war bonds,” and all of this, “Uncle Sam wants you,” hoopla about war, and was this really something that was a necessary thing to be doing? Anyhow, I was involved in peace activities from a fairly early age. However, still being quite young there was very little that I could do except save money and buy stamps. You have so many stamps in a book and then you could buy a bond. I’m not quite sure how—. I’m having trouble remembering exactly how it worked. $18.25 bought a $25 war bond. However, one of my sisters, my older sister, joined the WACs. KG: Could you specify what the WACs are? RZ: The Women’s Army Corps. KG: Okay. RZ: And my other sister was going to college and I was still in the early stages of high school. KG: In what way did this war propaganda that you were talking about, that you grew up with in your childhood, in what ways do you think that affected your decision to become interested in activism as you got maybe a little bit older, perhaps in your teen years, or college age years? RZ: Well Ibelonged to a group called the American Youth for Democracy, the AYD, and I don’t remember too much about our gatherings, our meetings, but I always wondered why it Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 6 was so difficult for countries to get to gether, negotiate and talk about the problems that they felt were causes for military engagement, rather than peaceful engagement. I remember that Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom is the oldest peace organization. They attempted to prevent World War I from begimIing by taking a ship across the ocean, to talk with the leaders about alternatives to war, and that was quite an unusual thing for women to do at that time. I think that was ninety-nine years ago. And I still feel today that the business of war is as being a very proﬁtable and why we are engaged in so many. If peace was profitable in a financial sense I think there would be more peace, when you consider all of the corporate entities that make tremendous amount of money through war and preparations of war it’s not that hard to understand. KG: Definitely. What types of activist activities were you involved in when you were perhaps college age or a young adult, in your early twenties or so? RZ: Well, I was not terribly engaged when I was a young adult because I married a month before I was twenty-one, I started teaching school, and ﬁve years later I had the first of three children, and during the period of time when my kids were little I was very actively engaged in either being at home with them or teaching school or doing both. I wanted to go to Selma, Alabama, I wanted to march with Martin Luther King, and my husband said, “If you want to keep your job, keep your family, keep your husband, send money. Stay home,” and that’s what I did. So during the period of time the children were at home, I was at home. And, okay, I’d write a letter to the editor, or I’d send money, but I wasn’t out there in the streets demonstrating, that I can remember, until quite a while later when the boys were all out of the house and on their OWIl. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 7 KG: I realize it was your personal decision to back away from the forefront of that area of activism because you had your family and children, et cetera. Do you think that societal expectations or constraints inﬂuenced your ultimate decision to send money or write letters as opposed to travel? RZ: I think it was my husband more than anything else. He had deep convictions and I think that it would have disrupted our marriage a great deal. For him to make a decent living he was giving up a great deal, because his work was not the work that he wanted. When he was in high school growing up in Washington, DC he wanted to be an engineer more than anything else, and he was told by the college advisors, by the high school advisors, go into business. A Jew is not going to get a job in industry. You are not going to get a job as a Jewish man. He would have been a marvelous engineer. He had the brains, he had the imagination to do very well in engineering, but he took business studies and became a certified public accountant, and he did many jobs in accounting that he did not like, including working for many banks, being the first Jewish officer at a bank. I remember going to Miami Beach and driving along the highway in Miami Beach and there were signs: “No Blacks, no Jews permitted.” KG: Wow. RZ: And that was in 1950, 1951. KG: I never knew that they had signs that said “no Jews” as well. Wow. RZ: So I realized that so much of what he did was not what he had wanted to do. He tried to get jobs in business in engineering and was unsuccessful. So his life had a lot of disappointments and I didn’t want to have one more disappointing thing: “I’m going to go off and go march with Martin Luther King regardless of what you say.” Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 8 KG: Definitely. RZ: “I’m going to go and oppose the Vietnam War and get arrested, regardless of what you think.” He was a good husband, a good father, and I thought he deserved more than a mn- away wife [Laughs] out there fighting for all the causes. KG: I think it’s very interesting. When we study activists we often forget the fact that these are people who have personal lives as well, and that personal lives can suffer or improve based on the activists’ decisions and how they go about their work. RZ: I admire some of the couples I see today who are in their seventies where the husband and wife have been partners in peace for many, many years. I want to applaud them all the time and wish that that was something that I could do, but my husband died at the young age of fifty-mne—fifty-nine—and I was fifty-siX. We had birthdays the same day, same month, just three years apart. He never got to enjoy retirement. He paid into the retirement system but he never got anything out of it, and he lived a difﬁcult life, working at things that he didn’t enj oy doing. I’m the beneficiary, in a way, of that difficult life because he worked at a bank that he really disliked very, very much and he continued working there because they had a very good retirement program, and I was the beneficiary of that. My life changed dramatically after he passed away. I went to spend some time with my oldest son in Blacksburg, Virginia where he was doing a PhD program, and there was a group—. I was a volunteer at the food co-op and they said, “We’ve got a bus and we’re going to Washington, DC about—.” I don’t remember what it was about, but it was in [Pause] 1987, I think. They told me what they were going to do and what it was about and I said I’d like to go. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 9 So that was my first activism since I was fairly young, and from that day on I have committed myself to any cause that I felt was a cause for equality, for justice, and for peace. KG: You mentioned earlier about your experiences with racism in the ’505 against Jews, and obviously you saw racism against blacks as well. To what extent do you think your Jewish heritage has affected your motivation for activism in terms of racial politics? RZ: Well from the earliest days of American history our country was being ruled first by a king of England and then by white middleclass, upper middleclass men, and the policies that they had were based on what was good for them. Slavery worked out being very profitable for the Americans who came over from England. Perhaps they had seen slavery in England before. Certainly there was a lot of child labor, which was almost like slavery. Then coming to the United States and the opportunity to bring slaves over from Africa and justify what they were doing, saying we’re making life better for them. It’s always those who are in one way or another hurting people, they’re always saying they’re enabling them to have a better life. Today we see that in the immigrants who come over from Mexico, from Guatemala, from Honduras, where they have been under danger of being killed because of their activist roles and their oppressive governments. They come here and do demeaning, hard work, whether it’s farm labor or in a plant killing animals that produce pork and chicken products, low wages, working very hard and being injured on the job. Terrible housing, two or three families living together in small rooms, and we think that we’re enabling them to have a better life. It’s not so. They do it to send some money back home. If it weren’t for people like myself who are willing to go out there and say, “It’s wrong,” to corporate America, “What you’re doing is immoral,” things won’t change. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 10 So whether it was slavery, or the takeover of Indian land—. The original people who lived here were Native Americans and what did we do to them? We either killed them, had wars with them, or we cheated them out of their land. We have a history of finding a way to diminish other people’s legal rights, or to demoralize them, or to dis-empower them, and then when people stand up to take back their rights they’re called all kinds of names. KG: Definitely. Would you consider innnigration issues to be on the forefront of your personal political platform, or would you say that it ties in with social justice in general? RZ: I think it’s a part of the social justice talk and movement, because it’s difficult to separate one thing from another without looking at the whole milieu of oppression. So if you look at the problem with immigration, some say, well, if we build higher walls fewer people will get in that aren’t supposed to get in, and then we can carefully judge and select who we want to come in to this country. But it’s been an unfair process for a long, long time. Now the Cubans who said they were ﬂeeing from Castro, they could get in with a snap of the fingers. They didn’t have to wait on line. But if you were from Mexico or Honduras or Guatemala, they have numbers for each country that are permitted to come into the United States. They have [Pause] a number of allotments from every country, and then, depending upon your talents, those who have skills that we want, okay, we allow them to get in without as much difficulty. So we are robbing the countries of their skilled people, or they come over to this country and they get well educated here and remain here rather than going back and taking their skills in business or agriculture or technology. They remain here and have good jobs. They don’t go back to their country and help produce the wealth that their country needs. And when it comes to the people who work in the fields, the employers want them because they are cheap labor, they work very, Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 11 very hard, and bosses have not found Americans who can or will work that hard for that kind salary. KG: Exactly. RZ: And if they were going to have to pay a decent salary they might have more Americans who are strong. I don’t know that they’ll ever be as fast at picking tomatoes as those who have been doing it for years, picking grapes, apples. But the whole point is that the subcontractors, they will hire people even though they are undocumented. They are undocumented. KG: Because they want to exploit the cheap labor. RZ: Exactly, exactly. So, they want to have immigration, and when they threatened for wrongdoing, employers pay a small fine, I don’t know that any employer has ever gone to jail for hiring undocumented. But the poor undocumented workers, who are afraid to go out of their house for fear that ICE is going to grab them and put them in jail and then deport them, and the children who were born in this country have had their parents taken away and sent back. Then if a child is thirteen, fourteen, sixteen and their parents are being deported, they can stay but they have no one to care for them. Ifthey go back they don’t even get credit back in Mexico for the schooling that they’ve done in the United States. They don’t even speak Spanish, perhaps, because they’ve spent their entire life in this country. So they are children between two worlds, and it is not just. So immigration is a giant, giant problem in this country, because except for the Native Americans—. [Brief interruption] KG: I definitely want to come back to the issue of immigration, because I think you offer a really interesting perspective on it. But one question that I forgot to ask earlier that I definitely Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 12 would like to ask is, as someone who was a young adult in the 19605, what was your perspective or personal feelings towards the women’s movement at the time as opposed to today? RZ: In the [19]60s, I was in my thirties then, and I really was not very much engaged in the women’s movement. I remember doing an action in Boca Raton, Florida when Nixon was President, so that was quite a bit later, and I carried a sign. I think it said, “My body, my say, my way,” and I was very much engaged in the right of women to decide on their families, on the size of their family and on whether or not they wanted to end a pregnancy, whether they felt well enough to carry through childbirth, or for whatever reason. I felt strongly that women are the ones who bear the children, do the majority of the work in raising the child, and they are given the least amount of choice in what to do. They’re being ruled by men, who are not bearing the children, and for the most part are not spending the most time with those children at an early age. So I felt very strongly about that and I’ve been in a number of demonstrations—this is later on—in Washington, but this was past the early stages of Gloria Steinem and those in the women’s movement. But women still are more than fifty percent of the population and we don’t have fifty percent of the vote in Congress. KG: I’m sure you know this, but the women’s movement of the [19]605 historically has been criticized for being exclusive to white, middleclass women. What do you think about that? RZ: Well, I think that you have strength when you join to gether, when you are inviting everybody to be part of something, when it’s inclusive, not exclusive. Now I don’t know whether that had anything to do with my not being a great participant or just that I was busy teaching, still teaching, and being with my husband. But in looking at it, I realize that was one of the splits in the women’s movement was that there was this exclusivity. White middleclass women were the Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 13 ones speaking out and not inviting everyone else to be a participant. It took a long while for that to happen. KG: I know you mentioned that you spent several years as a teacher. How many years? RZ: Twenty-seven or twenty-eight. KG: Okay, so you’ve seen a lot of historical change in that time. What sorts of changes have you seen among your students in terms of maybe collective consciousness or personal beliefs of your students that they perhaps bring to the classroom? Basically, what changes in those thirty years have you seen, from your start to when you retired? RZ: Well I was working with very young children. I started out teaching first grade and then I taught second and third grade and then after a number of years I continued my education and I went into doing K through siX corrective reading, so it was remediation work. I was working with kids who were having reading problems and I did not have them all day long. I’d go from group to group or I’d go from one school to another school, so I had very little opportunity to really get to know how the children looked at life per se or—. Their big problem was fitting in and behaving and learning, and my big job was getting to know them well enough, getting to know their parents well enough, so that in one way or another I could make a difference in their ability to read and understand during the year that I had them. KG: Okay. I didn’t realize that they were— RZ: Very young. KG: —younger children. [Laughs] I assumed that they were maybe high school age. But that kind of directs my next question. Do you think that young women today are reaping the Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 14 benefits of the women’s movement of the [19]605 and [19]70s, and if so how so, and in what ways do you think they could demand more? RZ: I think the young people today, young women, are more engaged in what’s going on in their school and in their community than perhaps they were when I was a teenager, but there were always teenagers who were involved. Iwas involved, maybe now perhaps they are more involved, but the issues, some of the issues, are very much the same—justice, faimess—that were involved then. I think that the college students today, like yourself, are meeting with more opportunities in college, different kinds of classes that talk about different problems as they affect people in this country and around the world. We never had a dream about global warming when I was a kid, sixty-five years ago, and today this is on the minds of every person who has half a brain in their head, that what we’re doing to the earth is affecting all of us and will affect the generations after us. So whether it’s an issue of, “Can I have the after-day pill?” or whether there is more rape going on, on campus, whether there are more women who are being manhandled, we’re knowing more about it today. It’s less hush-hush, and it may be more frequent. It’s the same thing with gun Violence. I don’t remember that there were so many cases of gun Violence when I was a youngster as there are today. So students are faced with an opportunity to not only take more courses about today’s circumstances, whether it’s criminal justice, or whether it’s dealing with foreign relations, than I ever had the opportunity to take, and I think there’s more interest and more activism today as a result, at least I hope so. KG: That definitely makes sense. I know that in my experience, just from what I’ve seen and what I’ve heard, college activists are often dismissed as being idealistic or impatient or that they don’t have the life knowledge to really understand how things work and that change takes Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 15 time. What are your feelings on that, and what advice would you have for young college activists, or even fresh out of college? RZ: Yeah, well I’m sure that anybody who is on the other side of anything that you believe in is going to say, “Oh, you’re naive.” That’s the biggest way they can put you down without saying, “You’re stupid.” You’re just naive. Well, I’ll tell you, naiveté is not bad, as long as you’re open to learning. Ifyou say, “Okay, I don’t know quite enough about this issue about fracking. I’m kind of naive about it. I hear it’s good by some, it’s bad by others. I want to know more.” Okay, so naiveté is good if you search out the facts. You search out what has been going on, on this side, on that side. Anyone who is opposed to anything Ibelieve in is going to try very, very hard to separate me from those who believe as I do. Divide and conquer. Whether it’s racially or whether it’s ideas. Economics: Okay, those people are just dirt poor because they’re lazy and you’re middleclass because you worked hard. Let’s divide these people. Bullshit. KG: Because it creates the “other.” [Laughs] Definitely. RZ: Right, it’s the “other,” and the whole idea that Ibelieve as far as racists are concemed—. And I had a fight with a guy at the Brooklyn Navy Yard when I was about fourteen or fifteen. I was reading Helen Caldicott, and here I was a kid of fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen, and I was invited to go to dance in the Brooklyn Navy Yard. I lived right across the river from the Brooklyn Navy Yard. KG: Oh, wow. RZ: And I went to this dance and I was dancing with a white sailor, and we were having fun dancing, and there were black sailors there too, and he said, “Tell me, would you dance with Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 16 that black sailor over there?” I said, “Sure. Why not? If he asked me politely, sure.” He said, “Well if you did that I would never dance with you again.” KG: Wow. RZ: I said, “Well, that’s your choice,” because I had been explaining Helen Caldicott and her book, The Races of Mankind, and if you’ve never read Helen Caldicott she’s a good person to read. She’s probably in her eighties now and still speaking out. I think she’s Australian. KG: Okay. RZ: Anyhow, I had a very early taste of racism, and I went to a high school where there were black girls and white girls and black fellows and white fellows, and I don’t remember having any big issue at the school, at least I don’t recall any. So I think that when it comes to living in the South—. When I came to North Carolina it seemed rather odd that there were problems. However, I soon learned that although the areas that I was living in, which was Raleigh or Chapel Hill or Carrboro, that this was the most progressive area, outside of maybe Asheville, in the state, and that racism existed, and that young people, when they are born, they are not born equally. Some are born with a silver spoon in their mouth, like George W. Bush, and some are born without enough food in their mamas’ bellies before they’re born. So then how can people say that that person is stupid and lazy if they are born poor, if they are not fed a decent diet, that they are in poor schools with teachers who do not have the proper background to be teaching, that they are not given extra help when necessary, that they are given lower salaries and difficult jobs. How can they say they have equal opportunities? It’s not so. It’s not so. I think all of these things have really been the prodders, my inner corp saying, “You’ve got to do something to make things better, because you’ve had it pretty good in your life. It’s Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 17 time to see how other people are trying hard to make life better and there are things that you can do to improve their lives, and if all do better then all do better,” is the way I look at it, because if you have some doing so poorly, have poor education, have no job, have a young family, are forced out of your home due to unemployment, and you need something to eat, what happens? You are the likely one to get into trouble with the law, out of absolute essential necessity. Ifyou don’t know where to turn for help, nobody has said, “There is a food kitchen here,” but you go out and you try to get something to eat and you take something that’s not yours, you’re in jail. You’re in jail, and there is a private jail complex that makes money from everyone that goes to jail, a lot of money. KG: I know during the meeting they were talking about the school to prison pipeline, and that definitely ties in with what you’re saying right now. What are your feelings on that, and possible remedies? RZ: Well I think that we have to stop taking advice from the National Riﬂe Association, who would like to have a gunman in every school in the entire nation, and I think that we have to get sensible about this business of having guns all over to protect ourselves. We have to stop punishing children for throwing a spitball at a teacher. Yes. That kid can be taken out of the school in handcuffs and sent to detention, and the prison industrial complex applauds. More money in their pocket. The kid who takes a piece of chewing gum out of an open locker, taken in handcuffs out of school so that they are shamed, that they are embarrassed, that this is a mark on their life. I volunteer over at Orange Correctional every Tuesday. KG: Is that a youth facility? Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 18 RZ: No, it’s an adult men’s facility, and it’s a low security prison. The men have been in many, many prisons and they come here because this is usually the one before they are released. It’s a low security prison, and the legislature is thinking about closing it, but they may not close it because it has forty security cells. In other words, isolation cells. KG: Okay. RZ: So if a man gets into a fight they’re thrown into the security cell. It cost a lot of money to build those forty cells so they may not close Orange Correctional because of that, we hope they don’t because it’s one of the best. People from various churches come and spend time with the men every Tuesday. Some of the volunteers are teaching computer skills, others reading, and some offer religious services. When a man reaches a certain level we can take—men, not women—can take them to their church, so we’ve had a number of men brought to our Quaker meeting on Sunday. KG: Oh, wow. RZ: So we have them for service, and at potlucks, some of the men take them out to lunch, and sometimes help them find jobs, so it’s a very good facility and we’re just hoping that it does not get closed, so we’re trying to encourage the legislature to leave Orange Correctional alone. It saves the state money, it saves Hillsborough money, and there are many reasons why it should remain there. KG: So there are no women at this facility. RZ: No. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 19 KG: So your experience working with the men at the facility has been overall pretty positive? RZ: Oh, definitely. They are so grateful to have somebody come and listen to them and talk with them, because many of them don’t have family close by and so they don’t have Visitors, and this is an opportunity for them to talk with someone. We had a day about six months ago where we had family members bring their children to Visit with the men, and the women who brought them at another church, and shared experiences and we played games, and ate to gether while the children were Visiting their fathers. They make birdhouses, and doing other activities, and they got books and toys to take home, and their fathers had a chance to see their kids. So we may do that again. But these are men, many of them have been incarcerated for long periods of time for doing what other men, white men, have done and have either not been incarcerated or have gotten a much shorter term of incarceration. KG: Could you provide an example of what those sorts of crimes may be? RZ: Usually it’s a matter of possession of marijuana. KG: Okay. RZ: So where well-to-do whites will sniff, the African American men are generally using crack, and punishment is very different, has been very different. KG: That reminds me of the controversy surrounding the war on drugs implemented by the Reagan administration and the fact that it was not—. It mostly targeted sellers instead of users, sellers tended more often than not to be black, a lot of them kids in some cases, so there was a lot of controversy surrounding the racism involved in that implementation. Do you have any perspective on that or—? I mean it’s basically the same thing, is what you’re saying. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 20 RZ: Well those who use drive the market. If people weren’t using the drugs there would be no market for it. I was in Colombia, South America in February, and there is a big problem with the production of coca there in Colombia, and what our country has been doing is providing planes and spraying the coca fields and to spray areas that they believe have coca in them, and it’s very good for Monsanto, who is selling the Roundup, and very super strong Roundup. Now what has happened there over the past ten years that we have been providing billions of dollars to the Colombia military to spray has forced millions of people off their land while others have moved into more and more remote areas of the jungle. Now if we did not have a policy of providing military aid and we took that money and we used it for rehabilitation in the United States we would not have that large a drug problem. The big problem is we do not offer enough programs for those who want rehabilitation. Many of the inmates go to AA and to drug rehabilitation classes. There aren’t enough programs in this country to help those people. Drug abuse is a medical problem, not a social problem. When you are addicted it is terribly hard to break that addiction without help. KG: I was going to say, do you think it speaks culturally to the idea that for a lot of Americans it’s difficult for them to look at a drug addiction as essentially a disease that needs a cure, such as any other disease? They often like to look at it in terms of personal decisions, upbringing, which definitely can play a factor in it, but just the fact that a lot of people have a problem accepting the notion that it’s a disease like any other. RZ: That’s right, it is a disease. My husband smoked too much. He drank too much. At one time alcohol was prohibited and they decided, hmm, I think we’re going to stop the prohibition of alcohol, but there were few programs to help people who became addicted to alcohol. He was fairly close to dying before he, of his own accord, gave up smoking, gave up Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 21 drinking. But for most of his life he did both, and I think education is very important, and we need programs to help children in families where there’s a lot of drug abuse because those poor kids are in a tough, tough spot. KG: What do you think about the ways that the school systems approach, programs like DARE—. Are you familiar with the DARE program? RZ: Tell me more about it. KG: It’s basically an anti-drug program taught mostly by police officers who volunteer their time or—. Yeah, I think it’s mostly police officers. It’s targeted towards young children because that’s clearly a little bit easier to address. You tell them, “Drugs are bad, don’t do them,” and they say, “Yeah! I’ll never do drugs!” But ten years later, they’ve— RZ: Right. KG: —grown up and realized it’s not that simple. How do you feel about approaches like that? Do you think they actually help? RZ: Well I don’t know very much about the program so it’s hard to say whether they help, but I think that what you need is people who have been there and are no longer being affected by drugs or alcohol. [They] are the ones to go and speak with children. KG: You need personal stories, personal testimonies. RZ: You need the testimony of someone who has been there. You don’t know what it’s like unless you’ve seen it, and when you have a police officer doing something it is, “If you do the wrong thing I’m going to punish you,” type of dilemma in the child’s mind. “Just say no,” like Nancy Reagan, did not cut it. “Just say no.” You need reasons. And as far as marijuana is Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 22 concerned I think it should be legalized. It should be legalized, the government should be selling it and making the money and the taxes, just like cigarette taxes, and for those who need it for medical purposes they will have it. For those who use it for recreational purposes, they will have it. But it can be limited. It can be purchased on a limited supply. We had rationing during World War II. You could only get so much of various things. So why not have legalized marijuana where you can get so much and no more? KG: That reminds me of the policy on certain types of cold medicine these days, because large amounts, I’m sure you know they can use it to manufacture methamphetamine, so if you buy one bottle these days you have to go sign your name and your information. Do you think a system like that in terms of marijuana legalization would work, or a little bit different? RZ: Well, it’s pretty hard to say. You never know what the results are going to be. You might have one idea and think, “Oh, this is perfect. It’s going to work just great.” Until you start it, and then you find out where you have failed. There is a group called the Drug Policy Alliance that has been working for years where many of the police chiefs in different areas are very much in favor of the legalization of marijuana, and maybe if marijuana was legalized you wouldn’t have as much of a demand for any of the harder drugs, like cocaine. KG: As we get towards the end of the interview there’s only a few more things I’d like to hear about. Well, obviously there’s a lot more I’d like to hear about. [Laughter] I didn’t mean to word it like that. If you look collectively at all your experiences in activism, I’d just like to know through what organization do you think you’ve been able to participate in the most personally meaningful type of work, and also have you faced any moments of sigmficant discourage in which you thought, “Is this worth it, am I worth this, is this important?” Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 23 RZ: Well, going from the last question 011, no. I’ve never felt the questioning of the value of what I’ve done. I think the most sigmficant action was the case, I believe it was Progress Energy in Wake Co., back about ten, twelve, thirteen years ago, about trespassing in their building. That wasn’t their building. It was a building in Wake Co. where Progress Energy had their office. A group of us went there to deliver a letter to the chairman of the board and we wanted to go up to his office and deliver it, and we were not permitted to. Then someone from the office came down but there was some question about whether or not he would deliver our letter. So they called the police and the police were there. They said, “If you cross the line over here on these tiles you will be arrested for trespassing,” and five or six of us did. That case, it was at a time when Shearon Harris had many situations where there were people who were unauthorized in there, in the building, and there were some serious situations of the safety of Shearon Harris and the safety of all the people who live within fifty miles radius of Shearon Harris. I and four of the others would not plead guilty, we wanted the case to go forward, and so it went all the way up to the North Carolina Supreme Court. It was several days of testimony, and I had been to Kazakhstan in the Soviet Union in 1999, Ibelieve, and I had been where they did the above-ground testing and had seen Victims who were in utero at the time, a man without arms or legs. As I say, he was in utero at the time of the above-ground testing there, and there were many others who were badly affected and their children were badly affected as a result. I have very strong feelings about the unsafe conditions of nuclear plants and I felt that it was very important, so I got up on the stand and I talked about that, and of course I was told I couldn’t speak about certain things. The case went on several days and the head of the jury was a man who had an airline ticket to ﬂy away the next day, and he did not want the case to go forward. So Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 24 that day when the jury met in their little space he encouraged the others to go ahead and make a decision of guilt, so we were found guilty. When we met in that same room, in the garbage can were the notes, and that’s how we know how that decision was made, because it was a very, very close decision. There was only one vote more needed for guilty or innocent. I thought that was a very pivotal time in my activism, where you don’t know what’s going to happen, but I had been to the Nevada test site, and my involvement with Friends, Quaker meetings. From the time I lived in Florida to Miami to North Carolina, I have been involved with Quakers, and I have been very, very much opposed to anything nuclear. I feel what went on in Japan with the bombing in Hiroshima and Nagasaki was unnecessary, that the Japanese were ready to raise their hands and give up, and the need to drop a bomb was we wanted to know what was going to happen, and we had done enough damage in the islands where we were testing the bomb. So I have been very anti-nuclear for many, many years and will continue to be so. KG: Shifting gears a tiny bit to something a little bit more positive, could you tell me a little bit about your work with the Raging Grannies and how you became involved? [Laughs] RZ: I became involved in that about thirteen years ago when I was living in Carrboro, and I was over in Arcadia, a co-housing development, and one of the people who lived there had a son who was in Canada and he brought back this book to his mother about the Raging Grannies group in Canada. Raging Grannies started twenty-five years ago in Alberta, British Columbia and what they do is they take old fashioned melodies and they parody them with words that fit the occasion. They had been against the American nuclear ship that was in Alberta, Canada, was coming to Alberta, Canada, and they were going to be docked there, and this group said, “We Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 25 don’t want any nuclear submarines in our waters,” and they made up songs about it and they got out and they sang. That started the Raging Grannies there, and these women said, “Well maybe we can start a group,” so they put notes in everybody’s inbox, all the women’s [mailboxes] that said, “Would you like to come over for a cup of coffee and a cupcake, and we ’Ve got something interesting to talk about.” So we went over that day and they shared the information from the book and said, “Hey, we can sing. You don’t have to have good voices. Shall we contact them and see if we can become Raging Grannies too?” We said “Yes,” so they contacted the Raging Grannies of Alberta, British Columbia and said, “We’re a group of women too, of that grarmy age, and we’d like to start a group. Can we use the name “Raging Grannies?” and they said, “Delightful! We’d be so happy!” So since then we’ve been doing it, and when I was in Florida there was a Raging Grarmy group in Delray Beach, so I connected with them and I’d go out and sing with them. Then one of the Raging Grannies from Delray Beach moved to Durham a year ago and she became part of our Raging Grarmy group here. So we write songs, we share songs, we go where we’re invited and we go where we’re not invited. KG: [Laughs] RZ: So we’ve gone to a hearing on fracking. We’ve gone to two of them. One we were invited and one we were not, and when they asked us to sign in we sign in and say we’re going to send our message in song. We’ve gone to rate [hike hearings] at Progress Energy and we’ve sung out message. So it is delightful. It is an experience that is so much fun, because street theater gets attention. Ifyou stand on a soapbox you can stand all day and talk and few people are going to stand and listen. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 26 KG: Because it’s not interesting. [Laughs] RZ: Right. But if you get out there and you wear grarmy hats and buttons and granny clothes and look like theater and you sing, people want to hear you. So we’ve gone down to the govemor’s mansion, across from the govemor’s mansion and sung about fracking. We have been out to one of the banks that wanted to do payday lending in Raleigh and we’ve sung out there. We go lots of places we’re not invited, just like at the legislature, because we want people to know that we’re not going to sit back because we’re old. We ’Ve gone to military recmitment stations over the years and we’ve been told, “You’ve got to move from here.” Some have gotten arrested over the years. So there are gaggles all over the United States, I forget how many gaggles we have in the United States, and there are some in Japan and in—. I’m not sure whether it’s France. I’ve got to check on international. But lots of gaggles in Canada, and every two years we have an un- convention. KG: [Laughs] RZ: So I went to the one in Alberta last year and in 2014 it’s going to be in Montreal. So we made a disc in Febmary of our Raging Grarmy group here and we’ve got a lot of songs about Occupy because that was the time of the Occupy movement, strong, and all these songs deal with occupying the banks and occupying all over. KG: That’s really awesome. I just recently became familiar with the Raging Grannies so I definitely wanted to learn more about it, firsthand. RZ: Well you don’t have to have a good voice. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 27 KG: [Laughs] RZ: I’m an example of that. But you have to have spirit. You have to believe in justice, in peace, and in simplicity. We are open to everyone. We’d love to have more people. We don’t all sing at the same time necessarily, and so we have about twenty-five names and maybe sometimes we have three, sometimes we have eleven, because we’re grannies and we have grandchildren to take care of sometimes and things like that. KG: Well I think that’s really powerful and I think it’s really great, what you’re doing. As we get towards the actual end of the interview my only other question is, is there anything that you’d like to add on the record or just in general about your life, your story, your beliefs that we perhaps haven’t covered or maybe we just touched on it and you’d like to put some emphasis? RZ: Well I think that in the movement of justice and peace, we have a necessity to bring the message to people who do not necessarily believe as we do, that love, compassion, simplicity, and peace will bring all of us, or ninety-nine percent of us, a happier, more fulfilling life, because in truth we all do better when we all do better. As simple as it sounds, I’m sure many will say, “What a naive person that is.” But we have to live with ourselves and be happy with who we are, what we leave to the next generation, and how much we have hurt others, because we are none of us perfect, and until we realize that, all right, you’re here at the legislature and you’re wearing shirts that say you’re against abortion, and I’m here saying “I think a woman needs to choose,” how can we reach each other? How can we speak? How can we find that there are many issues? We may disagree on this but maybe we can come to a point where we say, all right, the people who have had mistakes, the people who have been raped, the Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 28 people who have children who are bound to be very poorly born with bad deformities, that these people have a right to have an abortion. Recently there was a woman in Honduras, I believe, very strict—. It might not have been Honduras, but very strict laws. They allowed her to have a caesarean, she was almost nine months pregnant, and that child was born without part of her brain. But it took so long to get a court order to allow her to have a caesarean at that stage, and the baby died right afterwards, but why should a woman have to go through that? KG: What do they have against caesareans? RZ: Well they couldn’t do an abortion at that time, the baby was too large. KG: Oh, okay, okay. RZ: She was almost nine months pregnant. KG: Okay. RZ: So they had to do a caesarean. KG: Because they figured out that there was not a lot of hope. RZ: Well they knew. They knew in advance that there was a problem there, but she had been trying to get an abortion for eight months. KG: That’s crazy. RZ: So we get down to some very, very basic things. Can we agree on certain things? And the other thing is that people don’t often vote on their basic economic interests, they vote on their emotions, and this can be a big problem when it comes to the day-after pill, when it comes Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 29 to abortion, when it comes to the rights of gay people and lesbians. They say this is against God’s will. Well, what about the right of your child to go to pre-k because he or she needs extra help? So they will vote against their interests, their unemployment compensation, against having more teachers in schools, because they are so driven by a social issue, whether it’s abortion or whether it’s gay rights. KG: They have turmel Vision to the extreme. RZ: Right. KG: They won’t look at the overall picture but they’ll look at one thing that this group wants that I don’t want so I’m not going to—. Yeah. RZ: So I have to be able to talk with these people as a human being, with love in my heart, not hatred because we disagree, and let them know that I can have all that I need but I see that you are in need of certain things and I’d like to be in a position to help you. KG: That’s really beautiful and powerful. Thank you so much for talking to me. I’ve learned so much from you. RZ: Well I’ve enjoyed talking about how Ibelieve, because the opportunities are few, and I had someone say to me a couple of weeks ago, “You should do an oral history— KG: [Laughs] RZ: —with someone,” and I don’t know where they wanted it to go, I’m not sure. Maybe this is the right place that they would like it to go, or whether it was over at Duke University or some program there. Interview number U-1000 from the Southern Oral History Program Collection (#4007) at The Southern Historical Collection, The Louis Round Wilson Special Collections Library, UNC-Chapel Hill. Zalph 30 KG: Chapel Hill has one of the largest oral history programs in the country, it’s the Southern Oral History Project, and you’re going in the archive now. [Laughs] So I’m definitely happy to do a lot of work on your story. That’s going to be all I do tomorrow, and I’ve got to transcribe. RZ: Well my son, Barry, and my son, Walter, will be very pleased. KG: Ifyou’d like me to make copies just let me know how many copies. I can do it in a couple minutes. RZ: Three. One for me, and three for my two sons and my daughter—in—law. KG: Okay. I’ll definitely do that. Oh, I can turn off the recording now. [Laughs]..