 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Today is May 9, 2007, and we re in the OSU Library in Tulsa, and today we re speaking with Carolyn Thompson Taylor, and she was in the House of Representatives from 1984 through 1992, correct? Correct. We re so glad you were able to join us today. Bring us up to date a little bit about your childhood, your hometown, your youth. I was born in Norman, Oklahoma where my parents were also born and most of my family had been there for quite some time. I went through the Norman public school system and, of course, I hate to tell an OSU person this, but when you re born in Norman you know there s nowhere else to go but the University of Oklahoma. (Laughs) So after I graduated from Norman High School, I went to OU University of Oklahoma and received my bachelor s degree in American History. I went back and received my teaching certificate after my bachelor s degree. I always wanted to go to law school, but decided I wanted to also teach, too. So I thought I d teach awhile and then maybe go to law school later in life. I loved teaching so much and was fortunate to be hired as the government teacher at Norman High School where I had recently graduated from. So that was kind of a strange thing teaching alongside most of my old teachers, or former teachers now as colleagues. While I was the government teacher at Norman High School, I got involved in helping and volunteering on political campaigns of pro-education candidates. I went to the Capitol a couple of times lobbying on behalf of education, you know, or Teacher Day at the Capitol, OEA Oklahoma Education Association Day at the Capitol, and that kind of thing. 5 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Then in summer of 1984 I had been awarded a Fulbright Scholarship to spend the summer studying politics and government in the Middle East, and the incumbent state representative, Cleta Deatherage Mitchell, decided really at the last moment not to run for re-election. When that happened, some people called and asked if I would be interested in thinking about running. That was something I d always wanted to do someday but hadn t thought of myself doing at twenty-seven years old but, you know, that opportunity comes along where it s an open seat. It was a last-minute thing, and I knew I really wanted to do that at some point. So I talked to the principal at the high school and he was very helpful. We got the school board to give me a leave of absence for the fall semester so if I lost I could come back for the spring and wouldn t be out of a job I loved. I started running for office, had to give up the Fulbright Scholarship and started knocking doors instead and was elected in November and stayed until 1992. While I was in the legislature, I went to school at night at OU and got my master s degree in political science and starting working on my doctorate. Then when I left the legislature in 92 to move to Claremore, because I got married, I finished my doctorate actually at OSU because Tulsa, this campus, was much closer and I could get most of my courses here rather than commuting back and forth to Norman. OSU was wonderful. They took all my OU hours and I just had to finish up a little bit here OSU-Tulsa Campus . I did take a class or two in Stillwater, where Nancy Lewis and I would drive over there together. She was working on her degree at the same time. We both graduated with our doctorates in higher education, and I ve been teaching ever since at Rogers State University in political science in Claremore and love it. Let s go back to your campaign. Who was your campaign manager? I asked a friend of mine, who was a fellow teacher at Norman High School. She was a business teacher and, of course, teachers have the summers off. Her name is Paula Roberts and she managed my campaign during the summer until school started, and then she sort of did it after school and on weekends and nights after that, and did an excellent job. We re still very good friends. After she left teaching, she became the Election Board secretary for Cleveland County so she s still very active in politics. Did she do it for each of your campaigns? Yes, she did it for all four campaigns. Do you remember how much you spent on your campaign each time? 6 Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor I d have to go back and check but I ll give you a ballpark figure. The first time I ran in 1984, I think I spent around 18,000 to 20,000, if I remember right. In the last campaign, the 1990 campaign, I think it was like 65,000, something like that. And nowadays, it s probably quite a bit more than that. Oh, a House seat today, you d spend a minimum of 100,000, and the State Senate races, the guy that ran this year in Rogers County, he raised over a half million dollars for a state senate race. It s just astronomical. And the cost is driven by advertising, you know. So many of the candidates now are on TV and radio and billboards and all that stuff. Back in the mid-eighties when I first ran it was much more low-tech. You didn t have to have a website and do all of this back then. In an urban area like my district was, which was just the heart of Norman, mostly the OU campus and surrounding area, it was very compact, easily walkable so I could meet everybody. It just wasn t as expensive to run a race like that. Any favorite campaign stories? Oh, gosh. There s, you know, there s just so many fond memories. I really loved the knocking doors. There was a group of us. We would campaign and go out all day long knocking doors. Nancy Virtue Lewis was running for re-election at the district next to mine, and then Cal Hobson, a good friend of ours, had another part of Norman. We would go knock doors all day long and then we would meet at night, every night after dark and have dinner together and just tell campaign, or knocking door stories. It was just a lot of fun. Any particular one that stands out in your mind as Gee I can t really believe I did that or I said that or Oh, you know, I guess the first time I ran I was always so surprised because I didn t have any money, of course, being a school teacher. I was always surprised knocking doors people would say, Here, let me write you a check, when I was there asking for their vote on their front door. That was just so surprising to me. I would come home at the end of the day and empty all my pockets out of cash and checks, and sit down and write thank you notes for a couple hours. My mother always teased me calling me a streetwalker (Laughs) you know, but that s how my first campaign was paid for. It was an amazing thing. Did your parents help or did you have siblings that would help? I do have very fond memories of that because my mother, who is very 7 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor shy, went out and knocked doors asking people to vote for her daughter, which was a hard thing for her to do and yes, and all my brothers and sisters did too. I m the oldest of five kids. My dad, he took on the job of maintaining all the yard signs. That was his project and, of course, he s an engineer and he had it all down in a very organized, engineering-kind of way. He had these maps where every sign in town was supposed to be. He had this little moped motorized bicycle at the time he would drive and at night he would go out and check every one of them. If they weren t up or if the rain had gotten them or if they had been stolen or whatever, he d go replace them. He was the sign guy. Were your opponents male, female? The first time was a woman. The second time was a man. The third time was a woman, and the fourth time was a man. Interesting, too. Yeah. Younger, older? Always older always older much older usually. Do you remember the first day you were sworn in? Oh, sure. I was excited. Do you remember what your thoughts and feelings were? It was scary, you know, and yet exciting at the same time. I d gotten to know some of the other members of the House because, you know, they didn t have races. They d come help me, which was common. People help each other, you know. I was glad I already had some people I knew there, the local district area representatives like Cal and Nancy and others like Vickie White. It was fun that we were all there together best friends. Did you have a particular role model while you were there or mentor? Oh, definitely. Cal Hobson taught me a lot, and I always looked up to him. He was very, very helpful not only helping get me elected but also raised lots of money and really paved the way, as someone who was so totally na ve about the whole thing in many respects. And then Nancy Virtue, who had gotten elected two years prior to me, in 82, was very helpful in showing me the ropes. I had been her campaign manager and 8 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum so we had gone through campaigns together, of course, but now as colleagues in the legislature, we were friends and that was a nice thing. What was it like presenting your first bill? Oh, I don t know if they still do this, but every time a freshman introduces their first bill, everyone picks on them, you know, and asks them a million questions and just tries to make it an initiation (Laughs) process I guess. And my first bill, you ll appreciate this the director of the Norman Public Library at the time, his name was Bill Lowery, had asked me to introduce a bill insuring privacy rights of people that checked out material at the library. So the records of books or magazines or whatever you checked out would remain private, and at the time it wasn t. So he asked me to do that, and that was my very first bill. I remember all the guys giving me such a hard time about that and asking questions, just silly questions. You mean, if so-and-so goes in to check out or look at a Playboy magazine in the library, we won t be able to find out, and all that kind of thing. Or John Monks, who was just a crazy guy from Muskogee, stood up and gave a long speech against it, saying, This is the first thing Communists do when they come in, and This is just the road to Communism (Laughs). But now, of course, with the Patriot Act and all that, how far we ve come, but that was my very first bill. Did it pass? It passed it passed. (Laughs) And what did you do to celebrate? Oh nothing. (Laughter) Just a sigh of relief? Just a sigh of relief it was over, yeah. What was your office like? What floor, and did you have to share space? Let me think. I don t think I ever did have to share the space, come to think of it. When I became chairman of the Education Committee, the committee chairs always had much nicer offices and so I had a real fancy office then. That was nice. But, let s see I started out on the third floor. I guess I was always on the third floor. Same one or it changed each 9 Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum No, it just changed every time. Every two years, it would change. Describe a typical day. How early would you get there and how late would you stay? Well, because Norman was commutable to Oklahoma City, I didn t ever stay in a hotel. I would go back and forth. Usually the session would begin at 9:00 or 10:00 in the morning or there would be committee meetings at 9:00 or at 10:00 in the morning. I d typically get up and leave Norman about 8:00 and get to the Capitol about 8:30 and get organized and answer mail and e-mail well, not e-mail at the time, but return phone calls and get ready for the day s meetings and appointments. Then usually all the work at the Capitol would end about 5:00 or 6:00 and every night there would be receptions that different groups would be hosting for the legislators, and we d go. Usually there were two or three a night of those. You d make the rounds and then after that was over, oftentimes a group of us would go have dinner together or hang out together somewhere, and that s when so much of the real work actually gets done. You re socializing with people and getting to know them and what s important to them in their district. That all was very helpful when you were then trying to get them to vote for something for you, you would know a lot more about them. That would be a typical day during January to May. If it was a campaign year, then beginning in May to November I d be knocking doors and campaigning. Norman is a very, very active district in terms of organizations and things to go to and events. I was always amazed. The legislators from the rural areas don t have as many opportunities, I guess or expectations to go to so many events, but in Norman, and I m sure Stillwater s this way, too you know, the Rotary Club and the Lion s Club and the Kiwanis Club and the League of Women Voters and every group in town wants you or asks you at some point to come be a speaker or to come do something. There were lots and lots of civic responsibilities that went on year round during the legislative session and off. It is truly, I don t think people realize, a full-time job. Then off session there would be interim studies and all kinds of work still going on at the Capitol. It was very demanding and that s one of the reasons why I chose not to run for re-election in 92. I was physically worn out every day from these twelve, fourteen hour days, and there s really not a break. I just needed a rest and I couldn t see a way of doing that and staying in it. Maybe it was the way I was doing it (Laughs) which was aggressive, but I was ready for a break and needed one. Did you do your own research for your bills? 10 Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Typically not. The staff was very good about this. I would ask them to gather information for me. I didn t have time to do it myself, and then I would, of course, read everything. At the same time, remember I was going to school and so I had those responsibilities and didn t have time to do both. You probably ate lunch in then most days? Typically, lunch was a bag of popcorn (Laughs) from the Capitol cafeteria or snack bar. (Laughs) Did you do any bills that didn t get passed that you really wish had? I think I was always pretty lucky. I think most everything passed, not always on the first time around. I remember I did lose this was back when I was chairman of the Education Sub-Committee of the Appropriations Committee which controls the budget for most of the education-related agencies, colleges and universities, CareerTech, K-12, Arts Council, Department of Libraries, and the math science school. And at the time, the math science school was brand new and it was just established, which was very controversial at the time. I remember the first year it was my job to get the appropriations bill passed for the math science school. All the rural area legislators were against it, thinking this was just a big-city thing and was going to drain talent from their area. So on the first round, the money to pay for the school didn t pass. I remember that was the first time I think I ever lost a bill. Then you can bring it back up and it passed the second time. They were just wanting to show that they didn t support the math science school and that was their way of doing it. That personally wasn t a bill of mine, it was my job to carry that as the appropriations person. Every bill that I, I guess, that I sponsored on my own I don t think I ever remember ever losing one. That s good. Yeah, it was good. How many other women were serving at the time you were? I think that there were six or seven of us during most of the time I was there. Did you do things together with them, or everybody was just too busy? We tried that. We tried a women s caucus, the House and the Senate together, and it just didn t work unfortunately. We fell into the democratic women did things together and the republican women did 11 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor things together. We didn t try hard enough to find areas that we could both work on together. There were just too many differences in policy. Did you notice that the women were treated any differently than the men in any particular area? You know, people ask me that and I never felt treated differently because I was a woman. I was treated very differently because I was young. I was twenty-seven years old and most of everyone else could have been my grandfather. And that was the biggest hurdle them seeing me as not somebody that could be their granddaughter, and as an equal colleague or partner. But once we got to know each other that went away very rapidly. I think they respected me for the things that I cared about and I hopefully showed respect for the things they cared about, and we became friends. But initially that was a greater hurdle than a gender gap. Maybe it s because when I was first elected in 1984, the two previous representatives from Norman had been women, Cleta Deatherage Mitchell before me and then Mina Hibdon before her. So there was this history of the woman representative from Norman, you know, as always a girl they would say and so it wasn t a big deal. That s good to hear. But there was always a joke. Then the person that followed me was a woman, Laura Boyd. The person after her in that seat, District 44, was Bill Nations. He would always call me up, when he was thinking about running, and say, Can a man win in this district? (Laughs) Before I go jump into it, would Norman ever elect a man? (Laughs) I read in one of the newspaper articles that you had given out Doonesbury cartoons. Oh, yeah. That really made the boys mad. One of the first bills in a committee room my first year was to let county commissioners decide the property tax rate for the county. I was against that because that is where the revenue largely comes from for public education and I could see that funding source being a political issue and rapidly declining. So I fought that bill and the way I did that was in committee. That was immediately after the county commissioner scandal in Oklahoma and there had been some cartoons about that. I just wanted to point out that it wasn t a good deal to put in their hands, (Laughs) the tax rate that funded public (Laughs) education at the time and so that made, of course, the sponsor of the bill, who was a very powerful legislator at the time, Lloyd Benson, very, very angry at me and made all the county commissioners in the state pretty mad at me, too. I got some interesting mail after that. But, it defeated the bill so that s fine. 12 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Did they speak to you later? Oh, sure. We all made up. You can t stay mad at each other very long because you need their votes and they need your vote. Did you chair any other committees besides the Education? No, I always chaired the Education Committee and the sub-committee on education on the Appropriations Committee. I was a member of many other committees, and I chaired some special committees during the interim that were more study committees. Were you the lone woman on the some of those? Oh, most of the time. Do you have a particular political philosophy? I never thought about a philosophy. A slogan then? No guess I d have to think about that. I had read that you supported the amendment to make the House more gender neutral. Oh, that. Yes. One day it hit me reading all these bills that the pronoun was always the male, and all the state laws were written as if the entire population of Oklahoma was male, and (Laughs) so I proposed that the language in the statutes and in these bills be gender-neutral. That was a wild day. It was just sort of a spur-of-the-moment thing and when it hit the floor, it was just a wild debate and the press went crazy about it, and it was funny. (Laughs) How did it end up what was the result? It passed. It passed. It did, and I think that got more press than so many of the other things that I did that were a lot more significant. (Laughs) What would you think would be the most significant thing you did then? Oh, I think a couple of things including working to get what became known as House Bill 1017 passed, which was a massive education reform and funding bill that raised taxes. It also was directed to education, and then it had a whole host of reforms that now has been 13 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum copied around the country. Many other states have passed very similar pieces of legislation or have tried to. There was an initiative petition to defeat that bill becoming law and we had a statewide vote on it. I was very involved not only in the drafting and passage of the legislation, but then defending it before a statewide vote. It survived and that was just such an enormous and rewarding thing at the time because that was my passion. I guess that s my philosophy everything revolves around education and seeing that bill from beginning to end, which was many years in process that was very, very rewarding. I also worked on a number of family and women s related issues. I passed legislation creating a family leave policy for all state employees in Oklahoma, which was at the time revolutionary. You know, now it s not because federal law has now done that. I passed a law that required or provided for prenatal care in every county s health department, which wasn t at the time available. One of the things I am the most proud of, I think, is getting the bill to create the Oklahoma Museum of Natural History, which is on the Norman campus at OU University of Oklahoma , and then being able to then provide the funding for that to be built, because I love natural history and I thought that would be something in the long-run that could show and preserve Oklahoma s natural history, of course. It s a magnificent facility and I think the largest on a university campus in the country, and I go there now and I see all these kids coming and all the great programs that they have and that s a very rewarding feeling as well. That will be your legacy. Yeah, I guess so. Your very last day of office what was that like? Oh, it was very emotional because, you know, you work so hard to get there and I felt good about the things that I d accomplished. So I was sad on the one hand to be leaving all that behind, but I was excited as well because I knew I was going be moving into just another phase of my life and getting married and having the opportunity. I had hoped to have a family and start my career in higher education, which is where I always wanted to end up, returning to the classroom. So it was good. People were very kind and from both parties friends, and democrats and republicans, and it was sentimental. Any thoughts of ever doing it again? 14 Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Probably not. You know, I think it s somebody else s turn and I enjoy what I m doing now. I stay very active in Oklahoma politics, give advice along with helping people with their campaigns, helping recruit people to run and, you know, educate. Just my job at RSU Rogers State University being a political science professor, hopefully encourages younger people to get involved more in politics. I think that is important right now. What advice would you give to women who are interested in going into politics? Well, don t be afraid of it. The talents that women have in their jobs or in their roles as mothers or sisters or in the workplace are no different than the skills that you need in the legislative environment. In fact, it s exactly the skills you need in the legislative environment. Many studies have shown that what a woman brings to an elective arena is the ability to compromise, the ability to bring people together, the ability to get things done, the ability to plan and execute, having a goal and then accomplishing that, whether it s legislation or some other program. Women are good at that, and that s what we do all the time in whatever we do and so don t think you re not qualified. I hear that, Oh, I just could never do that, or, I m not a lawyer, or, I just wouldn t be able to do what it takes. Well, that s silly. You re doing that now and you just don t know it. And the money will come. A lot of people believe money is another other hurdle. Oh, how in the world would I I don t have 100,000 or whatever. That s not your personal money. People will give you campaign contributions. You just have to jump out there and ask, and that s a hard thing, too, sometimes for women to do. Boy it was hard for me the first time, or for a long time. But then it s not hard and we need more women in government and in elective offices because it does make a difference. Women bring different issues to the table and women have a different way of getting things done, and we sorely need that in Oklahoma. It seems to me that women that are closer to the Capitol area are more apt to run they don t have to leave family. That s true that s true. We ve had in Oklahoma more women elected from Oklahoma City and Tulsa the urban areas. It s taken a long time for women to win from rural areas and places farther away from the Capitol. That, now, is starting to change. Our lieutenant governor now is from a rural area and served in the Oklahoma House of Representatives for a long time. We have several women now from rural areas and so that s a good thing. Any of your siblings get into politics after your success? 15 Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor (Laughs) I wouldn t be surprised if my daughter does. She s very I think, her personality she would do very well in that environment. I don t know about my son. I think he will be very politically active, but I would be surprised if he put his name on the ballot. I think he will make a difference in other ways. Any memorable events from like the first week or two afterwards after you finished like second thoughts or Oh, regrets? No, no, no. I was Looking ahead? Just looking ahead that s exactly right. Some of the women I ve interviewed haven t gotten into politics until they retired at sixty-five, so maybe you can too Well, that s right and, you know, nationally and in Oklahoma that is the trend now. Women wait and politics is their second or their third career. They put family first or their career first and then politics comes in their fifties or sixties typically. I didn t do that. I did it on the front end. I guess I did it reversed. I had my political years and then I had my family years. Looking at the make-up and the changes at the Capitol since the eighties, the legislature is much younger, both male and female, much better educated in terms of degrees, and I think that s bringing some positive things to the state Capitol and the state government. Seems to be a lot of lawyers. There always will be lots of lawyers And that s good. and that s good, too. You know, the reason for that I think is you can practice law and still be in government or in elective office, or you can stop doing that for awhile and most people s jobs you can t do that. You have to quit your job to run for office. That s why you see a heavier concentration of insurance agents or farmers or lawyers, because they can afford to have somebody taking care of the business back home while they re in Oklahoma City or they can do it at the same time. A school teacher can t run for office. They ve got to quit their job, or a state employee, or somebody that s running a small business or working for someone else, you know, unless their boss is just going to let them do that for awhile. That s one of the reasons why we have a preponderance of lawyers on the legislature. They ve got the flexibility 16 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor to do that. I just can t imagine what you would feel like walking up the steps into the Capitol thinking, I m here to do the state s business. The state s business it s an awesome responsibility, but it s rewarding and gosh, you learn so much. I ve always told people it was the greatest graduate school in the world. (Laughs) Did you have to change your attire? Did you have to buy a whole new wardrobe? Oh, I did. All I had was my teacher clothes and so I remember buying my first suit and first high heels, I think, was when I was elected for office. And you wore suits most days? Most days. Sure, yeah. Was that part of dress codes or you just figured that might give you more leverage with the guys or was the chamber too cold or Oh, I just think you wanted to look professional and be treated like a professional, and the men all wore suits and so we did, too. Plus the chamber is very cold and I think that s (Laughs) because the men always controlled the temperature. So I always wanted to have on as many clothes as possible (Laughs) just to stay warm and that s when I started drinking coffee. I didn t ever drink coffee until I was in the legislature, but it was just to stay warm. (Laughs) Did it affect you in any other ways? Oh I hope not. Maybe I did have greater respect for people different than me. I certainly learned a lot about Oklahoma that I didn t know when I first went to the Capitol. I had very limited experience, just being from Norman. I learned a lot about the rest of the state from the other representatives and senators from the districts that they represented and had an opportunity to go to a lot of parts of Oklahoma that I normally wouldn t have gone to. Did you find that you had a question that would keep popping up from constituents? Oh, when I first ran for office, you know, there was that, You re too young, or, You re too quiet, and, You re not mean enough. I heard 17 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor that a lot. How are you gonna survive, you know, you re just not mean enough. You had to mean? I didn t quite get that. (Laughs) But then that went away after my first year in office. People never asked me that anymore. But once you were in, did they ask you to do, you know common question like, Can you fix this? or Can you fix that? Was there something they would ask? You can t be an expert in everything. My background was education and that was the area that I spent most of my time legislating in or chairing committees or hearings in. So what people do is they would come to me with questions about education and hopefully they felt like I would give them the right answer or straight answer or whatever. I know nothing about corrections or environmental policy or other things and so I would go to other people that I respected for that. A lot of times people sort of tend to specialize in different policy areas and so that was the biggest thing. People would come to me if it was education-related questions or funding questions or those kinds of things, and I would go to them for issues I know nothing about. You had to do a lot of networking then it sounds like a lot of it. Oh, yes. Lots that s a lot of it. It sure is. Did your constituents come and want pictures made with you? They wanted everything. Like I said, Norman s just a very active district and so they want you to come speak to every organization you can imagine or every school s graduations or letters, citations for birthdays or anniversaries or pictures or they ask if their kids can come to the Capitol, or can a class come to the Capitol? It was just an enormous amount of that kind of constituent service, which it was fun. I loved doing all that. It s a good way to stay in touch, too. Did you have to travel to D.C. or out of the state while you were in your position? I went to a number of conferences, education-related conferences. I was often asked to speak at some of those things. I was real excited once. I got invited to a big deal in New York City and was asked to be on a panel and once you do that, then your name gets out there or you re known as someone that can talk and knows something about what they re talking about. So that was exciting to get to be invited to some of those kinds of things. Then another facet of it is other representatives and senators would ask me to come to their districts and talk to their 18 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum clubs or their group and I did an enormous amount of that for them or help campaign for them or come talk to their teachers about education or whatever and gave a number of graduation speeches all around the state, and that was all very exciting. Good memories. Yeah, it really was and then the 1017 debates. I was fortunate to be asked to uphold the yes side, you know, and that was very different for me being on live TV debating people on the other side of an issue. That was frightening, but it turned out fine. And then the first time I ever did OETA, Oklahoma Educational Television Authority they used to have this call-in show and would have someone from the House and somebody from the Senate in the studio to take calls live and, you know, that was a little scary at first but then I came to really enjoy doing that kind of thing. Think on your feet. Yeah, you have to think on your feet but, you know, that s what you do as a teacher. So that wasn t that foreign really to me and being a teacher in a classroom for several years, your job is to reach every student and communicate with them and that s what your job in the legislature is to communicate and be able to reach and relate with everybody else. In a way, it was a big classroom and I think being a teacher was excellent preparation for that environment. Sounds like it. Did you have to deal with lobbyists very often? Oh, sure. A tremendous source of information at the Capitol comes from the lobbyists, and the key is to hear both sides of an issue. But the lobbyists are a very important part of the process and an even more important part now that term limits have forced people to retire after twelve years. There s a tremendous power shift toward the lobbyists because they re there for twenty, thirty, forty years some of them, and have a lot more expertise and experience at the Capitol than these new representatives and senators coming in and so that s a very important part of the legislative process, the lobbyists. Do they still have a doctor and a nurse on duty? As far as I know, they do. There was always a nurse of the day and the doctor of the day when I was there. The same one or does it change? 19 Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor No, it changed every week. I guess the Oklahoma Nurses Association and the Oklahoma Medical Association would organize that and so there was always a medical person Were you required to check in with them every so often or No, no. I mean, it was nice to have them there. The few times that I felt I needed to see a doctor had a stomach ache or a headache or whatever, that was nice to have them there but, no, you didn t have to check in. One person had mentioned that and no one else had Oh, really? and I just wanted to see if that was still the case today. Well, if the nurse or the doctor was from your district, then it was your job to introduce them on the first day of the week to everybody. But other than that, you didn t have to see them. That s funny that came up. Do you remember who swore you in? It was Justice Marian Opala on the supreme court. Each time, same one? I think so and he s still there. I m sure he still does that, or whoever the chief justice is now. Had you considered running one more time or were you ready to move on? Oh, sure, as it got closer to when I had to make an announcement. I had to give enough time for somebody else to run and to think about filing for office, you know. Sure, there was a lot of pressure just, Oh, go one more time, but there was a couple people that really had expressed an interest in running if and when I didn t run for re-election so I knew there were good people out there and that helped as well me deciding to let go and move on, and I was ready. Did you have any money left over in your campaign? What would what would you do with it? Very little. I pretty much used it all up at the end. I think I used what last little bit I had to write a letter to my district thanking them and mailing it, of course, that s your cost for voting for me and for four years, four 20 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor times and Who does the budget? Who keeps track of all that? Most campaigns now have and I did, too a treasurer Treasurer. somebody who maintains all the books, and my person was Charles Hollingsworth who s a banker in Norman. Today it s an enormous job because there s so many laws regarding campaign expenditure and campaign finance both at the national level and at the state level. Some candidates now have treasurers and then they also have accountants and, you know, even in some cases probably a lawyer looking after all that. You certainly would need to do that if you were running a statewide race. Do you want to talk a little bit more about what you re doing now, or what you did immediately after you finished? Sure. Immediately after I left the legislature, I came to this campus Oklahoma State University Tulsa Campus and was Vice-President for Academic Affairs when it was the University Center at Tulsa, UCT, which was at the time a consortium of OU University of Oklahoma , OSU Oklahoma State University , Langston and Northeastern all offered and brought courses here, and I sort of coordinated all of that. I liked it very much and did it, let s see, for about five or six years. Then the opportunity came at Rogers State University, or it was made into a four-year university by the legislature. It s five minutes from home and so they asked me if I would like to come work at that campus and so I was happy to do that. Then the reform happened where this campus became just OSU and NSU went to Broken Arrow and OU went to the Schusterman Center and some of us went to Rogers State University and that s where I ve been ever since. I m a professor of political science and I also have some administrative responsibilities I do for the president on top of that. Are there questions I should be asking about, if your background is in political science as well as having done tha? I think you ve asked some excellent questions. Any that I haven t covered? I usually end with the one when history s written about you, what would you like for it to say? Oh I guess that she made a difference. I hope that s the goal of 21 Finchum Taylor Finchum Taylor Finchum everybody that gets elected, that they really make a difference. I feel good that I did in education and in women s issues and in children s issues. It wasn t the phrase at the time, family values, and I think that phrase is heavily misused today, but I think the things I did hopefully made a difference for families and for children in the State of Oklahoma. And you still maintain some friendships from that time period, too, so Very much. Some of my best friends I made at the Capitol, from both political parties, and we still are very close and it s an enormous experience professionally and personally. I highly recommend it. If there s nothing else, we ll close. Okay. Thank you very much, Tanya. Thank you. ------- -------..