 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Today is November the 6th 2008. My name is Tanya Finchum. I m with Oklahoma State University Library and we re conducting an oral history project entitled Women of the Oklahoma Legislature. Today I m at the Oklahoma State Capitol to talk with Lieutenant Governor Jari Askins, who was elected to the House of Representatives in 1994, and termed out in 2006, then ran for and was elected as Lieutenant Governor of Oklahoma. Thank you for having me today. You bet. Let s start with having you tell a little bit about your youth, where you were born, and we ll work forward from there. I was born and reared in Duncan, Oklahoma. And I always kind of laugh that s what we say on the bio, reared, and everybody always wants to say raised, but my mother was a journalism major and she said, You raise crops, not kids. So I was born and reared in Duncan, Oklahoma. Lived there all my life. I still live there. That is still my home, my place of residence. That s where I went through all of my schooling. It s the area I represented as State Representative. Brothers and sisters? I m the oldest of three children. I have a sister who is a petroleum landman. When she graduated from OU University of Oklahoma with a petroleum land man a PLM degree, she was one of six women in the program and clearly that has ballooned, those numbers. But she has been in the oil and gas business forever, since her graduation with a short period out. During one of the oil busts, she actually went back and got her nursing degree, a B.S. in nursing, and then was head hunted back into the oil business. My brother is the youngest. My sister is in the middle. My brother runs our family business in Duncan and Chickasha. 5 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins We are in the land title business. It is the company my father bought back in 1949 and so it s a second generation. And talk a little bit about high school and elementary school. I went to Will Rogers Elementary School in Duncan, Oklahoma. My parents lived in a small house when I was born and the summer before I started first grade we moved to a bigger house three blocks from school. That was a time when you could ride your bike or walk to school and you came home for lunch. So it was easy to do that. I have friends that I have known since we had the same babysitter before school. I have friends that I went through all my classes with we had eight grade schools in Duncan at the time but I went through all of my schooling in Duncan. There s a group of five of us who still communicate and get together. You know, I was really lucky. I don t know if it s because my last name began with A or what, but you know a lot of teachers will appoint people to do different things, and I always had opportunities to do things in class or do special projects or moderate special programs. I really give a lot of credit not just to my parents, but to my teachers who were great encouragers of trying to get young boys and girls to do different things. Whether we were having a lightning round of math in the second grade on the blackboard or playing kickball on the playground, they just always gave us opportunities to be the team captain so you always had the opportunity to be in charge. What was your favorite subject? I would probably tell you reading simply because I love to read now and I think I always did. Even when I was in high school and college, I took English and history courses whenever I could. I loved that. I love biographies, I love historical novels. My best grades were usually in English and math, my best scores on achievement tests were in math and science. I always found it really interesting. I really liked most of my classes. I can t think of any I really hated. Any government classes or political science at that time? You know, I had some, but never was interested in politics. It was always a private subject to my parents. I didn t grow up with them putting campaign signs in the yard or working on campaigns, and how they voted they always said was private. I had one semester of government as a sophomore and didn t have a political science class until I was in college, when I took one as an arts and science elective. 6 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins And then we ll move into your college days. Where did you go and why? I went to the University of Oklahoma. My mother went there and I grew up on OU football. I was always there on weekends and it s what we did as a family because you could afford to then. There was another girl and we were going to be roommates from grade school on, we were going to be roommates in college at OU. Then she decided to go to OSU Oklahoma State University and then my best friend decided to go to OSU and all of my best friends were going to OSU. So I really started looking at whether because I loved the campus. That was where the state tennis finals used to be and I played tennis in high school. It was the only sport we had for girls then. And I loved the campus and I had friends up there. I just decided that I would still go to OU even though all of my friends were going to OSU. So I just went up to Stillwater on weekends to visit. Did you live on campus? Lived in the dorm as a freshman and roomed with another girl who s a good friend of mine and we were suitemates with another couple of girls from Duncan. We were all good kids so there was some real safety and security in knowing that we weren t going to let each other get in trouble our freshman year. I pledged, I went through Rush, pledged a sorority. I didn t look back thinking about it this way, but I was always involved in extracurricular activities, always. Junior high, high school, you know whatever. I remember my mother, who was an OU grad, really started my junior year and especially my senior year of high school talking to me about going to either a junior college or a girl s school or someplace out of state. She would bring home brochures or talk about schools in Colorado or Sophie Newcomb in New Orleans or William Woods or what s the other one in Columbia? It used to be a women s college I don t remember if it still is but she used to talk about it. One time she said that she was just concerned that I was used to being a big fish in a small pond in Duncan. Even though my grades were good, she just thought that I would enjoy the opportunity to start out in a small pond and have leadership opportunities there. And I remember looking at her and saying, Well, why can t I be a big fish in a big pond? She never said anything to me again about my choice or my desire to go to OU. So when I went to OU, I knew who I wanted as my big sister. I met her during Rush. She was active on campus, ended up being a top ten Freshman Woman and she helped me get into campus activities. So for me, it was just an extension of meeting new people, expanding the network of people you knew and being able to be involved like I was at home. 7 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Sure. Elected to student government at that point? Never ran for student government. Let s see, I m going to have to think this through. In junior high I was secretary of the junior honor society and chaplain of the junior high student council. In high school, I was secretary of the student council and chaplain of the high school honor society. And I was officers in those things but that was the only student government I was ever in. I never ran for student government positions at OU. I did run for offices in the organizations I was in. I was in Alpha Lambda Delta, which I think you get as a freshman scholastic recognition; I was president of that. I was in Mortar Board and was an officer in Mortar Board. I was an officer in panhellenic. I was an officer in my sorority from activities chairman to pledge trainer to president. That was just kind of where I focused my running for office. Developing skills that You know, I ll tell you what, I never even thought about that. I never thought about doing that. Every organization that I was in, that I can think of, at least three times I was the position that would be the equivalent of what is pledge trainer. Once in high school and twice in college. And my poor sister had to suffer through me with them three times. But I can remember that one of my beliefs in that position, more so than as, say, Rush chairman or president or something like that, was that I knew what my values were and I knew what my expectations were. And I always felt like we had an obligation to younger women or newer members to help them realize that they had options and choices. I wanted to reach out and find the shy young women and not make them feel pressure to do things they didn t want to do. To let those young women, whether it was a high school organization or college, get their feet on the ground. That s always been my favorite position, being more I hadn t thought about that but being more of a trainer. And your major was journalism? My major was journalism. And I swore I wasn t going to major in journalism. My mother was a journalism major and she actually ended up being editor of the student newspaper at OU, The Oklahoma Daily for a year. I think at that time they usually changed each semester but the year that she was editor would have overlapped around 1944, either late 1943/early 1944 or late 1944/early 1945. And it was war years. I was not going to go through journalism. And as I kept looking at things I looked at psychology. If I look back now, I probably should have gotten a double major in English and journalism because I probably had enough credit hours; it was close to that, or in history. Or now they might have said Letters as a degree. So I actually thought, Okay if I m going to 8 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins declare journalism, I m not going to declare news writing. So I declared public relations, not knowing how much of that I would use later as I ran for office. What did your mother do in journalism? What was her career? She was from Sayre. She had been working for what was then the Sayre Daily Headlight Journal, I think that was the long name back then. She didn t come to OU until she was a sophomore and they offered her a job. So she had been working at the newspaper in Sayre and writing stories. When she graduated, she went to work in Altus for the newspaper. Then, she actually became county supervisor of what would be the county welfare department in Greer county for a while, and then she ended up marrying Dad. So she wasn t in journalism real long but she always used it. People who she met one of the editors at the Altus paper later became the editor at Duncan. And so she was always in communications positions as I was growing up. And how about your dad? My parents were older when they got married considering the time. Mother was 28 and Dad was 37 and it was a first marriage for both of them. My dad was born in Duncan and his family moved. Mother was born in Tecumseh. Dad s family moved to Plainview, Texas when he was in the sixth grade. And I think it was probably his junior year of high school when they moved to Sayre. It was about my mother s junior year in high school when her mother and father moved to Sayre. My dad had a good friend whose parents owned an abstract company so he had worked at the abstract company. He worked at the post office. He was in the war and enlisted in the Navy. After the war, came back to Sayre and was working in the post office again as well as the abstract office. His oldest sister was probably already the court clerk in Stephens County by that time, and she told him that this really small title company was up for sale. He went to Duncan and bought that company. So he moved back to Duncan in late 1949 and then proposed to Mother and they got married in 1951. So we were back in his home town. Okay, so once you graduated from OU, what next? I knew when I was a freshman that what I wanted to do my first year out of college and I really tried to chart a course to get there. I wanted to work for Alpha Chi Omega the year I graduated. It was a one year contract back then and they hired three or four young women to be chapter consultants. They call them different things, different decades they ve changed the name. And I was selected. There were three of us that year and I got to travel to college campuses around the country, 9 Finchum participate in membership recruitment and did a lot of leadership training. Mostly we would spend a week on a college campus, work with the officers in a chapter, and give workshops. I wanted to do that and I got to do that. I look back, because I kept notes, and I traveled for fifteen weeks each semester. I visited seventeen different campuses in those fifteen weeks. I was really fortunate because most of the schools that I visited were what was then the Big Eight or the Big Ten conference schools. I also got to go to Chapel Hill, North Carolina. I got to go to Berkeley, California and do things. So I saw a lot of college campuses. And I absolutely loved that and loved the opportunity to work with chapters and see what they did well and take their best practices and share them with other groups. I got to do an awful lot on those campuses. I really enjoyed that. It was at the end of that year, which would have been one year after graduation, when it occurred to me that I needed a job. I applied for one at the University of Oklahoma and the one they offered me was in Housing and it was not something I saw myself doing. So I interviewed with the three large banks in Oklahoma City, what were then Fidelity, First National Bank, and Republic I think it was Republic and one of them offered me a job. I interviewed for marketing or public relations jobs. One of them hired me and I worked for the old First National Bank and Trust in Oklahoma City. I was assigned to the municipal bond department and this would have been July of 1976. They started this new accounting service. It was a computerized accounting service that had been developed by First National Bank and Trust. It was marketed to banks across Oklahoma to help computerize the accounting for municipal bond portfolios that the state banks carried. I knew nothing about computers or municipal bonds but I was pretty good I never took accounting, but I was pretty good; I always kept my dad s books. So I just had to memorize those forms, those reports and we d go out and sell that service to banks around the state. So for the next ten months, I traveled the state of Oklahoma from Hugo to Cheyenne to up north. I traveled all around the state visiting with banks and a lot of those banks don t exist anymore or they exist under different names. I enjoyed being on the road and seeing new places in Oklahoma, but I got bored. So it was about March of 1977, I looked at graduate school and I couldn t find anything in graduate school that interested me except law. I applied for law school, and started law school two years after I earned my undergraduate degree. Traveling around Oklahoma was good preparation for this too. 10 Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Yeah, you know, all of that really was. We were in Cheyenne, Oklahoma about three weeks ago and they asked have I ever been there and I said well, yes actually, I visited a bank here 30 years ago. Some of that has been really, really good because there are places where I could say, Yes. I have been here. Talk a little about law school. Was it tough? You know, it was tough. I approached it from the standpoint that was graduate school to me. I was there at an interesting time because they had already moved from the old law barn on the main campus to the new building that s on the south end of campus. Had I gone straight into law school after I graduated, one in four, 25 percent of that class, were women. Two years later when I started, women were one in three. So almost exactly 33 percent of the first year law students were women. Even the law professors were seeing a significant change. And many of the women were like me or older and had been out of school for a little bit before going back to law school. So I entered law school with no thought that I would need to practice law; I just wanted to learn things. I thought I would go to work for an oil company I had this background in the land title business. I checked records for lease brokers to help pay my way through law school. By the time I finished law school, and I did work for a firm during law school, I realized I would need to practice law. So I started looking at opportunities to practice oil and gas law, and received an offer to go work for a firm in Duncan that had clients all around the state. It was the oil boom of the late 1970 s and early 1980 s. So you traveled even more? You know, I didn t end up traveling that much. With that attorney it was mostly just an office practice where I did title opinions for oil companies. First, title opinions for their drilling sites to make sure they leased the property from the right owners and the right mineral interests. And then later we did what we called division order opinions, which meant they had production. We verified all of the royalty interests or each person who would get a part of the payments from that successful drilling. So that s what I did, thinking that I would only go to Duncan for a couple of years to make sure I knew what I was doing and then I d get my feet on the ground as an attorney and go to Tulsa or someplace because that was where most of the oil business was then. I started working on August 18, 1980 in Duncan. Passed the bar exam, found out, and was sworn in early October, 1980. In late May of 1982, I got a phone call from the district judge asking me if I would take a 11 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins position, an appointment as a special judge in Stephens County. I was shocked. I just laughed at him. He went to my church. I asked him if he was trying to find the person who had had the least amount of time in the court room because I didn t have any. I did oil and gas opinions. And he said some things to me that were really encouraging about what he was really looking for. So rather than leave Duncan after two years as I d thought I would, I took a position July 1 of 1982 as a judge in Stephens County and held that position for almost eight years. That brings you up quite a ways then and helps with what you are doing today, too. Yeah, it does. As I tell students, if I had known I was going to be a judge there might have been areas of law I would have studied a little harder. Most of my court room time was actually criminal law. And a lot of things I did then I mean everything was a building block, unbeknownst to me, to whatever I did next. So it was that experience that really taught me a lot of things that I still fall back on today. And then what? I was approached in 1986 and asked by some friends, retired teachers, to run for the State Senate. I wasn t through with being a judge then. I mean, the Senate was just a wild blue yonder to me. I never even thought about that but it was somewhere between 1986 and 1990. I vividly remember sitting at my desk in my office knowing that judicial branch interprets the law, the executive branch implements it, and the legislative makes it. And I remember looking at some laws I was being asked to interpret and it was new law and thinking, This is one of the stupidest laws I ve ever seen. And all I could think of was that if I kept thinking that, then maybe I needed to run for the legislature and be part of changing it. I left the bench in 1990. I had good judges ahead of me. But at that time, they were 15 or 20 years away from being eligible for retirement and they were not men I would have run against for an election. I just felt like I needed to do more. So I left the bench and ran for state representative against an incumbent. Didn t win that time, but it was a close race. A lot closer than I think people gave me credit for when I started out. It was not particularly pleasant for our community because many of my family s friends and the incumbent s friends were friends, and that was uncomfortable for a lot of people. But we were running on different party tickets. When I ran in 1990, I ended up meeting other people running for office around the state. In January of 1991, the new general counsel for the 12 Finchum Askins new Governor Walters called me and asked me if I would take a position on the parole board. That probably wouldn t have happened if I hadn t left the bench and met candidate Walters while he was running for office. So I ended up becoming the first person on the parole board who had judicial experience. There were a number of them who had been lawyers. You didn t have to be a lawyer to be on the parole board, but they had been lawyers and later in life became judges. I was able to take judicial experience with me into that position, which made me catch on a lot faster and I ended up being elected chairman of the board. There were two other men who had been chair at different times and wanted to be. Bluntly, neither of them could guarantee which one I would vote for so they both decided I told them I d be chair if it would be unanimous. So I ended up being the first woman to chair the Pardon and Parole Board in Oklahoma. Good for you. Yeah, but I think all of that happened because I had been a judge. I really believe that. And all that happened because I went to Duncan for two years to practice oil and gas law. You know, all of those things were just building blocks. So I did the parole board, then I left the parole board to go to work in the governor s office in 1992. I knew that my state representative was not that 1992 was going to be the last time he was going to run for office. Term limits were not impacting him, but that was the last time he was going to run. And his friends told me that they wanted me to know that. I knew in 1994 it would be an open seat. And so I thought, Well, you know, if I m going to run for state representative again in 1994, - I kept my house in Duncan. I went to work in the governor s office and just got an apartment. I d come up here on Monday mornings and go home on Friday afternoons. So for about 15 months I worked in the governor s office and learned about I did criminal justice issues and I read legislation that passed. So I got to see things from the executive branch side of dealing with the legislature. I worked a lot with then Lieutenant Governor Jack Mildren, whom I knew and had gotten to be friends with. So I had that opportunity before I announced and ran for state representative with a few months in there for January of 1994 I left the governor s office and I was executive director at the Pardon and Parole Board. I tried to get them to just call me an interim director because their director had left. They knew I was going to leave to run for office but they didn t want to call me interim even though they knew I was going to leave. From 1994, I actually lobbied at the Capitol. I argued my budget in front of the budget committees in the House and the Senate. I sat in the gallery working legislation and watching other legislatures, House and Senate, not thinking about it but watching how they operated, knowing I was 13 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins going to run and consciously thinking, I hope I can act like this person. Betty Boyd was one of them, because I watched how they paid her a great deal of respect. Whether they agreed with her and voted for her legislation or didn t, the way she conducted herself on the House floor caused people to respect her. I watched other legislators that when they got up to talk, people left the chamber. I thought, I knew who I hoped I d be like. I saw good and bad that I hoped I would either forget or adopt. And it was a good experience. It made it easier for me when I was elected. Sure, see both sides I did. I did. It really was helpful. When I was elected in 1994, I had been with the parole board, I had been director, I d worked in the governor s office; there were a number of legislators, democrat and republican, in the House and Senate, who I d had a lot of contact with. Either because they had constituent issues involving people who were incarcerated who were coming up for parole, or perhaps their constituents were families of the victims and they wanted to know how to protest someone s early release. So they would contact me or the parole board about what the process was, what they needed to do. So I would be at the Capitol talking to them. Early in my legislative first term, 1995, I remember some legislatures talking to me about some things and I said, You know, you ve got to remember this is my first term. I don t know that. And they said, Well it doesn t seem like your first term, because you ve been here. So we laughed because they always called new legislators freshmen. And I said, Well, I guess I m a redshirt freshman. I d been around. I just hadn t been in the game yet. So we all laughed about that. But it was really true. And it was extremely helpful to me to already have some of those relationships and familiarity. Even if I didn t know all of the intricacies of the procedures of what they did, I had seen it from at least two different sides: one from receiving legislation in the governor s office, and two, either promoting it myself as executive director of the parole board and being in the galleries to watch what went on. That was an extremely valuable time. And interpreting it then? And interpreting it. Yes. I mean, it really was. It was good. So not long after I was elected the second term, and I think for every term after that, I was just thinking how this ties in with what I said earlier. I participated in the orientation and training of new members of the House of Representatives after each election cycle. I was just thinking of how that ties in with everything I said earlier about just wanting people to feel 14 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins comfortable with what they were doing. There were things we changed in 2002 that I think made it easier for members to adapt. It was just an opportunity to try to make people feel as comfortable as I did when I started on my first day. Let s back up a little bit. In your second campaign, not the one you lost, but in 1994 when you ran talk a little about it. Your opponent male, female? He was male, and he was an attorney. So that wasn t an issue. Being a lawyer clearly wasn t an issue. And quite frankly, I was a judge for a lot longer than I ever practiced law. So I had a number of advantages. It was an open seat that I had run for before. There were people who had supported the incumbent the first time I ran who were more than willing to support me when I ran the second time. For me it was a different experience than it was for some of the others. I did not have a primary. In fact, in that particular race, I don t believe the republican opponent had a primary either. So we were only on the ballot in November. In fact, every time I ran for office in the legislature, I was only on the ballot in November. I never had a primary until I ran for Lieutenant Governor. All six times? I only had to run three times. I was unopposed three of those six times, but I ran. I clearly had a pretty good idea of what I wanted to do. I d run a pretty good campaign with very little money in 1990. Of course, the cost of things went up considerably by the time I left the legislature. But yes, I worked to raise money, I had fundraisers. I was fortunate because District 50, at that time, was the city limits of Duncan and the western edge of Stephens County. So I had other schools like Central High which is now incorporated as a community and I had the community and school of Empire, Oklahoma. But I didn t have the city limits of Marlow or the city limits of Comanche or any of the cities or towns on the eastern side of Stephens County. So it was a very compact district. I really only had one daily newspaper, which was The Duncan Banner. I could buy ads in the Marlow or Comanche papers which are weekly, and generally did that the last two weeks of the election. But the primary, I really only had to worry about one concentrated area which was a lot different than people along the far western border of Oklahoma or the Panhandle. Or people even in the urban areas where familiarity with your legislator is a lot different than being in a rural area. It was my hometown. I had a distinct advantage because everybody who had been there for any length of time knew it was my hometown and knew I d been a judge. 15 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum When I was elected, there were not many women who had been elected outside of the metropolitan areas of Oklahoma City or Tulsa unless they were near Norman or Stillwater. Even Annabelle Wiedemann was from Yukon. So that was probably rural at that time she was elected. There might be people who would consider that still metropolitan to Oklahoma City. Trish Weedn was a state senator from Purcell. She was probably the other rural woman at that time. And when I was elected, there were four of us who were women who were elected. Two from Oklahoma City, one democrat one republican, and then a woman who was a retired educator and superintendent from the Muskogee area. But there weren t any women from southwest Oklahoma. There was a state senator woman elected when I was but we were the first women from down in that area. That part was different because it was my hometown. I think that everybody knew me. Knock on a lot of doors anyway? Yes. I loved knocking doors, that s my favorite part of campaigning. It is the hardest part of running for lieutenant governor because you don t do that in a statewide campaign, but I love knocking doors. I think that s why I got close the first time I ran, because I knocked doors. I knew from that experience which precincts or which neighborhoods I should walk first, or which ones last, and which ones to try to do two times. But yes, that was a major component of every legislative campaign I was involved in. Did you have a slogan? When I first ran when I ran in 1990, as well as 1994 my last name is Askins. It begins with an A and both of the opponents in both of those races, their last names began with A. I remember consciously thinking, Well, first off there s not a lot you can do with the last name Askins, and thinking that I didn t want people to just think about the first letter. If they didn t see well, it might get mixed up. So because Jari is spelled differently, J-A-R-I, it s short for Jaritta which is my mother s name, I really focused on the Jari. Probably the first three campaigns I ran our signs were Just say Jari. We had Askins on there but we really played up the Jari. And your color scheme? It was red and white, the colors of Duncan and of Empire. So everything that you know in Duncan was already red and white, so it was red with white letters. And did you have the same manager every time? 16 Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins I wouldn t have said that I had a manager back then. I had a treasurer. It was probably my brother. Ethics laws were continuing to change as the Ethics Commission was really just getting started then. But I had people who helped me and I had people that helped us with the newspaper ads. I had somebody who had been a political consultant, and I would run things past them, especially in 1994. They weren t active anymore, so I really relied a lot on my own experience. And then there were a couple of women who had journalism backgrounds and newspaper experience, and a young woman who drew ads. They really helped me put together the ads we d submit to newspapers. We did some cable TV so I taped some things that we ran on cable networks down there but really didn t pay anybody. I don t think I ever had paid staff except maybe once. In one of my last campaigns, a single mom who needed some money did some office work for us. Did you have a watch party? Absolutely. I think beginning in 1994, we had all of them at the really nice community center in Duncan called the Simmons Center had watch parties election night. Especially in rural areas, it s a lot easier. You send people out to the polling places because when the precinct workers leave, they will post the results for that precinct on the door at that polling place. So you could have runners or spotters, and cell phones helped. And you could have them check two or three boxes and call them in and get it a lot faster than you could get it waiting on it to all go to the courthouse and everything to be tabulated because of all the other races that were there. Was the first one close? No. No? It was comfortable. I can t even tell you what it was. I can tell you how many I lost by. But I can t tell you but it was a comfortable lead through the evening. And we didn t do polling or anything during those early campaigns. And then your swearing in, can you talk a little bit about that? Your first one. November 1994, two weeks after the election was the swearing in for the House of Representatives. I was really fortunate. My parents, my brother and his wife and their two kids and my sister were all able to come. One of my best friends from St. Louis who worked with me my first year 17 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins after college flew in for it. I remember being in the House Chamber and it was great. Glen Johnson was going to continue as Speaker. We knew each other through activities in college. He had gone the student government route and I had gone the other curricular activity route. And when we were out of college, he was just ahead of me in law school. So I was comfortable because I knew who the Speaker of the House was, he knew me from being a judge. Loyd Benson, who later became Speaker but was Majority Leader then, and whose mother was one of my constituents, he had also been in my courtroom. He was from Frederick, and he had been in my court room when I was a judge. So I was lucky because I knew the two top people in the House, and the Majority Leader in the Senate was Darryl Roberts from Ardmore and he had been in my courtroom. So I came in with people who called me judge. And as a freshman that gave me a lot more credibility. And as a woman, that was really helpful, I know, in establishing what other people thought about me. So I was really fortunate with that. It was a fun day. We came up and I think the swearing in actually started at noon. And you know, lots of excitement up here at the Capitol. That s always a fun day because families are exhausted and excited. They re exhausted from tough campaigns. But everybody who s up here is a winner. So it s always fun. Did you drive down Lincoln? Probably, but you see, I had already been working here for a couple of years so I already had an office on the second floor in the governor s office. I had an office down on north Lincoln at the parole board. So driving on Lincoln was something I d done a lot. My first office was on the third floor in an area that they used to call it something different than what they call it now. They used to call it the fish bowl, now they call it the bull pen. But my office was right at the end of the hallway on the third floor in the north wing. It was a suite of about 12 offices and eight of them were pretty tiny. But right at the end was a door with an office with a window, and that s where my office was, and I could look out. And, literally that office was in the middle of what would have been Lincoln Boulevard, right in the middle. And I loved that. I thought that was a lot like being on the bench, not taking sides one way or the other. But just kind of being middle of the road. So that s where my first office as a legislator was. And your first desk on the floor? Was back row and I was on the center aisle. Very much on the center aisle. 18 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Did you get to choose or did they assign? Loyd Benson assigned it. In the House of Representatives there are 50 desks on the floor and there are 101 house members so you share a desk. And the Speaker s desk is behind the podium. So Loyd Benson assigned my seatmate to be the woman from Muskogee who was elected. Barbara Staggs? Barbara Staggs. And she and I and one of the freshmen republicans, Fred Morgan, we had all been in Leadership Oklahoma together two years earlier. Our Leadership Oklahoma class, we think, is the only class that did not have a state elected official in it. And they knew that I ran, and they knew I was going to run. I knew Fred was going to run. I did not know that Barbara was going to run. And Barbara became my seatmate. And we were seatmates for all 12 years. All 12 years. Was that really unusual? I think it really was. She came in with educational experience and experience in a lot of retirement issues. I came in with criminal justice experience and other areas. So it was good because we could bounce things off of each other. Or I could say, I don t know why you re doing that, your DAs are going to hate that. Or she could tell me, You know, this is what a classroom teacher really needs. And that was just you build those kinds of alliances and that was great. Barbara and Fred and I were elected together and served our 12 years together and then term limited together. Did you all live together at one point? There was more than one occasion Barbara and another state representative now Senator Mary Easley and I shared a three bedroom apartment. She was Representative Mary Easley then. We shared an apartment in 2003, a three bedroom. Before that for a couple of years, the three of us had rooms right next to each other in a hotel down there. My first three years, I lived in hotel rooms and I just rented them by the month. The next three years I had an apartment downtown at Regency Tower. Then, a bunch of legislators had gotten really good deal in one of the hotels on Lincoln, so I moved out of the apartment and moved into that hotel. Barbara, Mary, and I had three rooms right next to each other. Then two months later, I broke my leg. So it really worked out well to not be in an apartment by myself but to have my friends on either side of me. And then let s see, we did that for two years. Then we did that apartment for one year. Then Barbara and I had hotel rooms by each other. And then she got off and was doing something. Then our 19 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins last two years, I rented a two bedroom apartment and sublet to her during sessions. So Barbara and I roomed together another two-year cycle. Good friends. Yes, good friends. Really good friends, you know. That was comfortable for both of us because we just had different interests. And her husband, Ross, would come up and meet her and stay with us and everything. So it just worked out real well, besides helping share expenses. Let s talk about the first time you presented a bill on the floor. The House Bill 1003 was a bill I filed right after the election right after I was sworn in 1994. It was a bill that would have reduced the number of inmates who were eligible for certain early parole considerations. We were overcrowded then, so there were a lot of pre-release, pre-parole types of programs. I didn t think that violent offenders should be eligible for those, and there were no restrictions on them. So my first bill came from my criminal justice background and parole experience. And I think it s one of the first ones that I explained on the House floor. As I was answering questions about it, the chairman of the appropriations committee came back and asked me privately, You are going to strike title on this bill, aren t you, because there s a fiscal impact? Well I knew what that meant, and it was making sure that the bill didn t go through in final form because there is a fiscal impact. If you quit making people eligible for early release, you were going to keep them in prison longer so the cost would continue to go up. But that was typical with every bill that had a fiscal impact. You struck a title on it and kind of worked through it during the session. And I got the bill through the House. And I don t even think it got a hearing in the Senate because of you know we didn t have private prisons then and we were overcrowded. But eventually, like six years later, we repealed all those early programs. So eventually we got where I thought we needed to go. But I could tell you that and I have friends who could tell you too I don t know why, but there were several times when I would present bills, even from the back row, and answer questions for other legislators. There was one bill that came up legislation brought to shorten the appeals process in the state of Oklahoma for criminal appeals in death penalty cases. We have no authority over the federal appeals process. But there was legislation and I was asked to be on the committee, I wasn t the primary author. The primary author was Representative Larry Rice from Pryor, who was a police officer before he became a higher education administrator or a state representative. And by the time we 20 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins finished putting the bill together in committees with the Senate and everything, he asked me if I would handle it on the floor. And I didn t mind because it was talking about appeals, criminal cases. I was on the parole board. I sat through hearings on two death penalty cases. It was a subject matter that I was more versed in than anyone in that room. So I frequently got to talk about legislation or handle legislation even if I wasn t the primary author. So there wasn t a gender barrier then. No, for me there was not a gender barrier. I do think that the lessons I learned in the gallery before I was a legislator I did not forget. I don t think I acted on the floor as a representative any differently than I acted as a judge. But I think it was just remembering to be respectful of other people. I started out with the opinion that if people asked me questions, or debated against me, or voted against me, it was not personal, that it was just something they disagreed with in the legislation. No matter how many times they tried to make it personal to see if they could push buttons, I wasn t going to let that happen because the next day it might be a bill that they agreed with me on. I didn t want to make it personal because it shouldn t be. Not everyone has that attitude when they re using the microphone, man or woman. Do you want to talk about a couple more of your special bills? You know, I was really lucky. I carried a lot of legislation. I was successful with a lot of legislation, especially early on. And I was asked to carry a lot of different things. I generally carried things that dealt with domestic violence, an issue that I think is still a huge problem in the state of Oklahoma. If you want to talk about something that I think has difficulty at the Capitol because of gender, it s domestic violence issues. There are a lot of people who don t really think it happens. Unless they know someone who has been involved in domestic violence or domestic abuse, man or woman, they are not really sure it exists. Some believe it s exaggerated. So that s a huge educational process that is ongoing. I think tremendous improvement has been made with prosecutors and local law enforcement officers around the state. It is so private. As we all know, incidences that occur in the home nobody wants to report them. If the outward appearance is a loving family and a perfect home, it is very difficult to give up that public image and to let people know that behind the front door it s not pleasant and quite often deadly. There are a lot of men who are strong advocates on domestic violence issues. That s one of the better friendships Representative Ron Peters who s a republican from Tulsa, and I am a woman from Southwest rural Oklahoma, and we worked well together. He continues to help fight that 21 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins fight. Did you have any unfinished business? You know, I really felt like there was more work to be done. I think we still have huge children s issues in this state. It s not typically an area where the lieutenant governor has been actively involved, but I felt that with my legislative experience, perhaps I could do some things on the children s issues. I think that poverty in the state of Oklahoma is a crime, as high as our poverty rate is, and certainly our child abuse rates keep going up. I felt there was just more that needed to be done. When I was term limited, I kept thinking, I m not ready to just go home and sit on the sidelines anymore. So I decided, nobody asked me, I just decided that I was going to run for lieutenant governor, and it turned out to be a good experience. If you hadn t termed out would you still be doing Of course, I knew when I was elected state representative that term limits were in effect. They were passed by the voters in 1990 when I ran the first time. They were effective in 1991 for anyone elected in 1992 or later. So I knew when I came in that 12 years was the limit, and I never thought beyond that. But the lieutenant governor s seat you know it was probably time to do something else. I know I was an effective legislator. And I think I was effective even in my last two years when we were in the minority party. I was really grateful to my caucus who elected me in 2003 as their designee to be Speaker after the 2004 elections if we had maintained the majority. I didn t realize how significant that was. I mean, that was something that I had to go out and work for because there were people on the caucus who weren t ready for a woman. And some of them may not have been ready because they knew that I knew the good old boys, I just didn t play their game. I think that was my judicial background and one, a woman doesn t want to be one of the good old boys. I did things socially with a bunch of the guys. We d go to OU basketball games or we d play golf. I didn t have any problem with that because I ve always been if not the only, one of few women wherever I ve worked. So to have colleagues at work, my colleagues were mostly men. But I was able to secure enough pledges in my caucus that a good friend of mine who was interested in having the same position wasn t even nominated. So I didn t even have opposition. What I didn t realize until probably a year later, even when the democrats lost control of the House and became the minority is that it didn t matter if it was the democrat caucus or the republican caucus and 22 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum it didn t matter if it was the House or the Senate. Up until then, up until my opportunity, a woman had not been elected the leader of a caucus in the Oklahoma Legislature. In 2005 when the republicans took control of the legislature, for two years Susan Winchester did serve as the Speaker Pro Tempore, which was the number two position in the in the House of Representatives; she was the first woman to do that. But in terms of being the leader of the caucus, there were a number of women who had had leadership positions, but they were deputy positions. They were positions like I had. I thought that was significant. I think those opportunities were credibility given to me because of the years I had spent as a judge, which helped me and changed how I handled myself as a legislator. So you were the leader of the caucus in 2005? Right. I offered to step down in 2004 but that would have been when I really took over, so I did it through the end of session in 2006. So for two years in the legislature I really helped make that transition from majority to minority. And what type of things would you do in that position? Oh, sometimes you re just counselor. People get mad or you would do things like assign rooms or try to find secretaries or legislative assistants for the other legislators. You try to help members move their legislation. You try to hold a caucus together if you think it is something that you can pull enough from the other side of the aisle to perhaps get some changes in the legislation that would not pass without your help. You work with the Senate leadership. For those two years, the democrats were controlling the Senate. So we d try to communicate with the Senate, the Senate democrats, and the governor s office to let them know what we were doing and what we thought we could do in terms of being strategic and helping the governor move his agenda if it was something we agreed with. So a lot of strategy and a lot of trying to anticipate problems. I had some members who had been elected and didn t know yet how to maneuver the system. And then I had other members who had waited for ten years, hoping they would have an opportunity to play a larger role in the legislature, only to find that they were now a member of the minority party and they didn t have that opportunity. For some who had been waiting their turn, it was very frustrating. And so you tried to find ways to help them feel successful in what they were doing. Kind of negotiating a lot then. 23 Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum A lot of negotiating. You mentioned your office your first year was on the third floor. Did it change a lot over your six terms? You know, it did for a while. First term it was on the third floor. My second term it was on the third floor in another area that was in the southwest wing. I was there for two years and then that wing was two-thirds legislative staff. That was the year they renovated the House Chamber they moved House staff down to the basement and then renovated that hallway during the session. I was there two years and as I started my third term, had an office up on the fifth floor in the north wing. There were three offices there but they needed space for one more so they walled it off. And actually four of us who were women, democrat women Debbie Blackburn, Barbara Staggs, Mary Easley and I all were up there. Some of the men started calling it the hen house. I told them that sounded way too matronly for us; we were way more fun, so we called it the chick suite. But we were only there during one session because they completed the renovation of the third floor s southwest wing. I moved there and I was there for five years. We got them to build a stairwell from four down to three. So I stayed there for the end of my third term and all through my fourth and fifth terms. I could have moved up to the fourth floor, a lot of people wanted to do that. I liked it better down on three. I liked it where we were. Then during my last term, I was up in the northwest corner on the fifth floor in the minority leader s office. Those were all my offices. Did you have the same assistant? Most of the time first-term legislators share. Debbie Blackburn and I shared an assistant for our first term. My second and third terms, which were two years each, I had what they called a session secretary, not full time. I had the same one for those four years. Then when you re not in session, you re assigned and like the full-time assistants will have two or three legislators that they work for. I had a lot of constituent work, a lot. So my interim secretary was one of the women who worked for the Speaker. She was used to a lot of constituent work and I was really the only legislator she had, so that was really helpful. Then at the beginning of my fourth term, after the 2000 election, I got a full time assistant. The Speaker knew I needed one and another legislative assistant, I asked her if she d come work for me full time. So she finished six years in the legislature with me and she s with me now in the lieutenant governor s office. That s good. 24 Askins Finchum Askins Yeah. Good relationship. She puts up with me. You mentioned that you were in office when the Murrah building bombing happened. Talk a little bit about that day. You know, I remember I was really lucky. I was down in the basement of the Capitol having coffee with a friend of mine whose husband was lobbying for something upstairs. She was a friend from before I was in the legislature. And people were running by and they were saying that the Federal courthouse had exploded. As a former judge, I had a lot of friends in that courthouse. Two men who had been police officers in Duncan when I was on the bench were US Marshals. So we ran upstairs and of course on the way learned that it was the Murrah Office Building. And it was just it was incredible. It was one of those things that the horror of it was paralyzing. And you couldn t stop watching on television what was going on. I remember about ten o clock it may have been a little after ten since that happened at 9:03 but about ten o clock we went into the House Chamber and the Speaker called us in and convened session. And they kind of explained what had happened. I remember that Oklahoma City State Representative Kevin Cox came in and told us that he had dropped his son off at I may be mistaken, but I think it was the daycare at the Y. I know it was not the one at the Murrah building. But it was the one a few blocks away at the YWCA. And I think he had gone by the little post office that was there and he was driving toward the Capitol and his car felt the concussion, the smaller vehicle that he drove. I remember him describing to us what he had experienced. There were many of us in that room. I learned that one of the men I worked for while I was in law school had lost his life. He had been a house boy when I was a freshman in college. He was a house boy at my sorority house who married my sorority chapter president, and at the time of the bombing was one of the attorneys for HUD and lost his life. Representative Susan Winchester, a friend of mine, lost her sister. There were other people in the legislature who had people they lost. But I can remember that was a Wednesday. And they told us all to leave and go home. And they were going to shut down the Capitol for fear of not knowing what was happening. I remember coming back to Oklahoma City on Thursday evening and the bombing was in Representative Debbie Blackburn s district, it was in her district. She had been down to Ground Zero. I came back and we went down to Ground Zero again. She knew the Oklahoma City law enforcement officers. I knew the highway patrol and others who were involved in the command center there. I remember walking around. I 25 Finchum Askins Finchum remember they were still in rescue mode at that time. They hoped. They had not shifted to total recovery yet. They were still hopeful. I knew it was a crime scene. Of course they had already made the arrest up at Ponca City or near Perry. So I couldn t help but look at it as the crime scene that it was and realize that we were so fortunate that more lives had not been lost. The sheer impact I was state president of an organization and I had friends in every other state. I was getting calls from people in every other state wanting to know what was happening and compassion was pouring out from around the country. I remember the first night I went home to Duncan. And I remember telling someone that from the first hours on, there was no looting. It was almost two days later before the national press picked up on the fact that there wasn t a lot of looting going on in Oklahoma City. There were just people trying to give of themselves, give of their resources, and do what they could to help. I remember feeling like people around the country, or the world didn t know much about Oklahoma. The way in which they had to learn was unfortunate. But I think they learned about Oklahoma people in a way that could never be described to them. They had to see it for themselves. And I ve never been more proud of our emergency response personnel. It was a difficult, difficult situation that they were put in. And as the recovery process continued, I just think that unless you ve ever been in that kind of situation, you have no idea the emotional and psychological impact that rescuers and first responders have. They are just exceptional people to me. And that kind of prepared you for 9/11? I think it did, unfortunately. It s a hard fact to realize that that s now the world we live in. If we don t pay attention to what we do and how we treat other people, we won t be prepared. I spoke this morning, gave welcome remarks at a conference that s a two day conference that s really FEMA driven, Department of Homeland Security driven. This part of the workshop was on bombing prevention. As I welcomed them to Oklahoma City I told them a little bit about my background. I said, I recognize you all are here to do great things. And I recognize that the goal is to prevent bombing. But we all know that you re never going to prevent all of it. Hopefully the training they receive, the awareness, the skills that they learn will help us prevent as much as we can. Hopefully it will also help us mitigate the damage that occurs and accelerate the recovery process or the apprehension of the people who commit those acts. So there s just so much education that we have to continue to do and to be prepared for. Some of those things can you do in your current office? 26 Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins Finchum You know, typically they are not roles of the lieutenant governor. They have not been roles in the past. But because this is a job that has, I think, the opportunity to write its own description beyond what the constitutional responsibilities are, I do spend a lot of time talking with law enforcement agencies. I enjoy them. The part that I miss most from leaving the bench is my contact with professionals of the criminal justice system. So if I have the opportunity to speak at a graduation of a highway patrol academy or Norman Police Department or Oklahoma City Fire Department, I do. To be able to talk to those men or women about what I think their jobs are about to become as public protectors, I want to be a part of trying to maintain that involvement because I care deeply about it. I think I m the first lieutenant governor that anyone can remember, certainly in modern times, that comes to this office with that kind of experience. So I try to use it whenever I m asked. You re the first democratic woman lieutenant governor First democrat woman. Yes. Congratulations. Thanks. Well, if a woman came up to you and asked you what your opinion would be if she was interested in running for the House or the Senate what advice would you give her? I would tell her good for her. I would tell her to make sure that she believes that she has thick enough skin to be able to do it. I think there are times you have to be poker faced and not let people know that they can push your buttons. Women are perceived to be too emotional to be able to do these things. I think that s a perception that is trending differently because more women are leaders of businesses. I mean more women are taking over their fathers businesses. So there are more women in decision-making positions now than there used to be. But you need to have a thick skin. You have to be able to withstand the assault that happens during the campaign, the criticism. Is your family ready for it? Yet if women don t run, then I think that s not a fair representation of the population. Oklahoma continues to rank in the high 40 s for the percentage of women that serve in the legislature compared to other states, which is totally disproportionate to our population. I don t think men or women should win just because of their gender. But I think we have to cultivate good women and help them win, to help them make good decisions. To spin off that a little bit if they had children, would you give them 27 Askins Finchum Askins Finchum Askins any different advice? I think the reason that most of the women who have been elected have come from Tulsa or Oklahoma City and primarily Oklahoma City is because if you have children still in the home, you go home at night. You can be as busy at the Capitol as you want to be. So if you have children at home, you generally want to be home in the evening with your children, helping them with homework, making sure they get it done. I think the women if they have small children many of them are from Oklahoma City. If their children are older or out of the home, that s when they tend to be from further away. I think that campaigns are becoming more expensive and I think that deters many women from wanting to get into that. You know they may be the philanthropic fundraisers of their community, but it s different when you re raising it for yourself. And things are becoming costly. With the economy the way it is now in 2008, I think it will have an impact on who runs for office. You pretty much have to know you re going to make an investment yourself. You just want to minimize it. You want to raise as much money from other people as you can. Is there a term limit on being a lieutenant governor? Not yet, but in Oklahoma and in most other states, if there s an executive office limit, it s on the governor. I think Oklahoma and most states have not had term limits on any other offices. I think there s high probability with the change in the legislature that there will be an effort made to term limit the other offices. That takes a constitutional ballot. It would have to go to the vote of the people. If they pass it, they do. If they don t, they don t. I m curious what your next step is. Do you know? And how far down the road it is? It s in two years which will be in 2010, my term is up. As to whether or not I run for re-election or whether or not I run for governor since Governor Henry is term limited, we have not yet announced what our decision is going to be. There are a lot of factors to consider. Unlike most people, my decision is not made upon who is running or who is not running because you have no control over that. It s like going to college because that s where your boyfriend is or something. That could change. So you have to make your decision based on other things. We re looking at the situation and people have been really nice asking us to do it. As soon as you declare, then you become suspect in everything you do, unfortunately. I know that I have some unfinished work here as 28 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins lieutenant governor. You know, there s a lot of speculation after the presidential races. And certainly every time the governor leaves the state, I m acting it s not even acting under the constitution I m the governor while he s out of state. Whether his situation changes before the end of his term remains to be seen. So I don t know. We ll just assess it. I can say, I foresee no situation where my name is not on the ballot in 2010. How are these campaigns different other than one being across the state and one being in a district? I spent a lot of time over my last six years in the legislature campaigning for other democratic House candidates. So I was traveling the state quite a bit. Certainly not as much as I did campaigning for lieutenant governor, but pretty close. Most places I went, I d been before helping other offices. And clearly one of the differences is the cost. I think new records were set in the election cycle, this year, 2008. I think costs continue to go up. The Strategy is totally different because you can t physically knock on doors in every community in the state. It s a matter of getting acquainted because people will vote for someone they feel a connection with. If you can t meet everyone, then you try to find the people you know in those communities who can make that connection for you and tell people, I personally know her, I can vouch for her. I hope you ll vote for her because I know her. I think I was lucky. I don t mean lucky. But nobody expected I guess I m the only one who thought I was going to win. I know I m still shocked to have people tell me they didn t think I d win the democratic nomination. And I ran because I knew I could. I told somebody one time, my network around the state were from people who knew me from Duncan, were people who knew me from college, people who knew me from other community activities that I had been involved in. They were people who knew me before I was an elected official. They were not just people who knew me as a legislator. And I think that made the difference. They could tell people that they knew Jari the person. I really think that made the difference. My last question is when history is written about you, what do you want it to say? You know I hope it says that no matter what position I was in, that I was fair. I m smart enough to know that you re never always right. But if people know that you re fair and you make your decisions based on all the information that you had available at the time, I think that s a reasonable request. I had constituents when I was a legislator who I knew did not agree with every vote I cast. But most of them, when we 29 Finchum Askins Finchum Askins talk about it, understood and believed that I voted the way I did based on the information I had at the time. And I hope that those decisions are based on what is fair and good for the state of Oklahoma regardless of where you live, regardless of what your income is. I hope that I am helping people understand that they have opportunity and that we help provide opportunity for Oklahoma s oldest and youngest citizens. And that s what I like about public service. Have I forgotten to ask anything that you want to cover? I can t imagine, but if you go over it and think of something let us know. Well, thank you for your time. Absolutely. --- ---..