 Finchum Johnson Finchum Johnson Today is November 9th, 2007. I m at the Capitol in Oklahoma City, and my name is Tanya Finchum. This is part of the Oklahoma State University Library s Women of Oklahoma Legislature oral history project. I m here today with Connie Johnson who was elected to the Senate in 2005 and re-elected in 2006. Thank you for allowing me to talk with you today. Thank you. It s my pleasure. Let s start by having you tell a little about your youth, where you were born, and then we ll move forward. I was born in Holdenville, Oklahoma, the fourth of five children to Wanda (Fleming) and Wallace C. Johnson, both educators. At the time we lived in Dustin, Oklahoma, a very rural area. My mother was from Holdenville, the closest place for me to be born. I ve since learned that our family was in Dustin as part of a project to place African American families in rural communities. My dad, a World War II Langston University graduate, was a teacher. I m sure it was an interesting time. We moved when I was three, so I don t have a lot of memories of Dustin, except for the day there was a snake in the well. We moved from there to Idabel, Oklahoma, where my dad taught school at Booker T. Washington High School. So from the age of three to the age of six, I grew up in a very rural Oklahoma setting, Idabel being in the southeastern tip of the state. I began school. I remember just as vividly as yesterday the area, the friends I had, the networks in the community. We lived behind Dr. Williamston and his wife who were the adoptive parents to Earl Grant, a noted musician and organist. Church was on one corner, school was on 5 another, the funeral home was in between, and my best friend was across the street. It was a very rural setting, and it was just a fun time. My dad taught sixth grade and my mom immersed herself in the community. They affiliated with First Baptist Church Reverend Dr. B. J. Jones was the pastor. He and his wife also owned the funeral home. My siblings and I sang in the choir and his wife was the director. We often had choir practice in the viewing room. At the end of choir rehearsal we had to walk around and sing as we went past the dead bodies. It was also an interesting time, and I was learning at a young age to be open to different possibilities. I recall my sisters and brothers being in school, and the day coming when I finally got to go to kindergarten, which was up the street on the other corner. Kindergarten was so much fun. We left Idabel when I was six years old, soon after I had completed kindergarten. We moved to Oklahoma City. Watching my mother prepare for the move, as a young mother, was interesting. She had four children and by then I guess if I was six, my brother was nine or ten, and my twin sisters were eight, or seven we are close in age. We moved to Northeast 22nd Street, Oklahoma City. We relocated during the wave of integration of Oklahoma City s neighborhoods that had reached 23rd Street. The pattern of integration on Oklahoma City s eastside began on 2nd Street, moved to 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 16th, 23rd, 36th, 50th, and 63rd. So in a way, we had moved into an elite environment. My next door neighbors were Caucasian, Mr. and Mrs. Belew. It was interesting because in Idabel, I just don t think I ever encountered people who were different from me. The Belews were an elderly couple for whom my mom became a support person in terms of their age. She is still, to this day, that kind of a giving person. My next door neighbor on the other side, however, was a very serious yellow dog democrat, named Nettie Jackson. Mrs. Jackson awakened in my mother the spirit that I believe lives in me today with regard to politics. With my mom s encouragement and Mrs. Jackson s urging I founded the East Side Teen Democrats Club, which was the first of its kind on Oklahoma City s eastside. So when I think about when and how I got my start in politics, I m always drawn to that moment. I am so grateful to Mrs. Nettie Jackson and her memory, and for my mom s activism and belief in advocating for change and for a better quality of life for all people. As a six-year-old, first grader in Oklahoma City, I attended Creston Hills Elementary School where my dad taught. My first grade teacher, as it turns out, would be the grandmother of a child that I babysat during high school. She was the daughter of the dentist where my mother worked 6 while I was in elementary school. The dental office was around the corner from our house. When I think about where I was the day I heard John F. Kennedy had been shot, I remember having walked home for lunch and gone to the dental office, when I heard the news. I walked back to school as an absolutely devastated twelve-year old, but I m skipping ahead. First grade was interesting because I entered into the mix of a set of children who started together in kindergarten. I imagine my expectations and perspectives were somewhat different, as my first grade teacher and I didn t get along too well. I had some interesting times with her, but somehow I survived first grade. My dad taught sixth grade, so I knew all of the teachers and absolutely adored the principal, Mr. Boyd, who I thought was the most awesomely big, tall, beautiful black man I had ever seen. My second grade teacher, Mrs. Holbert, was a precious nurturer. Mrs. Statum, who was the mother of some pretty prominent people in Oklahoma City, was my third grade teacher. In the fourth grade, Mrs. Christian introduced me to my lifelong love affair with numbers via a program called S-M-S-G. I forget what the acronym stood for, but for us as fourth graders, it meant exposure to a higher level of math. Of course we called it, Some Mess Some Garbage, but it began a process whereby, by the time we graduated high school, many of us had completed calculus. And so it was very fortuitous to have been exposed to that program and had the chance to participate. My fifth grade was a lady named Mrs. Nelson. I was familiar with each of my teachers preferences and personalities because my siblings had also been in their classes. Mrs. Nelson was another challenge to my sense and sensibility. Then, finally, came the sixth grade, and I too was going to get to be in my daddy s class. But he left Creston Hills and went to teach at Douglass High School where the principal from Idabel/Booker T. Washington had been hired. He hired my dad to teach special education. Mr. O. M. McDaniel was a very small man in stature but a giant of a person, and certainly one of the best known principals of Oklahoma City s Frederick Douglass High School. So, instead, I was put in Mrs. McGlon s sixth grade class which turned out to be okay, but I had always wanted to be in my dad s sixth grade class. My sisters and brothers, who were in his class, told me that I was so lucky that I never got in his class, and that he was very strict on them. My dad loved children. As a firm, disciplinarian, I think he required his children to be above reproach. That was his goal in being so tough and strict on them. Mrs. McGlon was an interesting person in my life. She went on to become Dr. Evangie McGlon. The day of my swearing in at the Senate, 7 she attended and gave me an Angel lapel pin that I wear to this day. She told me, There are a lot of devils out here, and you re going to need protection. I took her at her word. While I don t necessarily view them as devils, I certainly trust that the angels look after me daily. Mrs. McGlon, allowed me to teach class every day after lunch a very beneficial experience. It was so inspirational that she trusted me, and that at that age I was capable of doing that. I think she was one of those teachers who recognized the strengths of students, and she figured out how to maximize my potential by using me as a teacher. And just to confirm how effective it was, about 30 years later, a classmate shared that he would not know how to read today had it not been for me teaching him. I have no memory of having ever taught anyone to read, but he swears by it. I graduated sixth grade and went to the newly built John F. Kennedy Junior High School. We were the first class to attend the brand new school, named after the slain president. His brother, Robert F. Kennedy, came to OKC to dedicate it. We were the first class to go from the seventh through the ninth grade in the new facility. It was such a beautiful school, and it was a lovely time. Dr. Melvin Todd was the principal. He and my dad were fishing buddies. So you see there was a network through our community where our teachers knew our parents. They interacted with our parents. We knew that if you cut up in school you would get in trouble at school, and by the time you got home, you would get in trouble again. But that had a benefit for our children. So Dr. Todd was the principal. Hyder Houston was my seventh grade counselor, a noted child psychologist later in life in the Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center arena. We had quality teachers throughout my high school and junior high and elementary school years. I can t say enough about the quality of the teaching that we received during that time. During the 1950s and 1960s, Black teachers were unable to access higher education in Oklahoma, or they encountered difficulty. Consequently many attended college and graduate programs in other states, and came back to Oklahoma out of a love for their community. We had master s level teachers in our schools during a time when most schools were staffed by undergraduate degreed personnel. Our time at Kennedy was a beautiful experience. There we turned thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, and then it was time to go to Douglass. Interestingly, by this time, my mother had gone back to school. My youngest brother was born when I was nine years old. Mom went back to Langston University to finish her degree and made that commute everyday. My Great Aunt Arsula Sanders, who I ll tell mention later, babysat my youngest brother, John, while Mother attended class. She 8 graduated summa cum laude from Langston University; subsequently qualified, got her teaching license, and taught ninth grade English at Kennedy Junior High School. Mom was cool. I had a fun time. She didn t stress or bother me. She actually taught my ex-husband, who always told the story about her putting him out of her class. He blamed it on something that had happened at home, claiming she was upset, and took it out on him by ushering him to the principal s office. He never forgot that because, to this day, Mom doesn t play she is a firm teacher as well. Both of my parents loved children and loved seeing children learn. I think I inherited that passion because ultimately I also trained to be a teacher. I went to Douglass in the tenth grade. My father was there and it was a totally different world. He sweated me every day because I was starting to notice the boys. Tenth grade was also an interesting time. I became a member of a specialized twirler group known as the Trojets. I was chosen for the Trojets even though I didn t know the first thing about twirling, except for the time my mother was trying to show us how to twirl at home in our bedroom and ended up breaking the ceiling light. The Trojet sponsor who chose me was a champion twirler who believed that I could learn. He invested in me and it paid off. I became a very good twirler and ultimately was head Trojet. We twirled with fire and led the Pride of the Eastside Band, a band whose drummers could be heard from the front porch on 22nd Street, on a Friday night, sitting on the front porch. Douglass High School and the Band created that feeling of Pride in the eastside of Oklahoma City. Every child grew up dreaming of the day that he or she would attend Douglass Tenth grade was wonderful, eleventh grade, great. Interestingly, of course, you have to talk about your love and experiences in order to share who you are as a well rounded individual. So Glenn McKinley Hill and I became boyfriend and girlfriend on February 26, 1968; I was absolutely in love with Glenn but we were from different sides of town. My father absolutely could not stand him. At one point when we broke up, I dated Thomas Henderson, who later became known as Hollywood Henderson of the Dallas Cowboys. Thomas would later write about our relationship in his book in a not so pleasant way, for which he would later apologize, ostensibly because I broke up with him and got back together with Glenn, my first love. During my senior year, I was elected by the largest plurality in the history of the school to be Miss Douglass, which was a pretty notable achievement at the time. It was an honor that I will never forget. To actually be the queen of such a noble institution like Douglass High School was an honor known only by a few. I was a straight A student all through high school. I graduated in May of 1970, and earned a full scholarship to the University of Pennsylvania. 9 Immediately after high school graduation, I got my first real job and worked for a few weeks at the Oklahoma Corporation Commission as a secretary. They literally tried to get me not to go to school, and to stay and be a secretary because I was a very good typist. Mr. McDaniels wife, Mrs. Juanita McDaniels, was my typing teacher in the ninth grade. I won the typing award in the ninth grade because I could type about 105 words per minute, even with long fingernails. But destiny called, and I entered an early entry program at the University of Pennsylvania for summer school, where I took two classes: calculus and English. That summer really defined my future. I had a professor, Dr. Peter Conn, who taught composition in such an effective way that I really learned to write that summer, and writing has been in my life ever since. I returned to Penn in September, and ultimately pursued an undergraduate degree in French, as French had been a lifelong love of mine, again because of my mother s influence. I had also studied under Madame Katye James at Douglass High School, who as I understand it, only recently retired about a week ago. I have no idea how old she is. I just know that my mom planted the seed, she watered it, and I ultimately majored in French at the University of Pennsylvania, and pursued a master s in education with the idea of being a teacher. I did a practicum at Philadelphia s University City High School, and it was there that I experienced firsthand the shortcomings of our educational system. Most of them related to a lack of funding. We were out of paper at the end of September and I just decided I could not do this. I came back to Oklahoma, and was unemployed for a while. It was at the down turn of our economy the end of 1975, first part of 76. I ultimately began working as a public information officer for the Oklahoma Community Action Directors Association. The job involved travelling around the state and documenting CAP programs such as weatherization and housing, and a variety of programs that helped those who were economically disadvantaged. That ended up being a once in a lifetime experience. As a public information officer I got to document those types of scenes as a part of achieving funding for subsequent years. I worked there for perhaps a year and a half, when I began working with the City of Oklahoma City as a public service employment coordinator. Interestingly, my life was starting to develop a pattern, again, of working with people. As the public service employment coordinator under the CETA Program which is the precursor to JTPA and now what is known as Workforce, I actually designed intake systems to bring people into that program, and to receive services that made them more employable. I did that for about four years. In the meantime, my first child was born in 1979, and once again, I lived in the country, in Newalla, Oklahoma 10 about 25 miles southeast of Oklahoma City. We commuted daily. My son, who was literally a highway baby, today is a very accomplished musician. In 1981, my youngest brother was murdered at Langston University; a sad and unfortunate set of circumstances. It really threw my mom for a loop, and our whole family into disarray. It was also at the end of that year that I began working again, interestingly, at the Oklahoma Corporation Commission as a personnel assistant. I worked there for about six months and ultimately was hired by Senate staff in December of 1981, just in time for session. I was thrown into a setting about which I had no clue. But strong writing skills ensured my success and survival. When I finally left the Senate staff, 24 years later, I was the best writer on staff. 1981 to 2005 was a time of growth and development and seed planting. I worked on issues from birth to death, did the research, and addressed constituent problems and concerns on those topics. I tell people I worked on issues from birth to death, but the government truly affects our lives from the time we awaken in the morning until we go to sleep at night; and literally from the time before birth until the time of death and beyond, so that represents a lot of issues in between. We covered issues such as health care, health insurance, disability, elderly issues, education, and economic development. Over the course of my career as a senate staff person, and a senior legislative analyst, I had the fortune of writing legislation that made a difference in Oklahoma. I was involved in conforming our state s laws to the federal Adoption and Safe Families Act; child welfare reform, mental health reform, juvenile justice reform, health care reform and Medicaid reform. I ve had the blessed opportunity of being at the table in very influential ways on issues that have shaped our state, and where we are today. Some of the notable moments that I recall while being on staff were the occasions that I travelled on legislative business. I was accustomed to travelling. As a freshman at the University of Pennsylvania, I took my first airline trip ever when I went to school. But as a student recruiter at Penn, I flew all over the country, recruiting other African American students to come to Penn. Some of the people I recruited actually matriculated at Penn, graduated, and in their own right are successful today. I maintain contact with many of them to this day. I was afflicted by the travel bug, so in my job as an analyst I had the occasion many times to attend our National Conference of State Legislators NCSL meetings as well as the National Black Caucus of State Legislators NBCSL meetings. I was very active in both associations. In NCSL, I served on the executive committee for three 11 years. I created a staff section within NBCSL along the same lines as the staff section at NCSL, as a way of assisting legislators during the conference with policy issues and statements. So, again, I have had the blessed opportunity to contribute and to work in some nice places. I have always loved the Oklahoma Capitol building, and I ve been here long enough to see the changes, like the beautiful chamber that I m sitting in right now, that was redone in 1993. It s always been a source of pride to me that we were able to uncover what had been covered over after years and years of modifications, and to restore a room as beautiful as this one. The House chamber went through the same situation. Even the hallways of the Capitol have been improved in such a way that it makes the Oklahoma State Capitol one of the prettiest Capitols in the nation. And of course I am a domer. I was so excited about the prospect of completing the Capitol with the placement of the dome that I even signed my name on the steel structure that holds it up today, so I feel like I m up in there somewhere. But this has been a beautiful place to work. It s a place where people are people oriented, it s about helping people, and that really is what government is about, the public health and safety, the public well being and safety. To have been a part of that in my little small capacity is something I have always cherished. So how did I come to be a legislator, and this is a part that I have not really shared too much about in this interview, but it certainly is the hallmark of my being. In the year 2000, realizing that my predecessor was term limited, this notion, via a still small voice, popped into my mind and said, Well, why not you? To which I replied, Oh no, I could never do that, not me, no, no. But it troubled me enough that I just kind of let go of the thought for the time. Interestingly, at some point, I must have shared it with someone because now people tell me that, Well you knew back in 2000 that you were going to I said, I don t remember talking about that. I do remember at some point because I felt so exposed, I felt the need to say to my predecessor, I want to run for this seat, and I just want you to know so that you ll be the first one to know. She was so excited for me and she hugged me and I said, Oh, because, in fact, she had not heard any rumors. In the ensuing five years many things happened some of them supernatural that it became clear to me that this was something that was a part of my purpose. The twenty-something years, at that point, I had spent in the Senate on staff were for a higher calling, and that it really was not about me. There were some pretty bizarre things that happened at the time, but in hindsight they were not bizarre now that I m through it. I really feel, appreciate, understand, and value what I went through. I claim God as putting that thought in my mind, but I also know 12 that He knows me better than I know myself. He knows that I m very stubborn, that it would take a long to me to convince me, and yes, it took me a long time. I talked to friends all over the country about this proposition. I talked to people here locally, I talked to my mother, and I was the last one, literally, to get it. Then I kind of got in a squeeze play, because my plan was that my predecessor would get to serve through the 2006 session, which would have been the end of the Senate term; but there had been so much visibility over passage of term limits in Oklahoma that it seemed that the general consensus was to follow the law s strictest interpretation. She was term limited at 12 years, which meant a midsession departure in November, 2005. Had she been able to remain until 2006, I would have only had one more year to retirement (which somehow initially seemed important), and could be safe in running. But that wasn t to be. I had to make the decision. I commiserated. I talked to my supervisors trying to figure out a way to preserve security, because in the back of my mind were nagging thoughts about being a single mom, having two children at home, being unemployed, and having no health insurance. In addition, the political nature of seeking the office was such that if I were to lose the race, I would be unable to return to my job and would need to find employment. Although, at the time, that concern was minor as I had developed a good network of colleagues during my career and I felt sure I could find another job, in state government. But still, the risk was substantial. However, the biggest risk which was more of a reality was that when I won, my salary would be 25,000 less than my staff salary. But, interestingly, the things I had seen and experienced with regard to this feeling in my life outweighed the money, and it was not the issue. More so, the opportunity to give back according to what I had been blessed to receive from the time I received the full scholarship to the University of Pennsylvania, until the time I became the only Black person on Senate staff in 1981; what that meant in terms of my recruiting and advocating for other African Americans to serve on Senate staff; and how all of these experiences combined to create a diverse background for the season of change that was dawning in the Oklahoma Legislature. In many ways I was on the cutting edge of the changes that were slowly unveiling themselves in the Legislature. From having a baby during session something that wasn t my plan, but that happened and required my being on maternity leave for the first two months of session, something that was unheard of at the time. Ultimately that reality changed the legislative mindset to being a more family friendly environment in which the Senate is a big family, and there are many small families within this family, whose worlds keep turning even though the Legislature is in session. During my career, I also served as a 13 kinship foster parent to three children. My family s experience with the child welfare system led to passage of significant legislation on child care for working foster parents. There were so many similar occasions and circumstances throughout my life and career that pointed to the making of me, and that ultimately dictated that I had to do it. I recall the day I submitted my letter of resignation. It was five o clock, everything was closed and the Pro Tem had already gone home; however, that day, June 19 my anniversary date and 24th year, was the day I had agreed to submit my resignation. As I finished the letter, one of our service staff came by, named Carl, who I asked to put the letter in the Pro Tempore s office, to which he said, Sure, Connie, took the letter and continued happily down the hall, smiling. At that point I had an anxiety attack in which my heart beat fast and I broke out, as James Brown sang, in a cold sweat. But, clearly, two seconds later a feeling came over me that felt as if the weight of the world had lifted off of my shoulders. I felt free. After 24 years of service I had taken a step that literally represented a leap of faith, and I had moved to a new level of trust in God. I tell everybody that at that point, as afraid as I had been to run, I ended up afraid not to run, because of how plain God had made it. In doing so, I believed, I trusted, and I had faith; and I found out that God is faithful. That s my story. You know a lot of people are cynical about others ascribing events in their lives to something spiritual or supernatural. Yes, we worked hard on my campaign, but I also know what happened. I told people about the mysterious things as they happened along the way; how I would have a thought about needing to see someone and the person would walk around the corner. Things like that happened so often and in such ways that I knew there was no other explanation. The campaign was also just another experience in our daily lives. We started it the day after session ended. Some felt that I should have resigned early, but my familiarity with and commitment to legislative service meant service until the last day of session. I kept that commitment, but because of that some felt that my chances were very limited. I ran for the Senate along with four other people, three of whom had been previously elected. One was a seated city council woman, one was a former county commissioner, the first Black and the first female county commissioner in Oklahoma County s history, and one was a seated representative. The other contender was a student. But I believed and still believe in the integrity of the process, and I stuck to my commitment. The day after session ended we began the campaign at the Boley Rodeo in Boley, Oklahoma, a major African American event in Oklahoma. We knew that pretty much that a majority of the people in Boley the Saturday before Memorial Day are from Oklahoma City. It 14 was absolutely the most fun time of the campaign. An important side story to that weekend was my overcoming fear in my life, via the most beautiful black stallion of a horse that I had ever seen. I was afraid of horses, however, because of an earlier unpleasant event. Even with my friend s, the horse s owner, gentle insistence, I refused to ride. But, I dreamed about the horse later that night. The next day I called my friend, went to his ranch in Arcadia, and I rode Q, who figuratively represented the fear leaving my life, the day my campaign began. I ultimately rode Q in parades and in the rodeo. The Boley Rodeo weekend was such a beautiful time and I made so many contacts that, again, I felt that God was guiding my campaign. And yes, there were my friends like Ted Logan, and my cousin Ronnie Hunter from Holdenville, who all came to my aid. When the state representative got in the race, I didn t have any money and was unable to raise a lot because no one wanted to appear to support a candidate against a seated elected official. We were only able to raise 12,000 the whole campaign. But we had heart, commitment, determination, belief and prayer all of the things that you can t place a dollar value on working for us. We worked hard. I had a personal trainer that came my way, I trust, through God s blessings. I had an image consultant who came my way through God s blessings. All of the things that I needed were provided for me in triple fold, and I just keep remembering how supernatural all of that was. I say we did life because my son decided to get married July 4th weekend, of 2005, in Philadelphia. We closed down the campaign and caravanned to Philadelphia which, for me, was like going back to my second home. It was a beautiful time. It was what was supposed to be. My 35th class reunion was also during that time, and I was one of the planners. My classmates embraced me in ways that I had never expected. It was these kinds of things and more that, to me, constituted life during the campaign. The special election was set for September of 2005, which worked just fine for me; it pays to have friends in high places. We spent July, August and the first part of September knocking on doors, participating in parades, meeting people. The campaign was tough, it was hot. There were 105 degree days. But campaigning turned out to be a lot of fun for me because I like people; I like meeting and helping them. I believe that is our family legacy. I campaigned based on experience, experience for change, and you have to understand that that meant change was what Oklahoma was going through as a result of term limits. There was going to be a change that would mean that the institutional memory of the legislature would be 15 depleted. I was the candidate who had actually worked in the field for 24 years, more years than all of my competition put together would ever have. That was the point that I drove home during the campaign. I had wonderful role models like Senator Bernest Cain, who I had worked with for 24 years, who had always respected, trusted, and literally been supportive of me the whole time we worked together. This is what you call a friend. And so September 13th came, and it was very interesting. We were in my campaign office feverishly making last minute phone calls encouraging people to go vote, and anxiously awaiting the returns. We were in the office that night, the count was up and then the count went down. My mother was screaming at the cell phone when it rang. My babies were crying fearing that the worst was about to happen. The whole time, however, I felt this sense of calmness and literally started cleaning off my desk while humming a favorite childhood song, Yield not to temptation, for yielding is sin, each victory will help you some other to win. Then, the count started going back up, and the rest is history. The feelings of accomplishment, achievement, pride and joy flooded the room. The beautiful people who volunteered and worked on my campaign, who believed in me, who did whatever was necessary, rejoiced so much that it was like my joy was the least among them. People would call on my phone the next few days screaming, jumping up and down, crying and shouting. And it was kind of like, okay we did the right thing and God is faithful, and it really felt good. At that point it was a matter of organizing and getting ready for change. My predecessor s term ended November 28, 2005, and she chose to serve until her term ended. Although I officially took office on November 29, 2005, the swearing in ceremony was held on October 3rd, the day after my Great Aunt Arsula Sanders 100th Birthday, which our family attended from throughout the United States. Aunt Sula was the House Mother at Langston University. Now if my mom was my role model for my life today, my great aunt was our family s role model for a life devoted to service in justice and equality. This great aunt had been a missionary in Monrovia, Liberia, and had been a founding member of the state conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the NAACP. The Senate chambers and the gallery were literally full. It was such a day of elation and joy. All nine Supreme Court Justices attended. I will never forget it. My uncle Lee Edward Fleming sang, and tore it up , also known as bringing the house down. It was such a beautiful 16 celebration of family and community as I was sworn in as the fourth senator for this district since it was created in 1965. I had worked for all three previous senators, Senator E. Melvin Porter, Senator and now Federal Judge Vicki Miles-LaGrange, and Senator Angela Monson. So it just made sense, the voters thought it made sense. That first year I was appointed to chair an appropriation sub-committee, something that s unheard of for a freshman senator. The leadership respected my experience, and I introduced about 49 bills and successfully passed nine of them. The subsequent year, the composition of the senate changed and we went to a tied chamber. This has had some implications on our ability to get things done, but we re working on that. The democrats are going to take it back. Interestingly, there was more to the financial aspects of the office in that, as a state employee, the employee benefit package was 1,200. For legislators, it was 260. We are addressing the issue as a legislature, because of, once again, my being vocal and outspoken about the inability of legislators to afford health insurance for their families. We made use of safety-net services such as Mary-Mahoney, a federally-qualified health center for people who are uninsured. Through my life and my career I have actually lived much of what I have worked on. And again, when one covers issues from birth to death, you literally will end up living it. My grandmother was in a nursing home which relates to issues such as quality of care and per diem payments. There was such a large spectrum of topics that affected my life as well as my work, and in such relevant ways that I believe they all spoke to my purpose as being who I am and doing I m doing today. Session began in February, and it was interesting having to now work with my former bosses as my colleagues. Everybody had some adjusting to do, including me. I was very warmly received, at the same time in some ways a lot of people wondered just what it would mean. And so I have made it my business to take care of my business and to seek to always have an attitude of helping and sharing my background and information, knowledge and skills with my colleagues to their benefit. I think many of them have appreciated that. It s been a very interesting time. I completed the unexpired term, but I never stopped campaigning because my election to the full four year term would take place in the Summer of 2006. So it was literally an 18 month campaign; however, because of session I couldn t campaign, but one person that I had beat had already begun campaigning. Add to that, we went into special session and did not adjourn until June 16th, or it might have been June 25th, and the election was set for July 25th. I literally had one month to 17 campaign, but we did it, and here we are again today. Following that, I was sworn in with all of the other senators representing the even numbered districts, and began work again. Interestingly, at the same time that year an opportunity came about for me to return to school in an area in which I had invested a considerable amount of work issues for people with disabilities. I am presently a student at Langston University s Urban Center Campus pursuing a master s in rehabilitation counseling. And again that just appears to be one of the things in my life that I think was placed there by God for his purpose. There will be life after the legislature and in my role throughout my career it has always been my goal and my desire to help people. This will enable me to help them in a more qualitative way, and to better understand the nature of their unique problems, especially the problems faced by people with disabilities. In anticipation of the veterans returning from the Iraqi war, there will be a huge need for people who are culturally competent to provide counseling and other types of rehabilitation services to a group of people who will also be disproportionately minority. And so to our government s credit, this program is out there. For me, it has meant meeting a whole different set of people that I would have never met before. Having worked in the legislature for 24 years, it s a pretty closed environment, and your set of friends and associates is pretty much static. With this program, I am now meeting students from other professions, from other walks of life, and we have a common bond in our desire to become rehabilitation counselors. I m meeting and I m getting exposed to a whole different set of, a whole different environment in terms of the academic environment. Again it had been 31 years since I d been in school, and I d had my doubts about, how do you read a book, what does it mean to study, and but that is working itself out. It s been a very worthwhile, beneficial, rewarding experience that I view as my opportunity to do something for myself that ultimately will help me to help people in a more qualitative way. The opportunities that I ve had in the program, include having done summer study abroad, right after the end of this session, which was a very grueling session, in the Gambia and to look at the quality of life for people with disabilities. Disabilities is one of the issues that I have worked on. I began working as a staff person for Senator Bernest Cain. We created the Olmstead Strategic Planning committee and ultimately he and I got to serve together in the chamber at the same time. That was awesome to be with someone who was such a friend. This is a man whose heart was always for the people, and the issues that he worked on. He told me one day that he felt he d always been a little overbearing when it came to my work. I 18 had to make him believe that I enjoyed every issue we ever worked on together, and that included disabilities, health disparities that effect minorities, and child welfare I loved my work. It also meant that the work I did ultimately had a purpose. So working with Senator Cain here in the chamber and the likes of Senator Cal Hobson, that year at the end of 2006, we probably lost the biggest mass of institutional memory and skill that we will ever loose. Those were truly the last vestiges of the old guard. The people who were passionate, who had been here long enough to figure out the nooks and the crannies and to actually have been effective in making a difference. They all left, and those shoes will never be filled again. Disabilities ended up being an issue that I would author after Senator Cain, during the last year, turned those bills over to me. We definitely made a difference. Then came the opportunity to actually become academically grounded, and to learn about disability policy initiatives over the years beginning with World War I when rehabilitation for disabled veterans became the hot issue, all the way through to rehabilitation issues for everybody, and how those policy and advocacy efforts have evolved into what we have today. The Olmstead Ruling was truly a result of the disability community s advocacy efforts at the national level, and it has trickled down to the state level. The rights of people with disabilities parallel the rights of other people who are different, be they minorities, be they people of different gender orientations, be it socioeconomic differences. Our society owes it to itself to value and appreciate those who are different. And I guess I represent one of those people. I m different in terms of being a female. I m different in terms of being a Black person, but I m different because what I bring to the table at this point is perhaps a depth of knowledge of the issues unlike anyone else in this chamber, and that is something to be celebrated, to value, and to appreciate, and I look forward to using everything I know to try to make a difference for the people of this state. I look at our state as consisting of two groups: the haves and the have nots. The have nots numbers are growing and even the haves numbers are growing. But our tendency to disregard those who are disenfranchised, and those who are left out of the debate is real. For me as a democrat and I ve been a democrat a long time, officially since I was thirteen years old this is the group that the democratic party has always stood for, that we ve always represented. And as a party, we have got to figure out a way to return to our base constituency. The elderly and their access to care and prescription medications; children for whom life and child welfare or juvenile justice is just a matter of a slip on a banana peel; for all Oklahomans who can t afford health care or 19 for whatever reasons, such as living in a rural area, they do not have access to care; for minority communities, for Native and Asian Americans, African Americans, Hispanics who are disproportionately represented in the numbers of people with chronic diseases and those diseases have an impact of potential disability which ultimately cost the state. To the people who are incarcerated, most often behind wounded spirits that have decided to self-medicate with substances and because the majority of our laws are imprisoned instead of treated. Only to find out that when they ve served their time, the fact of having a felony in their background means that they cannot get a job, most often. They can t get education, they can t get housing, they can t access the things that insure success in our society. And how long are we as a state going to continue to pursue that policy? So this is the group of people that the democratic party has traditionally stood for, represented, and spoken up for, and we have some how or another got to get back to that mindset that says that this is our constituency. Oklahoma and our state hangs in the balance in the next two years with redistricting. The fact that the House of Representatives is majority republican, the fact that right now the Senate is tied, and this next election cycle will tell, will be very telling, with regard to the future. I m working hard to insure that we return control of the Senate to the democrats, because, for me, that s the party that has the most potential to implement the kinds of changes that I think will make for a better Oklahoma. Certainly I appreciate and value the different perspective of my colleagues on the other side of the line of the chamber. And I have had the opportunity to learn as I work with them. A lot of the work background that I have stems from my work in my community with the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Prayer Breakfast committee in Midwest City, a community that was founded on the racist principle that none of those people should be caught over there after five o clock; a program that was begun to celebrate the things we have in common, such as eating, music, fellowship and prayer. On the King holiday, the breakfast begins the day s activities. Through that program, through my involvement in that program, I have developed a greater appreciation for differences. That qualifies me in this chamber to be aggressive in trying to understand perspectives that are different from mine. And when I do that I end up learning. If I take the time to engage to form a relationship, I end up learning that I literally have more in common with my colleagues over there than I have different. We perhaps have different notions about how you get to this certain quality, but by and large we have similar experiences, common occurrences. 20 I ve talked with colleagues who had a pretty much spiritual epiphany just like I did that brought them to this point in their lives, and that was so reassuring to learn. But it formed a bond between us that allows us to work together on issues like Real ID, which I worked on successfully this year. So the chamber, the service, the future, to me right now really hangs in the balance with regard to whether democrats will pull it together and perhaps hook on to the coattails at the national level. I really think we re getting ready for a change in the White House, and between Hilary and Obama, I ll take both of them either way. We have this opportunity as the pendulum swings back the other way to bring back to the table the interests and the well being of the people versus the capitalistic system hopefully those are one and the same but at the same time, the focus must be more on the needs of the citizens versus the needs of the corporations. Those benefits are ultimately, supposed to trickle down to the people, but we know that often it takes a long time. I m truly, at this point, focused on issues about youth development. The level of violence in my community, particularly, caused by gangs and guns is a major concern to me. I have invested a lot of time this past session in raising awareness about the nature of that problem, actually sponsored some public hearings under my service as a member of the Human Resources Committee that brought people to the table to talk about what the issues were that lead to gang violence. And, of course, we understand that families are broken. Often times, in many cases, the father is absent due to incarceration. The mother while she may be present, she may be absent due to substance abuse or alcoholism or even mental illness. The children are left to fend for themselves in communities that are broken. Because of a lack of caring on the part of our government perhaps, the children are left to their own methods and often join a gang for security. They join a gang for economic reasons, and they don t understand that the choices they make when they choose that route have only two outcomes. One of them is imprisonment and the other one is death. And we ve got to figure out a way first to help our children first understand about those choices, but we as a state have to figure out a way to create a system that meets the needs of families, that provides in various communities a support system of services perhaps that address treatment, that address health issues, that address gang violence. We have to incorporate our faith community in the solutions, and literally rethink how we do what we do to help children. The sad state of affairs of our juvenile justice system being the puppy mill for the Department of Corrections is unfortunate. But here we have this opportunity as Oklahoma is potentially going to be sued by the U.S. Department of Justice behind some inadequacies at the Rader Center. 21 There is the potential that we will be put under another decree, like the Terry D. Consent Decree, because of our failure to adequately provide for the children who are in custody. We re going to, as a state, pay. Now we re either going to be mandated to pay or we re going to get a clue and do the right things. But what it means is that it s an opportunity for us to mix it up, and actually come out with a system that does not prepare children to go into DOC Department of Corrections . We open up every year with a supplemental budget increase for the department of corrections. Oklahoma incarcerates more women than any other state in the nation. We re fourth overall in the rate of incarceration and with each woman there are approximately two and one third children. What about the children, what is happening to the children? The children are being raised by grandparents who were prepared to be retired, whose limited retirement incomes do not allow for yet another mouth to feed, but in some cases there are seven grandchildren. It s a sad state of affairs, and this is our opportunity this potential decree instead of being a negative, is a positive opportunity for us, as a state, to fund the programs and the systems that will make a difference in these children s lives. And then to use that to branch out to make a difference to their parents, to empower families to become economically wealthy, to give them the opportunities, be it lessening our restrictions on people returning from incarceration and putting in place programs that insure their success in order to lead to the success of their families, in order to lead to the success of those families in the community. That s the challenge that awaits us as a state on this particular occasion. So coming out of the session, we ended up with two task forces that will look at the issue of gangs. Those two task forces have combined. I m co-chairing one of the sub-committees. As we listen and all get to the same conclusions at the same time about solutions to the problem of gang violence, so that s simply one of the issues that has really, really grabbed my attention and my desire. Because I m about children, I stand for children. I have a legacy of people in my life who care about children. Aunt Sula passed away on July 23rd of this year, following my return from Africa, and it was so unfortunate, because she kept saying, Well tell Connie to come see me, so we can compare notes on Africa. When I came back I had to finish my course work, including a power point of what we had learned, and the night that I finished that course work and was planning to go see her is the night that she died. So I still feel that Aunt Sula is there, happy, proud, pleased. She was so proud of me. Anybody who came in her nursing home room, she would tell This is my niece. She is the Senator, and so I feel that I m living her dream. I m living my mom s dream in terms of her activism, the example that she gave me at an early age. I think that my victory ultimately represents 22 Finchum Johnson a victory for her and I m so pleased and so proud to have this opportunity to give back. To give back to my mom for all that s she s invested in me, to give back to my community for all of the support that has been given to me over the years, to give back to the state of Oklahoma through my service as a state senator, and certainly to continue with these opportunities to just do the right thing, whatever comes my way, to try to be found having the right motivation, having a pure intention. And as I learn and go through, trying to develop in my own self a sense of self and a consistent sense of my purpose, my goals, my desires, my love for my community, my love for children, my love for people in general, I just really count my service as a senator for the state of Oklahoma, Senate District 48 as a blessed opportunity and I thank God for it. How did you juggle family life with your schedule? Not very well. (Laughs) I have a support system. One of the miracles my sister who lived in St. Louis for thirty-something years moved back to Oklahoma in 2005. She and her husband--are actually my youngest daughter s godparents, they helped me. My mother has always helped me practically raising my son. Even my in-laws like today my daughter s grandfather was picking her up from school. How do you juggle? My children, for the most part, were born into my lifestyle, especially the last two. And I had them pretty late in life. My first child was born when I was 27. My last two were born when I was 37 and 39, I think, and I trust God that those children came along when they were supposed to come along. But they always have only ever known my lifestyle of service. And I m a multi-tasker. I can take care of my babies my babies, they re not babies, they re grown people. But they have been my motivation for getting up on most days. It just happens that I work in this kind of a career, but certainly I am motivated to give them what I received from my parents and more. To give them a wholesome, nurturing, safe, secure, warm and loving home environment has always been my goal. I tell everybody I really never planned to be a mother (Laughs) but at the point that God decided that I would be a mother, it was like that was a part of me that I had had a good example to follow. Nothing but family ties and family strength in my background. My dad was from Beggs, Oklahoma, my mom is from Holdenville. That s just the example that I grew up with taking care of my children and doing whatever is necessary to make sure that they get everything they need. My children, interestingly, have developed that part of me that no one really knows about because at the heart of raising them it comes out through what I steered them to do. So in the fourth grade, I steered my 23 son to play the saxophone because of my love for Grover Washington, who was a consummate saxophone player. He also plays piano. He is the minister of music for a church in Camden, New Jersey. We took piano lessons when we were kids, so my children took piano lessons. So the music aspect of my life which to me goes back to the fourth grade with the appreciation for math and the arts and the sense of reasoning and the ability to think that comes with music has transferred into my children. My two oldest children are artists. They can draw anything. I don t know where they got that talent from. But I just understand this supernatural thing of transfusion that goes from my spirit to their spirit. My oldest daughter, who is now a freshman at Oklahoma State University majoring in construction management, is an artist, a saxophonist and a piano player. She learned from a master musician how to create music, and how to translate thoughts from her brain onto the keyboard through her fingers. She directs her choir. She writes songs. My youngest daughter can t draw a stick, but she s the only one who ever won a state award for her artwork. She is an awesome singer. One day we might produce a CD together and I may have yet another career. In the meantime, I tell everybody my real love is music. During the course of my children s growing up, they saw a side of me that no one else was privy to. They also grew up knowing that I would do anything for them. I mentioned the Midwest City Prayer Breakfast goals and program function. My children attend the Mid-Del Schools and accordingly, and unfortunately, there have been instances where they and other children have been treated differently. I joined the Prayer Breakfast Committee in order to work on that issue from within that community. The Prayer Breakfast is in its 10th year and things are changing in that area, a portion of which I now happen to serve as their state senator. As I said earlier, the work environment of the Senate has always been family-friendly. So, during the September to December period, I could be in the schools on a regular basis. But, from January to May, I was probably very sparse. But the foundation of my children being there to learn was established early. Their teachers knew that if there was a problem, they had my phone number. They could call me at anytime. My children don t like it when I come to the school anymore. I ran for trustee of my town because there is only one school in my town, an elementary school which is part of the Mid-Del System. Because my town, at the time, did not have an appreciation for what that school meant to our community, I ran for trustee. I lost. Next I ran for the Mid-Del School Board. There are five seats on that board. Forest Park, Oklahoma, perhaps pays the largest amount of ad valorem tax into the district because of the value of our properties. However, we have no seat on the board. Two seats are held by people from Del City and three 24 from Midwest City. I thought that was wrong. I felt that to have some input, to have a voice, you need to be on the board. I ran for the board. I lost. But it was just that willingness that my children saw that I was willing to do whatever was necessary to make a difference in their lives. Now my children is all encompassing because any child who goes to school with my child, is my child. And my children know that. So when there was a party, it was always at my house. Whenever they needed to go somewhere, I was the one to take them. Again, my job gave me the flexibility to do that. So I ve just grown up I ve developed, I ve evolved in an environment that has given me what I ve needed to juggle family life. And relationship wise, I would be less than honest and less than straightforward if I didn t share that it had a negative impact on my relationship with my ex-husband. Over the course of time it was clear that my path was developing in one direction and his path was perhaps, not in sync with what I wanted to do and what I was showing a strong tendency towards, which was public service. And there were other issues in the marriage, but we ultimately divorced in 2002. At which point I became a single mom. At which point I wondered, Lord, how am I going to make it? That was the first cut in my income. And then I had the nerve to run for the Senate and take another cut in income. But again, it s all behind feeling driven to be who I am today to fulfill this purpose in my life. And my children, this is all they ve ever known. But they also know they re very spoiled. They know that I will go to bat for them one hundred fifty percent. It has helped to have a strong support system. I tell everybody, my mother raised my son. That s her child. And she has just always been there for me. I think because she values and perhaps has a vicarious experience going through my life. And, you know, I m working on relationships. I don t really have a social life. I m working on that. I don t have time. I have interests or interested people but I m just not willing at this point in my life to devote the time that I should be using to study. But ultimately, I want to have a meaningful relationship. It also helps that my daughter has two years to go in high school. And perhaps by the time I m finished, Mr. Right will come along. But, you know, there s going to be a very special person. I m trusting God that he ll send him my way so he can find me. But, you know, relationships in this setting, not only with your children but with your significant other, have a precarious way to go because during session you literally are married to session. It dictates your life. The saying has always been that no person s life, liberty or pursuit of happiness is safe when the legislature is in session. I know what that means. And so, yes. I juggle it. I think I do okay. Time will tell. But in the 25 Finchum Johnson meantime, I think like I received growing up, if I can just show my children love in the right way and be found trying to give them oh gosh, just a teaspoon of what I ve received, and I ve received so much, I think they will appreciate what I ve done, what my life means and dictates that what is expected of them in the future. Which we re building on a legacy here. Again, I think I was chosen to do this for a purpose and that the children that I was blessed to receive have a job to do as well. I don t know how it s going to play out, but certainly my youngest one is an excellent singer. My second one is going to build great buildings one day. And my oldest child is going to conduct a symphony or something maybe, he s even going to be a doctor one day. And my newest acquisition, my daughter-in-law absolutely, absolutely precious. A lot of similarities her youngest brother, just like mine, died recently and that was a unique situation that I was able to identify and relate to her on. And you know, we re coming up on the anniversary of that the end of December. But you know, when my daughters and I went up there to be with them, I think again and my mom helped make that happen. I think that s just another example of successfully showing that you care. So it s really not a juggle. It s really a process of caring for your children for what they do, for how they feel, for their future, for their expectations, their beliefs and being consistent about that. I am so excited about the relationship that I have with my daughter who just went to college. She values my writing skills. I value her intelligence. She is an awesome student. She was valedictorian in Midwest City High School. She achieved in the midst of that environment and she understands. She got a lesson that will serve her throughout life different from mine. I went from an all-black high school to a predominantly white, Jewish university. Well my daughter went from a diversified high school to a diversified university and she s already familiar with tendencies of people based on differences. So you know, just having a well-meaning attitude toward their growth and development. I couldn t be there all the time and there were times when I would get home from work at three or four o clock in the morning. But my children understood the cycle that I was working hard, that I was doing meaningful work, that I was still meeting their needs in the meantime and that I had expectations of them that they created, I didn t create. They ve always just done very well in school and the support system helped make that possible. Okay. These are long answers aren t they? (Laughs) 26 Finchum Johnson Finchum Johnson Finchum Johnson Finchum Johnson That s great. You ll cut it down. (Laughs) No. I think we d better stop because you need to get somewhere, don t you? Oh, sure do. Wonderful, wonderful Thank you very much. Thank you for this opportunity. This has been a very opportune moment to reflect on who I am, how I got here, what I m supposed to do and how much I love my work. Well, it shows. I do, I do. Thank you. --- ---..