Theresa Danley:	This is Theresa Danley interviewing Mrs.
Addie Williams on December 30, 1977. I arrived at Mrs. Williams's home at 10 a.m. via taxi. The day was very cold, with a rain which followed a night where the temperature went below freezing. Mrs. Williams lives in a brown brick house situated on a thoroughfare, with a bus going by the door. There is a wide porch at the front of the house. I was met at the door by her daughter, Mrs. Addie Roebuck, who asked that she might help in the interview, as she felt her mother's memory might need some help. She was given that permission.
Now, Mrs. Williams, I'm going to ask you some questions about your background and all. I understand that your birthday is February 20...
Addie Williams: Theresa Danley: Addie Williams: Theresa Danley:
Addie Williams: Theresa Danley:
Addie Williams: Theresa Danley:
Yes.
Eighteen seventy-four. That's right.
And that makes you this coming February 104 years old.
That's right.
That's really amazing. I've never met anyone that age.
Really.
I have to say this. You're the youngest 104 years old that I've ever heard of or ever dreamed I would ever meet. Mrs. Williams certainly doesn't look...she doesn't look seventy years old. Her skin is so smooth, no wrinkles, and while her hair is snow white and all, it's not sparse at all. Her eyes are very alert. At this time she isn't wearing glasses. I don't know whether she...
Addie Williams:
Yes, I do wear glasses. I have cataracts on my eyes now; they don't do me much good. I can see a little bit better out of those...
Theresa Danley:
And her memory is remarkable.﻿2
AW: Well, it's pretty good, but I'm awful forgetful now. I'll be talking about something and then forget what I'm talking about sometimes.
TD: Okay. Now, let's go back. You were born in the country...
AW: In the country.
TD: In a place called...
AW: King's Old Field. I don't know where that is, nothing about it, but that's where my mother said I was born in the country.
TD:	In what county?
AW:	Pittsylvania County.
TD:	Virginia.
AW:	Virginia.
TD:	And your parents' names?
AW:	Jerry Luck and Luvenia Luck.
TD:	And they were also born in the county?
AW:	I imagine so, I don't know. I imagine she was born in the, you know, country, my mother and father.
TD: And how old was your father, Jerry Luck, when he died?
AW: Ninety-four, I think.
TD: And how old was your mother, Luvenia? AW: Ninety-eight.
TD: And I believe your father died in 1942, and your mother in 1955, and they were both...they both died in Danville. They were born in slavery?
AW:	I suppose. They must have been, wouldn't they have. They were born in slavery.
TD:	Now you did know of your mother's mother, and her name...
AW:	Mary Bennett.
TD:	Mary Bennett. And you believe that she was also born in the country?
AW:	Yes, they were in the country.
TD:	And your father's father's name was...
AW:	Jerry. My father's father was named Jerry.﻿3
TD:	And that name Jerry has sort of gone down in your family, hasn't it.
AW:	Yes.
TD:	The sons' and grandsons' names, I mean.
AW:	My grandson's name is Jerry, um hmm.
TD:	Now they had how many children?
AW:	How many did they have, Addie?
AR:	I believe there were six children. Your mother and father had six children.
AW:	I guess so. I've forgotten. I guess so.
TD:	And you were the oldest of their six.
AW:	I was the oldest of them all.
TD:	And of the six there's just two of you living. Your sister...
AW:	Yes, my sister and myself now.
TD:	And your sister's name is...
AW:	Etta Jones.
TD:	And she lives at...
AW:	Sixteenth Street and...
TD:	...and Spring Road, Washington, D.C. And you spend part of your time with her?
AW:	With her some time, and with a daughter in Philadelphia.
TD: But this is your home here, and when you're not here, you have someone staying on the premises?
AW:	Well, when I'm here, j'ust somebody here with me, but when I'm away, lock the house up.
TD:	Now your sister, Etta Jones, is also, what is it...she's in her nineties?
AW:	She'll be ninety-two in June, June or July. Next year she'll be ninety-two.
TD:	Now you're the oldest, and the next one born to your parents was Winston?
AW:	That's right.
TD:	Winston Luck, and he died in Washington, D.C., at the age of...
AW: How old was my brother? *
Addie Williams Roebuck﻿4
AR:	Ninety...
AW:	Ninety-one, wasn't it? Ninety-one, I think.
TD:	The third member of the family was Lottie?
AW:	Yes.
TD:	Lottie Luck Wade, who died in Danville...Lottie Luck Wade died in about 1975 here in Danville?
AW:	She died here, but I can't tell you the year. I've forgotten it, I can't think.
TD:	The next one I understand was Dr. Jerry Luck?
AW:	Yes.
TD:	And he was also here in Danville. And how old was he when he died?
AW:	I think they say he was seventy-two, wasn't it. I think he said seventy-two.
TD:	And how long has he been dead?
AW:	How long has he been gone, Addie? Twelve years.
TD:	And Clyde Luck, Dr. Clyde Luck...
AW:	That's my brother, my next brother.
TD:	He's the youngest?
AW:	He was younger than Jerry.
TD:	And how old was...he lived here in Danville?
AW:	Yes, here in Danville. He was in his seventies when he died.
TD:	And then their sister, Etta Jones, is...
AW:	She was older than these two boys.
TD:	She was older than those two boys. Now let's go to your education. You first went to school...
AW:	in the county, in the county. My father, he and I walked from the country to Danville to catch the train to go to Shaw University.
TD:	Let's go back in the country school, now you had to walk to school...
AW:	Yes, indeed. Nothing but walk.
TD:	Do you know how long?﻿5
AW: The school was in King's Old Field, I think that's where it was, and we had to walk there every day, my brother and myself.
TD:	Your father?
AW:	No, my brother Winston. Just we two.
TD: About how old were you when you started in that school?
AW: [laughs] I don't know. I think I was around...I don't know how old.
TD: You had to walk. Do you know how long it took you to make that walk to school?
AW: No, I don't know how long, but I had to walk a long ways.
TD: Were you in school every month of the year?
AW: Every month that school was open.
TD: Well, how long was the school open?
AW: How long did the schools open then...
TD: Well, did the schools close during harvest time?
AW: No, they just closed in Christmas time, you know, like that, and not in harvest time.
TD: Did you ever have to do any work on the farm while you were in school?
AW: Nothing but work on the farm. My father was a farmer.
TD: Which meant that you had to do some chores before you went to school in the morning?
AW: What, do some work? Yes, my mother would have me to...I had to work in the field, but I had to milk two cows, scrub the churn and the bucket with brass hooks we had, and scrub these water buckets, scrub the floor, and just scrub the churns and everything before I went to the field, and then I'd have to go to the field to work, every day of my life.
TD: How long did you work in the fields? I mean some people tell us they started to work as early as the sun came up, and work until...
AW: We worked from sunup until sundown, and in planting tobacco time, when there was much rain, we'd plant tobacco all day long in the rain. It was raining hard, you see, and sometimes when it didn't rain, my father would have a barrel of water, we'd pour so much water in the hill and then put the plant in there.
TD: And all of the members of the family had to help in this?
AW: Yes.﻿6
TD:	Did your father own the property?
AW:	No, indeed, he rented it.
TD:	He rented. Was this on a sharecropper arrangement?
AW:	Yes.
TD:	In other words, he had to pay a certain percentage of the crop in lieu of rent.
AW:	He had to pay the white man for renting the land.
TD: Did that mean that he got much cash during the year in payment for his crop?
AW: Well yes, when he sold his tobacco and all, you know he'd get money for that. But he was renting this great big farm...
TD: Do you know how many acres?
AW: No, I don't know how many acres there were, but it was a big farm.
TD: Did he have other people helping him besides his family?
AW: No, just his family, just we children. Not to my knowledge.
TD: Was he able to clothe his children and his wife? His wife, I presume, worked in the fields with him.
AW: Yes, she worked in the fields.
TD: With the cash payment was he able to clothe his children, well, I don't say adequately because in comparison to nowadays, I guess we would say it was inadequate, but did you ever want for clothing and shoes?
AW: Indeed I did. I did want for them, and seldom I got any.
TD: You were the oldest?
AW: Yes, I was the oldest.
TD: Well, did they have the practice of handing down clothes and shoes to the younger children from the oldest? When you outgrew your shoes, did your brother have to wear them?
AW: Not to my knowledge. Because they'd been worn so much, nobody could wear them.
TD: After you got through with them, they were worn out.
AW: That's right.
Yes. I guess so. But it was common practice then for you to go barefooted?
AW: oh yes, we went barefooted in the summer.﻿7
TD:	What about medical attention? Did they ever have any doctors or...
AW:	Yes. Old Doctor Williams was our family doctor.
TD:	There in the country?
AW:	Yes, in the country.
TD:	Was he white or black?
AW:	White.
TD.	Did you ever rely on home remedies then, when you caught colds or were sick, did your mother use home remedies before she called in the doctor?
AW: Yes, that's right, yup. Home remedies.
TD: Can you remember some of those home remedies that were used? AW: Let's see.
TD: Well, when you went barefooted, did you ever suffer in winter time, say with chilblains or frozen feet?
AW: Yes, 'cause one of my feet got frostbitten.
TD: And what remedy did they use for that?
AW: I don't know, I've forgotten, they used so much, I didn't know what it was that they used.
TD: You'll be interested in knowing that one of my interviewees told me they used to take baked potatoes, yams, and get them very hot and wrap them around the toes and all. It's a remedy for frostbite.
AW:	I don't know what they did to mine. I can't remember.
TD:	Well, when you were thirteen years of age, you moved to Danville?
AW:	Yes, we moved to Danville.
TD:	Do you know what was the reason the family moved to Danville?
AW:	Well, I think my mother wanted to leave the country, that's why.
TD:	Well, what kind of employment did your father have or your mother have?
AW:	My father was a farmer, he worked on a farm.
TD:	Now he didn't move with the family when they moved to Danville?
AW:	What, my father?
TD:	Yes.﻿8
AW: Yes, yes, yes. He moved here with us.
TD: Yes, but was there something that happened on the farm that caused the family to move?
AW: No, they just wanted. Nothing happened to my knowledge. We just wanted...
my mother wanted to move, she wanted to leave the country, and we came here.
TD: Did she express any deep-seated reason she wanted to leave the country?
AW: Well, if so I can't think of anything now.
TD: And do you recall what kind of employment they had when they came to Danville?
AW: My father worked in a gas house. My mother didn't work at all when they moved here, to my knowledge.
TD: And what kind of work did your father do in the gas house?
AW: i don't know what his job was in the gas house. But I know they had coke.
What they did... something to the coke. Before it was coke, they did something to it, and then when it got the gas up, whatever it was they...he called it coke, and they burned coke then. My father worked at the gas house.
TD: How long did he work, do you know? Did he retire from that job at the gas eompany?
AW: Did he retire? I don't know, I can't remember whether he retired or not.
TD: He really was not covered by Social Security when he died, they didn't have any...that much Social Security, because Social Security didn't come into effect until about six years before his death and he evidently had retired before the age of ninety-four, though.
AW: i guess so. I imagine.
TD: So that meant that the children took care of their parents before that. And then the amazing thing that on his earnings from the gas company he was able to put his children through college. Or did you get scholarships?
AW: No, didn't get any scholarships.
TD: Well, who paid for your education at Shaw?
AW: My daddy, my father.
T°: That's right, see. How did you get to go to Shaw?
AW: We was living in the country and my father, he and I would walk nine miles to Danville to put me on a train to go to Shaw.
TD: And how far away was Shaw? From Danville, how far? You went on a train.
AW: Yes, I went on a train, but I don't know how many miles it was.﻿9
TD: And how many years did you remain at Shaw? AW: Just one year.
TD: Just one year. And what kind of courses did you take there at Shaw? AW: I've forgotten.
TD: Well, did your education end with that one year at Shaw? AW: No, I didn't finish, I didn't finish. TD: Where else did you go? AW: Nowhere else.
TD: So you just had one year at Shaw. At that time Shaw was noted for education of females. In fact, the matter is, there was no school for girls in the state of North Carolina, white or black, and the white school for females was set up at the inspiration of Shaw. Did you know that?
AW:	i didn't know that. But there were girls at Shaw.
TD:	Well, after you left Shaw, what did you do?
AW:	Taught school.
TD:	Where?
AW:	in the county.
TD:	Back where you came from?
AW:	Yes. Um hmm. Yes, out in the country where I came from.
TD:	And how long did you teach school there?
AW:	I taught fifty-four years...
In that same...
AW:	No, not in the same school, in different schools.
TD:	in different schools. Did you teach school in Danville?
AW:	No, no. Well, I substituted in Danville sometimes for my auntie. She's dead now. I would substitute for her sometime.
TD= But for fifty-four years you were teaching school. Was it a one-room schoolhouse?
AW: Hardly one room, yes, that's what it was called. TD: How many grades did you teach?﻿10
AW: From the first to the fourth.
TD: To the fourth. So you were teaching...mainly reading, writing, and arithmetic, the three R's.
AW:	That's right.
TD:	Did any of your students ever go on to higher education?
AW:	if so I've forgotten, yes, I don't know...I've forgotten. I'm so forgetful.
TD:	How old were you when you married?
AW:	Twenty-two.
TD:	So part of that time you were teaching school when you were married, and you had your children and were still teaching school.
AW: Yes. But you know I had my oldest daughter while teaching in the country but lived in the city.
TD: Well, you were living here then in Danville, and went to the country to teach.
AW: No, I was living in the country then during the week.
TD: When you married, you lived in the country. You married at the age of twenty-two to...your husband * s name?
AW:	What was his name? Pemberton Williams.
TD:	Yes. And he was a chauffeur?
AW:	Yes.
In Danville?
AW:	Yes, for years, several years.
TD:	And how many years were you married to him when he died?
AW:	I can't remember. How many years? Sister, can you remember?
AR:	No, I've forgotten, but I think they were married sixty-nine years.
TD: Now I wanted the names of your eight children, and this is the thing as I understand, that all during the time you were having these eight children, you were teaching in the country and living in Danville.
AW:	Yes.
TD:	How in the world did you do that?
AW:	I can't tell you, honey,
TD:	That meant you had to more or less commute. How did you get to the job of﻿11
TD: (cont.) teaching?
AW: My daddy would take me, and I'd stay there till the end of the week. I taught in Mount Lebanon, nine miles from Danville, and I'd go home every Friday evening, but some of my children's parents would go with me every week.
TD: I see. You stayed there with them in the homes of the parents of the children. Do you recall what your pay was as a teacher? How much did they pay you?
AW: I'm ashamed to tell you. Just twenty-one dollars.
TD: Twenty-one dollars a month?
AW: Twenty-one dollars a month.
TD: That's amazing. Some of these youngsters nowadays spend more than that in an hour. You were working hard, commuting, and raising eight children.
AW: That's right.
TD: Of course your husband supplemented your pay of twenty-one dollars. What
kind of medical attention did you have when you were pregnant and gave birth to the children?
AW: I had a midwife. I didn't have a doctor, didn't see a doctor, didn't hear anything about a doctor.
TD:	Yes. It was a midwife all of the time. How much did midwives get?
AW:	Seven dollars.
TD:	Seven dollars per delivery.
AW:	I'd always save up that money for the midwife; she charged seven dollars.
TD:	Did you ever have any prenatal care?
AW:	nDj not to my knowledge.
TD:	So it was just time for delivery, you called in the midwife. And when you went back to teaching, how old would your baby be?
AW: I carried my oldest daughter with me up to Mount Lebanon. I don't know how old she was then. My mother was taking care of her, but my mother was taken sick and I took her and brought her up to Mount Lebanon where I was teaching, with the people that I was boarding with.
TD: in other words, your parents helped you, your father helped you to go to your job, and your mother helped rear your children.
AW: That's right.
TO: So it was a very close family connection there, shared responsibilities. And in turn, did you care for your parents when they got disabled, or were they﻿12
TD: (cont.) ever disabled to the extent they needed your care?
AW: Not to my knowledge. They never were disabled to my knowledge.
TD: In other words, they worked or were active clear on to the time they died.
AW: That's right.
TD: Remarkable, remarkable. We don't find that nowadays. During that period when you were growing up and in your early married years, what kind of social life did you have? What would you do for recreation?
AW: [laughs] Nothing that I know of.
TD: You didn't have any dances or get-togethers?
AW: No, no.
TD: What did you do with holidays?
AW: Just the same thing every day. I didn't go to any dances or anything like that.
TD: What about your religious life. Did you join church?
AW: Yes, I joined a church in the country. Then I joined the James Street Holiness Church here in Danville. I've been a member of that now for years.
TD: The church that you joined first, was that a Baptist church?
AW: Baptist church. Oak Grove Baptist Church.
TD: And they made a big time, the time of baptism. So that you must have...how old were you when you were baptized?
AW: I don't know how old I was, but I know I was baptized in a pond. What was the white folks' name of that? I can't even think of the people's name...I was baptized in a pond, owned by Joe Edwards, a white man.
TD:	i presume it was a black minister who baptized you.
AW:	Yes, a black minister.
TD:	And you joined the Holiness Church when you came here to Danville?
AW:	Yes.
TD:	And have you been a member of that church for years? Are you still a member?
AW:	Yes, I'm still a member.
TD:	Are you active in church life?
AW:	Yes, pretty good. Don't do much now. I used to teach Sunday school and different things, but I don't do anything now. I go to church and that's﻿13
AW:	(cont.) about all...
TD:	Do they ask you to do something?
AW:	Years ago, I taught Sunday school...
TD:	Yes, but I mean now.
AW:	No, no. They don't ask me to do anything now.
TD:	Aren't they glad to see you when you come to church?
AW:	Yes, always...
TD:	I can imagine it's quite an occasion.
AW:	Have to call my name, they're so glad I'm there.
TD:	Yes. And it makes you feel very comfortable, doesn't it?
AW:	Yes, indeed.
TD:	I'm sure of that. Did all of your children follow in your religious inclination?
AW: No, nobody except myself.
TD: You were the only one that belonged. Did your husband belong to that church?
AW: Yes, he belonged to it.
TD: Now, let's see if we can name all these eight children, [laughs] The oldest one is who...
AW: My oldest child was Harry, wasn't it? No, my first baby died pretty soon after it was born, that's what they said.
TD: Yes, um hmm.
AW: Then Harry was my next son,
TD: That child, the first child who was born and died in infancy, did he have a name?
AW: No, it never was named.
Did they give you any cause of death? He was delivered by a midwife...
AW: Yes, I believe it was. I don't know what the cause of his dying...
TD: Right. In view of what we know of science now, was it because of a difficult delivery or because of...
AW: Maybe so. Maybe it was a difficult delivery, mainly, 'Cause my sister used
to say it took me a whole week to have a baby. Pretty tough, let me tell you.﻿14
TD: The second child was... AW: Harry.
TD: Harry. And the third...now, Mrs. Williams, you say your first child died in infancy. The second one was Harry, which is...he's now living.
AW:	Yes.
TD:	And he's a doctor in Martinsville, Virginia. Your third child was Gertrude.
AW:	Yes. Was she third?
TD:	And she died at what age? Fourteen, I believe.
AW:	Yes, fourteen years old.
TD:	What was the cause of her death? Did you ever know?
AW:	i don't know the cause. I think she never could...
TD:	Was she sick a long time?
AW:	No, she wasn't so sick. I don't know what it was.
TD:	Then your fourth child was James, and he died in an accident, he was drowned while fishing. He worked in the post office in Washington, D.C.
AW: Yes.
TD: Then Nathaniel.
AW: He's a real estate man.
TO: Where?
AW: He lives in Washington.
TD: Real estate in Washington. And then you have a son here in Danville. He's a lawyer. That's the one who carries on the name of Jerry in the family. And then you have a son named Clyde, and where is Clyde?
AW: He lives in Martinsville, and he's the principal of the school there, the high school there.
T°: High school. And then Addie, your daughter, who's here with you today. Addie Roebuck. And she lives in Philadelphia. Now all of these children have gone through school and college. Any one who has not gone through college?
Well, Nathaniel didn't finish college.
TD: But he did go to college.
Yes, they all went to college.﻿15
TD: How in the world did you do it?
AW: Lord only knows I had to work hard.
AR: The boys had to work their way through. They waited tables, ran elevators, worked on the "road" [railroad], anything they could do, and they sent me through school. My brothers paid my tuition.
TD: You were the youngest of the family.
AR: My brothers had to work.
TD: Had to help. In other words, it was the cooperation of the family itself that helped each other to go through.
AW: I had a mighty nice family about that, helping each other.
TD: It's hard to pinpoint those family contributions in dollars and cents
because they're all done in love. Now I asked you how in the world could you educate all of these children without any personal sacrifice. Can't you tell us some stories of what you and your husband had to go through in order to see that your children got their education, and what they themselves did, and contributed financially to their education.
AW: He worked for a private family and I taught school and that's just the way we made it.
TD: But it was more than just that. What sacrifices...or did you consider them-sacrifices at the time?
AW: I declare I've been through something.
TD: Your son, Harry, who's a doctor practicing in Martinsville, Virginia, he
had to go through medical school with help from somewhere. What kind of help did you as his mother give him?
AW: Well, I had to borrow money to help him.
TD: Help him with what? Tuition?
AW: Tuition.
TD: Where did he get his clothing and how did he live?
AW: Well, I guess he got them himself. He worked in the mill, and I suppose that's where he got his clothes and everything. He worked in the mill in Danville.
: In other words, he worked in the mill during the summertime.
AW: Yes.
TD: But he didn't let his employment interfere with his education.﻿16
AW: No. He was working with a family and he [the employer] came when he heard I was sending him [Harry] to college, and he said—he was already working for this man—he said, "Well, if you let him stay here and work with me, I'll give him eighteen dollars a week," or month, somehow, I forgot. I said, "Would you keep your daughter or son out of school for that much money?" He slammed the door and got in his car and left. Harry was working for this man; Powell, I think his name was. And he wanted me to let him stay there and not go to college. I said, "Would you keep your daughter or son out of college for eighteen dollars a week?" He slammed his car door, and I haven't heard from him since.
TD: Well, Harry must have gotten his inspiration from you.
AW: He thought maybe eighteen dollars sounded like a hundred dollars to me, and I would let him stay there and work, but I went and sent him on to college. As I say, he wouldn't let his [the employer's children] stay out for eighteen dollars.
TD: Since Harry was the oldest, you had other children younger than Harry who were also making the same kinds of demands for education, didn't they? So what money you had, you had to share with other children. How did the children...you spoke of Harry working in the mills, did the other boys work in the mills too?
AW: No, nobody but Harry, and I was working in the mill too. They were only paying about six dollars a week for working in the mill.
TD: What did you do in the mills?
AW: I worked, of course, you know they give the colored people the worst, the mopping up, the cleaning out the toilets.
TD: Yes. And how long did you work in that?
AW: I just worked...I don't know. I don't think it was quite a year.
TD: Did you ever work when Social Security came into effect? Did you work on a job on which they took money out for Social Security for you?
AW: i don't know.
TD: Then you had James and Nathaniel who went to school, but they did not go through any professional school...
AW: No.
TD: But Jerry, the lawyer, he lives here in Danville, he went to professional school.
AW: Yes, he certainly did.
Yes. And who helped him?
AW: I guess he helped himself most, 'cause I didn't have anything to help him with.﻿17
AW: (cont.) But I did the best I could, borrowing money...
TD: Borrowed money. And who paid...when you took a loan out for this education, who paid it back?
AW: My husband.
TD: Yes. And you two, together. So you borrowed money for Jerry. Did you do the same thing for Clyde?
AW: Yes. For them all.
TD: Yes. And Addie. Now Addie says that her brothers helped her, and so she was the youngest one in the family, and the only girl. So that the education that your family got was based on what you and your husband sacrificed, and how they helped each other, see. Isn't that something to be proud of?
AW: That's right.
TD: Why should you belittle it, see?
AW: That's right. I see.
TD: In this day and age and all, there are people still sacrificing. They don't get credit for these sacrifices, because in this day of inflated prices, something like eighteen dollars, a loan, means absolutely nothing when compared with today's wages. But when their earnings were only eighteen dollars a week or a month, an eighteen-dollar loan was a tremendous sum, a tremendous sum.
AW: I just think sometimes I don't see how, but the Lord just helped me and opened up the way for me, and I made it.
TD: Was there any particular event in your life that you look back on with pride and feel that it altered your life or changed your outlook on life?
AW: You say what?
TD: Any event in your life that you looked back on with tremendous pride.
AW: What you mean by that?
TD: Well now, for example, when Harry got his degree as a doctor, how did you feel?
AW: You might have known how I felt. I was very happy.
TD: Were you there?
AW: Yes. I told the sick lady, she's dead now, and she was sick, and she sent for me to come down, you know, the street in Danville, three o'clock in the morning, and she was sick in the bed. I thought she wanted to tell me something about her dying. She said, "Mrs. Williams, I certainly am sorry Harry didn't get his diploma." I said, "Harry did get his diploma. I got it today." And she said, "Well, I'm so glad." I felt that she thought maybe he﻿18
AW: (cont.) wasn't going to get it. She thought he didn't get it, that's the
way I felt, by her sending for me that time in the morning, sick in bed. My husband met me at the door, and walked me down the street. And when I got down there, that's what she wanted to tell me, she's so sorry Harry didn't get his diploma. I said, "Yes, he did get his diploma. I got it today." She said, "Well, I'm so glad," and I don't believe she's glad.
TD: When you say, "I got it today," do you mean your son handed you...
AW: Yes. It came to me, it came to my house that day. His diploma came to my house that same day.
TD: But didn't they have graduation exercises at Howard?
AW: Yes.
TD: Were you there?
AW: No, I didn't go there. Yes, I did go to the exercises. Yes, I went to the exercises.
TD: Now what about Jerry when he graduated from Howard Law School?
AW: Yes, from some law school or another. The law school that Jerry went to, was it in Howard?
AR: Terrell*
TD: Oh, Terrell, yes. That's in Washington. And when he graduated from Terrell, how did you feel then?
AW:	You may know how I felt.
TD:	I want you to tell me!
AW:	I felt pretty good, felt proud of him. It was so nice.
TD:	You felt it was worth all the sacrifices.
AW:	Yes, that's right, certainly so.
TD:	And also Clyde, and your daughter Addie. You had all those children up there to get their diplomas.
AW: That's right. You know how I felt. I felt mighty happy.
TD: That was even more than happiness. I think you were bursting! I want to get that feel of how you felt at the...
AW: I felt pretty good over...
TD: But how did you express yourself at feeling pretty good?
AW: I Was just thanking the Lord that he'd spared me to see them all get through,
*
Robert H. Terrell Law School, Washington, D.C.﻿19
AW:	(cont.) with the help that I had.
TD:	Did you feel the certain pride of a job well done?
AW:	Um hmm.
TD:	But your life didn't end then. Now how many grandchildren do you have?
AW:	Lord have mercy. I have to count them. How many grandchildren have I, Sister. ..
TD:	Well, we'll start with Harry. Harry has a son who's a doctor.
AW:	Yes, Harry has four, four children.
TD:	Four children. One of who's in Howard Medical School?
AW:	Yes.
TD:	James, the one who died. Did he have children?
AW:	Yes, he had one child.
AR:	She's married and living in Maryland.
TD:	And Nathaniel...
AW:	Nathaniel doesn't have any. He has an adopted...
TD:	One adopted child. And Jerry, your son.
AW:	Jerry has four children.
TD:	Clyde has three...and you [to Addie Roebuck] have...
AR:	One.
TD:	one. Now let's go back to Harry's children. One is in Howard Medical School. One is...
AR:	An architect. And one's a lawyer.
TD:	In Washington, D.C.
AR:	Right.
TD:	One is a lawyer with the government?
AR:	No, he's in private practice now. But he did have, you know, law students, senior law students, in all the schools. But he's in private practice in Washington now.
TD:	And the fourth one is...﻿20
AR: The fourth one's a girl, and she works in the government. I've forgotten which agency.
TD: And James's children...
AR: He has the one daughter. She didn't graduate from college. She married before.
TD: And Nathaniel's adopted child, how old was the child when adopted?
AR: She was a baby, an infant, less than a year old.
TD: And how old is she now?
AR: She's about twenty...
TD: And she's gone through...
AR: Yes, she finished Morgan [University in Baltimore], and she lives in Richmond.
TD: And Jerry's children?
AR: Yes. Two of them are lawyers, and the girl is a senior in law school, the one that you met at Howard. And the boy didn't finish Howard, but he lives in Washington.
TD: And Clyde?
AR: All three of them finished school. One girl teaches in Springfield, Pennsylvania, right outside of Philadelphia, and the boy works as a supervisor in one of the furniture factories there in Martinsville. And the girl works at Patrick Henry College in Martinsville.
TD: And your...
AR: My boy's in his fourth year at Howard.
TD: Fourth year at Howard. Now, is there any great-grandchildren?
AW: Oh yes.
AR: Harry's children all married, oh goodness, Harry has one, two, three, four, five six, so there's six great-grand, and Nathaniel's daughter, Joyce, has one, that's five, none of Jerry's children. Clyde has three, so that's what, eight. Eight great-grandchildren*
T0-' Does the family ever get together on so-called family reunions? Oh, we always have family reunions.
10: Are they periodically, I mean do you set a certain time of the year that you
*
Jimmy has four grandchildren and one great-grandchild, and Jerry now has four grandchildren, giving Mrs. Williams a total of fourteen grandchildren, eighteen great-grandchildren, and one great-great-grandchild.﻿21
TD: (cont.) get together?
AR: Not really. We had tried to get together this holiday, since our cousins from California, who are doctors, were here too. But we didn't get it together.
TD: Now, as I understand it, the one from California's name is Luck.
AR: That's right.
TD: So he's not her children, or Williamses.
AR: Oh, you mean just the Williamses. Oh well, we get together, it's all of them, Williams, Luck, Wade.
TD: That's right.
AR: We did have a family get-together for my mother's one hundredth birthday, we had a big shindig. In fact, we had a special train out of Washington which brought fifty-five people down here from all over.
TD: Do you have any pictures of that event?
AR: We have it on...my brother has it on the movies. The pictures are so
scattered; generally we have pictures all the time, and of course we still have our family get-together on her birthdays.
TD: Which is in February.
AR: Yes, And we're planning a family reunion for this one. But the pictures, as I said, they're just everywhere. They're better on movies, though.
TD: other than the honors that the family has given you, at the time of your birthday, your hundredth birthday, and these family reunions, when the family has showered their love and affection on you, did any people in the community so honor you? Hasn't your church honored you?
AW: Outside the family, you mean.
TD: Yes.
AW: I imagine so. I'm so forgetful now.
TD: Now what do you feel about the morals of the young people today? Your daughter said you had some strong feelings about family and marriage.
AW: Said I had what? Some strong feelings?
TD: Yes. You believe that they should get married with the clergyman performing the ceremony?
AW: Yes indeed.
TD: And they should try to live with each other and have children?﻿22
AW: That's right.
TD: I gather you don't approve of the method of shacking or living together on a temporary arrangement,
AW: No indeed, no indeed. I don't approve of that.
TD: The girls nowadays are being given contraceptive pills to prevent pregnancy.
AW: That's what I hear.
TD: You didn't know anything about that in your day.
AW: No indeed.
TD: So it's entirely different. What do you enjoy the most about your modern living? You enjoy a warm heated room, I'm sure. You enjoy this house?
AW: What?
TD: You enjoy this house.
AW: Yes indeed. My husband left me three homes. But my boy Jerry sold two of them for me, and left me this one. I'm happy to be here in it.
TD: That's right. You have a certain independence nowadays that a lot of people, senior citizens, don't enjoy. You don't look forward to spending your days in the senior citizen home, or a nursing home.
AW: That's right. I say, I hated to have all these children, but I see that the Lord was so wonderful and so good, I didn't know this day was ever coming. But the Lord knew all about it, and so if I didn't have them now, I guess I'd be somewhere in a home. But they all are so beautiful, so good, and friends and my neighbors and all are just as nice to me, as nice can be. And the lady across the street, she's an undertaker, I call her my second daughter.
TD:
AW:
She looks after you?
AW: I used to be there at night before they got somebody to stay here with me,
I used to spend nights with her. She's an undertaker; she lives right across the street from me, had me over there to dinner yesterday. I told her I wanted her to come over here and have dinner with me sometime. The lady that's rooming here with me will cook a dinner.
110: In order to give us some kind of a clue as to how you have been living, let's talk about what you have been doing this week. Last Sunday you went to church, didn't you?
Yes, I certainly did.
TD: And what did you do after church?
AW:
Eat and sleep.﻿23
TD: You did something else. AW: What?
TD: You did something else.
AW: Well, I did go to church and enjoyed the meeting and everything, and I came home. Where did we come home from church Sunday? Did we...
AR: Went to Evelyn's for dinner.
AW: Yes, that's right. We were invited out to dinner. TD: And what time did you get home?
AW: These holidays I've been getting, it would be either one or half past one o'clock before I'd get to bed.
TD: Half past one a.m.
AW: That's right.
TD: That's more than I can do.
AW: So where were we last night?
TD: Now wait a minute, I want to know what happened Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. You went out of town one of those days. Took a trip.
AW: Where did we go?
AR: Tuesday we went to Martinsville, on Wednesday we went to the Whitingses' cocktail party in Durham.
AW:	That is right, you see, I'd forgotten that.
TD:	You went traveling to Martinsville, and you went traveling to Durham.
AW:	That's right.
TD:	And yesterday, Thursday, you went out for dinner...
Aw=	That was yesterday, right over here, across the street.
TD--	And of course today you're having me. How do you keep it up?
AW:	Well, the Lord is...
TD: That's a pretty strenuous schedule for somebody fifty years younger. Where do you get all that energy?
AW: Well, I don't have much now. I can't do anything much now.
TD: All you're saying is that you don't do as much as you used to do. Tell me what other woman 103 years old could do what you're doing.﻿24
AW: I can't tell you about those, but I know about it myself. I could do
more than I do, but the ladies, they stay with me, won't let me do...I want to do something. I don't want to get so I can't do anything.
TD:	That's right. You enjoy life.
AW:	Yes, I certainly enjoy...
TD:	You're not sitting in any rocking chair.
AW:	No indeed, thank the Lord I'm not.
TD:	You belong to Holiness Church in Washington?
AW:	No, right here in Danville.
TD:	Well, when you're in Washington, what church do you go to?
AW:	To the Holiness Church there. My sister, now she's a member of one there, and I go to her church when I'm there.
TD: So the church is really the one activity, the one social activity that you have and you enjoy it. And I'm sure they enjoy you, and enjoy your sister. There's not many churches can boast about members being that old. Yes, and especially active members, see. Nobody has to help you go to the communion rail.
AW: No indeed. I go myself.
TD: Oh, in your church do they pass the communion around, or do you go to the communion rail?
AW: Yes, we stand around the table there and they pass it around.
TD: And nobody has to help you across the street.
AW: Yes, they do.
TD: Do they?
AW: Yes, they help me. I used could go by myself, but I don't care for going now, my right leg gives away at times.
TD: Did you have any serious illnesses in your life?
AW: Not to my knowledge. The only illness I had...
TD: When I say serious illness, you would know about the serious ailment. You say you have trouble with your knees. Arthritis?
AW: Yes, I guess, in this right leg, sometime that gives away. I almost fall, so they gave me a cane to walk with.
TD: And do you use the cane?﻿25
AW: Sometimes, sometimes.
TD: Why don't you use that cane? You don't want to be classed as an old lady.
AW: Oh yes, I don't mind being that. As long as I can walk by myself, I want to do so.
TD: How long would you like to live?
AW: Just as long as the Lord let me stay here. Just .in His hands.
TD: Do you feel any particular grief in the fact that your friends and acquaintances and relatives have all passed on and left you?
AW: Do I what, feel...
TD: Feel any particular grief?
AW: No, not in particular.
TD: Have you gained new friends to replace those old friends that you've lost?
AW: A lot of new friends.
TD: I think that's perhaps your secret. I think the saddest thing of all is to lose your close relatives and your friends, your dear friends, that they've passed on. You understand that you must make a new life without those friends.
AW: Yes, that's right.
TD: It's not easy.
AW: No, indeed, I declare. I'm very thankful the Lord has helped me along. I come up the hard way. And I did want to educate my children, you know that was a job. Had to borrow money and do different things to keep them in school.
TD: Mrs. Williams, did you ever travel beyond Virginia and the Danville area? If so, can you tell us about your travels? You went to California, didn't you?
AW: Yes, we went to California, across the United States; we went to New Orleans.
TD: Now, when you went to California, what part of Cilifornia did you visit, and who did you visit there?
AW:	I visited my brother's son.
TD:	That was Dr. Luck.
AW:	Dr. Clyde Luck, yes. I visited him.
TD:	He's in Los Angeles.﻿26
AW: Yes.
TD: Did you like Los Angeles?
AW: They all said, "Mama, when you go, you won't want to come back [home]."
I was happy to come back. It's a beautiful place, and a clean place, but I came back home and was glad to get here. They say I wouldn't want to come back home, but I did want to come back home and I did. My daughter took me.
How long were you there? How long did we stay there, Addie? About ten days. Did you like the smog? Huh?
Smog. I can't stand...I can't breathe in Los Angeles. Well, it didn't hurt me any.
It didn't hurt you. Why did you go to New Orleans?
Yes, we visited in New Orleans, just went on a visit, to my knowledge. Did you visit friends or family? You mean...
I think you were on your way some place else, and you stopped over in New Orleans.
That's what it was.
But you still wanted to come back home.
Oh yes. No place like home. [laughter] But I enjoyed it. When you traveled, did you fly? I hope I'll never have to fly. Oh, you don't like... You like flying? Yes.
I don't like it. Have you ever flown?﻿27
AW: No, I've never flown out there, I've never flown. I haven't said I
wouldn't fly, 'cause you never know what's going to happen. But I hope the Lord'11 fix it so I'll never have to fly, 'cause I don't want to fly.
TD:	So you went by train.
AW:	No, we went on a car.
TD:	You drove. And you liked driving across the country?
AW:	Yes indeed.
TD: And driving across the desert? Did you like those long drives across the...
AW: No, we didn't have the desert. What was this place we went, we didn't see a house nor anything?
AR: We crossed the Mojave Desert.
AW: Well, I know we went in some desert, and we didn't see a home nor a house nor anything. That was when we were coming from California.
AR: Well now, you're thinking about the places out west that you... through South Dakota, I mean North Dakota. We went the long way, so she went through almost all...about twenty-some states. We took her through Wyoming, Montana, Idaho, Iowa, stopped in Salt Lake City...
AW:	Checked all kind of states for me. I got them there in my pocketbook now.
TD:	And what, the national parks and all, did you visit any?
AR:	Went to Yellowstone.
TD:	Yellowstone. Did you like Yellowstone?
AW:	I liked all down there, for the time being.
TD:	And did you visit Grand Canyon?
AR:	No, we didn't stop in Grand Canyon.
TD:	in California, did you visit Yosemite Valley?
AW:	I went to the Disneyland.
AR:	Walked all over Disneyland.
TD:	And you liked Disneyland?
AW:	I enjoyed it.
AR:	She's been to Florida, Canada, New England. When her grandson was at Harvard, he gave her a great time for eight days up in New England. Took her over to Harvard and took her to the Cape...﻿28
TD: Oh yes, Cape Cod. Do you like Cape Cod? AW: Pretty good, you know. Just for a visit.
TD: But after all these, that you still want to come back home.
AW: Come back home. No place like home.
AR: Canada. The youngest son took her to Florida.
TD: Did you see Niagara Falls?
AW: Yes, we went sightseeing on the Niagara Falls. I saw that.
TD: What did you think about those falls? Did you ever see so much water at on time?
AW: That's right. And the Pacific Ocean. TD: Oh, you liked the Pacific Ocean.
AW: Um hmm. And they say that's 3,000 miles wide. Is it? TD: Yes.
AR: I guess it is. Her son wanted to take her to Jamaica on her last birthday, but she wouldn't fly, and they couldn't get a boat, except a cruise boat. They couldn't get a straight through boat. So she wouldn't go.﻿29
[A celebration for Mrs. Williams's 104th birthday, February 18, 1978. Participants include her son, Clyde Williams; grandsons, Robert Williams and Harry P. Williams, Jr. grartddaughter, Winona Williams Gee; great-grandchildren, Larry and Laurie Williams, and Erika and Eryn Gee; and the Reverend James Johnson.]
Theresa Danley:
Clyde Williams:
This is Theresa Danley recording the birthday luncheon in celebration of the 104th birthday of Addie Williams. It is located in the Officers' Club on the grounds of Walter Reed Medical Center. There are about 150 people seated at tables of ten people each. The participants are members of Addie Williams's family, including her children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, and surprisingly, a large number of friends and individuals who identified themselves as foster children, inasmuch as either they or their ancestors have been mothered by Mrs. Addie Williams. There is a large number of children and infants attending, and the children's activities are noticeable in the background noise. Mr, Clyde Williams, Mrs. Williams's son, who is the principal of Martinsville High School located in Martinsville, Virginia, is the M.C. He is standing at the podium with microphone and he starts the informal program.
On this momentous occasion it gives me great pleasure to welcome you on behalf of our mother, Mrs. Addie L. Williams. I shall^be as short as possible under the circumstances. Coming in last evening, I was told that I was to give the welcome address. As far as I am concerned, there were two reasons why I was chosen to give the welcome address. Number one, they said they didn't want any short people up here. Number two, digressing— one of my cousins just came up to ask me why is it that I'm always the one to do the speaking. If he doesn't know this is one of the things that I do least of all, but we've got a number of lawyers in the family, and they say that we did not want the lawyers to make the welcome address, because [they are] long-winded and I am one of the individuals or members of the family who does not waste too much time speaking; so I was chosen. So it is with a deep, deep gratitude, great pleasure, that I welcome you, every one of you, to visit with us, with our mother, who is celebrating her hundred and fourth birthday on Monday of next week. Thank you again for coming and meeting with us. In order that we may not prolong the program any further, I'm going to ask Reverend James Johnson, pastor, Mount Zion
a Pun, as C.W. is short of stature﻿30
CW: Pentecostal Church, to please come and say the grace. Reverend Johnson.
JJ: May we all bow our heads please. Our Father, we thank Thee for this food which we are about to receive to nourish and strengthen our bodies. Bless the hands that prepared it and those who paid for it. In Jesus' name, Amen.
CW: Thank you, Reverend Johnson, and gentlemen, we are prepared to eat. [After the meal]
The waiters and waitresses have asked that if we were to keep our seats just a little longer so that they could finish serving and taking up, then of course we'd have a little bit more time to fraternize thereafter. So let's take a few moments and continue the program in order that we may have a little bit more time to fraternize one with the other. At this time there are two young people, a young lady and a young man, I think they are the great, and if I'm mistaken, Dudley or Jimmy, then straighten me out, the great-grandchildren of my mother. This time a tribute to her by Larry and Laurie Williams, [applause]
^L JL
LW:	Great-grandmother has a lovely way of bringing joy to every day,
By the kind and thoughtful things...she shows the love she has for me. Her love we share in many ways, sometimes in word or in play...
Lwt**	She'll always have the time to spend when there's a broken heart to mend.
In her home, you will always find a welcome of the warmest kind... She's a wonderful blessing from above, for Great-grandmother most of all
is love, [applause]
CW: I know we had to put the microphone down so that they could talk into it.
They lifted it up higher than I left it. [laughter] So we can continue at this time, and I don't think we're going to have any trouble shearing this young fellow. He is an attorney and his stock in trade...my nephew, Attorney Robert
Williams, [applause]
RW****xhank you very much. I don't know...Clyde has been casting a great number of aspersions on lawyers today, I don't know whether he s calling on me now because, to give a little tribute. Unfortunately, it s apt to be a little extemporaneous; we talked about this program we were going to get together, but unfortunately communications broke down a little bit m the way. I wanted to say a few things about the 104 winters Grandmother has seen. You know, I think all of us were touched in some way by the book and the movie last year, Roots. And it's one of those things which got me to thinking about the roots of-our family, the beginning, at least as far back as we can travel. And Grandma, I think, embodies the spiritual heart of our roots. She represents what I think her father, Jerry, Jerry Luck, and what I recently found out, her grandfather that she knew, which she called Grandpa Jerry. Part of the family, for me it's been somewhat beneficial, because in growing up in Danville, I was raised there with her, she used to babysit, correct, take care of us. So I got to find out a little bit, as I was growing up, some of the things about family, about her father, out in Pittsylvania County, after African slavery,
James Johnson	**** Larry Williams
Laurie Williams	Robert Williams﻿31
RW: (cont.) how he worked and farmed, and found out and decided that he could not make it out there on the farm. He thought life offered some better thing, and then moved into Danville, and now he's just had a great experience, that he said that the time he moved there that he wanted all of his children to get an education, and he was going to make sure that none of his female children, none of his daughters ever went out to work. Get Grandma to sometimes talk about the time when he would sit down at the table with a knife in his hand, and would not eat anything, would not, and made sure that all of the children had eaten. And when he talked about all the other things, the push that he gave his children to get an education, to get something that no one else can take from you, to develop the skills so that you can make sure that you can go out there in this world, and you can do it on your own, and you can become a success.
a
This is what I think Grandma represents. So for me it's more than just birthday, it's a celebration of spiritual values, not only in the spiritual sense, the traditional sense, but the spiritual in the sense of resilience, the strength that has been brought to the family, the hard times that she had to endure, her ancestors had to endure, make sure their progeny and their progeny's progeny could do something in this world. This is a real tribute, and I feel very sad because it's unfortunate I think that some of her grandchildren and great-grandchildren are going to miss some of the things about the family's history, and I've suggested this to some members of the family, and I'm going to throw it out here, and I hope it s something that we can pick up on, if we can find some mechanism for making "work I would hope that we could come together and develop a foundation a Ration that we can contribute money to over a period of time, and that foundation would do two things, basically. One, it would do some "search so that we can find out more about the history, and that research can then be printed out and distributed to members of the family. And the second thing is we can establish a scholarship program, so that we can give youngsters who are coming along a chance to go to an institution that they choose, andthose youngsters that we pick out who have the types of values that she ^bodies that other members of the family had. And I think it can be developed, and certainly as you've heard today, we have enough lawyers in this family I think we can find that mechanism to do it. But I think it e very ™P°"ant because I'm certainly going to want to make sure that my children understand the hardships and the hard times that my ancest<^rs went through., the type of commitment they made, the type of things that they dxdwithouttomake sure that we could get an education, and we would come into the society and make some contributions to it. I think it's very important, *nd * because of Roots, I know some of Uncle Harrys grandchildren have n ng some of theTr~research back, and it's a difficult task when you don t have the sources there to give it to you. And I think that we have to create some mechanism whereby those sources are kept there, those sources permanent, so that we can always look back and talk about types of contributions these persons made that we believe, and I am sure for others, have added some strength to carry on, and strength to make sure that we had what was necessary to come out in the society and be productive.
And I think a poem, it's not a great poem, but I think it's a poem that symbolizes what I think is Grandma, a part of what she embodies today. It s by Langston Hughes. It's called "Mother to Son.﻿32
RW:	Well, son, I'll tell you:
Life for me ain't been no crystal stair.
It's had tacks in it,
And splinters,
And boards torn up,
And places with no carpet on the floor— Bare.
But all the time
I'se been climbin' on,
And reaching' landin's,
And turnin' corners,
And sometimes goin' on in the dark
Where there ain't been no light.
So boy, don't you turn back.
Don't you set down on the steps
'Cause you find it's kinder hard.
Don't you fall now—
For I'se still goin', honey,
I'se still climbin',
And life for me ain't been no crystal stair.
Thank you. [applause]
CW: Thank you very much. Just for clarification, you know, I'm trying to have the last word, but I'm not going to say too much about you because in your present position, I think you've made mine just a little bit more secure, so...[laughter]. At this time I want to present H.P., Jr., one of the grandsons of my mother, who will make a presentation. H.P.
HPW: It's not often we give thanks along with a living legend such as Grandmother. But we're also blessed that she can be here to witness what that holy union between her and Grandpa has contributed, brought about, enriched lives of the various people that we see here, our friends, their own families; and with that comment I just want to offer Grandmother on behalf of the fourteen grandchildren and their spouses with cousins, a dozen red roses, [applause]
CW: We have a couple of young ladies, Erika and Eryn Gee, who will make a
presentation, or a tribute to their great-grandmother. Erika and Eryn. I'm as nervous as they are. [laughter]
WG:* Grandmother, this is a poem that Erika made up herself and it was during Valentine's Day, so it's a Happy Birthday Valentine's Day poem for Great-grandmother .
A	i	ii
EG: "Td Great-grandmother on Her Birthday and Valentine s Day
You are like a pillow in my heart, And a runner at the start. You are tender in the mind, And also very kind.
***
Erika and Eryn Gee (reading in turn)
*
Harry P. Williams, Jr. Winona Williams Gee﻿33
EG:	You are like a shining star in the sky,
And a flying bird up so high. I hope that we will never part To hear the words "Bless your heart." Let Jesus always be by your side And let the knot between us always be tied. Let the trees bow over our heads, And we shall pray for you over our beds. You are like a clock of time And our love for you will never go blind. You're now a hundred and four, And at your next birthday We will be waiting at your door!
[applause]
CW: Oh, that was beautiful. Talking about being nervous, they gave it no
thought, I'm the one who's nervous. That was really beautiful. I might in passing say that I think the corsage my mother's [wearing] was presented by the great-great-grandchildren, for which we are very grateful. At this time there is, whenever I use the term or the words, the terms, young ladies, both of them frown upon it and let me know very vividly that we are not young ladies. But I'll still use the term young ladies, sitting to the left of my mother is her sister, my aunt, at the young age of ninety-one. I would like for you to see our aunt, Aunt Etta we call her. [applause]
Thank you very much. We'll move on very rapidly. Out of the immediate family, I believe there are four boys and one girl. If you would stand so that you could be seen, I would appreciate it. Don't be bashful, Harry, Jerry, Finn and Sister, [applause] They were the ones who gave me the job this morning as I came in. Still they refuse to stand and be seen. Thank you very much. While the family's being rolled, the grandchildren, would you please come forward so that we can take a picture of you with Mama. All of the grandchildren, would you please come forward. [Much talk and confusion] If we could gather the great-grandchildren and have them to come on up, please, all of the great-grandchildren. Thank you for indulging us for just a few more moments of picture taking. Would you bring, call the great-great-grandchildren. As you entered this afternoon, there was a young lady at the piano there, Beth Ellen Williams. You have not had a chance to see her and know who she is. So Beth Williams, would you please stand, and thank you so much for your instrumental music, [applause] Thank you very much.
There have been some requests for you to give us some more music. I didn't want to spring it on you, but I lost and I couldn't have reminded you in advance. Give us some music for a few moments; we would be most appreciative if you would, [applause] Beth and Frank, I think are getting ready to give us some musical renditions and Frank, if you would give me the high sign when you're ready... Okay, Frank?
Thank you, thank you very much. Now, are you prepared to give us another rendition?
On the tabl6 in front of my mother there are a number of gifts and cards from the many friends that she has, that we have, we wish to take this﻿34
CW: (cont.) opportunity to say thank you so very much- This has been a real
precious moment for us. We could not have done it without your being with us, so that we appreciate your coming and being with us. I have one other presentation that I would like to make to my Mama. This is an autographed picture of President Carter. It was brought in this morning by Attorney Dudley Williams. So at this time I would like to, on behalf of Dudley, present the autographed picture of President Carter to Mama, [applause]
We find it very difficult to read, so you'll have to bear with us. One of you younger fellows come up here, it's not light enough for me. [laughter] I know what -my age is, friend, and ten years before me came you! "Best wishes, Addie Luck Williams, Jimmy Carter." [applause]
Again, ladies, you have been very gracious, you've indulged us for a period of time. And I just want to take this last moment to again say to you how nice it was of you to come out and meet and dine with us and with my mother. These are moments that we shall never forget. Again, thank you, all of us, let's have applause for this particular moment. Thank you so very much for coming and being here, [applause]
[Singing of "Happy Birthday to You" and applause]
I'm still asking for indulgences, and after this one, I will not ask for another one, I guarantee that. If you would give me just possibly a couple more minutes. You know, I will not dare leave from here this afternoon without asking that the wives and the husbands of the children come forward and have a picture taken, because I do want to go back home and enjoy my stay there.[laughter] After that, there is a tape of a program that was dedicated to Mama over the radio, for those who would wish to hear it. Feel free to stay, and we will have an hour or forty-five minutes to fraternize. Again, thank you so much. The wives and husbands of the children, would you please come forward?
ID: Comments by Theresa Danley, the interviewer. After the celebration at the Officers' Club, a number of the family members returned to the home of Dudley Williams where the birthday cards were read to Mrs. Addie Williams. The birthday cards were read by two youngsters, great-grandchildren of Mrs. Addie Williams. She was seated on the divan, together with her sister, Etta Jones. Mrs. Addie Williams listened intently to all of the messages directed to her, and graciously acknowledged and recognized the individuals who had signed the cards. She appeared quite relaxed, and did not seem to tire after the long proceedings.﻿35
[Comments by Mrs. Williams's son, Harry Williams, on February 20, 1978, to clarify and expand upon points in her interview on December 30, 1977. Present and also speaking were Ruth Thomas Williams, his wife; and Jerry Williams, his brother.]
Theresa Danley:
Harry Williams:
Theresa Danley: Harry Williams:
Dr. Harry Williams is the oldest child, and oldest living child, of Addie and Pemberton Williams. He has just reviewed the tape taken on his mother on December 30, 1977, and he wishes to add additional comments. Dr. Williams, the story that your mother gave regarding your diploma and all, I believe you wanted to make some corrections.
Yes, I think she got that mixed up with the license. After I had taken the state board, state medical board, and see, when you take the state medical board, if you pass, they just send you the license, and the license is what my mother had in mind when she said, "diploma." The license was mailed to me that morning, and she got it mixed up with the diploma.
But she was there at your graduation.
Oh yes, she was there in 1927 when I graduated at Howard.
Theresa Danley:
Harry Williams: Theresa Danley: Harry Williams: Theresa Danley:
Harry Williams:
Theresa Danley:
Were there any other members of the family there at your graduation?
Oh yes, I think all of them.
So it was a great day for the family.
It was a great day.
I think you also wanted to add something about the sacrifices your mother and father made for your education.
Yes, I can hardly explain the sacrifices they made; there were so many. Just for one illustration, during my time in school, the man my father worked for would give my father twenty dollars in gold for his personal Christmas present. Many a day I have come back to Howard, first of January, and paid my tuition with some of those twenty dollar gold pieces.
How much was the tuition at Howard in those days? Do you recall?﻿36
HW: I wouldn't be positive about it, but we had the quarter system about the time I was in Howard, beginning in 1918.
&
RW: We had the quarter system too.
TD: No, that's fine. I mean we've just heard a comment by Dr. Williams's wife, Ruth Williams, who's interested in education too, since she's the daughter of an educator at a school in Martinsville. Sit down, to add to...I think the quarter system was quite common.
HW: Yes, and as I remember, tuition was something like twenty dollars a quarter, I'm not sure about that.
TD: Now, did you go all year, because most of them were three quarters, that
was equivalent to one year's education. Did you accelerate your education?
HW: No, I always worked in the summer. I had to work in order to come back the next year.
TD: And that work was in the mills or in...
HW: Well, my mother mentioned my working in the mills. I did work in the cotton mills in Danville for two summers before I finished high school in Danville. But when I came to Washington, to Howard, the first year there was a flu epidemic here in Washington.
TD: Nineteen eighteen.
HW: Nineteen eighteen, and the schools closed that fall. So I went down to
southeast Washington and got a job at a tailor shop, 'cause I had been doing some pressing clothes in Danville before I left. So I worked at a tailor shop while schools were closed. In the summers I always went to...did hotel work. I remember the first summer I went up to New London, Connecticut, with an old friend of ours who was an educator in Danville during the winter, principal of the school, and he was head waiter at a hotel in New London, Connecticut. He took me up there to give me my start in hotels. Since that time, I worked in different hotels, Scranton, Pennsylvania; Nantucket Island, Massachusetts...that's about all.
TD: That was rather common for the black college student in those days, I guess. One that was quite outstanding was Paul Robeson. Did you ever run into Paul Robeson when he worked in hotels?
HW: No, I didn't. He was a little ahead of me, and I never got a chance even
to meet Paul Robeson, but most of the students at Howard were either Pullman porters or waiters. And then when we came back to school, we had jobs as waiting table in the afternoon. A lot of these people in Washington were government workers. They ate downtown in the middle of the day, and they would eat in their apartments at night, so a lot of the apartments had restaurants in them. A lot of school boys worked in these restaurants.
TD: Also I want to supplement this story of summer employment of black college students who ran on the railroad. I met quite a few of Howard students who
*
^Ruth Thomas Williams
Martinsville Christian Institute, founded in 1900; James H. Thomas, principal, 1908.﻿37
TD: (cont.) ran on the railroad to California. When they arrived in California, they would be looking for some of the black college girls, that's how I met a lot. And a lot of them ran on the boats from Seattle to Los Angeles. So that a lot of those college students traveled far afield in those days.
HW: That's right. I first went to Detroit to get a job on the boat, and the
head waiter who had charge of my uncle, who had been working up there, lost his job that year, so they all lost their jobs in Detroit. That was a boat running from Detroit to Cleveland, I think, the D&C line. So I never got a chance to work, and I was too short to be a Pullman porter. My work was always confined to hotels, dining rooms.
TD: I don't think the young college student has an opportunity to have that kind of job nowadays, nor can they spare the necessary time from their studies.
HW: No, because working was discouraged when I was in medical school. The authorities there told us that the whole time should be taken up with medicine. After I left in '27, I don't think any of the students in the medical school worked. The medical schools impressed them with the fact that medicine would take up their whole time. If you didn't have money enough to come to school, you'd just have to stay out.
TD: I wish you would also tell us about how insistent your mother was that you remain in school after you graduated from high school. Let us hear some more about that.
HW: Yes, she... Well, there was nothing in my mind except going to college when I finished. There was never any thought of anything else. I don't know why, except inspiration from her father...
TD: And also from your grandfather, wasn't he living at that time?
HW: Yes, I said from the inspiration my mother got from her father, my grandfather, who insisted on going to school. I was working for a dry cleaning plant in Danville before I left. And after I left, the proprietor of this dry cleaning plant came to my mother and offered her, that is, said if she would just keep me out of school and work for him, he would pay eighteen dollars a week, and that's when my mother made that statement about...asked him if he would take his children out of school for eighteen dollars a week.
TD: Yet at that time that she was saying that, what were her earnings?
HW: Her earnings were...I don't know at that particular time what her earnings were, but I know at one time she was working, she was teaching school for about twenty dollars a month. And it gradually... I think about that time they were making about fifty dollars a month. I'm not sure.
TD: But even then eighteen dollars a week was a pretty good sum. So it did
indicate her dedication and sacrifice, to give up a job that appeared to be rather lucrative.
HW: That's right.
TD: Also, tell a little bit about the sacrifice of your grandfather when he lived﻿38
TD: (cont.) in...after he became unable to work, how he had to live with relatives.
HW: After he became unable to work, he lived with his son, who was a physician there in Danville, Virginia. And he was still very independent, and when eggs became sixty cents a dozen, he refused to eat them, although the son was doing all the buying of the groceries; he didn't have any expenses at all. But he was just of that strong a character.
TD: Also, what was his attitude about the women in his family working?
HW: That was one of the, one of his fighting pieces, to talk about his girls
working for white people. He refused to let them work, although they were very poor during that time. There was one story I heard where when they came to Danville, they were so poor, my grandmother just wanted to help, and she went out and got some laundry from some neighbor who was white, and my grandfather was very angry, and he took these clothes and carried them back to these people. His wife would not be washing any clothes for the white people.
TD: That brings up another angle. Was your mother, who was spending so much time teaching school and commuting and bearing these children, do you recall who did the laundry, your personal laundry in your own family?
HW: Yes, my mother did.
TD: How could she do all that?
HW: Well, we went to the spring to bring the water. Monday was wash day, and she did all the laundry, as far as I know.
TD: Well, wait a minute. This would have to be a time when the schools would
not be open. A day the school was open, she would be down in the country where she had to commute.
HW: Well, that's right. But when she came from school, she did her housework, laundry and all.
TD: Sometimes she was only coming weekends, that meant her weekends were full of household chores for her family?
HW: Oh well, the time she was boarding in the country, I think was along about the time I was very young, and I lived with my grandmother and grandfather, and they would just take me home on weekends.
TD: Oh, I see. Well, that meant that your grandmother also probably did some washing for the family.
HW: Oh, absolutely. My grandmother. I lived with my grandmother until I started school, my second year in school.
TD: But I still think that it's remarkable that your mother during her period of pregnancy would take on such heavy chores, and even during the period where﻿39
TD: (cont.) she was nursing her infants...you as a physician, would you have ever approved of such activities?
HW: No, and I still don't understand how she did it. I was there when all the children were born, after me, and I don't remember her staying out of school. She must have, of course, one of them was born in February, January, one was born in December; she must have been out of school some. I just don't remember that.
TD: Well, I believe that the schools were not open all year round, during planting times and harvest times and holidays.
HW: That's true.
TD: That may account for...
HW: That may have. I remember schools in Virginia, Pittsylvania County, opened late for people working in the farm.
TD: The school year really revolved around the planting time and harvest time.
HW: That's right. It surely did.
TD: And you say that after you graduated there, that it was your license to practice that your mother had mixed up with your diploma.
HW: Yes. Absolutely.
TD: That story of how she was awakened at three o'clock in the morning by a neighbor who thought that you hadn't made it...
HW: That's a story I think which comes out of some family traditions and some
family competition. This lady was of another family which was supposed to be a very fine family then in Danville, and she evidently thought...
TD: Wishful thinking on her part that you didn't make it.
HW: That's right.
TD: I gathered that's what your mother thought! As a physician, do you recall some of the home remedies that were either part of the tradition of the family or that you knew of that were used?
HW: Oh yes. When we had colds, we used mutton tallow. I don't know what that is now, but...
TD: Oh, I remember the old folks using mutton tallow.
HW: Mustard plasters. When you had pneumonia, the treatment was mustard plaster. And sometimes they would use those mustard plasters to the point where you got blisters on your chest.
TD: You spoke of the epidemic, flu epidemic, in 1918. Did your family suffer any with the flu during that period?﻿40
HW: That was the period when my sister, who was next to me, got sick and she finally died.
TD: Oh, that was Gertrude. You said that she was sick a long period.
HW: Yes, she was sick from the fall of 1917, 'cause my uncle, Dr. Jerry Luck, came home for Christmas and Dr. Winslow, who was waiting on her there, got him to see her. He was interning then at Freedmen's Hospital, and he brought her back to Freedmen's Hospital. That's where she died in April. She was in Freedmen's Hospital for Christmas, December, until April, when she died.
TD: Did you ever know the cause of death in...
HW: I never have heard them say authentically, but I believe it was tuberculosis; I believe she had the flu and it went into tuberculosis.
TD:	The reason I say that is because we do know that tuberculosis was very common..
HW:	Very prevalent.
TD:	But apparently the rest of the family escaped this contact with tuberculosis.
HW: That's another instance of the survival of the fittest.
RW: There was tuberculosis in my family...
TD:	We had tuberculosis in my family, and that's one of the instances where medical science has gotten a control over the disease.
HW: Yes. It was so prevalent when I came to medical school at Howard, they spent the whole first year on two diseases: tuberculosis and typhoid fever.
TD: Both are unheard of now.
HW: Yes, unheard of now.
TD: What you hear recently, though, maybe they should have spent more time on venereal disease, [laughter]
RW: That was so taboo, they didn't even like to talk about it then.
TD: Yes, that's right. We had to go through a period of acceptance. How do you account, from a medical standpoint, of the survival of the fittest? Did your grandfather ever suffer from any kind of disability? And your grandmother?
HW: I don't remember my grandfather or grandmother ever being sick until the end. My grandmother did take a cold. I think they came to Martinsville, to my house, after I'd started practicing, for sort of a family reunion during the Christmas holidays, and she got a cold, and she never recovered.
TD: Yes, but she was in her nineties.﻿41
HW: Oh yes, she was in her nineties.
TD: That's really amazing how...
HW: But I just believe this longevity just comes from living in a hardship surroundings, from infancy on.
TD: Did you ever visit in the country, at the old homeplace?
HW: My mother's old home? No, I never knew where that was. But I stayed
with my grandfather while he was living in Danville, after he had moved to the city, when he was working in what... My mother was trying to describe to me the gas house. It was a place they made coke. Now we don't hear anything of coke now, but they used it regularly when I was a boy.
TD: It was a brick that people used...
HW: Briquettes...until people started having...
TD: Backyard barbecues.
JW: Briquettes and coke are a little different. Briquettes that were made then are not the briquettes that you use for barbecue today. But that's what they called them in Los Angeles in 1902 and '03 and '04.
TD: Do you want to say something about your marriage, and how long you've been married, and what influence your in-laws had on your life?
HW: When I went to Martinsville to practice in 1929, there was a family there who furnished all of the high school education that Negroes could get in Martinsville and its surroundings. And this was Professor James H. Thomas, who ran the Piedmont Christian Institute. Was it United Christian Missionary Society, Baptist?
RW: It was first called National Board of Christian Missions; it was later changed to Martinsville Christian Institute.
HW: And he had a daughter who taught in the school and we got acquainted, [laughter
TD: How long have you been married?
HW: I married in 1931. I went to Martinsville in 1929. The funny story about that was there was a dentist in Danville who had been practicing in Martinsville and he...I guess primarily the cause of my going to Martinsville. Because he kept telling me about Martinsville. Well, this...
TD: Was he a graduate from Howard?
HW: Yes, he was a graduate of Howard, Dr. Cowan, and he...then the fall, 1928, when I was studying for the boards back home, my mother's home, Dr. Cowan had always wanted to take me to Martinsville, and just before Thanksgiving he wanted me to go with him to Washington, to the Howard-Lincoln football game, which was the social event of the day, then. And he said he had a young lady who wanted to go, he wanted to take with him, but he was trying
*
Jerry Williams﻿42
HW: (cont.) to find the right fellow to go along with her.
TD: This is a blind date! [laughs]
HW: But I refused. I told Dr. Cowan, I said I don't want to be bothered with women right now. I'm trying to get ready for this board. This was in November, Thanksgiving, you know. And so I came to the Howard-Lincoln game with my uncle, Dr. Jerry Luck and his two children, his wife and two children. She came with Dr. Cowan, this young lady. I met her while I was in Washington just before we started back, and I was very surprised at what I'd missed. So right after we went back to Martinsville, I made it my business to see this young lady more and more, and finally we became engaged, and got married on the 17th of June, 1931.
TD: Was she Dr. Cowan's date when she came to the Howard-Lincoln...
HW: No, Dr. Cowan was married. He was an older man, he was just trying to look out for us youngsters. Yes, he was a chaperone, and that's why he wanted to pick out the proper fellow to go along. Some other fellows had wanted to go with him; in fact, he told me that they weren't the type for this young lady.
RW: My father was strict.
TD: You know, that is also the pattern of that day. When the men looked after and protected the womenfolk. That was the role of fraternities; are you a member of any fraternity?
HW: Alpha Pi Alpha.
TD: Dr. Williams, I believe that you have a story about how your mother was able to commute to her job in the country that is interesting.
HW: Yes, after many years, it seemed to me, many years, my father was able to buy'a horse, and my mother used this horse to get to school. I would get up about five o'clock in the morning and groom this horse while he was eating, while I was feeding him, and by seven o'clock, I'd have him hitched to the'buggy in front of the house, ready for my mother to drive to school. I don't remember how many miles, but she drove...took her from seven till about nine to get there in the horse and buggy. She kept the horse there all day and then drove back in the afternoon.
TD:	Well, while she was there, she had unhitched the horse...
HW:	Oh yes, she unhitched the horse and fed him while she was teaching school.
TD:	And when she came back home, who took care of the horse?
HW:	I took care of the horse, and also milked the cow we had.
TD:	The cow. That served the milk for the family.
Yes, we had a horse and a cow. We thought we were rich when we got that horse.
HW
[end of interview]﻿ADDIE LUCK WILLIAMS
