Gay Francine Banks:	This is an interview with Mrs. Walter
Aiken, one of the Rucker sisters. This interview is being conducted at the office of Mrs. Aiken at 691 West Lake Court, N.W. Atlanta, Georgia. Today is April 14, 1977 Could you go back and tell us something about your grandparents?
Lucy Rucker Aiken:	Jefferson F. Long, he was my mother's
father. And he was the only congressman, colored congressman, ever from Georgia, until Mr. Young came along. Now that's what I was just thinking about then, that my grandfather, Jefferson F. Long...my grandfather's father, was Crawford F. Long. But that can't go in history. I wouldn't dare put that down, see, because he was white and he was quite renowned in Georgia. I guess you know something about him...
Gay Francine Banks:	Yes.
Lucy Rucker Aiken:	I was out at the Crawford Longs about
three or four months ago and—let it stand there for a little while because I have a throat trouble—and I thought, well, this is from my grandfather, my great-grand-father. But that's not funny. So, I don't think we can go back. Well, anyway, my father was Henry Allan Rucker. He was the only Negro who served as collector of internal revenue for the state of Georgia. Who ever served. And he served in that capacity thirteen years. First he was appointed by President McKinley, served under President Teddy Roosevelt, and one year under President Taft. He was asked to resign by President Taft because he wanted a white collector in that position. And that ended that. Now, where do I go from there?
Gay Francine Banks:	Yes. So, where was your father born?
Lucy Rucker Aiken:	My father was born in—at that time they
used to call birthplaces by county—born in Washington-Wilkes County, Georgia. My grandfather was born in Crawfordville, Georgia. And my mother was born in Macon.
* Lucy Rucker Aiken, Neddie Rucker Harper and Hazel Rucker participate in the interview as narrators; Gay Francine Banks and Margaret Rowley as interviewers.﻿2
LRA: (cont.) My grandfather moved to Macon, and he was married to Lucinda Long. There were five children in the family, two girls and three boys. My grandfather by trade was a tailor, and after he came out of the Congress, he resumed his work as a tailor. He did not run for a second term, because he knew he couldn't be elected, and he thought that it was best just to give it up and go back to civilian life as a tailor. Let me see, where do I go from there?
Well, my father attended Atlanta University, completing, I think, his junior year. And then he had to stop because of finances. His father, Ned Rucker, was a slave, and he was permitted by his owner to use his trade and to receive remuneration for the same. He was a plasterer by trade; he learned that when he was a slave. And he was born in Washington-Wilkes, Georgia, also. Where do I go from there?
GFB: So, when did he move to Atlanta? Around what time?
LRA: That is something I have to look up. I have all the papers, all of his deeds to the properties that he bought, he and my father. My father came out of Atlanta University, and he had a little money, and he and my grandfather bought a barber shop on Decatur Street. And neither one was a barber, but they operated this shop until my father went into government service as a clerk in one of the offices. And I presume it was the collector of internal revenue office, and he sold the barber shop. And by that time my grandfather was retired, because he was quite old.
GFB: So, did your father cater to the black community with his barber shop that he had on Decatur Street?
LRA: I presume so, because Decatur Street was a street then with colored businesses only, and I presume all of them must have been colored. Look, there are so .many things that I might have learned as I grew up. But I just paid no attention to them, thought that probably I would never need them. The very vital things to me then were things that maybe I inquired about, but now I can see that a lot of things were vital that I should have had knowledge of and don't have.
My father married Annie E. Long, who was Jefferson Long's daughter, in 1889. And of that union there were eight children, six girls and two boys. My father lived until 1924. My mother passed in 1933. In 1920, I married a young man from Delaware, Walter Henry Aiken, who was a son of a farmer who had matriculated at Hampton as a young boy. Both his mother and father had passed. And he had an older brother at Hampton, and he was graduated from Hampton in 1912. He went to Howard the next year. He studied music for a couple of years—and I can't remember the name of the lady who was head of the music department, her name is gone. But anyway, he had a very beautiful tenor voice, very beautiful.﻿3
LRA: (cont.) We lived in Philadelphia, after getting married here in
Atlanta; we moved to Philadelphia, and he went into business under the G.I. bill in the insurance business, and North Carolina Life Insurance Company. And on the side, he did real estate. How much credit he got for that, I don't know. But he was supposed to go to North Carolina and stay there, which he did. We left after about a year and returned to Atlanta, and my husband and a bosom friend, Mr. W. J. Faulkner, who lives in Wildwood, New Jersey, at this time, and who was then at the YMCA here in Atlanta as boys' work secretary, I think—went into business—and I caught my verbs right in there!— went into business as contractors. My husband had learned a great deal about the business, the building business, when he was at Hampton. Just as far as I know, Mr. Faulkner did not have any experience in the building business, but at any rate, they went into business together. Financed by my father, and after building about three houses, my father said that they had been in business long enough to get on their own, and he did not continue financing them. So my busbar;?, they started in business in November, I believe, in 1921. And my husband went through the depression with Mr. Faulkner, who at the end of...oh, during the depression, left and went to Fisk University as chaplain. My husband was left here to continue the business, which he did, and kept building both houses and buildings until he passed in 1965.
This left me to carry on the business that I had previously had experience in since 1925; I went to work for my husband, or with him, rather. And I have continued this business, not the contracting business, but the rental end of the business. By that I mean, there were certain projects that he built that he owned, and those projects are the ones that I handle now. And that's the reason I say I'm in the rental business. Now, where do I go from there?
GFB: Well, could we sort of go back a little bit? Did you meet your
husband when you were a student at A.U. or Atlanta University, or...
LRA: I'm sorry I left this out. In 1918, my brother-in-law, John W. 2avis —you probably know of him—who married my oldest sister, Bessie, was recently graduated... No, he wasn't either, he was graduated from Morehouse in 1911, and what he did between times, I can't remember, but in 1916 he married my sister Bessie. Yes, he taught at Morehouse, that's what he did, because they remained at Morehouse until he was offered a job in Washington as secretary of the Twelfth Street branch YMCA. He went to Washington, he and Bessie went to Washington and established a home. They had one child at that time. I took the civil service examination, passed with pretty good marks, was appointed, and went to Washington to live with them, and also to take care of my sister Bessie, who was ill. And I remained in Washington from June 1918 until the armistice was signed. And then my brother-in-law, John W. Davis, was offered a job as president of West Virginia State College, and he accepted that position. So we moved to West Virginia, and in the meantime, I had met a young man, Walter Aiken, who had just returned from overseas service, the﻿4
LRA: (cont.) First World War, and...can we stop there?
GFB: You wnre just talking about where you just met him.
LRA: Uh huh. You see, I was a little ahead of myself. My brother-in-
law, before he went to West Virginia, brought this gentleman down to dinner with us on Sunday after he returned from the army, and we found that he was a very cultured, a very fine young fellow. And he immediately wanted to, offered his services as an escort to take me out on pleasure trips. We went to the theaters, to the parks, and so forth. And about two months later, he proposed marriage. I couldn't see marrying then because I didn't know him, didn't know anything about him, just knew he was from Delaware and knew what he had told me, and that was all. So in the meantime my brother-in-law, and this was before he left Washington, went to Delaware, mainly to inquire about him, to find out what type of fellow he was, what kind of family he came from and so forth. And he found that he was from a very fine family of farmers in Delaware. And a year and a half later, we were married, and went to Philadelphia. He was—I don't know if it was called G.I. Bill of Rights when he was in training under the government, because of the service he had rendered in the war—he was an apprentice to the North Carolina Life Insurance Company branch in Philadelphia. They were then located in Washington, the main office. Did I say that? Did I tell about Hampton, going to Hampton, and his musical career? Didn't tell you that?
GFB: No. You didn't tell me that.
LRA: Oh, yes. My brother-in-law found out that Walter's mother and
father had passed when he was quite a boy. And he had a brother at Hampton, an older brother, and he, this brother paid for him to come to Hampton and attend Hampton School. Hampton...what is it?
GFB: College?
LRA: No, it's...
GFB: Technical?
LRA: No, it was then an institute. So, he went to Hampton, took courses
in horticulture, animal husbandry, and some few courses in the building trade. While he was in Philadelphia, he met a Jewish real estate owner by the name of William Lipton. When Walter's duties were over with the North Carolina Mutual, he went to Mr. Lipton and became really a protegtf in the real estate business. After staying in Philadelphia about a year and a half, we went to... In the meantime, I know I said somewhere in there, I said we were married.
GFB:
Right.﻿5
LRA: Well, anyway, we left Philadelphia and went to Norfolk, Virginia. And we stayed there approximately a year. He, at that time, was selling building lots in a subdivision in New Jersey called Glassboro.
GFB: Right.
LRA: And business was very good. But Norfolk was, of course—you understand this as well as I do—full of transients, and he thought that he should go to a place where people were more stable, where they were more settled. And I wrote my mother and father and told them that we wanted to come to Atlanta, and what did they think about it? My mother was glad to have us because she had met my husband on one of her trips to Washington. And we came to Atlanta and he... Well, his bosom friend, who now lives in Wildwood, New Jersey, and his name is Dr. William J. Faulkner, who had retired from, I guess from the YMCA, where he was boys' work secretary in Atlanta, went into business with my husband, as contractors. They had no money at all. We stayed with my parents. Mr. Faulkner had a home of his own, and he had at that time three children. They decided that they would go in the contracting business because my husband knew something about it. Mr. Faulkner didn't; but my husband felt that it wouldn't be long before he could learn something about it. So they went into business, the contracting business. They were financed by my father. After building three houses and being successful with those three houses, my father thought it time for them to get out on their own. So he discontinued the financing end of it, and they started out alone.
In 1929 came a terrible depression, and Mr. Faulkner felt that he could not stay in business longer because of the depression. At that time we had $7,000 worth of notes which were no good at all, and that was one of the reasons Mr. Faulkner felt that he should leave. I'm trying to keep from getting mixed up here in the time. Well, Mr. Faulkner, I believe, was an associate minister of either Liberty Baptist Church or—what was Dr. King's church—Ebenezer, I think it was. I really think he was associate minister of Ebenezer. It was one of the two. And he left the business and went to the Congregational church as minister—its minister had just passed—and stayed there, I think, about three years. Then he had an offer to come to Fisk University as chaplain. Went to Fisk, took the family, and remained there for several years. Retired from Fisk, went to Chicago and took the pastorate of a Congregational church, the name of which I don't remember, and retired from there some years later, and is now just a retiree living in Wildwood, New Jersey.
GFB: I was wondering if we could sort of go back now to talk a little bit more about your brothers and your sisters.
LRA: All right.
GFB: I was wondering, I know that you graduated from Atlanta University in about 1912...﻿6
LRA: That's right.
GFB: ...and I was wondering, did your brothers and sisters also attend Atlanta University?
LRA: I have a sister, Neddie, named for my grandfather, who married a young man, Lawrence Harper, now deceased, who taught at Atlanta University—physics, I believe. When Atlanta University was... What?
GFB: At . the normal schools? Was undergrad?
LRA: My sister Neddie was a graduate, a normal school graduate of Atlanta University. Her husband, Lawrence, was a college graduate of Atlanta University. When the schools merged in 1929, he went to Augusta to Paine College as dean of men, and remained there until he died about fifteen years ago. And then my sister Neddie came to Atlanta,
My sister Hazel received her normal diploma from Atlanta University, went to Morehouse College, and received her college degree, and went to Atlanta University and received her master's degree. She was at this time teaching at Crogman School in Atlanta, and when she became of retirement age, she left the school system, of course, and now she lives with me.
My sister Alice was graduated from college, Atlanta University, married a very prominent attorney in Chicago who had received his college degree at Oberlin and his law degree from Chicago University,and served under President Truman as the first Negro judge of the... Oh, let me tell you in a minute. Can we come back to it? I can't think. But anyway, it was quite an important appointed position. He passed about ten years ago. Before my sister married, she pursued her education in Berlin, majored in Latin and German. When she lived in Chicago, she was one of the supervisors in the welfare department in Chicago.
My sister Anne, the one who just passed, received her bachelor's degree at Atlanta University. Received her degree in library science at Hampton Institute. Studied for a year at Iowa State. Was offered a position at Fisk University as an assistant to the librarian. Married a young doctor from Meharry, but this marriage didn't work out. In the meantime, she came to Atlanta and worked in the main branch of the public library system. Later she was offered a job in Frankfort, Kentucky—I think it's Frankfort—as librarian in the Kentucky State College system, and stayed there three or four years. Left there and went to New York, worked in one of the branch libraries in New York. Stayed there a year or two, two or three years. And the president of Kentucky State under whom she had worked was offered a job at Maryland State College, and he invited her to come to Maryland State and take a job there with him. So she went to Maryland State and stayed there until my husband, in 1952, went to Maryland and﻿7
LRA: (cont.) brought her back to Atlanta to work with us on a project
that he had just finished, the Waluhaje, which was a very... Well, it was a million-dollar building that he constructed for the purpose of aiding those elderly people who wanted to give up their homes and come into a place that was satisfactory to them, and also young people who had just finished school, and had embarked on teaching careers, and...that's about all. Oh, yes, and part of the building was left for people moving in and out of Atlanta, because we had no decent places for people to stay. So as I said, my sister came to assist me with that. We remained at Waluhaje until...my husband passed in 1965. We remained at Waluhaje for five years after that, and then I decided that the management of the real estate that he had left for me to handle, plus the management of the Waluhaje, was a little bit too much for me to handle. So I sold the Waluhaje and retired here to do this, the rest of this management, to manage, to engage in the rest of the management of this property.
Now, where am I now? Oh, yes. My sister Bessie was a graduate— she was the oldest—she was a graduate of Fisk University, 1911. And in 1916 she was married to John W. Davis.
My brother, Henry Allan Rucker, Jr., was graduated from, now I don't
know___ He finished a law course at Northwestern University, fifth
in a class of over a hundred. Now, where he got his college work, I don't know. He left Atlanta University in his junior year and went to Chicago. Whether he finished Northwestern or not before he took law, I don't know. I don't know the setup then. I don't know whether you were compelled to have a college degree before they could take you professionally or not. But at any rate, he did finish Northwestern law. He practiced in New York for two or three years, and then died of meningitis.
That ended the family except for one brother, Jefferson Long Rucker, who is a retarded child. He was born retarded. And he has been very, very well taken care of over the years by his sisters. Now, let me see now, I think that's covered the family.
GFB: Right. So now, which number were you? I mean, were you like number one or number three?
LRA: I'm third in the family. My sister Bessie was the oldest. My brother Henry was second, and I was third.
GFB: So were you born in Wilkes County?
LRA: No, all of us were born in Atlanta.
GFB: Oh, you're Atlantan?
LRA: Oh, yes. We were born in Atlanta on Piedmont Avenue, between Auburn and Houston Street, in a house that Sherman left when he burnt Atlanta. And that house is still standing. It is now owned by the﻿8
LRA: (cont.) Atlanta Life Insurance Company. We sold it to them when we moved over on this side of town.
GFB: Did many blacks live on that street?
LRA: When we lived...when I was a little girl, there were two families of colored people on the street, my family and a family of other colored people. Most of the neighbors were Jewish. We had two families of Caucasians, and we had one German family. And on the corner, the southeast corner, about a half-block away, we had a— funny how you get to talk about the neighborhood, and you can't think of the proper thing to say—well, a summer stand, I guess I could call it that, and it was operated by two Greeks, and that was our neighborhood.
GFB: Well, what about, was the normal school you went to A.if. for all your schooling?
LRA: All of us went to public school in Atlanta, every one of us, we
went to elementary school. And at the time, Atlanta University had a high school. So we went through high school and then into normal school or college, whichever was the case. Then I told you about the advanced education of some of them. I guess you wondered when I said my sister Hazel went to, finished Morehouse. But, they had about twenty young girls, or young women. About, oh I don't know, about thirty-six, around there, I believe, and she was one of them. Why they let down I don't know; I don't know that she knows. But she found out that she could attend Morehouse, so she went and finished. And got another college degree from Morehouse. She got a college degree... I said "another." She got a degree from normal, Atlanta University, college at Morehouse, master's at Atlanta University.
GFB: So, could you tell me a little bit about how the life was, you know, for students on A.U., at the campus, at that time?
LRA: Atlanta University was a small school. It didn't have too many students, and it was a poor school. It had no money, much. The president was constantly begging money from New England associates, and he managed to go from way back there to 1929 before they merged. The Atlanta University graduates didn't approve of the merger at all, but there was nothing that could be done about it. The Morehouse students...I don't know that it went as far as the teachers were concerned, but the Morehouse students continued to brag that they'd taken over A.U. So on and so on, which left kind of a bad taste in the mouth of the A.U. graduates.
Oh, to come back to another thing, my husband was on the first championship team at Hampton. I think he said he played center...
GFB: This is football, right?
*
Atlanta University﻿9
LRA: I'm sorry, yes. And he was a lover of football. I remember the year that we married, Howard [University] played somebody in Philadelphia on Thanksgiving Day, and he was a jurlge, he was an umpire, you see; he was in an official capacity at that game. Then when it came to Atlanta University, Atlanta University had such a very poor football team and no money at all to amount to anything. And they had coaches... they had a lot of things that other schools would like to have had but didn't have. My husband went to see the president of Atlanta University, and told him that he would like very much to assist with the football team because of his wife and his business friends and students alike, because of their urgent requests. He knew that he knew football, and he knew that he had played on the Hampton championship team and had been there, I guess, for four years, and he was an overgrown somebody, and the president consented to let him take the team. No money attached, because he didn't have any money. So he coached the Atlanta University football team for eight years___ And he had, I think—I'm not sure about
this now—but I think ae had three championship teams while he was there.
And when Atlanta University merged with the other school in Atlanta, he coached. He was invited to come to Fisk to be assistant coach to Tubby Johnson, who was the head coach. And he stayed there just a year. And they would have had a championship team that year, but for a postseason game that they lost and, of course, you know, that cut out the championship. That's in 1929. Then three years later he coached the Clark University [team] for three years. And this was all extracurricular activity, because he was running a contracting business; but I had been with him for some time, and I had learned pretty much the business and was able to handle it while he was gone. And I was quite a football enthusiast myself, so I kept up with everything pretty well.
And after he left Clark University, of course, he cut out the football, and he centered on the business entirely. I have a letter from the Atlanta Federal First... I will say that he went, he had a big project coming along in 1942, and this was a Federal Housing Administration project. And we were the only contracting firm in Atlanta to get commitments. The head of the Federal Housing Administration had great faith in my husband, and without any to-do at all, he gave him commitments. We built a hundred houses for war workers then, along with the other work we were doing. And after that time, he bought land for another subdivision and built houses in that subdivision. And that's right out here, all that property out west.
Let's see... Oh, I have a letter...oh, yes. When we first got this commitment to build in 1942, he went to two colored institutions in Atlanta, the Atlanta Life Insurance Company and the Citizens Trust Company and asked for financing. They refused to finance him; they refused to give us financing, or to make financing. They said it was a great...that in this project we had a hundred﻿10
LRA: (cont.) houses to build, and no house was to cost under $10,000.
They said at each one of these institutions that this was the first time that a colored man had asked for financing of that kind, and they were afraid that he couldn't carry it through. So that they wouldn't give him the money...
There was one man there who was at the head of the Atlanta Federal, a Mr. Matthew. He was very wealthy, and without any liability on our part—on his part, that is to say—he arranged with Atlanta Federal to finance this project for us. It was quite successful, and from there we built another subdivision, along with other properties that came in to us to handle. Let's see, now where was I? Oh, I have a letter... after Mr. Aiken died, Mr. Newbold, who was then the president of Atlanta Federal, sent me a letter that I prize very highly. This letter stated that over the period of time since we had started securing or obtaining loans from the Atlanta Federal, they had financed over one thousand houses for us. And every one was successful, and good builders and good contractors, and they had nothing to fear at all.
Now, where do I go from there? I stated that Mr. Aiken was a great big fellow, I think I stated that —
GFB: You were talking about, you know his...
LRA: Well, when I first met him when he came out of the army, he must have weighed over two hundred pounds, and he was about five feet, eleven inches. And he had—which I didn't mention—he was shell-shocked in the army, and that was the reason he was able to take the course with the National Health and Life Insurance Company. And I guess it was after that time that the disability ended, and that's when he left Philadelphia. I'm very disjointed! I can't seem to go on, to take it up with you and just go through it very smoothly. But anyway, after he was in business here for a few years, we found that he had diabetes, and he was under the care of a doctor for, oh, a long time, from that time until he passed.
We played Tuskegee, went to Tuskegee one year, and I remember that there was a former classmate of his at Hampton, who had a cafeteria at Tuskegee Institute. His name was Grant Debben, and he was a great big fellow too, taller than my husband, but quite a large fellow. So the day after the ball game, when we were in the cafeteria, Debben suggested that they weigh. And he said, "Chief..." Oh, they called my husband—I'll tell you about that. He suggested that they weigh, and Debben said, "Chief, I tell you, you won't weigh more than I do and I know it." So they got on the scales, and my husband weighed 250 and Grant Debben weighed 253. And from that time, my husband started reducing.
GFB: Right.﻿11
LRA: He was too big. Now, about the Chief. When Walter was at Hampton, there were many Indian students at Hampton. And one day, as he told me, they had a little quarrel on the football field, and my husband stepped in and settled it. And so one of the Indians suggested, "We'll call him Chief. He looks like an Indian anyhow, so he'll be our chief." And that name Chief just stuck with him until he passed. And that was from 1912 until 1965, so everybody knew him by Chief. Very few people said anything except Chief Aiken.
Now, let me see, there was something else that came in my mind to tell you. Over the period of... This is as he told it to me. He started coaching at, I think, Miner Normal in Washington, D.C., and from there... Let's see where else, I'm kind of lost in there. I don't know, but he coached twenty years in all, and I can't account for those in the middle because I've forgotten. But anyway, he told me—and he did keep up with his scores and so forth after he came to Atlanta University—but he told me that in all of his coaching career, he lost twenty-one games in twenty years. So you can see he was a pretty good coach.
GFB: Yes, I guess that's right. So I was wondering, when he was a coach at Atlanta University, I know there were some factions there on campus between the Wolves and the Owls. Did he have this problem?
LRA: That was before his time. Now, my brother Henry, one reason he left Atlanta University was because he was connected with the Owls, and they had had friction. And so many of the Owls were suspended, and I think my brother was among them, and they left and went, they scattered, they went to other schools. And that's how he wound up in Chicago. Now whether, as I told you before, he finished at Northwestern College or not, I don't know, but I do know he finished in law there.
And incidentally, last week, his daughter... He had one daughter, and she finished law at Columbia University—she finished her college work at City College in New York, I think, and finished law at Columbia University—she has practiced in New York ever since, and now she's connected with the city or state, I don't know which. And she's quite a brilliant little girl. She's not a little girl but she's short...I think of her as a little girl. And she came to visit us for a weekend just last week. She's quite talented. She has been married; she has a daughter of seventeen who attends Lutheran College out in Iowa, I believe majoring in music.
Now, let me see what else. Oh, I have a nephew at Morehouse College who is head of the department of music, Ted McDaniel. He is the son.. Excuse me, my sister Bessie had two children, Constance and Dorothy, nicknamed Dit and Dot, and they were known by those two names all the time. Dit died about five years ago; Dorothy lives in Memphis and is a schoolteacher. Ted McDaniel is her son. What else...﻿12
LRA: (cont.) Now, I told you... Oh, now, Neddie had one boy; she's the girl next to me whose husband was dean down at Paine College. They had one son, Lawrence, Jr., and for twenty-one years, Lawrence has taught mathematics at the University of Minnesota. And he has four children. The oldest girl is at Dartmouth, her first, her freshman year, and the other three children are in school in Minneapolis. That's the history of the family, I believe. Hazel is a bachelor girl, she didn't ever marry. She has always given as her reason for not marrying that she couldn't find a man the same type as our father! Well, let me see, where do I go from there? Alice, after her husband passed, came back to Atlanta, and she lives out in Langmar; she doesn't live with me because I don't have enough room for her at my house. And she has done quite a bit of volunteer work since she's been heie* with the United Nations, and teaching slow children at the YMCA, and different things like that, just, you know, her services. I don't know where I am. I think I covered the family, haven't I?
GFB: Yes, you have. I was just wondering if we could go back over again to Atlanta University, the old A.U., you know. And I was wondering who was president then?
LRA: When I went into Atlanta University, E.T. Ware was president, and he was son of the foomder of Atlanta University. And in 1913, I think, or '14, he retired from Atlanta University, and went to New England to live with his family, consisting of a wife and two boys. Dr. Myron W. Adams took over the presidency—he was former dean there— and remained the president until the merger in '29. Before President Adams, before President Ware, Dr. £umstead...I can't think of his initials, but Dr. Bumstead was president, after the founding by President E.A. Ware.
We have a very____I don't know whether this ought to be on record or
not, but at Spelmsm,, they had white teachers from away, maybe from New England, too, but they had separate dining rooms and students didn't come in such close contact with them. In fact, that was the knowledge that was given us, that's what we heard. At Atlanta University, every table in the dining room had two teachers. So we were constantly supervised, those of us who needed it, but at any rate, there was quite a difference between students at Spelman, all girls at that time. In fact, there is still quite a difference between the students there and the students at Atlanta University. The students at Spelman were very strictly supervised; the students at Atlanta University were supervised, yes, to an extent, but not as strictly supervised as they were. I'm talking now about the boarding students. But through all, we just felt at Atlanta University that we were superior in every way to the students anywhere else in school.
GFB: Right.
LRA: I still hold that we were- Let me see now, what else would you like to know about A.U.1﻿13
GFB: Something about the faculty members. Who were some of the teachers, you know, on the faculty?
LRA: We had a lady, Miss Ellis, who was an English teacher. She was— most of the teachers were unmarried—she was a fixture at Atlanta University. We had another one, Miss Swift. Both of them were up in years. Miss Swift taught mathematics. We had Dr. DuBois there, and Mr. Dill, Professor Dill; both of course... You know about Dr. DuBois. Well, both of them came in later years, but they were there as part of the faculty. I think Dr. DuBois finished from Fisk and Professor Dill finished from some school in New England, I don't know which school it was.
GFB: So what about Dr. DuBois? How did most of the students react to him?
LRA: Very favorably. They learned a great deal from him, and they knew he was very eloquent. And they knew that being in his class would mean
a great deal to them, so they reacted very favorably.
As I said, when I first went to A.U., they had high school, then it went on into college, on and on. And let me see if I can think of the teachers, some of the teachers; that's been a long time. But every now and then we talk about it. We had two or three colored teachers, Miss Annadle C. King, who was colored. She had finished from Atlanta University and...what did she teach? I don't know. We had Professor James T. Cater who was a graduate of Atlanta University, and I think he taught history. We had an elocution teacher whose name I can't recall; we had a librarian. We had a practice school on the campus; I don't know whether that building has been torn down or not, but it was the first building on the left as you went in from Tatnall Street.
We had some very good teachers, and they must have been very poorly paid, because we didn't have any money. But it was almost considered a very high class school. Let me see, oh, one of our most efficient teachers was Professor Webster. He was in the physics department, and he was a wonderful man. He was down to earth; at the same time, very brilliant and...I've got catalogues at home, I could have brought one for you to see, had I known. Then we had...oh, yes, Miss Hancock, who was in charge of the department of chemistry, and she was very good in her field. We had a music department, voice and piano, and we had a cooking department, we had a sewing department—this was down in high school.
GFB: Right.
LRA: And then we had a very fine man, Professor Howe, who was head of the shop, we called it, and I think that building is still there on Beckwith Street...
GFB: Would that be up near Oglethorpe School?﻿14
LRA: Oglethorpe School must be on the corner, and this was about the
middle of the block. Let me see what else... I don't know, I just have to get hold of that catalogue. But you can get that catalogue from A.U.
GFB: Right. You know, I just want to know whether or not you could recall something about... Tell me a little bit about the personalities... You know, how you were talking a little bit about Dr. DuBois...
LRA: Yes, well, they were all outstanding in every respect, and they were well thought of by the people in Atlanta. Atlanta University was a school you couldn't just walk into and make it part of you. You had to have credentials and get into Atlanta University, and when you got in, you found why. Because everybody was high class out there. All those Yankee teachers were very... They were just superior in almost every way. At Spelman, a comparison, I think...there were one or two teachers out there who were related to the Rockefellers, and it was just a little bit different. They were very strict and hard then. We have some very good graduates of Spelman, but according to me, I don't know much about Spelman.
GFB: Right.
LRA: Although in the same town and not too far apart.
GFB: So how did the young ladies dress?
LRA: In Atlanta University? Well, we were all dressed very well but very plain. Nobody put on all the fancy stuff that they wear today. And no uniforms or anything, but we were all conservative in our dress. And I remember, I'll tell you how conservative. I remember my graduation dress was white with some little bands of lace in some places, maybe on the sleeves, maybe around the collar. And Mrs. Adams, the wife of the...was he president? Yes, I think he was president then. Anyway, she objected. We had to show the dresses before we graduated, and she objected to that lace. She said that my dress was too fancy. It wasn't fancy at all, it just had little insertions just in the sleeves, maybe up here, and I wasn't the only one. There were several of them who had a little lace in the dresses, and it had to come out. That may answer your question. They were very conservative back them. Very.
GFB: Well, I would like to now sort of take you a little further back. You talked a little bit earlier about your grandfather, Jefferson Long, and I'm interested, do you remember anything about him?
LRA: Yes, he made one speech in Congress that was centered around the Ku
Klux Klan of Georgia, the element that had its origin in Georgia, and he was very much upset over them and asked that Georgia not be admitted to the United States. Because there'd been so many terrors committed in Georgia against colored people. And his speech is in the﻿15
LRA: (cont.) Congressional Record as having been one of the best speeches made by a colored man. But other than that... And that was another reason why he wouldn't run for a second term, because he knew that he could not be elected because he had made this speech. And there was one occasion, and it is in the Congressional Record also, and my mother had told me about this many times, that the people of Macon were very much stirred up because of some terrors that had been committed against colored people. And one day he called a meeting in front of the town hall and asked all the colored people, asked as many people as were in sympathy with him, to come to this meeting. And it seems that after he made this talk, the mob was ready to get him, so the colored people who were there protected him to the extent of putting him in a big sewer line that had not been completed, and he went all the way through the sewer line from the town hall to his home, to escape the mob.
GFB: Right. So did anybody ever make any attacks, say, like on his family
or anything?
LRA: No.
GFB: No, they never...
LRA: No, when he got home, he seemed to have been safe, because I guess
his house must have been surrounded by these colored people, and that's all I can see.
GFB: Right. Did your grandfather or your father ever tell you anything about the type of interaction he had with the people who worked in Congress with him? You know, were there black congressmen...
LRA: There were just a few, there's a picture of the congressmen up there now, and my grandfather is the one at the top on the right. And I see two, three, five, just seven on there; it was a very small number of them. I think, if I'm not mistaken—I'm not sure about this now, but if I'm not mistaken—he was the first colored person to make a speech, you know. And that speech was against the Ku Klux Klan.
Now, my father had recommendations from all the prominent whites in Atlanta, whether they knew him or not. Why they gave recommendations, why he asked for recommendations, I don't know. It may be that they thought there was some menial job coming along he wanted, but he was given the position of collector of internal revenue. And he kept it for thirteen years and had support of all the people in Atlanta. I think there was one man who said if he'd known what he was into, he wouldn't have given him a recommendation, but I don't think there was more than that one man.
But they have a statue there at the corner of... Oh, where the Fulton National Bank is, that was the post office, a small building, and that's where his office was. And he later became custodian of the building which houses both the internal revenue department and﻿16
LRA: (cont.) the post office. Right across from where...the Fulton National Bank is there now. Right across from this, from the Fulton National Bank, is a statue of Henry Grady. There was a Dr. King in Atlanta who was connected with the revenue service, and who was the son-in-law of Henry Grady. And when Papa retained Dr. King in office, you didn't have all that stuff about, "Put the colored man here because he needs to be there; dismiss the white man." If you are capable, those are people you want, whether white or colored. His office, I don't know how many whites were in his office and how many colored, but it was a mixed group.
There's a young fellow in Atlanta named Arthur Smith who lives on Gordon Street, and he's connected with the housing authority here, and his father was my father's secretary. There was another family here, Captain Wimbish. Captain Wimbish served in one of the wars, 1899 war, I guess, but anyway, he was a collector for the port of Atlanta. We didn't have any port, but there were some duties that he had in connection with that. There was another man here... Now ail the Wimbishes are gone. The last of them died about two years ago. We have another family here, the Thomases; incidentally, one of the Thomas boys married one of the Wimbish girls, but they are all gone. I think there's only one person left in the whole family, and that is the wife of one, and she lives somewhere in North Carolina. But what I started to say is, that he was the Fulton County sheriff, an unheard of thing in Atlanta. And in time you could... You called him Mr. Charlie, his name was Mr. Charlie Thomas. He was a personal friend of my family's. Any time you'd see Mr. Charlie escorting a group of prisoners from the jail, the city jail to the courthouse, it was...you know, something, nobody thought anything about it then, you know, because things were different. I was talking to somebody the other day about how the young folks—excluding you!—how the young folks are now, have an idea that we had a hard time during the years that we grew up. We didn't have a hard time. Everything was as normal as it was before all this riot over desegregation came about. But now, we had trolley cars. They had two seats in the back, one on either side, the side seats were for colored people. I lived... have you been on the north side of town?
GFB: Yes, I have!
LRA: All right. We lived on Piedmont Avenue. We walked to school, to
Atlanta University every day, from Randolph Street, which must have been ten or twelve, maybe as much as fifteen blocks east of where I lived. Why, the students would start out and...they'd pick us up, or we'd pick them up, or they'd pick us up right there at our corner, and we'd go in a body almost to school We didn't ride the streetcars because of the segregation. My father felt that his money... We paid only a nickel, but he felt that that nickel was worth as much to him as it was to any white person, and he said, "If you can't get the same accommodations, you're going to walk." So we walked. We had good rubbers, good raincoats, good umbrellas, and the winters were﻿17
LRA: (cont.) very different from what they are now. We had plenty of sleet and snow, and yet through all that we walked. And most of the students who lived on our side of town did walk.
The same thing with the theaters. We didn't go to the theaters because they had a balcony for colored people, and we had books and we learned much about life from these books, and so we were content. We didn't rebel against this, that and the other, because we were not mistreated. We'd go into a store... There are some places in the United States now that I have heard about, but where they are, I don't know, where you can't even get a hat for trying on; you can't get a dress, you got to...they just don't care for colored people in the store.
GFB: Right.
LRA: They had in Rich's, for instance, they had some seats right here for colored, and right across here some for white. They were all in there together. What was the difference? So they fitted our shoes, they fitted our hats, they fitted our dresses. And we had no reason to complain, except that we were not satisfied, naturally, but nobody did anything to us. We were not molested. I can't say now that things are better, because our people, as I see it, just weren't ready for desegregation. Because they walk into this office, for instance, with a big broad hat on and high-heeled shoes and all kinds of funny colors and will tell me, "Well, I'm free now." Well, I don't know what they mean. I don't know what freedom means to that particular person, because we didn't have to suffer when we came along. And there was one other thing I wanted to say right in there. I thought about it while I was talking...now, it's gone.
The Congregational church is still at the corner of Courtland and Houston. The pastor was Reverend Proctor, who later went to Brooklyn to take a church. He was pastor here for a long, long time. There were two men in Atlanta who fought segregation, Mr. Proctor and my father. And they fought it from the very beginning. They were not religious—neither one of them, but they didn't fail to work for an end to segregation. They didn't fail to tell white people in Atlanta, when occasion demanded, what they thought about this, that and the other.
I was reading...I have at my house a little office, I have a breezeway across that connects the garage and the house, and on this side of the breezeway, of the garage, is a little office space that my husband had made for himself when he would come in from work and want to do extra work over there. I had two showcases, and last year I decided that I had so many papers that I would try to put some of them together. So I used one showcase for my father and my grandfather; I used the other showcase for my husband. I was looking over some papers the other day—oh, I have not finished my work, it's nowhere near finished, because I have piles of boxes that need to be opened and gone into. Anyway, I was looking over some papers the other﻿18
LRA: (cont.) night and saw where my father attended a meeting at city
hall, and it came up that one councilman said something very detrimental to us. It went like this, that "The niggers were naturally... you'd really find niggers out in the street shooting crap." And my father was there. And he resented it a great deal. So he said, "Okay," he said, "in the first place, there are no niggers, unless they are spread among you folks and our folks too." And he said, "In the next place, a white man is just as subject to shooting crap in the street as a colored man." And I say that, to say that he wasn't afraid of anything or anybody, but when it came to mind and he thought it was time to take issue with it, he took issue. So those were the two; as it went along, there were a lot of colored people who worked with them and did everything they could to abolish segregation.
The young folks of today have not ever heard of Papa, nor have they heard of Mr. Proctor, nor have they heard of Jefferson Long and a lot of other people- And that's because it's not in history, they don't know anything about them. They've never heard about them. I see you are an exception, I'm leaving you out of this, but I'm talking about the general run of our folks. They just don't know. They think really that Dr. King started desegregation. He didn't. They had worked on desegregation long before...
GFB: Long before, right. Yes, I realize.
LRA: That's right, but nothing's in the history to tell them, so they don't know.
GFB: But I know your grandfather's name is in history though; they know about him.
LRA: But I said that you, because you're working in a different field altogether, have learned things that others don't know. That the majority doesn't know.
GFB: Right.
LRA: So it's just one of those things, that's all. Now, what else can I tell you?
GFB: Okay. I was wondering... in 1906, I know the Atlanta race riot
occurred. I was wondering if you could tell me a little bit about that.
LRA: Well, we had no radios, no television, and we depended upon the
papers to give us the news. And the newsboys would go through the streets with "Extra, extra," telling about what was happening in Atlanta. We had another paper in Atlanta called the [Atlanta] Georgian. It was rank, it was rabid, it was run by the Hearst Associates, and it was against the Negro all the way. When these﻿19
LRA: (cont.) boys came through our streets hollering "Extra, extra,"
we tried to find what was going on. We found out pretty soon, and my father, we found out something about what was going on. The [Atlanta] Journal had an office up on, oh, Forsyth Street, next to the library, and they would put printed copies of the news in the windows, and that's where we found out about a whole lot of things. Papa decided that he would go to the post office building to see what was going on. He knew that he'd be protected on government property, see, and my brother Henry wanted to go with him, so he took him. And all night, we were alone. They started shooting down our way, about four or five blocks north of us, starting where it was called "Dark Town," that's where a lot of colored people lived.
GFB: Say, what part of the city was this?
LRA: Northeast. And that was over there by Auburn Avenue, where we lived, I told you, between Auburn and Houston. You know about that section?
GFB: Yes, right.
LRA: Well, this was out at Piedmont, Butler, and another street, and Baker and Cain, the streets that cut in there to Houston. Auburn. Anyway, we heard that the mob was coming through our section, and it did. It went down into "Dark Town." They had a mess down there, because a lot of white people were killed down there; the colored man wasn't taking anything at all off of these people. I learned that they went on this post office, on the grounds of the post office, and my father and my brother, and one or two other people who went there for the same purpose, went into the office, locked the door and there they stayed. So all night we were alone, because they didn't come home. We didn't know what had happened to them, and we found that they were butchering people, taking them off streetcars, just killing them, that's all. It was quite a riot. So, early in the morning, we were all on the floor; Mama had us all lying down on the floor, because we had these long windows in that house at that time. Oh, about daybreak came a very fair man, supposedly a white man, to our house and up on the steps. And my mother, she told me she called out and said, "What is it you want? Why are you coming here?" And he said, "Mrs. Rucker, I am Mr. Sphinx from Hoke Street." Now, Hoke Street was in a Negro section, but the city wasn't populated; we didn't have more than fifty or sixty thousand people. And people were just, the few people were scattered, you know, in these blocks. But anyway, she said, "Oh, yes, and what do you want?" And he said, "Your husband and son are safe, locked up in the post office. And since I was coming home and I could get by"—he was perfectly fair—"I was asked by them to tell you to be free of any thought of disaster, because as soon as the streets clear, they'll be home." And they came home, I guess, about midday or the next day. Papa arranged for all of us to get on a train to go to Macon, and there we went. And we stayed down there a week until the riot was over. While we were down there, the streetcar folks had a riot.﻿20
GFB: Oh, no!
LRA: Of course, it wasn't anything like a race riot. It was confined to the business, but anyway, when we came home, everything was settled and everything was quiet.
GFB: Did you ever hear of what caused the riot? I mean, you know, what started it?
LRA: Yes, I did know, but right now it's out of mind...except that there was some connection between a colored man and a white woman, but I can't remember just exactly what it was. But in all sections of Atlanta where colored people lived—and they lived in pretty nearly every section, because even if there was just one family in that section, on that block, that still meant trouble. So they just took it out on everybody they could find. But the colored people in many of these sections were armed, and they dared them in there—the mob, I mean to say. So by morning, by midday the next day, everything was quiet and no more trouble.
GFB: Before we close our interview, I would like to ask you one more question. What about Decatur Street?
LRA: Decatur Street was a street of businesses of Negroes. There were all kinds of things on Decatur Street: a theater; there was my father's barber shop; there were several pawn shops. And to tell the truth, I can't tell you too much about it, 'cause we weren't allowed to walk on Decatur Street. Because it was a hangout, you know, where most...since there were colored businesses, there were colored people that hang out there. A lot of them sat in chairs on the edge of the sidewalk and conversed. And everything, we didn't have to pay for it, it was easy, you know, to live then, but as automobiles came in and people came in, why, everything got different. But as I said, we enjoyed life in Atlanta; it was far superior to the way it is now. Now, I wouldn't have to lock that door and put deadbolts on it if I wasn't scared. And I don't know why this has to be.
From 1921 until 1944, we had an office on Auburn Avenue at the corner of Piedmont...oh, there is a brick building, a three-story brick building at the corner of Auburn and Piedmont. My father built that building, or had it built, in 1904, first building that was erected by a colored man.
GFB: Today is April 25, 1977. I'm at the home of the Rucker sisters, at 1862 Simpson Road, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia. Today I was wondering if we could talk a little more about your father or your grandfather Last week, you mentioned that your father was a delegate to the Republican National Convention in 1880. I was wondering—you said, Mrs. Aiken, that both you and your brother and sister attended, and that one of the members wanted you to go up and hold the flag. And﻿21
GFB: (cont.) I was wondering if you could more or less tell us a little bit more about that.
LRA: I don't think it was as early as 1880. I'm not sure when it was. I remember that we went. Papa took three of us, the three oldest children in the family, to the Republican National Convention in Chicago, in 1904. Now, I was a little girl then. And at that con-convention, we had seats; Georgia had seats near the front, three or four rows from the speaker at the platform. The speaker then was Speaker Joe Cameron, who was supposed to have been one of the biggest men at that time. Speaker Cameron looked down, saw us, three of us, and he said, "I want the little children from Georgia to come up and hold the flag." And three little children from Georgia were embarrassed that he had even asked us. And we turned to Papa, and Papa said, "Go ahead," but we wouldn't do it. So, he then went to Alabama and got the two little Cashon boys from Alabama, whose father was quite popular. And they went up and held the flag. Then after that, T went to the 1908 convention that met in New York, and then I went to the 1912 convention. Then I went to the 1916 convention, but we were not seated that year, because my father was a part of that delegation that was not seated.
MR: Did you tell us where this one was, when you were asked to hold the flag?
LRA: It was in Chicago. I believe in the armory, I'm not sure, but I do think I have some papers on that somewhere in this place. I just don't know where they are. But I am trying to collect a whole lot of things. Then I have quite a few letters and papers that were... I thought they weren't any good, so I disposed of them. I have heard since that time that I should not have done it. They were part of other papers that should have been used.
GFB: So how long did you work with your father, say, in the area of politics?
LRA: Since I was sixteen. Don't ask me how old I am.
GFB: In what way did you help your father?
LRA: Well, in his campaign office I worked as a clerk, and at home I worked with Papa. He dictated all his letters to me and I sent them out all over the country.
GFB: Did he work from his home, or did he have a special office that he worked from?
LRA: Well, at the time my father was in office as collector of internal
revenue, from 1897 until 1910. And he was quite active then, and he worked from home, and we worked from home... We were good children, we behaved. Children don't behave so well now. But all of us did﻿22
LRA: (cont.) behave when my father, if he was busy, if there was a need. They would demand that we should be quiet; we were quiet. So, it was usually in that department that we worked for him. But during campaign years, he worked down in the building on the corner.
GFB: So could either one of you, either you, Mrs. Aiken, or you, Mrs.
Harper, recall when your father became active in trying to get the Interstate Commerce Law passed in 1877?
LRA: I'm afraid I can't help you. I think I have a scrapbook over in this office across the breezeway. I think you'll find all those things in that scrapbook. Or in another scrapbook that is quite old, but it is still available.
GFB: Well, what did your father do when he wasn't active in politics? I mean, what did he do for relaxation?
LRA: He was fighting segregation from the time I can remember until he died. He and Reverend Proctor were the two in Atlanta who started the fight. And Papa was a man who believed very strongly in principles. And he tried to carry out those principles. He got the help of Reverend Proctor, who lived right around the corner from us. Because he was, at the time, pastor of the First Congregational Church. And the two of them, they at first had difficulty getting people to go with them...in this fight that they had against segregation. But after a long time, the people, especially political friends of Papa's... All were afraid to rally around. So he spent most of his time doing just that. They had meetings and they had, really, they had conventions when all these people would get together, and they worked very, very hard. When he was in office, most of the people who had worked...worked in their own cities or towns in trying to build up the proper... that they could carry out against segregation. But there was never any bosses or fighting or anything; they were always very conservative people. Very different from what goes now. And they accomplished a great deal. But of course, they never did get to the point where it was entirely wiped out.
So far as we're concerned, we didn't feel it. We didn't ride the streetcar; we did not go to the theater. And any place where it was segregated, we didn't go. Papa...things were very cheap then, and Papa, for instance, wouldn't ride the trolley for five cents. Papa said, even though the fare was still cheap, still, it was better for us to walk. So we walked from home to A.U. and back, and the weather was very severe at that time; mostly in the winter it snowed and it would stay on the ground for days and days, and every year we bought good umbrellas, good raincoats, good rubbers, and we walked.
GFB: The last time we talked, Mrs. Aiken, you said that your father was active, we know, in the political sphere. So I was wondering, would you talk a little bit about some of the men he used to work with?﻿23
LRA: One of them was Booker T. Washington, and every time he'd come to
Atlanta, he'd stay at our house. He would not notify us. Sometimes he'd just walk up the street and stay there, just come in and stay there. I mean, he knew he was at home, because he knew he would be at home there. In fact, all the prominent people in Tuskegee used to come as our guests. And when the business league was organized, our father became a life member. Oh, all the...I shouldn't say all, but so many of the meetings that the business league was interested in were held right here in Atlanta, and Papa was always serving at those meetings, with Booker T. Washington and many members of his staff in Tuskegee. Mr. Emmett J. Scott was one of Mr. Washington's secretaries; I think he was his private secretary, and he was a man who was very influential. Also there was Mr. Cox, who was one of the secretaries, and he was quite influential. And all of them worked together for the good of the Negro. All as a part of the race. This work became well known over the South, and ever so many people rallied to it. Because we didn't feel that we were losing out or> anything while we hnd tor "ho would speak up for us.
GFB: So what kind of things did your father do specifically that helped to fight segregation?
LRA: Well, we had meetings; we had prominent people to talk at these meetings. We met with white people, we met with editors of the few newspapers, the Atlanta Constitution, the Atlanta Journal, the Atlanta Georgian. The Atlanta Georgian was a Hearst paper, and that was particularly... this paper didn't say anything about Negroes at all. They did everything they could to keep us down. But they were not afraid then of anything, and they just kept the same law all the way through.
GFB: So, you mentioned, the last time we talked about an incident where your father was in the city council...
LRA: That's just what I have just told you. About the "niggers shooting crap in the street." I think that's all that I know of.
MR: It wasn't all. Could you repeat that?
LRA: Papa was in a meeting with the city council, when one night one of the members of the city council arose, and he started talking about niggers shooting crap in the street. And Papa got up and said, "Wait a minute. I don't know what you mean first by 'niggers,' we don't approve of that saying at all. And white people shoot crap just like colored people do." And we thought when Papa came home and told us about it, we thought that, we wondered if there was any reaction to it, but there was no reaction to it. Because he spoke; that was it. He got off of his chest what he wanted, what was in his mind to say.
MR: Was the council meeting open to the public so that anyone could come.﻿24
LRA: I can't remember, but I think so; I'm quite sure it was. I can't remember if Papa went up there for a specific purpose or not. But I do know that that came up in the council. Papa received a recommendation from all the prominent white people who had political jobs in the state. There was only one man who later stated that if he had known why he gave him the recommendation, he wouldn't have given it. But he was the only one who took issue with what he had done before.
There was___the statue of Henry Grady is in the middle of the
street across from where the Atlanta Post Office used to be and where the Fulton, I believe, the Fulton Federal Building is now. This statue of Henry Grady has been there for many, many years. Henry Grady's daughter married a Dr. King who was then in the revenue service when my father became collector, and Papa retained him as one of his deputies. I can't remember how many white people nor can I remember how many colored people were in that office. But there wptp quite a few white people who were in the office when Papa went into it, and they stayed there, remained there. Just because he was colored didn't mean that they were going to get out, and when he resigned... So, as it shows, he had the goodwill of all of his office employees and all of his people, spread over the whole state of Georgia, and many of them were white.
MR: Well, segregation must not have been as rigid as it later became, because they worked together in the offices and shared the same facilities.
LRA: Well, there weren't many offices colored people had in Atlanta at that time. Captain C.P. Wimbish performed the office of director of the port. And we had no port here, as you know, but that was his job; that was the way it was termed. Mr. Charlie Thomas, another one of Papa's very good friends, was federal marshal for the state of Georgia. And it was very interesting to everybody to see him walking from the jail to the courthouse with many prisoners, most of them white. Because it seemed at the time that most crimes were committed, most federal crimes were committed by white people. I'm trying to think now if there were any others. I don't think so, Mrs. Rowley, there were others in other departments, other divisions in the state and in Washington. For instance, Mr. George C. Lang, who worked with the treasury at that time in Washington. Mr. Lang was blind, and he could not read the papers or anything except the... But in Athens, we had as postmaster Mr. Tink Morgan, who was as white as any white person could be, and he held that job as a colored man, and held it down for quite a few years. And retired respectably.
And incidentally, I want to tell you that my father received an A-l rating the whole time he was in office, and would probably have retained his job if it hadn't been that President Taft, under whom Papa had served one year, came to Atlanta and mingled,﻿25
LRA: (cont.) of course, with all white people in Atlanta who were prominent. And as soon as he left Atlanta, he sent a letter asking for Papa's resignation, which was given. And then he appointed a Mr. Jackson—I can't think of his initials right now— to the job, a white man, of course, to the job as collector of internal revenue.
GFB: So once this Mr. Jackson came into office, was the ratio of the number of blacks to whites still maintained in the office?
LRA: I can't tell you that, I don't know. I can't remember. I don't think that we had all of this hullabaloo about it because we put a colored man in office. I think that in all of these offices that I told you about where colored people were at the head, they retained their old employees, many of whom were white, because the office had always been white.
GFB: What about some of the mayors that were here in Atlanta at the time? Did your father ever have any —
LRA: No difficulty at all. My father held himself in a perfectly
normal way because he was a very conservative man, and there was never a run-in with anybody. He carried on official duties as he should have, and everything went very smoothly.
GFB: I was wondering if we should probably go back for a minute. You
talked a little bit about Booker T. Washington, how he was a close friend of your father. I was wondering, can you recall either of them talking about maybe, you know, how they reacted to Dr. DuBois and his philosophy?
LRA: No, I can't answer that question. I do know that their thoughts and ideas were altogether different. My father was friendly with both of them, Booker T. Washington and Dr. DuBois. Papa believed in Tuskegee because it was a school at that time, what you might call a training school, for our people. And later, of course, it changed into a college of arts. But before that time, it was performing what we thought was needed. In other words, my husband went to Hampton, finished at Hampton, at the time Hampton was just like Tuskegee. When Hampton changed into a college for higher learning—I guess that's the way you'd put it—my husband felt, and my father felt too, that this was a dreadful mistake. Ofttimes I heard my husband say that both Hampton and Tuskegee could have been a rural M.I.T. [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] if they had stayed a training school for our people. But of course, one person's ideas may not have been regarded as... somebody who could speak for the whole race.
GFB: So, Mrs. Aiken, it is very interesting that your father knew both Booker T. Washington and Dr. DuBois.﻿26
LRA: Well, Dr. DuBols lived here in Atlanta and taught at Atlanta
University. Papa and Dr. DuBois were quite friendly; they were both in a club called the Monday Club—it was a social club. And my mother was very friendly with Mrs. DuBois, and they were in a club together called the Twelfth Club. And the DuBois family was quite friendly with our family; both of us were living in Atlanta, we welcomed them because they were from Alabama, which was some distance away. But the friendship was retained by both, by Papa with both families, the Washington and the DuBois family.
GFB: So what kind of activities did they do in the Monday Club? Was it just...
LRA: It was a social club. And it was confined strictly to men; it
was a men's club. And the Twelfth Club, that was a women's club. So both of them were strictly social. And all we knew about them
was what was told us when they came home. I should say, what was discussed mainly at home, and...
GFB: So did your father ever mention any other people who were in the club besides?
LRA: Yes, I knew all those people, but I can't think... Can you think, Neddie, of some of the people in the Monday Club?
NRH: I don't remember...wasn't Mr. Wimbish in it?
LRA: No, I don't think so. I can't...Mr. Hope was in it, President
Hope. Charlie Page, who was in the... I'm trying to...what was the name of the insurance company?
NRH: Mr. Hamilton preceded him.
LRA: No, Horace Tate was in the insurance company... What was the name of the insurance company?
NRH: I can't think... I can't recall.
LRA: Well, now, Hazel was younger than either one of us, so she may remember more than we can.
GFB: Well, we could come back to that later on. If you could tell me, did you ever go over to Dr. DuBois's house?
LRA: Atlanta Life Insurance Company. Excuse me?
GFB: I was wondering if you could--- You know, you said that you
knew Dr. DuBois and he lived here in Atlanta, and I was wondering if you could remember if you used to go to Dr. DuBois's house.﻿27
LRA: Dr. DuBois lived in South Hall on the Atlanta University campus. His family lived there. Dr. DuBois had one daughter. What was her name, Neddie? What was Dr. DuBois's daughter's name?
NRH: Yolanda.
LRA: Yolanda DuBois. They had a suite in South Hall which was on the south end of the Atlanta University campus. I don't think you have seen that building. This was the boys' dormitory.
NRH: Wasn't the YMCA man who is kin to Lyle Carter...
LRA: Mr. W.J. Trent was at the YMCA, but Mr. Hunton... You are thinking about Mr. Hunton now.
NRH: Mr. Hunton?
LRA: Yes, I think Yolanda married the Hunton boy. At that time, Mr. Hunton, whose initials I can't remember, was living in Atlanta and working with the YMCA, which was very small at that time. But Mr. Hunton was one of the national founders of the national YMCA. Dr. DuBois' daughter Yolanda married Mr. Hunton's son. We had also a YMCA here that was small, but that did a whole lot of good works. The secretary was Mr. W.J. Trent, who later, I believe, became president of...what college in North Carolina? Livingstone. I think Livingstone College. I believe. Mr. Trent and Mr. Hunton were both friends of my father, and both of the men worked with him in the cause against segregation.
NRH: You could inject, you know, that William Trent was at one time head of the Negro College Fund.
LRA: Yes, but that is Mr. W.J. Trent's son, and I think he is stationed in New York, isn't he? Does he live in New York?
NRH: He lives in New York but he is not with that now, he's with a publishing company. But he was head of the Negro College Fund for a long time.
GFB: I was wondering if we could sort of go back a little further. You said that in 1904 your father built the Rucker Building down on Auburn Avenue, and you were talking to Dr. Rowley earlier about, I think, how it was on the second floor where the unions, the AFL...
LRA: Yes, the third floor had two lodge halls, fifty by a hundred feet. And they were used by the local union lodges, and I guess that's all you can call them. And the plasterer, the logger, and the brickmason were the ones who rented space in the building, and they were the ones who had the charter and the meetings. Eventually, the union would give one charter only; and because the lodges had their charters, the original charters, later when white﻿28
(cont.) people attempted to get charters and couldn't get them, why, they thought it was because of the colored workers who were all unionized.
Which makes me think about my husband. My husband had built the Waluhaje, an apartment building here in Atlanta, and we had big stars from New York and other places to come and give entertainment there. My husband had — well, it was really, there was no segregation at all in this hall, in this entertainment hall. Anybody who wanted to come, could come. Of course, there was a little paying there, but anybody who wished to come could come, and they had to sit where they could find seats. The place was overrun with white soldiers from Fort McPherson, from Emory College, from Oglethorpe University, and from the University of Georgia up in Athens. They all came down to see the entertainment, and they'd all sit where they could. And on Sunday afternoons—I can't to save my life think of what it was that they called those things that they had—they hau a competition for young people in different orchestras, or different singing, or different pianos, but anyway, it was a competition. They met there on Sunday afternoons, white and colored, everybody together. And that lasted the whole time that the Waluhaje was in operation.
Now, another thing, my husband coached the Atlanta University football for eight years. He had four or five, I can't remember what number, but they were championship teams. I have pictures to show the people who attended those games; they assumed that they would rather attend one of our games than attend Georgia Tech's games. At our games, the big games were usually at Ponce de Leon Park, and it was another case where you would come and look, and you would sit wherever you could find a seat; there was no segregation whatsoever.
The Atlanta Constitution had a colored man sports editor or writer. Remember his name, Neddie? Do you remember his name? The man who used to write for the Constitution sports. Anyway, Mr. Aiken told him at first, "Never put~in your article that we reserve seats for whites," because there were no reserved seats for anybody. And every time we had a game in Ponce de Leon Park, the place was crowded. And as I stated previously, people sat where they could find a seat. No segregation whatever.
The first year that my husband came to Atlanta, Atlanta University didn't have much of a football team. My husband had coached before, and he had played on the Hampton football team for a few years. And I remember that the first year, I don't remember if we played Morehouse College or not, but I somehow have it in mind that it was the second year that we were supposed to play Morehous-e, that it was on the schedule. But Morehouse had always used white officials from Georgia Tech, or the University of Alabama, or the﻿29
LRA: (cont.) University of Georgia, and other teams around here. But on this particular occasion when they met to decide on the officials for the game, my husband said, "You use colored officials from here on out and not white officials, because they're just as capable as the white officials." And they couldn't get together, so they did not play the game. But from that time on, we...or that year... No, the next year, when we played Morehouse, we had an official from Washington, D.C., Mr. Henderson; we had another one from Washington, Mr. James Washington. He was linekeeper, line-something, and we had...do you remember the other two? We had two others but I can't remember just now who they were. But they were all colored. And from that time on, all officials at the colored schools where we played any athletic event were all colored.
HR: Now you see what happened. You caused something that happened that you don't like today.
LRA: No, except for the reason that then they were out thp.re just for
the money they could get out of it 'cause they had no appreciation for our team. That is, if you called on white officials to come and officiate, the pay naturally was small, but he would take the job because of the money he could make usually. Now that, I think I can combat that issue. Right there, I think, that the opinion was that the white officials were more experienced and could handle the game better than the colored officials. In Washington, for instance, at Howard, they had colored officials, and that's where he got two of them because he had worked in Washington, and had gone to school for a little while at Howard. So that, I guess that's the end of that.
GFB: I was wondering if we could go back a little. You said you and your husband owned the Waluhaje, and that entertainers used to come there. Do you recall any of the entertainers?
LRA:	Sarah Vaughan was one. And...
HR:	Dinah Washington.
LRA:	Yes, Dinah Washington. Name some more. Who else?
HR:	Who was the trumpet player?
LRA:	Louis Armstrong? Uh huh.
HR:	The man who died lately?
LRA:	Duke Ellington.
HR:	Well, practically everybody from that era.
LRA:	The blind piano player was there too. What was his name?﻿30
HR: Who's that?
LRA: The blind piano player. He was on television the other night.
GFB: Ray Charles?
LRA: Yes, Ray Charles. I wish I could think, but it just disappears.
HR: There was a string of them.
LRA: And, excuse me, but I remember when the first time Sarah Vaughan came, why, the whole city, it seems, turned out to see her. As many persons as you could get in the entertainment room...
HR: Did you tell her about the soldiers from Fort McPherson?
LRA: Yes, I think I told her about Fort McPherson. I couldn't think of
what the Sunday afternoon affair was, you know, where you would come and hear competitive musicians.
HR: ...to get together...
LR^: When Sarah Vaughan came, she was so popular, and the entire town
turned out to see her. And it was very interesting to me to see a young white fellow come in and ask, still giving the old jazz, "Where do you get that note?" You would have thought there was no reason for anybody to have any segregation at all. Now what did you start?
GFB: Well, before you came in, Miss Rucker, your sister told me...you were talking about your father, and I recall we talked last week, you were telling me about the incident about your father at the dinner table. I was wondering if you could perhaps tell us that again.
LRA: [If there was] a word you didn't know, when we were done, he'd say, "Huh? Fine word, but you haven't told us what it means." And then we'd tell him the word, and he'd say, "There's a dictionary out there, Webster's Unabridged. Suppose you look that up." And we'd learn to find out meanings from the dictionary. Dr. Rowley said that these were the things that they wanted to know.
HR: The dinner table, that was the meeting place, because that's the
time that everybody assembled; at some of the other meals, some of them were absent. And my father, he studied the dictionary and his Bible as religiously as anybody could. And when anybody came, stepped into a regular conversation, he would just throw out a word. And everybody would look at him and say, "What does that mean?" And he said, "That's what the dictionary is for." And we'd go and study it after dinner. So, I think I told you that he came in with the word "facetious." And we hadn't heard it before and so﻿31
HR : (cont.) we went to the dictionary to find out: "trying to be
funny." So we went to school the next day—and we always walked to school—and that was our cry. And something happened, we'd go, "Be facetious." And they didn't know whether we were saying something bad or good to them. So we finally explained what it was, and from that time on, the boys said we were a facetious group.
LRA: That happened with the lessons, too. Papa knew it was time for the lessons and when we were in school, we'd always go over our lessons with Papa in the evening. And it was amazing to us that he knew as much Latin as we knew because he'd been out of school for such a long time. Papa, I think, if I'm not mistaken, went as far as the junior year in college at Atlanta University...and then later on he... Then had to stop because he didn't have the finances to keep going.
HR: I guess his children kept coming.
LRA: So he, that was the way he was able to... But he was a very, very... I would call Papa a very good scholar, and he took advantage of reading and everything he had to read; he started everything. He bought volumes of Gulliver's Travels. He bought all of Shakespeare's works. He bought all the poetry books of all the poets.
HR: He also liked literature. My mother liked poetry, too. Have you had your say? Have you talked?
NRH: I couldn't hear.
HR: Has she talked?
LRA: Very little.
HR: You weren't a member of the family?
NRH: Yes, I am a member. I said I thought I didn't have anything to add. What have you added? Lucy had added so much.
HR: I told about Papa and the dictionary and about other things...
NRH: Oh, I see what you mean...
LRA: We were always constantly buying books. And we were taught to read, and we enjoyed reading instead of running the streets. And now that is a part of us.
HR: What's that book that you left out, that we were reading? There were no libraries available; they were available, but not to us. And we would get all our information there. And I think I told you also, before, that Papa was never too busy to stop and hear what we had to say and to explain if it was necessary. If we couldn't untangle it ourselves, then he would help us.﻿32
HR: (cont.) And another thing about him was that he was a great walker. He would walk all the time and walk for miles at a time. And I think that's what kept him in such good health for such a long time. He had two or three friends who did the same thing. And you could find them most any time; they had been out walking. Now, did I tell you anything the other day that you want to know?
GFB: Well, earlier you had talked about some of your father's political colleagues, you know, Dr. DuBois and Booker T. Washington. And I was wondering if perhaps you wanted to add anything to that. Do you remember anything specifically about Booker T. Washington?
HR: I remember the telegrams would come, saying, "I'm arriving at
this time," and that meant for the time being that we would stay a little bit to the side, because Papa knew Dr. Washington, or Dr. DuBois wanted to talk, you see; and then afterwards, somebody might ask, "What did he have to say? And what did you tell him?"
GFB: Okay, so I'm wondering now if we could sort of move a little bit away from that and I would like your opinion or your opinions on the women's movement of today.
HR: We commented about it the other day, didn't we?
LRA: Well, I myself, I'm not for it at all. I'm against it. I worked every day...
HR: And should be for it!
LRA: That's the reason I brought that in. It would seem that I would be for it, but I'm not. I think that the whole thine was brought about by women who...and succeeded in getting a following. But, I think women got along pretty well over the years without it, and I think they can continue to get along without it. So I am...
GFB: What about your attitude towards illegitimacy?
HR: I wouldn't want to express myself on that because I have taught
in situations where there were families... Two or three years, with different families... the father's name was given, and the mother's name. But after that, they left off the father because I think they were embarrassed to have on their records a different father every year.
LRA: I was rather disgusted when I read in the paper a few weeks ago that the president made an announcement that went like this: he hoped that the people who were in the audience were married people. He hoped that they were not people just living together, and if so, if they were, he hoped that they would reform and plan on getting married. And instead of appreciating it, the audience laughed at him. Did you read that?﻿33
GFB: No, I hadn't seen that.
LRA: Well, I thought it was a pretty bad thing. I think that two or
three American families with Christian morals...American families, they don't claim to understand what it meant, what morality meant...
HR: They didn't think about a definition; they lived it. They had the right thing to do. In the past it was awful, almost a crime for something like that to happen. And now it is almost a crime if it doesn't happen.
GFB: So are your attitudes the same, Mrs. Harper? Your attitudes on this illegitimacy the same as your sisters?
HR: Are your attitudes on the system of illegitimacy the same? I believe they are, huh? I heard you listening.
NRH: Well, I h ^vpn't really studied that, but as far 3S T'm concerned, I don't go along with it.
LRA: I think that the family attitude is the same then...your attitude is the same.
NRH: I don't advocate it.
HR: Your attitude is the same?
NRH: Oh, yes, my attitude is the same. That's right.
GFB: Okay, I guess I'll ask you one more question; we'll make it our last question for today before we conclude our interview. I was wondering if you could tell me, you know, what type of hobbies do you have?
LRA: Work is my hobby. I don't really have a hobby.
HR: Well, you can look around this room and see what my hobby is. [She is referring to the plants she has.] I don't do as much with it now as I did years ago. I told you when we first moved out here, twenty-five years ago, down towards the bottom... You see it when you first come in on the left... Because the previous tenants had had cars and they just ruined the place. So it was very fertilized...so I thought this would be good for my dahlia garden. And that year I raised a hundred dahlias, and I can't tell you how many blooms because it was seasonal blooms. The water was in the stream, and it was not too far, but I myself carried buckets of water to every one of those dahlias. And I had pleasure in that...and another thing, I had to put... I don't mean to exclude something... I had dug them so as to have many large gardens as opposed to having little gardens, because two of the large ones and many of the small ones... to keep flowers in...rose gardens... I had an aid man who came, and he helped fertilizing and he would dig around them. And oh, I had any number of the roses, beautiful roses, and as I told somebody once, I did everything except milk the cow. And I really milked the cow, but I'm afraid of the cow!﻿34
LRA: When we were children, before Papa went to the office, he would take us in the garden. We had a beautiful garden each year^ and we'd pull the weeds, we'd pick beans, we'd pick vegetables, and we did everything around the garden. And in the afternoons after he came home from work, we'd go back in the garden and do the same thing, not with the same vegetables or fruit, but work in the garden; that's part of our life in the summertime.
GFB: The last time we talked... It's okay to let her speak.
NRH: I was going to say that one of Papa's favorite poems was "The
Children's Hour," by Longfellow, and I think he liked it so much that he used to say it to us, and we would learn it, of course. But I think he talked about it so much to us because he was thinking about the eight children that he had, and connecting them with the story.
LRA: Papa did not allow us to ride the trolley. He bought us good raincoats, good umbrellas, and good rubbers, and we walked a mile and a half to school every day, and a mile and a h?lf from school every afternoon.
HR: I think he broke it when it snowed.
LRA: Not with us, not with the older ones...
HR: ...it didn't make any difference to me.
LRA: Well, we didn't ride the trolley and we didn't go to the theaters
because we didn't have a brother or something like that, so... And Papa felt that his family was on a par with the family of anybody else in town, and that he...
HR: Did she tell you about her husband buying her the soda fountain?
GFB: Yes, she told me last week, but we didn't catch it on tape.
LRA: When we were growing up, we had friends who drove to the only drugstore because of the soda fountain. So Papa would not permit us to go, and I said, "Well, I hope that the man I marry will take me to a soda fountain." And that is why we have a soda fountain, which is very uncommon...
GFB: Today is May 1, 1977, and this is an interview with Mrs. Walter H.
Aiken and her sisters at 1862 Simpson Road, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia. Mrs. Aiken, I was wondering if you could tell me, perhaps, whether or not the color of one's skin determined whether or not he or she had more advantages in life than, say, a person who had darker skin?
LRA: No, I think not. We were reared essentially with all types of
people, and when we went to school...we went to school in quite an﻿35
LRA: (cont.) ordinary school, where there were all colors of people.
And we went to Atlanta University, where we were associated in the same age with all colors of people. Atlanta University had rather an amusing tale told on them; you would hear, "You can't go to A.U. if you're dark; they take only light skin." But we had as many dark-skinned people as we had light-skinned people, so that was just a fallacy, that was all. And then out in the public world, there were so many places we did not go, and we didn't feel any prejudice whatever. But it wasn't because of the color of the skin, because in Atlanta if you had any Negro blood in you at all, you were a Negro. But we were not prejudiced in any way. You're just like anybody else.
GFB: So what are your views on it, Mrs. Harper?
NRH: What was that? I didn't get that.
GFB: Are your views similar to your sisters, you know; skin color really doesn't matter?
NRH: Wait a minute, I can't hear it.
LRA: She is hard of hearing.
GFB: Okay. Mrs. Aiken, when we were talking earlier, you were telling me that your husband was responsible for you getting some of the streets named after certain people here in Atlanta, and I was wondering if you could talk a little bit about that.
LRA: Yes, I would be glad to. We had been in the construction business for many years. In fact, my husband was involved in the construction business in 1922, and succeeded to start off as a young man in it, just beginning. He had no financing, so my father financed him for the first three houses that he built. At that time he had a partner, W.J. Faulkner, who is now living in Wildwood, New Jersey, and they were partners from 1922 until 1933, and they built many houses. After Mr. Faulkner... During the depression, my husband started building subdivisions. And when streets were cut through subdivisions, he was asked by the city of Atlanta to name the streets. He would name them for friends of his, or would consult us, my sisters and myself. And we would probably come up with names. And I remember one street we have now, he named in honor of [the] president...who was founding president of South Carolina State College. He and [the] president were very intimate friends. They became intimate friends during the First World War. And after that time, when my husband, when we ran out of money, he wondered why he didn't name something for himself, or for my father. My father was a very conservative man, didn't believe in pushing himself forward in any respect. But my husband felt that his ideas should conform, and therefore no street, no subdivision, nothing that my husband built was named after either my husband or my father.﻿36
GFB: Okay, so I was wondering now, I know that you received an award, and I was wondering if you perhaps could talk a little bit about that.
LRA: Well, that was really, I think, an error. I believe that it should have gone to my husband, even though he was deceased, because he was the foremost member of Aiken Incorporated, the business name he used in contracting, although I was a partner of his. He was the person who helped develop a great portion of Atlanta's west and northeast side. In fact, when the Second World War came, there were so many people coming to Atlanta from small towns and needing
housing who couldn't get it___ Mr. Matthewson, who is head of the
Federal Housing Administration in Atlanta, sent for my husband and told him that now he could buy the tracts of land and build houses on it for our people. And my husband went out and obtained a large tract of land, had it cleared, got financing through one of the biggest concerns in Atlanta, the Atlanta Federal Savings and Loan Association, and first...was to build one hundred houses for our people. Even though he and I were partners, he went out and got contracts, and I did all of the office work and the details end. Therefore, I feel that the award should have been his and not mine.
GFB: At this point then, Mrs. Aiken, I have just about concluded, you
know, all of the questions that the Schlesinger people had requested that I ask. However, I was wondering if there is anything else that you can think of that you might want to tell us.
LRA: Yes, you haven't asked anything about my mother. And I probably can tell you that my mother was...well, we considered her an aristocrat. She was a very conservative woman, but she was well liked by everybody. And she was politically minded, and even though I don't know that I can remember if she ever went to a political meeting, she was very close to Papa. They discussed each day as it came and went. And she enjoyed the good things that were said about him. However, those were stories, you might call them, that didn't last so long. And I remember specifically a Negro paper in Atlanta edited by one Ben Davis, who was at one time a storekeeper in Jersey under my father. He was head of the Odd Fellows in Atlanta, and he used the Odd Fellows' money as a backing for his paper. And so his...and everything that he thought would be of benefit to him. This was the one paper in Atlanta which was fairly critical of my father when he was in office, even though in thirty-two years in office he maintained an A-l rating.
My mother spent some time in Washington and made many friends there. And this was, of course, before she was married, and after she had been graduated from Barber-Scotia Seminary in Concord, North Carolina. She was a Presbyterian and... I don't know whether to say, founded the Radcliffe Memorial Presbyterian Church here in Atlanta, or not. But money was given by a family of Radcliffes who lived in New England. But, of course, it fell upon these people here in Atlanta, the duty of organizing. And here is where I get﻿37
LRA: (cont.) that she was one of the original organizers of the Presbyterian church here in Atlanta.
I would say that my mother, of course, after she married, was a homebody. There were eight children in our family, six girls and two boys, and my mother spent most of the time as a housekeeper; and a mother who sewed, who made all the clothes for all the children, including coats and suits, and so forth, things that were taught her by her father, who was a tailor in Macon, Georgia.
GFB: You mentioned earlier that she was a member of a social club?
LRA: Oh, yes, she was a member of the women's organization. She was a
member of the club named the Twelfth Club, and that was composed of twelve women in Atlanta, two of whom were wives of Methodist ministers. One was daughter of a Methodist bishop, another the wife of a very prominent physician, one whose husband was employed as a United States marshal, the first who was ever appointed, who ever had that job in Atlanta, and the others... school principals, elementary school principals, wife of one of the elementary school principals. Another, the wife of the military, who incidentally was the mother of Walter White of the NAACP. Who else? Neddie, who else was in the club?
NRH: Yes?
LRA: Who else was in the club?
NRH: What did you say about Walter White?
LRA: I said that Mrs. White was wife of a military, and, also,the mother of Walter White of the NAACP. Who else was in the club? The wife of the first pharmacist in Atlanta.
NRH: She wasn't until much later.
LRA: Yes, and two other wives of two...the first Negro physician in
Atlanta. How many do I have? How many do I have, did you count?
NRH: No, I didn't count.
LRA: Dr. W.E.B. DuBois of national fame, and a few others whose names I can't, recollect.
GFB: Right. So what did they do in this club?
LRA: It was purely a social club, where they...	At that time, most of
the wives of these people were homebodies,	and this was a club for
relaxation mainly, where they got together	to discuss events of the day, and... The wife of a bishop, and the daughter of a bishop. And that was the extent of that, I think.﻿38
GFB: But going back to the relationship that your mother had with you all, could you describe that?
LRA: Well, my mother, as I said to you before, was a homebody. She stayed at home most of the time. Even though my father was in politics, and even though she was politically minded and discussed politics with him daily, she had her duties at home. We always expected to find her home when we came home from school. And days were very far between when we would come home from school and find Mama gone. Why, we'd probably take the house apart because we felt that Mama should be there; she shouldn't be in the street someplace. And that, I think, shows what kind of mother she was. A mother who was dependable, and on whom the children depended.
NRH: I don't know if you mentioned this or not, but although she didn't go out too often, people came to see her all the time. People came, regularly, her friends would come to see her. And there were some who came every day.
LRA: She was very, very popular. She was very painstaking. She was a wonderful mother. And the interesting thing about that was that, after I married, we lived in Philadelphia about a year, lived in Washington about a year, came home to Atlanta. Then my husband decided to go into the real estate business. Ended up in the contracting business. It was most interesting that he made friends with my mother the minute he came to town, and they had a close relationship, just as if he were a member of the family, until she passed. He, being in the contracting business, built an administration building at the Fort Valley Normal and Industrial Institute; one at Voorhees, South Carolina—Voorhees Institute at Denmark, South Carolina; another out of town in Alabama, a city I can't recall the name of. Whenever he went to inspect the building, she was always with him. That was an outstanding comradeship, really, and one that I was very proud of, because so often there is not a close relationship between in-laws.
GFB: Right.
LRA: Have you anything else to say?
NRH: I think that's enough.
GFB: Well, I guess that concludes our interview, and I would like to thank each one of you, Mrs. Aiken, Mrs. Harper, and Miss Rucker, for granting these interviews.
LRA:	Well, we were most pleased to have you here, Miss Banks.
HR:	We've been glad to have you.
LRA:	And we're just sorry that we haven't more information to give you.
HR:	I think we have enjoyed the interviewer more than being interviewed.﻿39
LRA: Neddie, could you say something to Miss Banks?
NRH: I was telling her she should come back before she leaves town, to pay us a special visit.
GFB: Thank you.﻿THE RUCKER SISTERS
