Tahi Mottl:	This is Tahi Mottl, interviewing Mrs. Ozeline
Wise, on January 4, 1978. And I'm interviewing Mrs. Wise, not only about her own life, but about the life of her sister, Mrs. Satyra Bennett. Mrs. Wise, will you tell me something about your family, your immediate family, and who's in your family?
Ozeline Wise:	Well, the immediate family consisted of Mother
and Father, two boys, and two girls, of which I'm the youngest. And we spent most of our time in Cambridge. I was born in Worcester,
Massachusetts, and we moved to Cambridge when I was two months old, and the homestead has been here ever since.
My father, William Barrett Pearson, was born May 1, 1862, the son of Josiah, who departed this life August 2, 1905. Josiah was brought from Africa, from West Africa, where he was a leader of his people, a chieftain, I might say, and his capture happened after it was reported that men had a big boat and were taking people away. He went to see what was happening, and he was then captured and taken to Jamaica, British West Indies. My grandmother, my paternal grandmother, was Betsy E. Pearson. She departed this life February 20, 1892.
My mother was Frances Lavinia Pearson, born November 28, 1863, in Rock Hill, Jamaica, near Adelphi. My maternal grandfather, Adam Gale, departed this life, February 9, 1877. He was known as "Teacher Gale." I was in Jamaica in 1969, and we were entertained as granddaughters of "Teacher Gale." During his lifetime, a day was set apart as "Teacher Gale Day," and all the needy would come with their large wooden trays and their baskets, and they were filled with fruit and produce from his sixteen-acre home. My grandmother, my maternal grandmother, Sarah Gale, departed this life September 10, 1925. I had the pleasure of knowing her. Her maiden name was Sterling.﻿2
OW: (cont.) My father, the Reverend William B. Pearson was educated at
Calabar College in Jamaica, British West Indies. After completing his education at Calabar, his father's master sent him to Oxford, England. After completing his studies there, he returned to Jamaica and married Frances Lavinia Gale from Goodwill, near Adelphi. He later came to the United States in October 1884, and joined the African Methodist Episcopal Conference. He was given pastorates in Pennsylvania, Indiana, and Massachusetts, also Michigan. Then later he was sent to the Leeward Islands as superintendent of missions. Later he was sent to the African Methodist Church in Worcester early in 1900, where I was born. His next charge was that of Saint Paul A.M.E. Church in Cambridge, the oldest black church in the city, having been established in 1873.
My mother returned to her native island, Jamaica, to be with her mother for the birth of her third child, Satyra. Satyra was born in 1892 at Rock Hill, Goodwill Village. The family settled later in Pennsylvania where they went to school. Satyra received her elementary education in Pennsylvania, in Worcester, and the Cambridge schools. After graduating from Cambridge Latin,
she entered	——---• --
taken courses in real estate law, and in her early working years she taught at McKinley Institute in Lynchburg, Virginia. She also taught religious training in the public schools of Cambridge. You need a year for that, don't you? She married Cyril George Bennett in 1919, and from that union there was one child, George Barrett Bennett. She later worked as a linotype operator for over thirty years for the Boston Chronicle and the Cambridge Chronicle, which was the Cambridge Sun. She also worked for the Boston Guardian, Mr. William Monroe Trotter being the editor. She was also employed by the Dedham Transcript and the LaValle Press of Boston. Satyra was an active member of Saint Paul A.M.E. Church for over seventy years, serving as Sunday school superintendent for fourteen years. Both of us were members of the Board of Christian Education. She was a class leader, treasurer of the Philathea Class, which is an international class, and of the church too. She was also a trustee for many years. The Philatheas were very active in the Sunday school
We were very supportive of the Sunday school and the church. One of our outstanding deeds was to carpet our Saint Paul Church, and another time I spearheaded the laymen in recushioning the pews in the entire church. I also spearheaded... She, also—you see, I used first person, but this is all about her, not myself. She spearheaded remodeling the kitchen of the church and purchasing a wall clock for the Sunday school. There was a dedication cermony and I just came across the printed program. She also did many other things to improve the church and the Sunday school.
I'd like very much to say something about the old Saint Paul Church. It was started in Mr. Henry Buckner's home, which was the largest home among the interested parties. I think it was on Hastings Street. In a short time, they outgrew his home, and they looked for a site to purchase. They purchased land on Portland Street at the corner of Hastings and Portland Street, and started to build. As soon as the basement was finished, they started to worship there. A church that could accommodate about four hundred people and a three-family house were all built in the same complex. We remained there until 1919, and then the pastor, Reverend C.B. Lawyer, realized the locality was becoming quite commercial. Lever Brothers, a soap manufacturing company, purchased the entire complex, and then we relocated to Austin
Llberforce UniversiLy
She was in tlie class o£
She has﻿3
OW: (cont.) Street, which is now called Bishop Richard Allen Drive, at the
corner of Columbia Street. The street was named at our centennial for the first bishop of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, who was Bishop Richard Allen.
My mother, Lavinia Pearson, worked diligently in all the charges that my father had, heading the missionary groups, visiting the sick and the prisons. She sent boxes of clothing, books, and materials, needles and thread, to Africa and the Islands. She made her life felt wherever she went. My brother, Leonard Vincent Pearson, was born in Indiana, educated at the University of Michigan. He departed this life August 7, 1969. The other brother, named Luther Anthony, was born in New York and taught at A & T College, in Greensboro [North Carolina]. He departed this life in 1909, I'll say. That's correct, 'cause all these dates are in the family Bible and I left a space there for them to get the Bible out and fix it.
Satyra Bennett has been an active member of the Saint Paul A.M.E. Church for seventy-odd years, serving as trustee and Sunday school superintendent for many years. She was a class leader, treasurer of the Philatheas, member of the Mortgage Committee, the Laymen's Organization, and was lay delegate elected from the local church to the annual conference and later a delegate to the general conference, which meets every four years. She spearheaded many fund-raising events for the benefit of the church: trips, raffles, teas, luncheons, banquets, and so forth. I might add that she was conference superintendent of the New England Conference Church School. She was a member of the Speaker's Bureau of the Congregational Church.
Many of her articles have been published in the Boston Guardian and many other Negro periodicals, Boston Chronicle, Cambridge Sun. She was a co-founder of the Cambridge Community Center, a Red Feather agency, and she also was on the executive board of trustees for the Massachusetts chapter of the Arthritis Foundation. She was a member of the NAACP. In 1951 and 1952, she was chosen by the governor of Massachusetts to represent the commonwealth at the Freedom Day celebration in Philadelphia. She held the office of vice-president of the Boston chapter of the NAACP. Among many civic activities, she served as air raid warden; lieutenant in the Massachusetts Women's Defense Corps; in the Red Cross First Aid Canteen Corps; secretary of the Cosmopolitan Club; chairman of race relations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Union of Federated Women's Clubs; member of the Speaker's Bureau of the Congregational Church (said that somewhere); and chairman of education for the Massachusetts State Union of Federated Women's Clubs. She has served as president of the Booklovers Club of Boston. She founded the Citizens Charitable Health Association [CCHA] in 1949 after banding together some public-minded citizens desiring to make contributions to the Heart Association. Since that time, large donations have been made to heart, cancer, arthritis, polio and the then Holy Ghost Hospital, now named Youville Hospital. One of the donations to Youville Hospital was a whirlpool bath for the upper extremities, which they were very pleased to receive. She served as president of CCHA from 1950 to 1966. It was incorporated on March 24, 1953, under the provisions of Chapter 180 of the general laws of Massachusetts, and it's an organization still in operation. Ed Brooke took care of all our legal work for this.﻿4
TM: Did she do any traveling?
OW: Yes, she has done some traveling. We have visited some of the islands in the West Indies. We've been to Jamaica many times. We were anxious to go to London and see where our father was educated, and we also did many countries on the Continent, about ten countries on the Continent. And she has made the trip across this country a couple of times. She had more free time than I had, 'cause I had jobs that tied me down. In her high school days she won a scholarship in French, to the Sorbonne, but unfortunately, my father thought that young women at that time shouldn't be traveling abroad by themselves. So she wasn't allowed to accept it, so that's why her education was done here in the United States.
TM: Was the family living in Cambridge at that time?
OW: Mm hmm, she graduated from Cambridge Latin.
TM: Oh, that's right.
OW: She was president for many years of the Citizens Charitable Health Association, of which Senator Brooke was her vice-president for many years.
TM: Mm hmm. Was that organization based in Cambridge or in Boston?
OW: It was based in Boston. The Citizens Charitable Health Association came
into being after she heard that someone had gone to the Chamber of Commerce, and the remark was made that Negroes always accept but they never give. On the strength of that, she thought that this was the time to do something, so she got a cross section of people together in the city of Boston and had a meeting, and they met in Mr. DuBois's kitchen. Mr. DuBois was a caterer and he was intensely interested in this affair, and they decided to have a banquet and to give the money to the Heart Association. The first banquet was held at New England Life Hall. Mr. Charles Gates, who was the executive secretary of the Heart Fund, was invited to attend and to give remarks at the banquet. Mr. Gates attended and he was so delighted to see so many there. That night a check for $500 was turned over to the Heart Fund. A replica of that check is still on the wall of the Heart Foundation. When she resigned as president of the Citizens Charitable Health Association, the organization tendered her a beautiful sterling silver Paul Revere bowl.
TM: Okay, I'll begin to ask you some questions. You mentioned to me earlier, and then also from the dates of your birth, that there was a space of some years between your sister's birth and yours. That is, you're quite a bit younger than she was. Can you tell me about that, and how old she was when you were born, and what do you remember of her as you were growing up?
OW: Well, I was the baby of the family and there were about eleven years between us. 'i always considered her my big sister, and in fact, the way we were brought up, I always had to mind her, and we became very close after I became older. Unfortunately, when she was in college, she was away from us because﻿5
OW: (cont.) she attended Wilberforce University, but after she got out
of college, then we became very, very close. She always steered, helped to steer my reading and, along with my mother, the different people that I met and I had company with. And she was very good about taking me to various places. I might mention that my mother was quite a dressmaker, and she taught us all to sew, but my sister was truly a very good dressmaker and I never wanted for dresses, because they could sew beautifully. My mother sewed so well she could tailor a man's suit, and I was always considered well dressed. Even the teachers would remark, "Who made your pretty dresses?" She kept very close tabs on me, and I guess that during that period we became very, very close. And of course she went off to teach at McKinley Institute in the South and then she was away from me. But she never was so busy that she didn't write me every week. I got a letter, just like my mother got a letter, every week. We just became very, very close friends; we were not just sisters, but we were very close.
She spent quite a bit of time with me when I lived in Billerica, because after I married, my husband and I bought a home in Billerica. I might add that I lived in Billerica for a number of years. We had one son, Hubert Wise, and I worked for the United States Navy for seven years during World War II in ship fittings and then in personnel. Then after leaving, I decided that I would take some time off from employment for a while. I opened my house in Billerica as a guest house, calling it "Gale House" after my grandmother. I did this for a few years; my husband was working. I put up black people because there weren't hotel rooms. But then later I went back into government because I always did like working for government. I went into the banking department of the commonwealth, and now I'm retired. I stayed with them for about twenty years and I now have retired from there.
TM: Well, tell me, in terms of your growing up, you spent your youth in Cambridge, and...
OW: I spent some of my youth in Cambridge, and then I spent some of it
out in Michigan. When my brother went to the University of Michigan, we moved out there.
TM: I see.
OW: And I spent much of my youth out there, and I went to those schools out in Ann Arbor. Oh, I enjoyed it very much, the people were so lovely. I felt so grown up because at that time Cambridge wasn't teaching another language in the grammar schools, and out there, you had to learn a language in the grammar schools. Of course the language then was German, and because Ann Arbor then was really a German town, 'cause even the stores, some of them had German signs. The mayor, as I remember, was a German. And we had to learn the German language, and I had to take it all the way through grammar school and then into high school, and it was just the other language that you had to take. I enjoyed myself out﻿6
OW: (cont.) there very much, but being a minister's daughter, X think most of my pleasure came from working in church clubs and singing in choirs and being in plays, and so on and so forth. I might say that my sister and I had written a couple of little plays—right here at this table— and one of them was given here in Saint Paul Church.
TM: Was this when you were adults?
OW: Mm hmm, mm hmm, I was a young adult then. And we enjoyed sports, I
enjoyed sports very much. We used to go to all the games. Active sports, I played basketball, skated, and it was the thing to do out there...
TM: So, did you go to elementary school in Cambridge and then high school in Ann Arbor, or grammar school in Ann Arbor?
OW: No, I went to elementary school here, and still elementary school in
Michigan, but I -Mrted high school out there and finished high school back in Cambridge.
TM: I see. And all that time, was Satyra at Wilberforce and then working...
OW: When I came back here and was going to high school, she was through
college, because there was only the eleven-year span between us, so she was out into the working world when I...that's the way 1 see it now.
TM: And she was teaching in the South?
OW: Mm hmm, she taught at McKinley Insitute, Lynchburg, Virginia.
TM: And then did she return to Cambridge?
OW: She returned North again, mm hmm; I think I've got it in sequence...
TM: So when must that have been, was that in the 1930s?
OW:	...and soon after she went South to teach, and then I continued on
schooling between Midwest and here. When I got through school, she married, because she married in '19, 'cause her son was born in 20. She married March 5, 1919, he was born January 5, 1920, and that s the sequence. Now was there something else?
TM: Oh yes. So at that time you had been separated, you two sisters had
been separated for a while, then you got back together again in Cambridge?
OW: Yes, then we got back together again.
TM: And is that when Satyra began to work for the newspaper...
OW: Different places, yes.﻿7
TM:
OW:
TM: And at that time what were you...
OW: Then I married in—sometimes I have to take the ring off to look—I
married in *31. I married in '31, on November 10, 1931, and soon after ^ I bought a home in Billerica. My husband passed away in '63. So, that s about it. Is there anything else?
Yes. What I'm wondering...about what may have been the early influences on your sister's life and your life, in terms of deciding to do all the kinds of things that both of you did in life?
Well, my sister made up her mind, when she was eight years old, that she was going to be a teacher. At that time, when she was eight years old, we were living in Worcester, Massachusetts, you see. And she thought that Ella Wilson, who was a Negro schoolteacher in Worcester, she wanted to shape her life after her, because she was a schoolteacher in Worcester, the first Negio schoolteacher Worcester ever had. Sarah Ella Wilson, as she was named, was quite a force in the city, and my sister patterned her life after her, when she was eight years old.
TM: Fairly early she decided what she wanted to do?
OW: Mm hmm, and so teach she did.
TM: And how about you?
OW: Well, I wanted to study, I wanted... My brother was a pharmacist, my
sister was a teacher, and I had hoped to go into -medicine. And it didn t work because my father died before I could get my college education. My mother thought that I shouldn't give up, because she did own property, and she was willing to see that I went. But I thought it was unfair because I didn't know what might happen, and I didn't want to use all her financial resources. So I spoke to a Mr. Leslie Cleveland, who was the headmaster of Cambridge High and Latin at that time, and he was disappointed, because I was disappointed that I couldn't go. I had been taking the college course and got good marks, but he told me that maybe I could take something in the clerical field that would help me to earn my own livelihood. At that time, I had several study periods—and because Michigan schools, I will say, were a bit ahead of Cambridge schools—and when I came back I had plenty of spare time. So he saw to it that I took shorthand and typewriting, and I did. After graduating, I took the civil service exam— the postal exam—and received a nice mark, 92.6 on my exam, and I thought maybe I would get a chance to work in the post office, but at that time the postmaster general didn't believe that women were all sufficient to their jobs, and I didn't get it. My mother was persistent, though; she even wrote the attorney general in Washington, but to no avail. So then I went into other clerical jobs around, until later on I went into the navy when our country got into trouble, they took my name off of that same list..
TM: Civil service?
OW:
The same civil service list after many years, and I worked in personnel.﻿8
TM: Was this during World War II?
OW: Yes, I got a permanent position in World War II. But after working a number of years I decided that I wasn't going to be employed any more. I stayed at home for a while. But then after a couple of years, I decided I'd go back to work and I went into the banking department of the commonwealth. So that was that. I took courses. I took a course at Harvard in work that pertained to my work in the banking department, and got a good mark there. And I got several promotions. So I went in under Commissioner Howard—Charles Howard was the commissioner then of the banking department. I was the first black woman that they ever had.
TM: Do you remember what year that was?
OW: Yes, I went in '50, I think it was '50, '52, somewhere in there.
TM: All of this time, while you were first working for the navy, and then began to work in the banking department for the commonwealth, what was your sister doing? I'm trying to get a sense of both of your lives, and since you interacted so much...
OW:	My sister was linotyping.
TM:	Oh?
OW:	She was printing at the time.
TM:	And she did that for the Chronicle and the Guardian.
OW:	Yes, and the Cambridge Sun.
TM:	Yeah, right through the world war.
OW:	Mm hmm, and the LaValle Press, Boston Chronicle. And she lived at home with my mother, right here [26 Mead Street].
TM: Oh, I see.
OW: See, my mother was here, because my father died many years previously, and so they made their home together.
TM:	I see.
OW:	with George.
TM:	oh, I see...
OW:	With her son.
TM:	This was while your sister was raising her son?
OW:	Mm hmm.﻿9
TM: And you mentioned that she was a divorcee?
OW: She was a divorcee,
TM: Yeah, so your sister and your mother and George...
OW: ...lived together.
TM: Lived here. I see, and you were living in Billerica?
OW: Yes.
TM: You told me earlier, of some of the organizations that your sister belonged to, and that she helped to create. During this time, what groups did you belong to?
OW: I worked with them, the same groups. We never separated, see.
TM: So even when you were living in Billerica...
OW: Oh, yes.
TM: ...you would commute and work in the same groups.
OW: Yes, 'cause I wasn't driving, and I don't know why I didn't drive, but my
husband always... If we had meetings to go to, why, I'd be there, and he'd stop by and pick her up and take her to her meeting as well.
TM: There are quite a few organizations; you must have had one or two meetings a week? Maybe more?
OW: Yeah, we did. And we loved it. That was our life. And so, that's about it. We enjoyed the spring of the year when the [Boston] Pops came into being. You know, when they started, we always attended the Pops. We used to go weekly.
TM: You and your sister would go together?
OW: Mm hmm, and my husband.
TM: You were telling me a little bit earlier how you and your sister eventually came to live in this house. And can you tell me about those years. And the latter part of your sister's life and...
OW: Well, I would say that in 1965, my sister called me one evening and she
said, "Ozeline, I wish you would come and live at the homestead again because I really and truly need you." And so I told her that the next morning on the way to work I'd throw a suitcase in the car, and I would spend the night and we would discuss things. Which I did, and having been so close to each other and such good friends, I decided that I would stay. I﻿10
OW:
(cont.) eventually put my house on the market, and I moved to Cambridge again. And that is how we did, and that was in the year of...
TM: About '65? OW:
'65, and she was well at the time but getting lonesome, and I continued to work at the office every day, and then in '71, she became sick. She had her first stroke in '71. I put her in Youville Hospital that morning, and I went into the office and decided that I'd leave, because I knew that she needed me. So she stayed in the hospital for thirty-one days, and when she came home, I took care of her for five years and five months. She had one attack after another...
TM: Did you retire at that point, or did you...
OW: Right at that point, the very day.
TM: Oh, I see.
OW: Yes, 'cause there was nobody here, and I knew that I wanted to come here
and get things prepared for when she was to come home, because the doctor assured me that she could come home. She had to take therapy, and so on and so forth, but I wanted to be here and make things pleasant and comfortable for her, so I stayed. It was the beginning of her a^ts. But in '74, she was able to go on a trip, because I took her to the doctor for a check, and the doctor happened to mention that he was going away, and he was so glad that she came in to see him before he went and she in turn said to him, "Oh, doctor, I wish I could go somewhere "He said, You can 20 anywhere that your sister will take you, 'cause your heart is strong enough^ but the only thing is, that your sister will have to have wheelchairs at all the airports for you."
she said to me, "Would you take me someplace? I said, Gladly. She fa sitting in that green chair in the living room. But I've got to find a place So I got busy searching for a place. And I found a man out in Wyoming that had a beautiful place in Jamaica...
TM: Oh! OW:
And it was all staffed with a cook and a maid and a chauffeur and a gardener, and I asked him if I could rent it. And he said yes He took me at ™t face value, he couldn't see me, but he took me at voice value. And w^ continued to tilk over the phone from time to time, and he wrote me and sent me pictures of the place. I have pictures of them today. And so it was planned that we would go for the month of December I took her and she enjoyed every minute of it. And a young friend of mine, Clara Scott, who'calls me Mother Wise said, "I will go w th you^ Todav she's a detective on the Cambridge police force. She went with me, and my sister enjoyed every minute of her stay, and the help fell m love with he" -d they took marvelous care of her and everything. And she made﻿11
OW: (cont.) the trip like a trooper. So any time we mentioned it years after, she would smile. She had such a nice time.
TM: Well, tell me, from the time of your sister's first stroke, was she able to continue any of her activities at all?
OW: No.
TM: But you've continued...
OW: I continued in doing things...
TM: Yes, work with the church?
OW: The same organizations. Yeah, I'm a trustee of the church. I'm a trustee of Saint Paul's and I'm also chairman of the mortgage fund—I guess they call it the building fund. And I was Sunday school teacher there for maybe twenty years.
TM: When did you stop being a...
OW: When did I stop?
TM: Yes.
OW: Some time ago, a long time ago. Because I found out that I just couldn't give enough time to research and studying the lessons, so I stopped. Could be ten years ago, maybe a little more, and so on and so forth.
TM: Okay. Well, tell me something about the offspring of your two families. That is, Satyra's offspring, George, and...
OW: My sister had just the one son. And he has one child, her granddaughter, and I have one son. And that's about the extent of the family...
TM: Does your son have any children?
OW: One little girl, mm hmm. One little girl. And that's about it.
TM: Are there any...
OW: ...other relatives?
TM: Aunts and uncles and cousins and...
OW: No, our family is almost extinct, but I do have a cousin, Elsie Polgreen, who was raised in Panama and now lives in New York, who came to me when my sister passed away, and stayed with me for several days. And our homes always seem to be the homes to shelter everybody. I have plenty of foster nieces, you know, and they were very nice. One of them came and﻿12
OW: (cont.) stayed for several days, and we had opened up our homes to so many people along the way. But as far as relatives are concerned, I only have this cousin and her mother, Connie Chambers, my mother's niece, who is along in years. And that's about it.
TM: Are there any relatives in Jamaica?
OW: No, no, no, no. A very distant cousin, Cyril Chambers, who... My mother let him buy the Rock Hill homestead there, which is a nice place—it overlooks the Caribbean. But the family is extinct, just about. You can see it's been going on for a long time where there weren't many children. Nobody had plenty of children. I failed to say that my brother Leonard has three children. One is in Boston, one works in a clinic in San Antonio, and the brother is in Chicago, where Leonard moved from Ann Arbor.
TM: So there are two nieces and a nephew, your brother's children.
OW: That's right. But that is it.
TM: Okay, well...
OW: During this trouble, we had loads of friends... You know, if anybody looked, they'd say well, "All those mourners," but they were friends.
TM: Your family was such an important part, and still is...
OW: Yes, the church was packed.
TM: ...an important part of Cambridge.
OW: The church was packed, the telephone, I couldn't even... Well, I didn't answer the phone, but there were people here that answered the phone. Calls were coming from everywhere.
TM: Yes, let's go back and... You've told me bits and pieces about your life in the church, beginning with your father's being the pastor of Saint Paul's. Can you tell me, or review for me, your experience with Saint Paul s
and in the church?
OW: The church itself?
TM: Yes, of both you and your sister, give me a little history of Saint Paul.
OW: Yes, do you want a history of Saint Paul, or our action with Saint Paul?
My sister too was a trustee of the church, and so many churches, they rise and fall, but we were never a family to leave because things weren't going our way. I guess it's because we're a product of a parsonage, and no matter what phases the church was going with, we always stuck with it,﻿13
OW: (cont.) and that's why she took such an interested part, a vital part in the church, in all phases. As I say, trustee, and helping with the mortgage fund (and I do the same thing) and she was highly respected in the church. Saint Paul today is a church that is filled with young people and the young people have great respect for me as an older person, because I know the ad hoc committee asked me to chair a banquet for them a few months ago—what was the date?—December third. Wasn't too long ago, was it? And they felt as though I had experience in knowing what to do and how to do it, because the young woman that was the general chairman is a psychologist, Jessica Daniel, on the staff of a couple of the hospitals in Boston today, and she said, "We want you to come in and work with us so that we can learn." And so I have been working [laughter] and it was really a nice association because we had many of our meetings In homes, and it was very warm, and the young men and women were really interested in doing, and it was quite successful, financially, as well. And they turned over their money to the building fund that we made. So that was one phase of it.
I sang in the choir. But I really only sang in the choir at one time when the church was sort of low. I really sang there just to add multitude [laughter]. I'm not a songbird! We spent a lot of time doing our school-work, and of course, as a minister's family, you know, we were pretty careful as to the social life that we led. All eyes were on you, you know, even if one was much older than the other, and my brother never did come back East, 'cause after he got through from U. of M., he went to Chicago. So you are watched in everything that you do, and not that we felt as though it was any punishment, but we felt as though we had to set an example. And in that life we were very happy.
TM: Do you feel that that experience in growing up, setting an example, set the style of the rest of your life?
OW: i think so. As we were taught, you just can't be seen everywhere, and
it sort of followed through. And as we got older, we didn't depart from that; it's just that strict, Victorian life that was set for us.
TM: But also what about your participation and activism and also leadership? Do you think that that began...
OW: Yes, I think so, because we sort of patterned after my mother, and...
TM: Was your mother a pretty active person?
OW: Yes, yes. Oh, she was very active. In fact, one of the things they do in the A.M.E. church, usually the minister's wife is the head of the missionaries, and she took full charge. We did plenty of missionary work. She used to send boxes and barrels to Africa with all sorts of things that you could name in them, and boxes to the South. That Palmer Institute? We sent many a box, my mother sent many a box down there with everything that they could use.
*
University of Michigan﻿14
TM: Was this throughout her lifetime, or mainly when she was the wife...
OW: When she was the wife of the pastor of the church, and even after she was no longer the minister's wife of that church, she worked with the missionary group. And she went to prisons, and she did everything. Besides sewing all the time. I can't tell you how many... She used to cut her work out on this table at night, and that's all she'd do. Next day she'd start sewing; she was a very busy person.
TM: Was your mother a professional seamstress, or this was sewing for you?
OW: No, I tell you, my mother never worked outside of her home a day in her life. But the way she was brought up, in that English way, they were taught to do all soxts of fancy work and everything, and to sew, and strictly English. She knew that herself, and when she came to this country she just established another replica of what she was doing there, you know, as how she was taught. Her father was a schoolteacher—as I mentioned before, thuy called him "Teacher Gale"—and she went to his school and that was all the schooling that she had. But she could hold her own at any time, and public speaking she liked.
TM: Oh, so where did she do her public speaking?
OW: Well, just around, you know, in different functions the church would give, and so on and so forth.
TM: She'd make a speech.
OW: And she could hold her own very beautifully. But she was really taught by her father, who was well educated. The house that she was born in is standing today, because that's where I went several years ago when they gave this party for "Teacher Gale's" granddaughters and...
TM: You mentioned the name of the town in Jamaica, but what is it again?
OW: Yes, it's in Rock Hill, near Adelphi. It's really a small place, but a beautiful place and it's on sixteen acres of ground, and it's a stucco house with six rooms and very pretty, very pretty place, overlooking the Caribbean. My gra-ndmother, she received a pension from the Crown, every month, and that's how she lived. I don't know how it was instituted, [laughter] but that's what she lived on. They were considered to be very comfortable. They had a heautiful home, had servants, and so on and
so forth.
TM: When you were growing up, did you go very often to Jamaica?
OW: I went, I went about three times when I was small and about three times since then.
TM: Did your family go?
OW: No my father couldn't really go. He sent us, you know, he sent my mother and me, 'cause I was a baby, and I couldn't be left. So I'd go with her, and that's how I happened to go to Cuba, and I've been to Haiti and...﻿15
TM: This was when you were a child?
OW: Yes, when 1 was a child. I've been back to some of those places, though, since. She loved the water, she loved to cruise, and my father was always very nice about sending her.
TM: So would you go for the summer, or was it winter trips, or...
OW: Yes. Well, once, when my brother died, my brother Luther died. There were two boys... He died very young, and she was heartbroken about her oldest son passing away. So my father sent us down and took me out of school, and I think I was gone for about seven months, and stayed at my mother's home.
TM: Was that the same trip where you traveled to Haiti and Cuba?
OW: Yes, one of them. And my mother had several sisters, but they've all passed away; of course they would be now.
TM: In terms of your growing up, you talked a bit about your mother and
making the trips to Jamaica with your mother, since you were the baby of the family. But in terms of your father, I wish you could tell me a little more about him, and your experience with him...
OW: Oh, yes.
TM: ...and what you remember of him.
OW: Well, he was a very busy pastor, he really pastored his flock. He was very busy with his church. He was very eloquent. I wish I could find that article that I found last night where he burned the mortgage on that church in Worcester, Bethel Church on Park Avenue, and I think his church work just about kept him very busy. He was really a family man though, and I think he might have tended to spoil me a bit, because it seemed as though I got everything I asked for. Maybe I didn't ask for too much, but he was really a lovely family man. But he was busy with his church all the time. He wrote a lot of articles and different things, you know. [ Looking through memorabilia spread out on dining room table.] As I'm looking here, this is something that my sister gave, a "Coronation Tea," when Queen Elizabeth took the throne; she thought she would give a tea and called it "Coronation Tea." See the crown that she has on the front there [on the program]? She printed that herself.
TM: This was May 31, 1953.
OW: And we really had a tea. She got some English people, she got a Sir Somebody to speak (you find the program there) and he gave a replica of the pin that was pinned on the queen. We had a queen of Saint Paul Sunday school, and he pinned it on her. He was so interesting with his English brogue [laughter]. And he stayed and he had tea with us and he had a wonderful time. We packed the church that day, they were coming from everywhere, to this "Coronation Tea." It pleased them be-﻿16
OW: (cont.) cause, you see, there were so many people from English islands here, and they came to this out of, what might I say, respect or interest, to this "Coronation Tea." And as you see, my sister had songs sung from "Long Live the Queen," and we also had our country's songs, and so on and so forth. It was beautifully done. We had a throne, and the girl that was made queen is very proud today because she has that lovely pin.
TM: Oh, this is fun. Now you've also mentioned that there are other, we have some other programs here, but also...
OW: I have loads of them.
TM: ...some of the plaques and awards that your sister won over the years. How about if we look at those now?
OW: Yes, you want me to get them?
This is a plaque printed by J. Rosen, and this was presented to her on April 27, 1961, from the Citizens Charitable Health Association, Incorporated. And this citation, she was the president at that time.; signed by Senator Brooke, he was vice-president; Mabel Waller, secretary, and Geneva Shaw, treasurer.
This is a little citation given to her. It's from the church. Something that she did and I don't remember just what it was that she did, but it's a Christian home marker, it's a fish symbol, and that was given to her by some organization of the church. It's a symbol, called a fish symbol, and the cross and the fish are the two most ancient symbols of the Christian church. The fish was used because the Greek word for fish was a simple code in which each letter stood for another word. The five letters stood for the five words, Jesus Christ, God's Son and Saviour.
Another plaque. This one is from the church. "The First Episcopal District Laymen's Organization of the African Methodist Episcopal Church presented its Annual Distinguished Service Award to Satyra Bennett for loyal and faithful service in the Office of Recording Secretary, July 28, 1972." That's very heavy, you can't do it with one hand, [laughter]
This was presented to her from the Lambda Kappa Mu Sorority, Incorporated; "Citation to Mrs. Satyra Bennett for her dedication in sharing so much of herself with her fellow man and for instilling in the Negro community its responsibility to help conquer disease through medical research." And that was given to her November 6, 1965.
This plaque was given "In recognition of..." Oh, this is given to me.
[laughter] "In recognition of the quality of Christian service,"
the Glennie Crawford Award. And that was given to me on March 12, 1977.
TM: And who presented this to you?﻿17
OW: This was dQne by the Henry Butler School and Resource Facility of the church. We have a school that runs from preschool, I guess, through third grade. Every year they intend to add a year, when they get things worked out. It's accredited now, but I don't know just how it's going because X really don't have anything to do with it.
This is a certificate of life membership for the NAACP— Oh, I'm sorry, National Association of Colored Women's Clubs, Incorporated. She also had membership in the NAACP, though.
And this is citation for. ..the Massachusetts Chapter of the Arthritis Foundation awarded this to Mrs. Bennett for "...thirteen years of unselfish and devoted leadership in the chapterTs efforts to reduce suffering caused by arthritis and rheumatic disease." This was given to her in 1969.
7M: What sorts of things did Mrs, Bennett do in the Arthritis Foundation?
OW: Now, I didn't belong to the foundation, but she was a trustee. Yes, and I have a sheet of paper with her name on the letterhead. She also was a national officer of the Salk vaccine organization. She was in that Salk vaccine group, and she was a national officer.
TM: When was this?
OW: Oh, I guess...when were we so busy with that? Around in the early sixties that was presented to her, to Satyra Bennett, for "selfless contributions to the civic climate of Cambridge, from a grateful city, June 4, 1967." Daniel Hayes was the mayor at that time, and vice-mayor was Thomas E. Coates.
These pictures [looking at scrapbooks and photographs]... Well, this is a certificate of election as a lay delegate. This is quite a thing, when you can get elected to this, I think this is the general conference, which we have every four years. Because we choose our bishops every four years and the laity is represented, as well as the clergy, and she was elected to that. And the date on this was 1956. [Looking at the photographs.]These are some of the bishops. I spot one right there, that's Bishop Nichols. Oh, she has the names of them all on there, [laughter] "...from the Women's Home and Foreign Missionary Society, Satyra T. Bennett." This was in 1956. And this one, it's a certificate of appointment—as what?— missionary. Reverend Bryant gave her this: "This certificate is presented to Satyra Bennett in grateful appreciation for faithful service in Saint Paul Methodist Episcopal Church as a member for fifty years." The hundredth anniversary.
TM: Oh, that was the same church centennial which you...
OW: Yes, that's right, which I worked for. I got a certificate too.
And this is a certificate of appointment, director of religious education. She even taught that in the Cambridge schools. And this is just another﻿18
OW: (cont.) appreciation thing. This is "in appreciation for a devoted and
faithful service rendered, Saint Paul Methodist Episcopal Church, Cambridge, as a trustee and ardent worker." There might be some other things around. I try to keep these together.
TM: Tell us about your sister's work in the public schools. When did she work in the public schools?
OW: I really don't know, I really don't remember. The year might be in some of those things that are written there.
TM: What are these? [looking at other certificates]
OW: Oh, this is for me, "In recognition of more than fifty years of dedicated membership."
TM: So would you say that the most important group or organization that you and your sister belonged to was Saint Paul Church?
OW: And the health organization, the Citizens Charitable group, we gave over twenty-five years of work to that. And that was hard work... I was a member from its inception. We worked very hard with that group. Then you don't have too much time left to do too many other things. It was a funding thing... We gave our affair in April, and we divided the money. Boston looked forward to it; it was like an institution... And well, like Youville, we gave that whirlpool for upper extremities. That wasn't exactly a fund, and we gave them many wheelchairs too at Youville. Little did my sister know that she had to use that whirlpool, nor myself. I had to take therapy, and you see that whirlpool is a big thing, it's like from that wall to here, you know. They put you in this hammock, and turn on all that turbulence, water. It ran us a lot of money.
TM: So, with the Citizens Charitable Association, Incorporated, effort went into planning the large benefit?
OW: And Satyra would suggest what they were to do, and usually she chaired the affairs. I have programs for every one of those things.
So that was that.
TM: Thank you very much, Mrs. Wise. It's been a pleasure.
OW: Thank you too, dear.﻿OZELINE WISE
