Mrs. A. Lillian Thompson:	This interview will be conducted with Mrs.
Jessie S. Abbott, a resident of Tuskegee Institute since 1923. She assisted her husband, Coach Cleve L. Abbott, by developing an athletic program for young black women. Together they were responsible for beginning the Tuskegee Relays, the Southern Tennis Association, the Southern Basketball Conference and the Tuskegee Golf Tournament.
Mrs. Abbott was secretary to Mrs. Booker T. Washington, Mrs. Robert Russa Moton and to George Washington Carver, to name but a few of the persons for whom she worked.
This interview is being conducted at her home, 606 Thompson Street on October 11, 1977. The interviewer is A. Lillian Thompson. Mrs. Abbott, the first question I want to ask you is to tell me whatever you can about your grandparents.
Mrs. Jessie Abbott:	My father's parents died when he was very
young, in his early teens, I would say. He was born in Richmond, Virginia, and he came to Iowa in his young manhood and met my mother in Shelby County, Missouri. He was doing odd jobs until he could find work. He did some work for my grandfather and met my mother, who was also in her early teens. Mother's mother died when she was about twelve, so she was keeping house for her father and younger brother. Her father was white.
Mrs- A. Lillian Thompson:	Was this your mother's father? Your
grandfather?
Mrs. Jessie Abbott:	Yes, my mother's father was a white man,
and he also came from Virginia. His parents had been slaveholders in Virginia . When they [my mother and my father] became attracted to each other and decided to get﻿2
JA: (cont.) married, he was very much against it. They eloped to Albia, Iowa, and got married. He disowned her then, but her brother kept in touch with her and with us all through the years. Just recently one of my oldest living sister's sons died. Her [my mother's] brother, as I say, had kept in touch with us all through the years, and his son came to the funeral, and got in touch with my only living sister. He promised to visit them and they have exchanged visits.
ALT: Do you mind saying what year you were born?
JA: Me? 1897.
ALT: And where?
JA: in Des Moines, Iowa. I was the fourth child.
ALT: You were the fourth child; now who were the other children, boys, girls?
Tell me about that.
JA: Well, the oldest two were girls, then the next was a boy, and then I was the in-between one, and then three girls. There were seven children in all. I was the middle child, and my brother was three years older than me, and the next sister to me was three years younger; so that left me a kind of lonesome child.
ALT: What was childhood like? What did your parents do?
JA: My father, he first moved to Des Moines, after they were married, to settle down. At that time there were, I would say, not more than four or five colored families in the whole town, but now there are thousands of them.
ALT: How did they treat you?
JA: I was going to say it didn't make any difference at that time, you see,
because it was legal for white and colored to marry in that section, so it was perfectly all right. My father first settled on the South Side and bought some land. But on this land he found a coal mine. He didn't have money to develop the coal mine, so he had to sell the property to a white man, to A.H. Beck, and the Beck Company made a fortune off of that coal mine. Then my father turned to being a truck gardener. He used to rent a lot of land and hire small boys to weed the garden for him.
ALT: Did you all work on the farm?
JA: No.
ALT: I mean on the truck garden.
JA: I didn't. My brother did. The other little boys he hired, they did the weeding and the hoeing in the truck garden. All I did was be a nuisance. I found out that the onion tops made a nice snap, crackle, when you ran across them sideways, so I was just a regular nuisance, that's all.﻿3
ALT: What was the school like?
JA: School was very good. There were, just as I say, there were only
several colored children. Not at first though. When I went to one school that was about four blocks from us, there were two or three colored children at that school, so of course, the white children didn't make any difference. They ate with us and played with us. They were very nice, except maybe one or two cases where some little white child would say, "Nigger," but they didn't dare say it much around us because my sister, the one who was younger than I was, she would take them right back home, almost into their doorstep.
ALT: Did you also go to high school?
JA: Yes, I went to high school at West High in West Des Moines. I majored in business. At that time they had a very good business course. You took shorthand, typewriting, commercial art, commercial history, bookkeeping, and English. I took Spanish as an elective.
ALT: Everything you'd need to go right into...
JA: Everything you needed.
ALT: Was there any particular reason you selected business?
JA: Well, no, not too much so, because I would really have loved to take art as one of my electives. But I didn't have time, since I elected the business course. That's what I thought I wanted at that time, to be a secretary.
ALT: Up until that time, say elementary or high school, do you think of
anything that was a major influence on your life, as you think back?
JA: Well, yes. My oldest sister married an old soldier, and when I was about twelve, I went to live with them because they had seven young children. I went to help my sister and live with them. They lived across town on the West Side. He played the piano, and he tried to teach me, but I was too dumb to learn. My interest wasn't in the piano.
We lived on a sort of sloping street that ran downhill about four or five blocks to a cross street. In the winter time a group of schoolchildren used to coast down that hill at night. The city had to finally stop us, because the intersecting street, which we crossed most of the time to stop the sled, had streetcar tracks, and we almost gave the patrons heart failure. When we saw a streetcar coming, and it was too near for us to cross the tracks, everybody would say, "Lean," and we would all lean to the right. The fellow who guided the bobsled would turn the runners to the right, and we would coast down the street beside the streetcar for about two blocks. So the city had to stop our fun.
Then another bit of pleasure we had, we skated. You see, Des Moines﻿4
JA: (cont.) has two rivers. The Des Moines River runs directly through the center of the city. The other river is the Raccoon River, and it comes in from the southwest and joins the Des Moines River almost in the center of the city, you might say. Back in the 1900s, it was so cold that the Des Moines River would freeze solid above the dam, and all the city skaters would flock to the river and we would skate until ten or eleven o'clock at night. So that's what I was interested in—the outdoors, and activity sports.
In my gym class I was the only Negro in the swimming class. I had waist long hair and when it got wet, it was slightly curly. The white girls would come out of the pool and get in front of the hair dryers and shake their hair and dry it. I kept mine braided. Finally I went to a hairdresser and had her put some oil on my hair and press it lightly, so when I came out of the swimming pool, I could do like they did. I could turn ^ it loose and shake it dry [laughter]. And of course in the gym classes I Used those trapeze bars, the rings, and all that type of equipment.
ALT: I'd often wondered how you got interested in athletics. That's where it was?
JA: Yes, I started out as a youngster. I always loved the outdoors. I had joined my older sisters and brother in walking, maybe a couple miles, where they could pick flowers, wild strawberries and gooseberries in the summertime. And then in the fall, we would go back and pick several varieties of nuts, like black walnuts, hazelnuts and hickory nuts.
ALT:	is that where you learned tennis and golf, or did that come later?
JA:	No, that came later.
ALT: That was later. Okay, I'll ask you about that later.
JA:	I was married when I learned those sports.
ALT: Okay. Now when you finished high school, what did you do?
JA: Finished high school, of course. In my junior year I had met Cleve. He came down from South Dakota to the Drake Relays on the South Dakota State track team, and when I first saw him he was speeding around the track as anchorman on the 400-meter relay.
ALT: Is that right?
JA: And at that time, there were about fourteen, I guess, colored students in the different high schools in Des Moines. We would get together and have a little party for all the visiting Negro athletes. That night he found out about it, but he didn't know where to go. So he missed us that first night, but he was determined to get together with us (the track meet was on Saturday), so on Sunday morning he showed up at church. I had gone to church with a couple other friends. He didn't impress me too much at first,﻿5
JA: (cont.) so I shoved him off onto this other little girl friend, so he
had to be content with her, and walk home with us. When we went back to B.Y.P.U.* that night, he was there again, determined that he was going to see me. This other little girl that we had paired him up with was there also. So he proceeded to tell her that he had to leave on an early train, and asked if he could take her home. He took her home and came right back to the church and took me home. He made me promise to write him. We corresponded all through his senior year. He sent me his football award blanket and all types of things like that.
Cleve was the only Negro student at South Dakota State College at that time. Dr. Booker T. Washington had asked different colleges to recommend graduate students, you know, good graduate students, as teachers at Tuskegee Institute. Well, Cleve had majored in agriculture, of all things, but he was also interested in athletics. He was on the basketball team, the football team, the track team, and the tennis team.
I was still in school when he finished in the spring of 1916. We corresponded for the year he was in Tuskegee, for the whole year. And then when the war broke out, all the young Negro college men tried to enlist in the Officers Corps training school at Fort Des Moines, Iowa. He came back to Fort Des MoLnes with several other young men from Tuskegee. As soon as he finished his training and was commissioned, we got married. We went down to the railroad station to see all these other friends off. They were going home to marry their girl friends, too, of course. Several of them were assigned to train at Fort Dodge, Iowa. At that time it seemed to be the policy of the government to send the southern boys north to train, while the northern boys were sent south to train. I think it must have been the idea of getting the southern boys accustomed to the bitter cold winter that they would encounter in France. That's the only reason I can think of that they sent them north.
ALT: So did you all come south then?
Not then. That was three or four years before we came south. He trained at Fort Dodge, Iowa, and he was head of the recreation program at Fort Dodge. That spring, of course, they were sent to France. I didn't live too far from the railroad tracks, and I could see the trains just loaded with soldiers leaving Des Moines, going to different sections of the country to the embarkation points. The night before Cleve left, I was expecting at that time, I sneaked out and went to Camp Dodge to see him. Then the next day he was shipped out. He left from New York on the big ship, the S.S. Leviathan. That ship carried them safely to France, but on its return trip from France it was sunk, yes, that big ship.
And the lives were lost also.
JA: No, not too many, because it had taken all the soldiers to France, and
they had disembarked. Then on its return trip to pick up more soldiers, it was sunk with all the crew members; the Germans sank it.
Baptist Young Peoples Union﻿6
ALT: What did you do during the year that he was away?
JA: Well, during the year that he was away, I kept up with all my friends.
A friend of mine, whose husband was in France also, shared a house with me. The owner of the house we were living in sold it, so I found a house nearer town that was near East High School, not too far from the state capitol. My sister-in-law came from South Dakota to spend the winter with me there.
Jessie Ellen was about seven months old when her father first saw her, when he came back from France. He was sent down to Fort Oglethorpe, Georgia. He was discharged from Fort Oglethorpe and came home. Then as soon as he came home, he had contacted another ex-Tuskegee employee, Mr. George Bridgeforth, who was president of the Kansas Vocational College in Topeka, Kansas, so Cleve had work. We left Des Moines for Topeka, and we were in Topeka about four years, and then...
ALT: Did you work while you were there?
JA: No. All I did was keep house, join the ladies' clubs, and enjoy social activities. We had a very nice, a very nice group. Then when we left Topeka, Dr. R.R. Moton had been inquiring from different colleges and different people for someone to head the physical education department here in Tuskegee. He happened to write to the South Dakota State College, and they wrote and told him that the best man they knew of had been here at Tuskegee in the fall of '16. While at Tuskegee we had some championship basketball and football teams. He was head athletic coach as well as director of physical education.
ALT: When did you become involved?
JA: Not until he taught me tennis, when we lived in Topeka.
ALT: Did he teach you just for pleasure or...
JA: Just for the pleasure of playing. It gave me an outlet of something to
enjoy. So another friend who lived in the same dormitory, we played tennis all the time out on the tennis courts. Of course, we were just beginners, and it was mostly just batting balls around. Then after we came to Tuskegee was when we found a group here playing tennis. I think Mr. G.W.A. Scott and Mrs. Bessie Scott and several of the other faculty members had a tennis court near the water tower on the campus. So then Cleve proceeded to build... take his athletic boys and build some good tennis courts, and start teaching tennis and golf.
I'll call my husband Major, that is his pet name. Major, of course, when he came south, he found out that there was no outlet and no participation for young Negro men and women at all in track and other sports, except among Negro schools. They couldn't compete, because they were segregated. They couldn't even go to a white college, let alone play on the team.﻿7
JA: (cont.) So he proceeded to start the Tuskegee Relays in 1926, and it was a huge success from the start. At that time it was the third largest relay meet in the county.
ALT: Were you involved in that personally?
JA: Not at first, not then. I didn't bother with the track at all. But tennis, and Major included the intercollegiate and interscholastic tennis during the relays, of course. And there I started playing and helping the girls and youngsters, young boys...
ALT: Is this something he asked you to do, or something...
JA: No, something I wanted to do. Dr. Jack Kennedy of the V.A. Hospital staff used to act as referee. He loved tennis. He played tennis, so he acted as referee for the tennis tournaments. One year he was unable to act as
referee, so I took charge of the referee stand, the score sheets, the draw sheets, and all that. Of course, I learned how to make a tennis draw sheet from attending the meetings.
We had so many good players, like the Jackson brothers, the McDuffy brothers [telephone rings], Russell, and Minnis, McCampbell, and of course, most of the physical education students. Major insisted that the physical education majors learn tennis, and learn how to lay out a tennis court. He taught them how to measure, and they had to help make the lanes on the track. They had a real well rounded physical education course.
He taught them also in the summertime. He advertised that they would have gym classes, play classes, for the young children. So there was always a flock of young children in the gym. They taught them swimming also. You could go into the gym sometimes, and the little children would be just squealing and yelling, and having more fun, just having the time of their lives. One day a friend of Major came into the gym, and he was surprised at the noise. He said, "Good heavens, Major, how do you stand all that noise?" Major replied, "Oh, those little doddy-hoppers [his pet name for little children] don't worry me. As long as he is screaming and yelling, he's having fun and he is happy. That noise doesn't bother me, as long as I know he is happy."
ALT: Did you participate in any other athletic events besides tennis, that is, helping the girls?
JA:
Yes. One year I taught a group of golfers.
ALT: Now when did you learn golf?
JA: Major taught me golf when I first came to Tuskegee. Shortly after we came to Tuskegee, the school would have annual faculty picnics at Camp Atkins on the school grounds. One year he laid out a little golf course out there, a putting hole, and the faculty members had a lot of fun with that little putting course. I have a picture, I think of Mr. Warren Logan,﻿8
LA: (cont.) the school treasurer, putting.
ALT: Is that where you taught the students?
JA: At that time Major had built a golf course. This was for physical ed.
majors, out on Franklin Road, a lovely nine-hole golf course. It had a lot of natural hazards, with a stream that ran through the course on three different holes, and we had to shoot over that stream. On hole number one, we'd have to shoot over the stream to reach number one tee. Then we went to hole number two, and on hole number three we had to cross that natural hazard again, and coming back to hole number seven we had to cross the stream again.
So it was really a tough little golf course. A lot of the doctors from the V.A. Hospital came out and played golf with us. I think I should say though, the first golf course Major made was a four-hole course on the campus between the Alumni Hut and the school hospital. That was the first little golf course we had, right on the campus, and that's where Colonel Joseph Ward (head of the V.A. Hospital), members of the V.A. staff, and the Institute faculty joined us and played on the course.
The game proved so popular that Major developed a nine-hole course out on some school property out on Franklin Road with sand greens, and we played out there, Colonel B.O. Davis, doctors from the V.A., our faculty members, just a group of us. Mr. Warren Logan, Institute treasurer, and I played out there. Almost every afternoon we'd be out on the golf course, and sometimes Mrs. Logan would come out to pick him up. It might start sprinkling, but we wouldn't want to stop. She would say, "You folks are the craziest people I've ever seen."
Joe Louis, the famous boxer, came down to visit the Institute once. He came out and played golf with our group. Dr. Mildred Brown and I acted as scorekeepers. We followed them around for the eighteen holes that they played.
I taught five college girls who wanted to play golf in the intercollegiate tournament. We just had the tournament for one year, because we couldn't get the other conference schools interested in a girls' golf tournament. We had a good golf team all through the years. I played with Alfred "Tup" Holmes, the champion, and our best golfers, because I would have to drive them out to the golf course to practice. Sometimes they would have a little work to do on the course, and sometimes they'd just practice. I played right along with them, nine or eighteen holes, and I learned more from the fellows than I could teach them.
^T: You mentioned that one of the reasons that you and Major together developed these various teams for black students was because they could not compete with others. Once you had developed them, were there other black schools with whom you competed in the various athletic events?
JA: All the black schools in the Southern Conference joined us. You know, we﻿9
JA: (cont.) would have	interscholastic golf tournaments, intercollegiate
tennis tournaments,	and the different players from Atlanta, Prairie View,
Texas, New Orleans,	Florida, North Carolina, South Carolina, et cetera.
The golf and tennis	tournaments were held at the same time as the relays.
ALT: So was Tuskegee the center of athletic activities for blacks?
JA: Yes, and at one time the Tuskegee Relays were the third largest relays
meet in the country. That was before Los Angeles started the Los Angeles Relays, and some others, like the Texas Relays, et cetera. Then in 1929 Major started training a girls' track team. He belonged to the Amateur Athletic Association. He was also a member of the Olympic Association.
ALT: Did he run into any opposition about women participating in athletics?
TA: Yes, at first some of the Tuskegee people didn't think too much of it.
ALT: It was not really right?
JA: No. And the boys actually tried to discourage the girls from participating in sports.
ALT: How was he able to overcome this?
JA: Oh, he just went right on, and the girls went right on learning track and field. We had the first all-black girls' track team to enter the Olympic meets. Of course, there were a few, maybe several, black girls who participated, but they participated not as an all-black team. I know there was Mae Faggs from Chicago, and Jean Lane, daughter of Dr. Lane, from Wilberforce University in Ohio. When Major got to the meets with his all-black team, they began to dominate the meets and take the honors.
Stella Walsh, the great Polish runner, was champion at that time, and Alice Coachman was our 100-meter runner. At first Stella beat Alice, but Major took pictures of the track events. He snapped the finish of that race, and he showed the pictures to Alice. She was running flatfooted and not putting out much effort, and Stella was straining, trying to win with Alice just two or three steps behind her. Major showed that to Alice, and that was the last time Stella ever beat Alice.
ALT: I would imagine that having a good athletic program is very expensive. Were there any funding problems?
JA: Well, they had a small allotment for athletic programs. He had so many poor students who needed help, that he didn't hire a lot of secretaries and other workers. He would hire students to give them work. Down at Alabama State College in Montgomery, they had started selling peanuts and popcorn at their games to help fund their athletic programs, so Major proceeded to buy peanut and popcorn machines, and hire the needy students to pop the corn and roast peanuts and sell them during the home games.﻿10
ALT: What about the equipment for golf and tennis, wasn't it rather expensive?
JA: Well, we had a small allotment. Some of the golfers had experience as
caddies and owned some clubs. Major bought me a nice set of Croyden clubs, very light women's clubs. I always had to use a very light club because I couldn't swing heavy clubs very well. The same held true with a tennis racket. I had to use a lightweight tennis racket with a small handle, which he bought personally for me.
ALT: Now in traveling about the country, did you run into any problems in the deep, deep South at that time?
JA: Yes, we couldn't go to a restroom. We did buy gasoline at a lot of gas stations, but we couldn't go to a white restroom, so we would have to drive through the country and find a spot in the woods where the children ^could go. The same problem held true for cafes and lunchrooms. We bought food at the better grocery stores.
ALT: What about eating, did you carry lunches?
JA: Yes, we carried lunches. We would stop at stores and buy food, milk, ice
cream, and fruit, and then we would have a picnic lunch. We usually had to travel day and night, because we couldn't find desirable places to spend the night. We couldn't go to a white hotel, and there were very few colored hotels or schools that could accommodate a sizeable group. A few times we could get accommodations at one of the Negro schools. Usually when we went to those track meets, it would take all day, all night, and sometimes the next day, and that's the way we did it.
ALT: Did you use cars, or did you have a special bus?
JA: At first we had to use cars. The school had a little station wagon, and that was the way we went to the meets most of the time. I remember one little amusing incident. One year we were on our way out of town, I think, to a track meet in Connecticut, and we were loaded down with girls and equip ment. Just as we got out of town, we passed a truckload of little white children, and of course, they were hollering, "Nigger, nigger, nigger," and making ugly faces. At that time we had a little tiny girl who was one of the best athletes and a 100-meter dash champion. She could throw a baseball she could throw a basketball, and ran on the 400-meter relay team. She was just a wonderful little athlete. She was so tiny, not even five feet tall. When Major speeded on past that truckload of children, this little girl put her hands up to make a donkey's ears and made an ugly face, and said, "Aghh, aghh, aghh." She thought about it, turned and looked at me as if she thought I was going to scold her. I said, "Thank you, Mighty Mouse, (her nickname from team members because she was so small). I saxd, I wanted to do that, but I am just too old."
ALT: I know that...
JA: So we had all kinds of instances like that, when we had to drive all day﻿11
JA: (cont.) and all night, and stop at stores to buy food. 1 invented a
way of sometimes serving a hot meal. We would buy canned baked beans, and I would set them on the hot radiator of the car and they would heat, so we'd have something hot to eat.
ALT: Even with all those difficulties the team managed to win?
JA: Yes, with all those difficulties, they were winners for years. They
dominated the track meets. You'll see pictures there of different teams.
ALT: One of the honors that came to you and Major and the track teams was a visit to the White House.
JA: Yes.
ALT: Would you like to tell me what that felt like?
JA: Oh, it was wonderful.
ALT: And tell me, how did you happen to get the invitation, and then what it was like?
JA: Well, we were in Washington for the Capital Classic football game, and
arrangements had been made for the four Tuskegee girls, who had represented America in the Olympics, to attend. Of course, they made arrangements for us to meet President Truman. We all shook hands with him and went into his office. President Truman sat down at his desk, and we stood around and talked with him. Major took a picture of the group with the President standing in the center. We also had a picture taken with him seated at his desk, with us standing, looking over his shoulder.
ALT: Now this was you and Major and...
JA: And the group of four girls.
ALT: The whole group was there.
JA: And on his desk he had a tray of matches saying, "I swiped these from Harry," and we all got a souvenir. He also autographed a football for Major.
ALT: Did he? Do you still have the football?
JA: Yes, I still have the football, autographed by Harry S. Truman.
ALT: Did you meet any of the other members of the family?
JA: No, just the President; we were escorted into the President's office and met the President.
ALT: Did you have any honors to top that one, related to the athletic program,﻿12
ALT: (cont.) or was that the high point?
JA: Yes, well, I would say the naming of the Army Reserve building adjacent to the V.A. Hospital, and the naming of the Abbott Recreation Park here in the city were posthumous honors [for Major]. I cut the ribbon at the ceremony at the V.A. program.
ALT: And you participated in both these programs.
JA: I was also given an all-expense paid trip to South Dakota State University during their annual homecoming game. They had erected a big concrete obelisk for the names of famous athletes. Major's name was the second one chosen. There is the plaque over there. This one is from Tuskegee. For that one, Tuskegee gave me an all-expense trip to Miami during the annual coaches' meeting, and is an award from the Helms Foundation to famous athletic directors and coaches.
ALT: Now, during the time you were working with the athletic program, you were
also working with Tuskegee Institute. What was the first job that you had?
JA: My first job at Tuskegee was when I worked for Mrs. Booker T. Washington.
ALT: Um hmm. What was that job?
JA: I was her secretary. She was head of the Department of Women's Industries. And of course I started to work for her in January, and she died in May that year, 1926. Then Mrs. Jennie B. Moton took over.
ALT: Okay, before you leave it, describe what you meant, what Women's Industries was.
JA: Oh, that taught all women's trades, like weaving and dressmaking and cooking, and whatever.
ALT: And she was head of that program.
JA: She was head of the Department of Women's Industries.
ALT: To what extent that you recall, would a typical day have been like, working for her?
JA: Oh, she was wonderful to work with. The two of them were wonderful people to work with, both dedicated and sincere. I think of Mrs. Booker T. Washington, and recall that for a Thanksgiving dinner, she invited Major and me to her home, and we had dinner with her at The Oaks.
ALT: And Dr. Washington...
JA: In Dr. Washington's home.
ALT: What was he like?﻿13
JA:	I never knew Dr. Washington.
ALT:	Never knew him?
JA:	He was dead before I came to Tuskegee; he died in 1915.
ALT:	That's right. I should...
JA:	And then after she passed, Mrs. Moton was elected head of the department.
ALT: Why did they really need a secretary, with whom were they communicating?
JA: Oh, different business people, and we kept up with all the records and student grades and inventories.
ALT: What kinds of records were these?
JA: All kinds. As I say, class records, student grades, to send in to the offices in the administration building, the Registrar's office, and all inventory records.
Both of the ladies, especially Mrs. Moton, were interested in the state women's club, the National Federation of Women. We corresponded with those ladies, and then Mrs. Moton especially was a good friend of Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune, founder of Bethune-Cookman College of Daytona Beach, Florida. Through her I met Mrs. Bethune.
ALT: Was that at Tuskegee?
JA: Um hmm. And then on tennis trips, sometimes on basketball tournaments,
and sometimes on football trips, we had to go to Bethune-Cookman College. Of course, I had an opportunity to visit Bethune-Cookman College many times. I always went to see Mrs. Bethune; she was a wonderful person, so wholesome and unassuming. She loved to show people through her home. She had this special guest bedroom. The walls were completely covered with autographed pictures of noted people that she had been in contact with, and who had donated to her school, including President and Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt, and many others. Whenever I would go to Bethune-Cookman with a group of students, I would always take the students by to meet her, and she would conduct us through her home. I think the last time I saw her was when Major, Dr. J.R. Mitchell, Mrs. Vivian Mitchell, and myself went to Miami to attend the Orange Bowl Classics.
ALT: Orange Bowl...
JA: Orange Bowl football game, that they have every year with the champion teams of the Southern Negro Conference. We spent the night there, so I took Vivian over to meet Mrs. Bethune, and she showed Vivian through her home. Major took a picture of us standing on her front steps, with her arms around us, the two of us. Whenever I visit Bethune-Cookman College, I always visit her grave on the campus and say a little prayer.﻿14
ALT: How did you happen to get that particular job? Did you know Mrs. Washington before, or you simply applied for it?
JA: No, I just applied for it. I'll tell you, she didn't know me, but I had seen Mrs. Margaret Murray Washington years before when I was, I guess, about a freshman high school student. Mrs. S.J. Brown, one of our influential lawyer's wives in Des Moines, had contacted Mrs. Washington and invited her to come to Des Moines and speak to the young girls. So she came, and we had a special little song Mrs. Brown had made up, using the tune of "John Brown's Body." Mrs. Washington likeiit so much that she asked us to sing it twice for her. That's the first time I had seen her.
ALT: That was the first time...but that had nothing to do with your work.
JA: That had nothing to do with it. Daisy Robinson, our dentist's wife; Anna Stewart, the publicity man's wife (she worked on the campus); and Laura Cyrus Washington (the adopted daughter of Booker T. Washington), and I were friends; and the four of us formed a little group and played cards every Saturday evening.
ALT: Speaking of cards, what was the social life like on the campus?
JA: Social life? Well, it was very simple. They had what they called socials for the students. The students back in those early days did not dance. They would clear out the tables and line up the chairs against the wall in the dining hall, Tompkins Hall, and the band would play music, and the students would march holding hands. Instead of dancing, that was their social.
ALT: What about the faculty?
JA: Now the faculty did have dances, and most of them were held in Tompkins Hall, two-step and waltz.
ALT: Would you say that there was a special group that could...I guess a
segregation within the community, the faculty and their wives one way, and the other part of the community...was there that sort of division?
JA: Well, I don't think there was too much. I remember all the faculty members used to have dances. Sometimes on Halloween and certain occasions like that we would have dances, and especially in the spring we would have a lovely faculty ball, and I think a faculty dance. Dr. Moton was one of the most graceful waltzers, yes, he was. He was tall and big, but he was so graceful and light on his feet. I loved to dance with him, and I danced many a dance...
ALT: Where did you learn to dance?
JA: Me? Oh, when I was a child in high school.
ALT: Did you have any problems running the house, coping with athletics, and﻿15
ALT: (cont.) then working also?
JA: No, 'cause back in those days, most of us took a student girl to live
with us. And if we had children, of course when the children came home from school, the student girl would be there. I never did turn the cooking over to her. I did all my own cooking, but you know, she did the housework and dishwashing and that type of thing. A lot of the people back in those days were not too nice to some of the student girls. They made too big a distinction with the workers and did not treat the girls as one of the family. While the children [the students] ate hamburger, they ate steak.
ALT: Treated them more like servants than...
JA: Than someone in the family.
ALT: I understand that there were also people who would have them use the back
door.
JA: Yes.
ALT: They couldn't eat at the table with...
JA: Yes. So whatever we ate, the child sat at the table and ate with us. All through the years, a lot of the students in the department could not make it home for Christmas, because home was too far and too expensive for their families. So usually at Christmas time I would collect the youngsters of our department who had no place to go, and have them come down to the house and have dinner and enjoy the Christmas tree and...
ALT: Did you also use them to keep house for you when you traveled, or you'd just lock up...
JA: Just locked up. The girl stayed on the campus.
ALT: And take your child with you?
JA: Yes, most of the time, but I did not travel much when she was in grade school. My daughter, Jessie Ellen, and Jennie Moton were in the same grade and about the same age, so Jessie and Jennie became fast pals, and Jessie spent a lot of time up at the Moton house. Mights, afternoons and nights. Catherine, the oldest Moton daughter, acted as a supervisor over the youngsters.
ALT: After working with Mrs. Washington and Mrs. Moton... I think you said that you worked until each of them died.
JA: No. I worked until Dr. Moton passed, and Mrs. Moton and members of their family left Tuskegee and went back to Hampton, Virginia, where Dr. Moton is buried.
ALT: Then what did you do?﻿16
JA: Then I stopped work for a little while. Mr. A.L. Holsey, who was
National Business League head, needed a little help that summer, so I helped him that summer.
Then Dr. George Washington Carver's secretary was called back to Pennsylvania because her father passed. She asked for two months leave of absence, and I was asked to fill in for her. She never came back, so I stayed with Dr. Carver until he passed in 1943.
ALT: Now this is Dr. George Washington Carver? Where was he working at that time?
JA: At that time his office was out at the Wilbank Agricultural Hall, out at the end of the campus. We were out there for about a year and a half, or two years, before the Institute built a new laundry, so they gave Dr. Carver the old laundry building, and remodelled it for a museum. Most -of the laboratory was down in the basement, but he did have two big rooms as a working lab in the back of his office. The front part of the museum held all of his samples of handiwork with clays, peanuts, cases of letters from people from all over the world, his paintings and crochet work, et cetera.
And the Institute also built him a small greenhouse on top of the old laundry boiler room. It was a lovely little greenhouse, not much larger than this room, a nice greenhouse. That's where he experimented with his amaryllis plants that he was so interested in. I used to follow him out to the greenhouse in the mornings and watch him water the flowers and my, the different...
ALT: Was this something he wanted you to do, or you were just interested?
JA: I was interested, and he enjoyed having me, because he saw that I loved anything that bloomed, too. I would follow him around out in the school garden and back of the school greenhouse.
ALT: Did he talk to you?
JA: Yes. We would be collecting different plants that he knew were edible.
Then he'd take them back to the museum and cook them. Then he'd come and bring me a dish of the plants and say, "Now, Missy, taste this. I want a woman's opinion of it. How does it taste?" So I'd...
ALT: How did it taste?
JA: Good.
ALT: Really? What were some of the things he cooked?
JA: Well, the boys who worked there would cook in their lab in the museum.
They learned to make sweet potato flour and peanut milk, and stuff like that, you know. I sampled peanut milk, and sweet potato doughnuts were delicious.﻿17
ALT: Did he have cooking facilities right up in the lab, I mean ovens and everything he needed to cook?
JA: Yes, upstairs in his lab; he cooked everything he wanted to.
ALT: Now did he record his recipes?
JA: Some of them, a lot of them...
ALT: Say he's making potato doughnuts, he makes this potato flour, then did he have a recipe for how much milk and how much butter and sugar and that sort of thing?
JA: He had printed a bulletin of his recipes. I don't know if I have any of the recipes now, but at one time I had some of them.
ALT: As a man, what was he like to work for, not the famous man that we read about, but the individual?
JA: He was very humorous. Well, let's see, it is hard to describe him because he must have been a mischievous little boy because he was full of mischief.
ALT: Was he? What were some of the things he did?
JA: Well, he would carry on sometimes in the museum. He had a group of young
teachers, young instructors, of course. Among them was Dr. William Wadell, who had charge of the horse barn; Austin Curtis, whom we called Baby Carver; Myrle Cooper, who had charge of the school greenhouse; and Larry Robinson, our postmaster. They were all young fellows who just loved to hang around him. Also included was Dr. Harry Richardson, the school chaplain. They would write him some mischievous letters, and he would answer them in kind. We'd get together and make up answers to them. I tore them up, because I wouldn't dare have them printed. I would never betray his trust in me.
ALT: Did he teach any classes?
JA: Not in his later years. Earlier he taught a lot of classes. He taught Sunday School classes, too, I think, at one time.
ALT: A typical day working for him might have been like what? Say when he arrived in the morning?
JA:	Well, first he'd open his mail...
ALT:	Did he get lots of mail?
JA:	Yes. Oh yes.
ALT: Was he famous at that time?
JA:	Yes, already very famous. He tells this story about once years ago, when﻿18
JA: (cont.) he was experimenting with different plants, he took okra plants and wetted the stalks and got the okra fiber. Then from the okra fiber he'd make placemats and baskets, and that type of thing. He said that year at the Alabama State Fair he had an exhibit of his vegetables, his art work, fiber plants, and paint from clay that he had made. He said there was an old crotchety man who came and stood, and looked, and looked. Finally he said, "You say you made that from okra?" Dr. Carver said, "Yes, I take the fiber from the okra plant." The old man stood there and he chewed his tobacco awhile and said, "Pitui. Well, I'm glad to find something it's good for; tain't fit to eat." So that is what the museum is filled with, all kinds of...I loved to go into the art gallery. There was one long room that was given over to all his art work. He was a painter, oh marvelous, so realistic and real and he...
ALT: Did he create his own oils?
JA: I know he made a lot of his paints from clay, as he was creative enough with everything. Those paintings were beautiful, and there were so many of them. I think somewhere I have a little booklet telling about his paintings, the dedication of his art exhibit, and so on.
ALT: Was he a considerate man to work for?
JA: Very.
ALT: Say if you typed over or erased something?
JA: No, not at all. He was very easygoing and jovial all of the time, but I made corrections before turning the work in.
ALT: So, as you think about the years with Dr. Carver, what stands out most in your memory, as significant in your relationship with him?
JA: As I say, both of us being sort of kindred souls, both loving all kinds of outdoor activity and plants, all kinds of plants...So as I say, I would follow him around in his greenhouse and watch him, and admire the amaryllis plants that had bloomed that morning. He had bred a new amaryllis and it had a big bud. We were both watching for it to bloom, because it was a new one that he had just been able to pollinate. He had been trying to breed a perfect bloom of, let's see, of a sort of peach color only, but he had never been able to get just the color he wanted. This was the first time for it to bloom so we watched it carefully. When we went out one morning, there it was, wide open, the most beautiful apricot colored bloom you ever saw. Dr. Carver was so happy. We both looked at it, and Dr. Carver said, "Oh, I'll have to find a name for my new amaryllis." Of course, being kind of sassy, I said, "Name it for me, Dr. Carver." He said, "All right, I'll call it Carverai jessica." [laughter] But Carverai jessica, after Dr. Carver became ill, and no one knew exactly how to take care of the greenhouse, Carverai jessica died, and the bulb was lost. That was the last of beautiful Carverai jessica, but it was the most beautiful peach color, salmon peach color.﻿19
ALT: Did you go out on any field trips with him, out to the woods...
JA: Well, at that time he was not able to get around too much. He was getting on in years at that time, so the school gave him a room in Dorothy Hall, adjacent to the museum. Mr. Henry Ford built him a private elevator, a personal elevator, for him to come and go from the first floor to the second floor near his room, to save him from climbing the stairs.
ALT: Did he continue to work?
JA: He continued to go to the museum every day, and he came up until the day before he passed. The morning that he passed he wasn't able to come; he was very sick. I went over to see him, and then I went over to the museum and did the office work and went home. About six o'clock that evening, Mr. Curtis called me and said that Dr. Carver was dead. I rushed back to Dorothy Hall and went into his room and saw him before the undertaker came. He looked so peaceful and restful. You would never realize that he had been in such pain, and his body had been so swollen.
The funeral services were held in the chapel. I remember when I went into the chapel to see his body for the last time, before the casket was closed for the services, R.O.T.C. students were standing guard, one at each end of the casket. The flower that he always wore in his lapel was not adjusted like he always wore it, so I leaned over and adjusted it. When I left at the close of the day, Dr. Carver never said a definite goodbye. It was always, "Goodbye until tomorrow."
ALT: You showed me a lock of his hair that you have. Tell me about that.
JA: Well, he wasn't able to go to the barbershop, so he would have the barber come over to the museum, to his office, and there he would cut his hair. So this morning after the barber had cut his hair, before he cleaned up the hair from the floor, I reached down and picked up a lock of his hair.
ALT: You also showed me a buffalo nickel... tell me about the nickel.
JA: Yes, a buffalo nickel. Well, the drugstore was across the street from the campus. It's a school building, but the drugstore was rented to a man named Burrows. In his drugstore he had postcard pictures of Dr. Carver standing beside his special painting of the plant Yucca gloriosa, the plant he loved to paint and experiment with. I wanted a picture to send to a niece of mine, so I went to the drugstore and bought a couple. They were only two for a nickel. I bought a couple of cards and carried them over to the museum when I went to work.
When I went into the office to take dictation, I said, "Dr. Carver, I bought a couple of picture postcards of you and your gloriosa plant that Mr. Burrows has for sale in the drugstore. I wonder if you would autograph them for me so I can send one to my niece?" He took the pictures, looked at them and autographed them. He said, "Mrs. Abbott, where did you get these
﻿20
JA:
ALT: JA: ALT: JA:
ALT:
JA:
ALT:
JA:
ALT:
JA:
ALT: JA:
ALT: JA: ALT: JA:
ALT:
(cont.) I said, "I got them over at the drugstore, Mr. Burrow's store. He has them for sale there." He asked, "How much did they cost?" I replied, "They were two for a nickel." He reached down into his pocket, pulled out his pocketbook and gave me my nickel back, and autographed both of the cards. I kept one card, and I still have it and the nickel among my souvenirs.
Do you have any other mementos from him?
Oh yes.
What are some of the things that you have?
I have a letter written to me, when I went home on leave to visit my mother when she was ill. I have several pictures, photographs of him at various stages in his life; Christmas greetings; a note of congratulations on my 35th wedding anniversary; several of his bulletins; and one year he gave me an olive [colored] bottle with a cover that he had crocheted for it.
He crocheted?
Oh yes.
What other things did he do?
Oh, he had a needlework room, and an art room... So he could cook...
He could cook, he could crochet, he could paint, he could experiment, and he did, with plant fibers, with all color of clays, kaolin clays.
What were some of the things he made from clay?
Oh he made paint and all kinds of vases and pottery. Perhaps you have seen some of those benches around the campus? He made them. That was some of his work...using wood shavings.
..some of his work. Did he do something with the persimmon?
Yes.
What was that?
He made a persimmon rubbing oil to be used to rehabilitate damaged muscles. He sent it to Washington, and got a patent on it.
Because we hear little other than about the peanut and the sweet p but not too much about some of these other things-﻿21
JA: Well, in the museum they still have all kinds of samples of his work, clays, vegetables he taught the farmers how to raise, et cetera.
ALT: Do you know whether or not he had training for crocheting and painting, or was it just a natural...
JA: Yes. He said when he was a small baby, his mother was stolen one night. Some slave raiders came, and stole him and his mother from the Carver family. They searched for them and got the baby back, but found no trace of his mother. They got the baby back, and because he was small and sickly, Mrs. Carver took him into the house and she trained him...
ALT: Um hmm, this was the white slaveowner?
JA: Yes. She trained him to do housework, cook, sew and...
ALT: And is this the family that saw that he got an education, and sent him off to the university?
JA: No. His biography states that he left the Carvers' home because he wanted to learn to write and read, and the schools there were for whites only. The Carvers gave him their permission and he left to seek work and more learning.
He traveled to many towns and did all kinds of odd jobs. After growing to manhood, he was admitted to Simpson College in Indianola, Iowa, and graduated with honors. Years later he was invited to deliver the baccalaureate address at Simpson College. I still have a newspaper telling about the college naming one of their halls for him. He has had all kinds of honors bestowed upon him.
ALT: To your knowledge, did he maintain contact with any family at all?
JA: Any of his family?
ALT: His family.
JA: I understand he kept contact with the Carvers for years, and with other families he lived with during his search for an education.
ALT: But that's all the things you knew?
JA: That's all. We never discussed his early life.
ALT: I always felt here at Tuskegee he was everybody's friend, and yet had no very close personal friends. Is that true?
JA: No, 'cause he had a lot of personal friends, like Mrs. Lena Shehee, and
Mrs. Sarah Polk Martin, and a group of faculty members with whom he sat at the table in the dining hall.﻿22
ALT: I know he visited our home many times on Sunday, and yet this was something he did with a number of families.
JA: Yes, yes, and the Campbell family. Of course, Mr. Thomas M. Campbell, being head of the agriculture department, they were very close. The second Campbell son was named Carver. He had a lot of close personal friends. Mrs. Martin was in charge of Dorothy Hall, and sometimes they would argue about a subject and she would say, "Now, George."
ALT: After Dr. Carver's death, what did you do?
JA: Then I stayed on with Mr. Austin Curtis.
ALT: There at the museum?
JA: "Yes. Now I think I'd better tell you first that I was there when Betsy Graves Reneau painted this picture of Dr. Carver standing beside his painting of the plant, Yucca gloriosa.
ALT: He posed for this picture?
JA:
He posed for the picture, and the artist painted it and I watched..
ALT: How near was this to when he died? Was this several months or a year or two?
JA: Oh no, that was maybe a couple years or so before he died.
ALT: How were arrangements made for that painting?
JA: Well, I don't know who made the initial arrangement. The artist, Mrs.
Betsy Graves Reneau, painted the picture. She came down to Tuskegee, and she would come over to the museum, and he would pose for her every morning.
ALT: He was a man of that much patience?
JA: Oh yes, yes. The same held true when the biography of his life by Rackham Holt was written. She was a wonderful person. She would come over to the museum every morning, and he would give her an hour of his time. She would talk with him and make notes. She got the history of his life and wrote the book. That is the book that was put on sale, the biography of Dr. Carver. She would talk with Dr. Carver, and then come into my office and chat with me awhile.
I heard Dr. Carver tell Austin Curtis, "Now you know, Austin, I'm leaving you a share of the royalties from this book; I want you to share it." I heard him say that any number of times to Mr. Curtis, because he wanted Mr. Curtis to carry on his work. But since Dr. Carver had left everything to the school to establish the Carver Foundation, Dr. Patterson thought that the royalties should be left to the school, and he didn't think Mr. Curtis﻿23
JA: (cont.) was entitled to share the royalties. That is the reason Mr.
Curtis left. Then Dr. Russell Brown and Dr. Clarence Mason were put in charge of the museum.
ALT: But at that time there was no one to really make a transition from Dr.
Carver after he died. Dr. Curtis is the only one left who worked along with him.
JA: Yes, Mr. Curtis is the one Dr. Carver selected. Mr. Curtis is living in
Detroit, Michigan, and I will tell you who might have his address. I have not kept up with him lately. We used to send each other cards at Christmas time, et cetera. But my neighbor, Mrs. Jeanne Lee's son, who brought his mother back home after she visited him, says that he sees Austin Curtis quite often.
ALT: Did you continue to work along with Mr. Curtis?
JA: Yes, I worked with Mr. Curtis until he left.
ALT: Was that a major change for you, the shift from Dr. Carver to Mr. Curtis?
JA: No, because you see Mr. Curtis had worked with Dr. Carver all through the time I was employed there.
ALT: Did the nature of the work change any?
JA: No, Mr. Curtis tried to carry on...
ALT: How long did you work with Mr. Curtis?
JA: Until he left. Mr. Curtis was here a little over a year after Dr. Carver passed. Then Dr. Russell Brown, and his assistant, Dr. Clarence Mason, took over the laboratory. The main laboratory was downstairs. One night the laboratory caught on fire and burned through the upper floor of the museum, and destroyed all of the needlework and most of the paintings in the art room. There were just several pictures that were left intact after the fire. When I went in that morning and looked, only the frames were hanging there with a lot of big black flakes where the paint had melted. The smoke and intense heat had ruined most of the pictures.
ALT: Did any of your work include working in the museum and hanging things, or arranging things?
JA: No, Dr. Carver arranged all of his works. While I was in the museum with Dr. Carver, Mr. Henry Ford came down to Tuskegee for the dedication of the museum. There is a concrete stone, a sort of a plaque. It's built up from the floor, and on this wet concrete Mr. Ford and Mrs. Ford both inscribed their names, and it stands in the middle of the floor.
ALT: Did Dr. Carver ever talk about his accomplishments? Was he very proud﻿24
ALT: (cont.) that he discovered these things? Did he ever say anything about it?
JA: Well yes, he talked some. Often people and noted scientists would come to his office to interview him, and ask about different products that he had developed... I remember one year two white men who came into his office. Somehow or other they got around to the race problem. They asked him what were his ideas about the race problem, and Dr. Carver replied, "Well, gentlemen, what you do speaks so loud, I can't hear what you say."
ALT: I've heard that Dr. Carver seldom cashed a salary check. Is that true?
JA: Yes, that's true. He gave it all to the school, to found the Carver
Foundation, for research. Dr. Brown and Dr. Mason were transferred to the new building to carry on his work. I carried many, many contributions up to the President's office to be used for the foundation. Some were small. I think I must have carried about $30,000 up to the office, that had come in the mail to him.
ALT: Was this money solicited, or people volunteered?
JA: This was money that people volunteered and sent...
ALT: Was the idea to have a foundation his idea?
JA: Yes, and he had always worked towards leaving his life's savings to establish a research foundation and museum.
ALT: Now if he gave all of his salary for that, what did he live on?
JA: Well, in his later life meals were served to him in Dorothy Hall. He wore old shabby clothes most of the time.
ALT: To your knowlege, did he have any interests outside of his laboratory work? Civic activities, social...
JA: No, not late in life, not when I worked with him. That was earlier in his life when he used to teadk Sunday School, teach classes.
ALT: When you stopped working at the museum, what did you do, in the years after?
JA: I stopped work for a while, and then the school decided to put in the mental hygiene clinic at John A. Andrew Hospital. Mrs. Vera Foster was chosen to act as director of the mental hygiene clinic. She knew that I was free at that time, so she asked me to work with her as secretary. I worked with her until she left to work at the V.A. Hospital as a social worker. I stayed on with Miss Dickerson and Ethel Harvey until I decided to stop work again. I think I had rested about a year or so, when Mrs. Virginia Garrett, whose husband was pharmacist at the V.A. Hospital, asked me to take over her job. Virginia said to me one day, "Oh Jessie, come on and take over my work. Cecile needs somebody, and I don't know who to recommend. Come on﻿25
JA: (cont.) and take my job here at the shop." So I started working with Mrs. Cecile Dawson.
ALT: Um hmm. What type of work was that?
JA: As a sales lady. At first she had dresses, jewelry, hats, hose and a variety of articles. She also sold Mr. William L. Dawson's records (the famous Tuskegee composer and choir director), and also his symphony record that was first played and recorded by Leopold Stokowski. I worked with her several years, until ill health caused me to stop a little over three years ago.
ALT: Of all the different types of jobs that you worked in, which one did you enjoy most?
JA: I couldn't say I enjoyed one more than I did the other, because T enjoyed all of them, and all of them were very important. They were all wonderful people to work with, Mrs. Washington, Mrs. Moton, Dr. Carver, Mr. Curtis, Dr. Brown, Dr. Mason, Mrs. Foster, Mrs. Dawson, all of them.
ALT: Have you been able to keep up with your athletic activities?
JA: No. I developed cataracts in both eyes and had surgery on both eyes, so
that caused me to give up tennis and golf, which I enjoyed so much. I had to settle for fishing. Of course it doesn't take any effort to just sit on a bank and fish, and that's what I spend my outdoor time doing now. I do belong to a deep-sea fishing group that goes on charter boats out of Pensacola, Florida, once a month when the weather permits, but I fish a lot in the different lakes around here. Here is a picture of my biggest fish, a seventeen-pound red snapper.
ALT: This is a letter dated December 9, 1941, and it is signed G.W. Carver. I'm going to read it. Was this sent to you?
JA: No. I typed it for him, and I kept the original rather than destroy it.
ALT: "My interpretation of 'What is Americanism' is this: Any individual who has all the rights and privileges accorded every other American citizen, who loves freedom, hates oppression and to the best of his knowledge and ability lives the Golden Rule way of life, when we are willing to do unto others as we want them to do by us, there is no chance of a misunderstanding. Signed G.W. Carver. This was written in pencil in his own handwriting.
JA:	Yes, his own handwriting.
ALT:	Very legible.
JA:	So I wouldn't tear it up. I kept it.
ALT:	Very legible. Oh, that is remarkable. We've been going through quite a﻿26
ALT: (cont.) large pile of mementos that she [Mrs. Abbott] has saved from her years with Dr. Carver. One of them is a letter dated 1939, addressed, "My esteemed friends, Mr. and Mrs. Abbott. I have neither strength nor power of expression to let you know how much your life has meant to me as we have traveled the path of life together here at Tuskegee as a little family. Let this brief note convey to you my sincere appreciation for your friendship and my best wishes for a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year." This is signed G.W. Carver.
Another letter that shows something of his sense of humor was addressed to Mrs. Abbott and had this postscript: "P.S. Oh, I forgot to tell you that I believe that as soon as you left, Austin showed a little bit of a hint of a tint of a shade of improvement since he is out from under your influence, and I think with a good whaling every day, that he may, in the course of time, come around fairly well. With much love and best wishes, G.W. Carver."
There was also a telegram that Mrs. Abbott received following his death. This telegram was sent by Roland Hayes. He said, "Kindly wire me collect the title of the song Dr. Carver loved most and send me the words of it at once. I want to pay tribute to him. You know and understand the devotion existing between us as no one else. Thank you." Signed Roland Hayes. In her reply, Mrs. Abbott wired, "Dr. Carver's favorite song, Schubert's 'Ave Maria' and favorite spiritual, 'Climbing Jacob's Ladder'."
There is also a little booklet entitled: The Man Who Talks With The Flowers. This was written by Glen Clark, and one copy autographed to Mrs. Abbott by Dr. Carver which states, to his "esteemed friend, Mrs. J.H. Abbott, June 22, 1940."
There is also a copy of a letter that was sent by Franklin D. Roosevelt on April 7, 1939, to Dr. Carver which states, "I am grateful to you for your note and happy, too, that I had the privilege of meeting you at Tuskegee last week. Yours has been a life of service, of which the American people are proud. I do use the peanut oil from time to time and I'm sure that it helps. Very sincerely yours, Franklin D. Roosevelt."
There are several pamphlets that were written by Dr. Carver. One of them that's entitled Nature's Garden for Victory and Peace was published March, 1942. In this little booklet Dr. Carver has instructions for preparing dandelions for eating, wild lettuce, chicory, pokeweeds, giant thistle, rabbit tobacco, buckwheat and a number of other plants, telling how they can be prepared for food.
Another pamphlet is entitled: How To Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of Preparing It for Human Consumption. There is another, How the Farmer Can Save His Sweet Potatoes. This book includes thirty different ways of preparing the sweet potato and has recipes for preparing sweet potato bread, sweet potato biscuits; in fact, there are several methods for biscuits. And another pamphlet entitled: The Southern Workman, dated May, 1939.
There is a little poem that Mrs. Abbott said was one of his favorites. It﻿27
ALT: (cont.) reads, "Flower in a crannied -wall, I pluck you out of the
crannies, I hold you here root and all in my hand, little flower. But if I could understand what you are, root and all, I should know what God and man is."
Now Mrs. Abbott has just handed me a letter that she and members of the museum staff wrote December 19, 1941, and sent to Dr. Carver. It says,
Dear Santa Claus,
Your children of the Carver Museum family are writing you early this year so you can fill our order for what we want before all your presents give out. We have been very good boys and girls and have improved a lot. See how much better we can write and spell since last year. Dear Santa, you forgot to bring Austin and Ralph some shoulder pads and linmint [liniment] to put on their backs last year. And you forgot my self-spelling tipewriter I typewriter]. This one is much worse in spelling and won't hardly write at all now.
Austin says please to bring him them pads this year, and some fresh air macheens [machines] or ventalaters [ventilators] for his office in the summer, and hopes you got some medasin [medicine] to improve Dr. Carver's sweet disposishin [disposition]. Ralph ain't here no more, so I guess he will write his own letter. Jessie wants a new light to read and rite [write] by, some switches for that bad little Cooper boy, a sistant [assistant] helper and that self-spelling tipewriter [typewriter], and please make that air macheen [machine] big enough for her too. Our new boy Henry wants some new coats with Carver Mooseum [Museum] wrote on them, lots of macheens [machines] to work with and a watch dog.
Now Dr. Carver is better than ever at making something out of nothing but you might bring him some boards and bricks and nails and put them outside the building so he can make more room for his paintings and exhibits. Please don't forget us, Dear Santa.
And that's signed, "Your loving family." This is an example of the type of relationship that existed between Br. Carver and those who worked with him.
There's one question I haven't touched on. That is whether or not religion has played any significant part in your life?
JA: In my life? Why yes, because ever since I was a tiny child, I can
remember going to church. Of course, at that time it was a white church, because there were no Negro churches in the neighborhood. Then as I got into high school, I went to a Baptist church that my sister and her husband belonged to. Later on when they moved over to West Des Moines, I went to the Methodist church. So I have been a churchgoer all of my life. When we﻿28
JA: (cont.) came to Tuskegee, all of the Tuskegee faculty were expected to attend chapel on Sunday morning, especially heads of departments. My husband had been an Episcopalian ever since he was in college. We sent our little daughter to the Episcopal Sunday School here on the campus, so I finally decided to join them and I became a member of the Episcopal Church.
ALT: You have worked in areas where being a woman and being black could have created barriers in moving through the country with the young athletes, where race was a factor in where you had to stay and what you had to do. As you look back on it now, do you think that things might have been different, or you might have been more effective had you been of a different race or a different sex?
JA: I am sure it could have been. I traveled with the teams, so of course,
"we ran Into a lot of segregation. We would have to travel all day and all night, because we couldn't find a place to stay. We couldn't eat in any of the restaurants, unless we found a little colored restaurant. Otherwise we had to stop at stores and buy milk, ice cream, fruit, meats, and whatever type of food we could find and make it suffice until we reached our destinations, where we always had good accommodations at the track meets, especially at the Olympic meets. And of course when I traveled a lot with the football team, and I served as chaperone, mostly, for the girls unless some of the other instructors went along.
ALT: Also during the years you've been in Tuskegee, there's been quite a
transition in the political climate, moving from all-white civic elected group into now an almost all-black group. What have been some of your observations in these transitions? Have you been involved in any, say,the voting and that sort of thing?
JA: I haven't been involved in much, because it came later in my life. I am a registered voter, but I haven't gone all out to do any political work. We do have a good setup here at Tuskegee now. Where it used to be entirely white, now Negroes are employed in all of the offices such as...probate judge's office, tax collector, sheriff, et cetera.
ALT: The mayor?
JA: The mayor is a Negro, the tax collector and the school superintendent.
ALT: Do you have any views of the women's liberation movement?
JA: No. I really can't say that I have. I have felt liberated all my life.
ALT: You didn't need the movement.
JA: I remember one year I took a group of our girls to the Coliseum Relays in Los Angeles. We would usually leave here, and go to Grambling College in Louisiana, where Mr. Charles Adams and his daughters and sons taught. Mr. Adams was one of Tuskegee's early graduates, and he sent his children to﻿29
JA: (cont.) Tuskegee to be educated. When he finished Tuskegee, he went back home and established Grambling Institute. The five Adams children were among our best students and athletes. We could always find lovely accommodations and rest there overnight.
We went from Grambling to Fort Worth, Texas, and found nice accommodations in private Negro homes. Then we had to travel all day and all night to reach El Paso, Texas, and then on to New Mexico.
In our travels we always tried to take the children to see some historical sites. For instance, when we went east one years we took the group to Mount Vernon to see George Washington's home. I have pictures of us standing in front of his home, and pictures of us looking at his tomb.
On the trip to California, I had read about the Carlsbad Caverns, and I had always wondered what they were like. When we went through Carlsbad, New Mexico, I told my husband I wanted to stop and spend the night and visit the caverns. At first he did not take kindly to the idea of stopping, because he was afraid they would tell us "no," because we were Negroes, and refuse us accommodations. So I said, "Well, I don't mind asking, I'll go up. Drive right up in front of the main office, so they can look out and see us. I'll go in and ask them if they can give us accommodations for the night and meals. They can't do any more than say 'no,' and they will have to tell me 'no,' because I am going to ask pointblank."
I went in and told the manager that we were on our way to the California Relays, and my husband and I and the track girls would like to spend the night. They welcomed us with open arms, gave us a beautiful cabin that had two double rooms, two double beds in the room where the girls could sleep, and a double bed in the other room for myself and husband. The next day we drove up the mountain to the Caverns. I have never forgotten those beautiful stalactites and stalagmites, and all the beautiful pictures. It is something to see! We always tried to take the children to see something educational. I remember one year I took a group of tennis players to Nassau, Bahamas.
ALT: Oh, did you?
JA: I have made four trips to Nassau. On this particular trip we had a large
carry-all van. A group of faculty members also went that year. I had a group of four tennis players. I participated in the tournament also. The other group were going to visit the Bahamas.
Marineland is down on the coast of Florida on Route A-1A...I think Florida is one of the first states that had a Marineland, where they have specimens of every kind of fish and animals in the ocean. I told the group I wanted to stop and show the children Marineland. Some of the group didn't seem too much interested at first, so I said, "Well, if you folks aren't interested in going in, you can wait in the car for us. We will go in." Everybody decided to go in. They were all thrilled at what they saw, because you can't imagine the different varieties of marine life we saw. It was really educational.﻿30
JA: (cont.) At one tournament in Nassau, we had the pleasure of seeing the
Duke and Dutchess of Windsor while Edward was the Governor of the islands. They paid us the honor of attending the matches, and I have a picture of them.
ALT: Did you go to the Olympics with the team?
JA: No. I have never been to the Olympics. They always select coaches, a men's coach, and a women's coach. Most of the Olympics have been in foreign countries, like the last one was in Canada. I remember one year we took the students to New York to sail on the boat for Europe. Major and I took the girls to New York and turned them over to the coach and chaperone. We went down to the pier to see them off.
ALT: Well, I can't think of any other questions to ask you, unless you think of something I might have missed that was significant.
JA: I probably will think of something later on, but here are some pictures of Dr. Carver. A small folder of twelve pictures. Now you asked about the needlework, see...
ALT: Oh, nice, they look like wall hangings, all kinds of stitches...
JA: All kinds of stitches.
ALT: Needlework by Dr. Carver. There's another picture of Dr. Carver and
President Roosevelt; and Dr. Carver surrounded by his beautiful plants, entitled "Dr. Carver studying plant diseases." Another one, "Dr. Carver in his laboratory." Do you have only the one set of these?
JA: You might find some at the campus bookstore now. I don't know, because you see, I've had these for years.
ALT: Another one in his lab, another picture of the museum. And then this
picture of the painting by Betsy Graves Reneau, Dr. Carver holding...what's the name of that plant?
JA: Yucca gloriosa. No, that is the amaryllis.
ALT: And here's another of Dr. Carver with his paintbrush and his palette, painting the flower. Dr. Carver and Henry Ford, and one of Dr. Carver on his way to work. He's got on his baggy suit and cap, and he's got a large...it looks like a bush in his hand.
JA: And a flower in his buttonhole, as always.
I would like to add that I had the unusual privilege of listening while Dr. Carver and Mr. Curtis formulated Dr. Carver's last will and testament. Dr. Carver wrote it out in longhand and gave it to me to type.
ALT: In going through some of her other papers, Mrs. Abbott has just handed me quite a stack of awards, certificates that she's received for voluntary﻿31
ALT: (cont.) services. One of them reads, "Voluntary Services Certificate for Distinguished Service Award. This is to certify that Jessie S. Abbott has given more than 100 hours of voluntary service during the year of 1949 and is eligible to receive one silver star for the honorable and distinguished service rendered to the patients of the Veterans Administration Hospital, Tuskegee, Alabama." Mrs. Abbott, would you please describe what it is you did as a volunteer. How did you get into that work?
JA: Well, the hospital asked for volunteers. So after taking the Red Cross instructions, we volunteered where we wanted to serve. I chose the golf course. I knew the veterans had a golf course, and that they played a golf tournament for patients every Wednesday. So I began to play with the men as scorekeeper and competitor. I kept the scores and played with them, and they were delighted whenever they could beat me.
ALT: Did you teach them to play?
JA: No. Most of the old fellows had been former golf caddies, and they knew the game. The group was composed of ambulatory mental patients. I had one especial old fellow who was a wonderful help. Every Wednesday morning he'd get out on the course. The putting greens were sand. He would roll them smooth until they were just perfect. I remember when we played in the afternoon, they were ready for us. He was a man called "Fish" Lindsay. His nickname was "Fish," and he was a left-handed golfer. He was very good, but of course, lots of times he couldn't do his best because he had worked all morning on the greens, so I could beat him quite often, but it wasn't easy. We got along splendidly, and he decided that he was my chaperone, and he called me his "favorite fish." One of the golfers I had was a little, old, very small veteran. I think he was 64 years old. He was the best golfer I had, because he was one of the first who took up golf at the V.A. Hospital. He had seen the doctors out there playing on the course. He had no clubs, and he wanted to imitate them and learn to play golf. So he went to the plumbing department, got a big iron pipe, put a little elbow crook on it, and made himself a golf club. When I started to play in the tournament, a good many clubs had been donated to it. Then I think some clubs had been bought by the Veterans Administration. So we played golf for eleven years.
ALT: Is that right? And you were actually there as a Red Cross volunteer for that number of years?
JA: For that number of years. Of course, I had to stop when I went to work
again after Major died. I had to go to work to supplement the little income I had, so that put an end to my golfing.
ALT: What are your plans for the future?
JA: Well, planning on fishing and loafing. Every summer we go to Fernandina,
Florida. My daughter, Jessie Ellen, and I love the salt water, and fishing and crabbing. I think I've had my share of night clubs and that type of thing.
ALT: You're into fish now.﻿32
JA: Now I will just enjoy resting and taking life easy. In a newspaper interview once the writer asked a group of coaches' wives how they felt about their husbands' busy lives. I replied, "I would rather wear out than rust out."
ALT: When is your next deep-sea trip?
JA: The last of this month.
ALT: Do you charter a boat?
JA: Yes, there is a boat. A Mr. James Snowden owns a Greyhound bus. He and another man bought a used Greyhound bus, and they take a group of about anywhere from twenty-five to thirty fishermen. We leave on Friday night, and it is about a four- or five-hour trip to make it. Then we leave the pier about four o'clock in the morning. We drive out into the Gulf about four hours. It takes about four hours to get out to the fishing grounds, then we fish all day, and leave the Gulf about three o'clock in the afternoon. It depends on the season. In the summer you can fish a little later, but in the winter time when it gets dark so early, we have to leave about two o'clock for the four-hour trip back to the pier. We leave from the Coliseum pier.
ALT: Mrs. Abbott, thank you so very much for taking the time to talk with me this morning. It's been a real pleasure.﻿MRS. JESSIE ABBOTT
