
Alfreda Duster﻿: This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Alfreda Duster. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Duster's home, at 6632 South Greenwood Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, 60637. The interviewer is Marcia M. Greenlee. The date is March 8, 1978. Mrs. Duster, would you please describe your career as it is today?
My career as it is today is as a retired social worker. For many years, I was active in social work, in the fields of education and delinquency prevention, counseling, and as a camp director, in a resident summer camp. Working with children in these realms today, I may be called on to make speeches, to counsel with young people, to advise parents about their problems with young people, or to counsel people in general. When you came in just now, I was talking on the phone to a young lady who has had a serious problem with alcohol. She came to me for counseling and advice and we talked for over an hour before she would admit that she was an alcoholic. She was about to lose her job because of that, and she blamed everything and everything else for this condition but herself. So the conversation I had with her when you came in was that she had made changes. She was determined to come back, not to leave her job. She was determined to be on time and be the things she used to be, as an employee, and this is the kind of thing that I do.
Last week I spent the week at Tabor College, a small college in Hillsboro, Kansas. I was invited there to speak during Minorities Emphasis Week. The college has six hundred students and recently they've recruited twenty black males, largely through athletic scholarships. And only one black female, who is the daughter of the﻿2
AD: (cont.) person who is now coordinating the Minorities Emphasis program. So that my talk to the student body was largely to the white students, who are students of this small Christian college. This is a college that is based thoroughly in a religious background. It is part of the Mennonite sect, and there is no smoking, no drinking, and certainly no sexual promiscuity. The only trouble in the last five years was with one couple, and they were promptly expelled. I was interested in the reaction of these six hundred white young people in a four-year college with a religious background. I found this inspirational.
Last year I went to Principia College, which is of the Christian Science faith and a college for the children of Christian Scientists. Until very recently they did not admit the children of black Christian Scientists. So when I was invited there fo speak, another time I spoke to mostly large white audiences, to give them a perspective of the black people, of the history of black Americans and what the situation is today. So that my...today's ambition is to write something about my father's family, and my husband's family, about which we know very, very little, and to build on the Autobiography of Ida L Wells. To even find forebears on the Wells side and to find out what kind of people they were and what happened back there in the 1840s when my grandfather was born.
MG: How about your own autobiography?
AD: I have been advised to try to pick up in 1931 when my mother passed, when she lost, of course, her activities, and to bring it up—because I continued the same line of things that she did—to bring it up from 1931 to the present, which is about 1978. If I could take the time, what I need to do is to close the door, refuse to answer the telephone and to write. But there are so many things, like this interview, which are important and so many things that I can do today, that I hate to isolate myself and write. Although I really should do so.
MG: Now tell me, how do these contacts come to you, the young woman you mentioned with the problem with alcohol, and the speaking engagement and the rest, how are they referred to you?
AD: By people who know me, and who know whoever the individuals are. The invitation to go to Tabor College came from a man and his wife who are now on the staff in Chicago of the Chicago Urban Life Center, but who were on the faculty of Tabor College. And since they've been here, they had been introduced to me through the Urban Life Center and brought their students to my home, and I had gone to the Urban Life Center to address students. These are mostly students recruited from the small﻿3
AD: (cont.) colleges throughout the Midwest, and brought to
Chicago by the Center for the Study of Urban Life. Spend a year here, become involved in the urban situation, live here, work here, study here, and are given a perspective of what urban life, urban employment and all those things are all about. So that they will, upon completion of their college work, make a better decision as to whether they want to stay in their small communities and how they're going to do it, or would rather come to Chicago, New York, Philadelphia or other large urban cities. The Mennonites have recently opened their lives to the rest of the world, because for many, many years they lived completely isolated. They have a program now which extends their residence into the big cities, to carry this message of religion and the Mennonite faith by working in child care centers and elderly homes and various hospitals and eommuni ty renters. So that they no longer live completely isolated.
MG: I'd like to discuss with you your childhood and young adulthood and some of the early influences on your personal development and career interests. Perhaps we should begin with your family background. You were born in Chicago, Illinois, on September 3, 1904, the youngest of the six children of Ferdinand L. Barnett and Ida B. Wells-Barnett. Your parents were well known as social reformers and civil rights activists. Your father, an attorney, was the founder of the first black newspaper in Chicago, the Chicago Conservator, established in 1878. He was also the first black appointed as assistant state's attorney for Cook County. This was in 1896. And he was a militant writer and lecturer on civil rights. Would you tell me a little about your father? Where and when was he born?
AD: I understand he was born in Nashville, Tennessee. Either his father was a free Negro or he purchased his freedom. And subsequently he purchased the freedom of his wife and took his wife and children to Canada, until after the Civil War was completed. He came back to Chicago by way of Detroit. I understand that his father, my grandfather, was a cook on the steamboats that plied Lake Michigan between Chicago and Michigan. I'm not sure whether there was any other employment; I understand that he did several other things and had other interests. But, I remember so well the fact that he was a cook on the steamboats because my father as a young lad traveled with him and learned to be a very good cook. This was very good, because my mother was not a very good cook and if she was, she didn't like to cook, and so it was a matter of my father liking to cook and Mother not liking to cook, and Father did much of the cooking.
I remember as a child my father was a very mild-mannered man, he was not aggressive or anything or outspoken like my mother. His aggressiveness and-his work in civil rights were mostly﻿4
AD: with his pen. He was in the courtroom to defend people he felt had been mistreated under the law. But when he came home, he was a very quiet and mild-mannered person, and I loved him very much. And I can remember one of my chores as a child was to have the hot water all boiling when he came home and have the potatoes cooked and ready to eat, and the corn pone made, which is a combination of cornmeal and hot water, then fried in little cakes. And I can remember being very negligent and not beginning my chores until I could see him coming home, down about the corner, and I'd be out in the front skating.
I was quite a tomboy, I loved to skate, and in those days there weren't automobiles and trucks on the street like there are now. And so we could skate in the street because the one or two cars that would come by in the afternoon were no hazard, it was no handicap. And there weren't too many automobiles available. So that I loved to come home from school and put on my skates and go skating till dark. And since my mother wasn't home, I would skate in the house, up the steps and in the house, back through the kitchen thpre and work on getting my chores done.
My older brother, Herman, and I were very compatible as far as teasing each other was concerned. He had let his hair grow long. He didn't wear it out like they do now, but he had put it back. I knew if I could get my hand in his long hair, I would have the distinct advantage. We played a lot. And my older brother, Charles Aked, was more mild, and he taught me more things than Herman did, but Herman and I have always been... We would have water fights and be in the house and have all sorts of, do all kinds of damage, but it was all a lot of fun. My sister Ida was very quiet. She read most of the time, but I was into everything. Adults in my neighborhood used to say that "a whistling woman and crowing hen would never come to any good end," but I didn't let that bother me, because I was very, very tomboyish. I climbed trees, played marbles, skated, loved spinning tops, et cetera. I recognized that my neighbors had as much influence on my life as my parents had. But I wasn't doing anything wrong, I was just doing everything. I played marbles and mumblety-peg, and skating was my hobby. Used to skate all the time. Came in, put on my skates and kept them on till almost time to go to bed. And my mother was very lenient. The ladies would come to her and tell her about my wild activities outside. She felt it was better for me to be where I could be seen than to be somewhere else. That was one of the rules in my childhood, I must always stay where I could be seen from the front door.
My mother, of course, stayed at home with her family, and had a great influence, of course, in our lives, because she was very positive and very firm, but very kind in her firmness. She taught me the art of walking in school halls. I was never surprised to look up and see my mother coming to school when I was in first grade or eighth grade. I remember in eighth grade I was threatened with not graduating because I talked too much in school. And I remember my mother coming up there. I know﻿5
AD: (cont.) now that they weren't really threatening... I don't really have any recollection of any problems I've ever had in grammar school, or high school or college. I enjoyed it all and we had in those days, of course, very dedicated teachers. By the time I got along, most of them were past middle age, but they were very good teachers, and there were very few black children in Douglas School when I was there. Douglas School is named after Stephen A. Douglas, the "Little Giant," who gave much of the land around that area, around Thirty-fifth Street, to the state of Illinois. He was very racist and did not want any black people to live there at all. It's ironical that the whole area now is completely black, and that the land that he left as a state park, on Thirty-fifth Street near the lake, is taken care of by the state of Illinois and most of the students are black people. I'm not sure what he's doing, what his sarcophagus is.
MG: Turning over.
AD: [laughs] Probably turning over every day. The school and the area were just beginning to turn black in 1915 or so, when I was in school. I was in eighth grade when World War I began, in 1917. I can remember the fact that we had one German boy in our class and that the whole class turned on him en masse, as if he had been the Kaisei; as if he was the one who started the war, or as if he was responsible for the war. And I've often thought about him in years since, what happened to this innocent boy--how people turn against people who had nothing to do with the beginning of World War I. Members of the eighth grade class in Douglas School blamed Edward for the whole thing, ostracized him and made his life miserable. I graduated in 1917 in June. I was twelve years old, because I had skipped through some of the early grades and I went to Lucy Flower High School. That was a technical school for girls. And my mother didn't want me to be in a coed school, so for two and a half years I stayed at Lucy Flower and had a good time. I had quite a nice time all my life. And when my brother, my older brother, then told Mother that he thought that I could weather the storm of a coed high school, I transferred to Wendell Phillips High School, named for the outstanding abolitionist. Because I had so many technical courses at Lucy Flower, I didn't need many years of work, and so I graduated from high school in three and a half years. Then I went over to the University of Chicago. At that time a high school diploma was automatic admission to a college. There were no entrance exams. I had no problem, I simply registered and started going to school at the University of Chicago. Because of advanced standing, I got so many extra credits from high school, I was given one credit advanced standing, so I decided to work for the other two, so I got out of college in three and a half years.﻿6
AD: (cont.) I can remember my college graduation, principally,
I think, because it was a beautiful day and a beautiful situation, and also the fact that Madame Curie was given an honorary degree at that time. I was thrilled, of course, to be on the same platform with her and to see her, to know what she had done, and how she had overcome a lot of things.
So that when I finished in 1924, I was not quite twenty years old. I graduated in the summer session, I wasn't twenty until September. Then the reason I took my degree at that time because, without my parents knowing it, I became interested in marrying Mr. Duster. My mother had wished that I 'd go to law school. She had always wanted to be a lawyer. She had not been able to study law, so vicariously she wanted me to be a lawyer. My father and brother had a law firm downtown in the Chicago Loop, Barnett and Barnett, and she had hoped that I would join the firm and go on and be a lawyer. She and Mr. Duster had other ideas about my immediate future, but I had the common sense, I think, to decide that if I wouldn't go into law school after three years of college, then I would stay and get my degree. So I took the degree of bachelor of philosophy in 1924 and became then, in 1974, a member of the Emeritus Club, having lived for fifty years after graduation. So that the whole panorama of my childhood is one of carefree, happy existence, one of delightful memories, and one which I think was the basis of a well-rounded life.
MG: How intimately was your father involved in your upbringing, and did the two of you ever discuss what you might do when you were grown?
AD: No, my father, as I say, was very quiet, and he always had a
succession of people coming to the house. In other words, our house was his extended office. He had an office downtown, but he would tell people, "Come to my house tonight." At that time, we had moved to Grand Boulevard and we had a big living room and then a library next to where my father had his office.
MG: What was the address there?
AD: 3624. It was Grand Boulevard. Now it's Martin Luther King
Drive, and by the way, that house has been declared a national historic site.
MG: Historic landmark.
AD: Historic landmark, from when my parents lived there during those troubled times, 'cause we were there when they were bombing buildings and trying to keep black people from moving south of Thirty-fifth Street, and during the race riots here. My mother went out every day looking for trouble sites and﻿7
AD: (cont.) never did get into one. But she went out every day. Of course the streetcars were on strike, and so she had to walk. She didn't deliberately go to what they called the von Hindenburg line, named for the German, see. But at State Street was the line where the whites were on the east side and the blacks were on...ne'er the twain should meet, and whoever got caught on the wrong side was severely beaten. And another ironical thing you might be interested in is that my brother, my older brother, one of my father's first two children, was very fair, but he was known to be black, so when he was on the north side at Edgewater Beach Hotel where he worked, he was in danger of being mobbed because he was black, and when he came to the south side where the people didn't know him, he was in danger of being mobbed because he was white. So he had to go in the house and stay.
But let's get back u tuy father. When he would come home in the evening, we would be around here cooking together, 'cause I always helped fix dinner. After we had dinner, even before we'd finished dinner, the people started coming. So that we had just a series of people coming all the time, much to my mother's unhappiness. He kept that up until long after she died. He came and lived with me. He still had people coming to the house. I don't know why he acquired the habit of carrying on his business at home. After all, he had an office downtown. Maybe it was to accommodate those who worked in the day. But the house was always full of people. So that we didn't have too much time for intimate talks between us. His impact on my life was rather his kindness and his quietness. He never never punished me in any way. He never did anything to any of us. That was my mother's job. Of course, as I found out, the one who does the punishment is not the one best liked in the world. Till after you're grown. So this is the way it was at home. And my father and mother always went places and did things together, but there wasn't too much time for intimate family life in the home, since it was almost a business.
MG: Now, a couple of things about your mother. The main facts
concerning her background are included in her autobiography, which is, we might give the title of it now, Crusade for Justice: The Autobiography of Ida B^ Wells, edited by you, Alfreda M. Duster. So that the main facts, as I said, are in her autobiography, but what do you recall her saying about growing up and her life in the South? What impressions did you form regarding the nature of her early life?
AD: Her early life, of course, is obscured, up until the age of
sixteen or eighteen, when she became the head of her household. The thing she used to tell me about that was that she had determined to keep her family together. Since her father had﻿8
AD: (cont.) left them with a little home, and since she was
able to take care of them, she did not allow them to break up the family. She kept her brothers and sisters there together. The very unhappy situation there was that people began to suspect or say later that maybe those were her children, not her sisters and brothers, and that was a very unhappy time for her. But she lived through that. But the two girls who were five and two at the time her parents died in the epidemic of yellow fever, they were her main concern because, of course, as they grew into adolescence and she was busy teaching and running the newspaper, they had the real problems of adolescence. Her aunt, who lived in. ..
MG: Memphis, was it?
AD: Yes, the one who lived in Memphis moved to a small town in
California, and asked my mother to come out there because it was a very lonely little town. And when she went out there, she just couldn't take it. That story's in her autobiography, but when she left, she left one of the girls with her aunt and when she came back, she only had one to care for in Memphis. Arid of course it wasn't too long before that young lady was grown, and when Mother had the trouble in Memphis and was run out of Memphis, then she came to Chicago. When she got -married she sent for her sisters to be her bridesmaids, because those are her only relatives.
Now the main things about her brothers, the two boys who were nine and eleven when their parents died, was that of course in those days, boys became men much younger than they do now. When a boy was fourteen or fifteen years old, he was considered grown. He could work. There was no child labor laws in those times—and both of them were apprenticed to carpenters also in Memphis or in Holly Springs, Mississippi. Jim was her problem child. He would get into difficulties, and then he would come to her to get out of them, and he became involved with two or three girls, and he didn't do anything wrong as far as the law is concerned, but he was her problem child. George was •much more quiet, the other brother, and he went West. He went out to Kansas when he was ... I don't know how he got there, but he went out to Kansas from Holly Springs and that's where he "became involved with a young lady and married and had a son who was—only one child—who was Jack Wells, who came to be a very outstanding man in Detroit, Michigan. He's passed now.
But my mother's connection with her brothers and sisters is noted in some of her diaries, where she wished she could control her temper more, wished she wouldn't get so impatient with her own. She had a class in the Sunday school, and she made the remark in her diary that she'd been entrusted to﻿9
AD: (cont.) lead and to guide, and she had great influence on other adolescents, Lord, let her be a little more tolerant with her own, so that she wouldn't get so angry and impatient with them. These were her concerns with the boys and girls as they grew up. And a very peculiar thing, but as far as her mother and father were concerned, her only stories to me were such as the story of how her father told her the story that the old lady, his former mistress, had had his mother stripped and whipped the day after the old man died. That's the only reference I've heard of those days, or the days in Holly Springs, where she grew up, except that she was able to go to this school founded by the American Missionary Society and the Methodist church. At that time of course, so soon after the Civil War, this was unusual, that she and her family were able to go; and of course their parents always wanted them to go to school, and it really paid off. She never stopped learning, she never stopped reading, she never stopped acquiring knowledge, although her formal education end-sd there in Holly Springs at what is now Rust College. But I understand that during all her summers, she spent time at Fisk University. She was teaching in Memphis, but she would go to Nashville for the summer sessions at Fisk.
MG: Well now, what was your relationship with your mother?
AD: Well, my relationship was really great. I enjoyed every minute of it. I can remember when I was much smaller, she'd come home and she'd be reading the paper, catch up on her information, and I would climb up on the chair in back of her and take her hair down and comb it, you know, and braid it up and do just like my grandchildren do to me now. I think that was one of my brightest memories.
The other is that we lived at 3234 Rhodes Avenue at that time, in the middle of what is now Lake Meadows, but we lived at 3234 Rhodes Avenue. It was a two-story house, very nice house, and one of my projects in school was on Arbor Day to plant a tree. And I planted a tree in our front yard, it must have been about maybe 1913 or 1914, somewhere in there. And when we left^ there to move to Grand Boulevard, my tree was still growing. I'm sure it would still be there if the Lake Meadows Housing Development had not cut it down. But it was a nice place and it was difficult for me after I grew up and finished college and became involved in social work; it was difficult for me to really empathize with people who had come from nothing, where they had lived in cottages, huts in the South, with no floor and no windows and had suffered the consequences of the discrimination and the hardships of the South. But of course as I grew older and I began to look into and to study it, I began to have more understanding of what the conditions had been. The whole panorama of life to me was one of beautiful childhood, carefree childhood, my mother and﻿10
AD: (cont.) father, sister and brothers, aunts and uncles and cousins there constantly coming in and out and being a part of this family. In addition to that, my parents knew all the outstanding people of the day. If they came to Chicago, they came to our house and I can remember among them William Monroe Trotter and Carter G. Woodson, who started the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, and Helen Q. Brown, the elocutionist, and Anita Patty Brown. I think in my mother's collection there's a letter that she wrote from France while she was staying in France, talking about things, and Charles Chestnut who was one of our early authors.
MG: Charles Chestnut.
AD': Yes. And there are letters from Charles Chestnut to Mother in the Chestnut papers. And, of course, I have letters in the Frederick Douglass papers— Mother and Father writing to and from Frederick Douglass. And I've heard her tell so many times about the time that they were in the World's Fair and he was the only black officially connected because he was the minister of Haiti, how revered he was and how it was so dramatically different from the treatment blacks got from the administration of the World's Fair. So that my mother and I were, see, I was the youngest, and I was always doing things, so I was the one who had to go upstairs and get her glasses, and to go here and get her house slippers and come back. And then as I say, she had certain rules that I had to follow because we had many people coming into the home, to take care of it, to do the cleaning and laundry. But she was always a dominant force in my life.
MG: Your parents were married in Chicago on June 27, 1395. How did they meet?
AD: They met because of their, both of their interest in this whole
upheaval. My father was one of the contributors to the book that she put out called Why the Colored American Is Not in the World's Fair* They had like interests, and when she came to Chicago, naturally she met him because he was one of the founders and the editor of the Conservator. She had just lost her paper, so their journalist careers were intertwined. They were both fighting what you might call the overall pattern of discrimination and segregation and mistreatment of the black race, and she had mass meetings that she called to talk about lynching and to try and form antilynching societies here. And of course, he was involved in that, so that the time she spent here in Chicago, from the time she came to the World's Fair in 1893... This trip was between the two trips to England, where she was speaking and lecturing. And after she came back in 1893 and had this
* Ida B. Wells et al., The Reason Why the Colored American Is Not in the World's Columbian Exposition—The Afro-American's Contribution to Columbian Literature (Chicago: Ida B. Wells, 1893).﻿11
AD: (cont.) particular experience, she went back to England in
1894, and when she came back the second time, she went across the country, trying to organize antilynching societies, anti-lynching leagues, and to talk about lynching from one end of the country to the other, all the way out to California, in the North, of course. Because her life wasn't worth anything in the South. But it was through that...and while she was touring the country, her itinerary was known and wherever she stopped there would be a letter from my father. And so they had a long distance correspondence courtship and I understand—I never saw one—but I understand my father could write a beautiful love letter. So they met in the work. There's a young woman named Stella Garnett who wrote a nice letter to me when she knew I was working on my mother's autobiography, and told me about what a wonderful man my father was, because she worked in the Conservator office. She was one of the first girls who was allowed out of the home to work in an office, and the only reason her mother let her work there was because my father was such an outstanding man of integrity. She was talking about the time when she said people often asked him if he was going to marry again after his first wife died so young, and left two young children. He told her that he wasn't interested in just anybody, he was looking for a certain type of woman who would mean something meaningful to his life and his career. And evidently Mama fit that pattern. He pursued and married her.
MG: When your parents married, several members of the black community, and others such as Susan B. Anthony, were unhappy about your mother marrying. Evidently they felt her leadership role would be compromised. Her exchange with Miss Anthony on this subject is particularly interesting and it's included in the autobiography. Do you recall your mother ever discussing the public reaction to her marriage?
AD: No. All I know is that she was not amused, but very concerned about Miss Anthony's prediction that marriage interfered with a career. In other words, Miss Anthony felt that she should give full time to her career. She was concerned because she felt that motherhood was one of the greatest things that happened. She was very happy that she had not taken the advice of certain people who advised the use of whatever contraceptives were available back in the 1890s. She really enjoyed her family, and she felt that people who deliberately did not marry and did not have children were losing the rounding-out possibility of their lives. And she says in the book there that she asked Susan Anthony if she really believed that the world would be that much better when women got to vote. My mother felt, traveling and knowing people as she did, that many women would not vote, and second, that they would be influenced by their husbands. So that it would just be an﻿12
AD: (cont.) extension of the husband's ideas that would take
precedence over any ideas the wife had. She was not naive enough to believe that the whole world would change for the better when women got the vote.
MG: How about your father? Did he ever mention the public reaction to their marriage?
AD: No.
MG: It was the social event, it seems, for that season.
AD: Yes, it was. But don't forget I was ten or twelve years
later in getting along...1895 to almost 1905. That's almost ten years. By that time, they had stopped talking about it. In other words, many of the facts of the autobiography were new to me. Because you see, if I was born in 1904, by the time I was old enough to appreciate what was going on in the world, I was at least ten years old, 1914, so her activities were far removed from me and she was busy, they were both busy doing...
MG: Other things, sure.
AD: Yes. And they didn't talk too much about what happened back in the 1890s.
MG: You mentioned already some of the influences that your parents had on you. Are there any others, anything else that you'd like to add to that?
AD: Yes. The thing that influenced me quite a bit in my social work was, once again, the effect of the home, parents, on children. Because in my youth, I used to believe that whatever happened in childhood need not necessarily influence adulthood, I felt that I was standing on my own, that the decisions that I made as an adult were my own decisions. It wasn't until life and time brought to my attention the fact that I was a product of my mother and father and the community... And the longer I live the more I'm aware that people are the same adults as they were children, and that the effect of their parents is much more dominant than I used to believe. I know that a person ninety-one like Mrs. Wallace is definitely a product of her father's strict and dedicated life. He died when she was twelve, but she still carries with her, and I know I still carry with me, the admonitions of my mother and father about various things. I know that what they wanted me to do, I do now unconsciously, or consciously. I know that my father's integrity, the fact that he never would allow any liquor or wine in our house, because he didn't want anyone to﻿13
AD: (cont.) say that they took their first drink at our house, he didn't want his boys to ever feel that they drank because they saw their father drink. I have felt the same way. These are the things that have had this impact on my life. I never smoked because I didn't want to tell my sons not to smoke while I was smoking. And my father and mother were the same. Both of them lived such dedicated lives that to me, it would be just criminal to depart from that.
MG: You had four older brothers, the eldest two who were your
father's children from his first marriage, and one older sister. Could you tell me their names and something about each of them?
AD: Yes. The oldest was Ferdinand Barnett, Jr. He was a rather distant figure because he went to the First World War in 1917 ■silvan, a." I told you, I was in eighth grade. The fact that he went to war was a big thing in Chicago at that time. And the pictures there is a picture in the book taken of the entire family when he went to war, with him wearing his uniform and the rest of us surrounding him. I'm very glad that we made it at that time because I don't know of any time after that that we all got together for a picture. But he wasn't married and he went to the service. He had distinct ability as a plumber, as a printer, as an organizer, but he just didn't like to work, and so he was in and out of various things, and he spent a lot of time down in my dad's office ... more so than Bert. Because he was single, and his grandmother had taken over when his mother died, so that my father, you see, had two homes after he married my mother and the other children began to come... You know, it's hard for two ladies to be in one household, especially one with as positive and as direct a character as my mother, so that he removed his mother and the two boys and they lived not too far from the house, and so he would get a chance to see both of his families. So Ferd was just a big kindly person who came into our house every once in a while.
Bert was a little younger than Ferd. He married young. He had gone to Kent College of Law and finished there, but in the meantime, he had married and he had little children and they needed to have an income and so he started working at some of the large clubs, because he was a very efficient waiter.
MG: Now what was his name, Bert, you said?
AD: Albert G. Of course, we all called him Bert.
MG: I remember that picture. It's very nice.
AD: And he married a very attractive woman who had come here
from the South because her mother was afraid that she would﻿14
(cont.) be the victim of rape. She was a very pretty-child, and she had been chased home from school by some man. So her mother was concerned about that and she brought her family out of the South. Hulette was born, I believe, in Alabama, and she was my father's secretary for a short time. She met Bert and they married and had four lovely daughters. Now Bert was very unusual, very outgoing, he was full of fun all the time. And sometimes, his wife was very concerned, he was too full of fun for her. [laughter] He joked about everything. Because they had the little ones, my father used to take me to their house on Sunday, 'cause he'd go there every Sunday, and we'd go over there and I remember that part of our growing-up relationship. Now of course after I got grown, I was as grown as my sister-in-law. They married when I was just two years old and their first child was born when I was only four, so that as the children came, I was growing up with them. They were more like my cousins than my nieces at that time. So we always had a very nice relationship with the family, and Hulette used to laugh at me all the time because she said that she didn't see how I could be so happy with nothing. By the time I was grown, the depression had come, so we didn't have any of the comforts of life, and I refused to work. I decided to let my husband carry the brunt of trying to provide for the family. As an aside, I might say that those who graduated with me from college, most of them didn't have any desire to have any children; maybe one, but because my parents had six children, because we were a close and loving family, I wanted to have six children. You see, if they hadn't had six, I wouldn't have been here! I thought that would have been a calamity, so that I decided to have six, and I've been wondering all these years, what would have happened if I'd had six...because I only had five children. I really wanted a large family. I thought that six children, I still think that six children is a beautiful family because it gives the family a sense of togetherness; it gives the family a sense of family expectancy and all things that are concomitant with marriage and a family. The modern family, one-and-a-half children, with one going one way and the other going another, with there being diversity of interests of the parents as they try to both fulfill their own lives and rear and educate children, just doesn't work out. I have made many changes, of course. I have changed with the times, and I realize that now a child or two children in a family need outside associations like preschool and the Head Start and even before kindergarten. But to me, you know, the home is the place where you spend those impressionable years from birth to age six. And then by that time, you've prepared a child to go out and meet the rest of the world.
So I've changed, of course, with the times. I don't try to be old-fashioned, I don't try to tell my children what to do, and﻿15
AD: (cont.) the difference between the lives that my children
lead and that their children lead is fantastic. The changes in the last twenty years are more than triple the changes in the hundred years before that. So that this is how I've felt about children and about a family and about my brothers and sisters.
My older brother was named Charles Aked, named for the minister in England who did so much for my mother's antilynching crusade. But we always called him Aked, and later on he had a nickname of Barney. And at school, of course, he was Charles. So we had a diversity of names for him, but he was a very, very kind older brother to me, and he taught me how to ride bicycles, he taught me how to skate, he used to carry me on his shoulders, so many things that big brothers do. And of course, wn<? very close to me all his life. And when my husband died, he just quietly moved into the family circle without saying anything, but to give my boys the male image that he thought they should have. He took them to ballgames, he took them to various places, he taught them how to play bridge and they had bridge sessions, and he taught them a lot of things just by being there, and I have always appreciated that too. My second child is named for him.
MG: Now, after Charles came Herman.
AD: Yes. Herman was very different from Charles. He was, I might say, a manipulator. Charles always felt that Herman pulled the wool over Mother's eyes. He could do something and then get out of it very easily. See, I was so much younger, I'm not sure, but I know that's the way Charles felt, and as Herman grew, he took on many of the characteristics of, I don't like to say bragger, but that's what I mean. Find a better word for it. And he spent his time and his effort in bragging about what his parents had done and how they had lived. So that's one effect it had on my life. I never told anybody that Ferdinand Barnett was my father, Ida Wells was my mother. I preferred to be Alfreda Duster and try to make Benjamin Duster's name meaningful in Chicago, because he was an outsider, and I didn't want his whole life to be known as Alfreda Barnett's- husband. So I tried not to trade upon their activities, but to try to do something myself that was creditable. And this I feel my brother didn't do because he liked to be with big shots. He liked to do what they did. Big politicians...if they was playing poker and losing money, then he wanted to be there losing money. And he didn't learn even up until his late seventies; he didn't learn that he had a responsibility to be Herman. He was not...he did not portray a positive image of integrity and viability that he should have had, because with the start he had,I thought he should have leaped forward.﻿And then your sister.
My sister was a very studious young lady. She read all the time. While I was skating up and down the street, she was improving her mind in the house. She didn't play outside like I did. She didn't do all the crazy things I did like that; I say skating, mumblety-peg, and all the children's things happening in the street. Even when we'd play hide-and-go-seek, she'd be sitting on the porch reading a nice book or a magazine. She read quite a bit. She was my father's secretary. She finished high school and she took a postgraduate course in shorthand and typing and everything. She moved into my dad's office much earlier and was there while I was busy going to college, and it wasn't until, of course, I finished college, I don't know how in the world I got there, but I did. I went right into my dad's office when I graduated. But my sister has been with me all of our lives. She has never married, and of course, I married and had all these children, so they're our children, and the grandchildren are our grandchildren and she is very much involved in the Duster family life. And she has been there, a marvelous support to me through the years, when, as I said, my husband died, and I had to go to work. You see what it meant to me to have my sister with me. And she's been with me all the time and has done these kinds of things...
And your sister is named for your mother.
She's named for my mother. But she's never used the Wells, she just says Ida B. Barnett. Mother always used the hyphenated name, Ida B. Wells-Barnett.
Yes, since you've mentioned it, maybe we should continue that because I did want to ask you that. This certainly was not a common practice at the end of the nineteenth century.
No.
What do you think it was indicative of, so far as her perception?
So far as her perception was concerned, she was continuing her work. She was continuing in journalism because she took over the editorship of the Conservator within a week after they married. She wrote and she didn't want to lose the identity of Ida B. Wells; because it was on that basis she'd made all her trips to Europe, that she'd done all her antilynching work, that she'd done her writing. So I don't think it was a common practice, but it had been done, so she simply hyphenated it, and used Ida B. Wells-Barnett, and she used that all the rest of her life. And I have books in here that were autographed for her, to Ida B. Wells-Barnett. I found a book last night that I hadn't even﻿17
AD: (cont.) looked at for many a year, which was published in 1897, so then she was already referred to as Ida B. Wells-Barnett. So it's always been like that.
MG: There have been some occasions too, weren't there, even after her marriage where she'd still be referred to as Miss Wells?
AD: Ida B. Wells, yes. And then in 1940 when there was a new project, the first federal project—housing project—to be built in Chicago, it was to have the nondescript name of, I think, Gardens or Parkway Homes or something of that sort. Through the Ida B. Wells Club—first club, civic club, organized in Chicago in 1893—the Ida B. Wells Club and the Federation, the YMCA and other groups, somehow got this idea that it should not be named just for anything, but it should have a name that was significant in the community. Several names were proposed and the overwhelming response in letters to the Chicago Housing Authority was that it be named the Ida B. Wells Homes. Now, she was Ida B. Wells-Barnett and had been for years before that. But she had died in '31. The project was built in 1940. But still, the dominant international fame that she won had been as Ida B. Wells; and so they decided not to put the hyphenated name there, but to name it the Ida B. Wells Homes.
MG: I just wanted to ask you one more question about family, and that is, being the youngest child, do you think you were treated any differently by your parents or by your siblings?
AD: The only thing I can remember is I was moving all the time.
I didn't stay still long enough to be concerned about something like that. I went to school. I was a good student and I guess very quick on the answers. I didn't have any problems with studying, and I was just youngest, and that was the only thing. My nickname was Babe, they called me Babe Barnett, all my brothers' friends, and they would have club meetings at our house. My mother always kept something going for the young people, and we used to have a group that came to the house and met regularly. And I was always in it; of course that was kind of a thrill to me because all these were teenagers, and I'm just about eight or nine years old...
MG: Big kids.
AD: Yes, and I was in there with them, and I think they had a contest once. Mark Anthony's oration. And everybody was supposed to give it, and of course, I was about eight years old and I gave it, and of course, I won the prize. And to me it was great to be the Babe, you know. And by that time, you see, my mother was...she﻿18
AD: (cont.) stayed home, by the way, until I vas eight years old. When I was eight years old, I was in second or third grade and my sister was in about fourth or fifth, and so she trusted us then to come home. We'd come home about three, and she always got home about four or five. So we usually had somebody there, somebody who would take care. I can remember one or two outstanding people in that succession of...
MG: Housekeepers, yes.
AD: And so that when...I had my rules, you see. I had to stay
within sight of the front door, and I couldn't go to anybody's house. So I just had a grand time growing up. In fact, my whole life has been grand. All through the depression—• T didn't bother ahnut the depression because I felt that if I had had a nice home, I had the opportunity of growing up, I'd had the advantages of having a beautiful home, then the depression was nobody's fault," not my father's, not my mother's, not my husband's. So I certainly should be able to live through a little hard times. And that's the way I took it, and so it never bothered me. My children would say my problem is that I don't know when I have problems. [laughs] I just enjoyed all of it. There's a lot of little good things that happened during the depression, too, you know. Poverty isn't all bad. Everything has some good and some bad, everything. Fame has its bad side, good and bad side. Wealth has its good and bad side. Poverty has its good and bad side, don't forget there's some good. And every...one of the objections I have to the portrayal of black people on television and on radio is that all of them are portrayed as either pimps or prostitutes or thieves or gangsters or superflies or something that's negative. The only thing they do on there is dance or clown or fighting or stealing. Last night they had a special on it. It opened up with two middle-aged women singing some song that was derogatory to our people. You don't have anything there that's really constructive. Even when they have the special, they have a special with a gangster in it. They have a special with a cutthroat, they have a special.. .even the ministers are ridiculed. Everything is ridiculed, there's nothing I know that's any good on television or in the movies.
MG: And when it's not that, most black folks are either singing or dancing...
AD: That's right.
MG: Who were some of the other relatives who were important in your life? Were there others that had influence on you?
AD: Oh yes. I doubt whether they had influence on me because I was never still, but I know they were there. My mother had two sisters, Annie and Lily, and the two brothers. I knew all of﻿19
AD: (cont.) them. They came to Chicago at different times and Uncle Jim and Uncle George were always welcome guests and we had a good time. And Uncle George's son was named Jack Wells, and he was very much impressed with Ida B. Wells. He almost idolized his aunt. He was way out in the country in Kansas and he'd heard about her and he wanted to come here. So one day my mother got a call that a young man was down at the station. He had hitchhiked or walked or gotten here somehow. He got to Chicago and he was looking for his aunt. Now you know in a place as big as Chicago, to find one person with no address or anything, it's usually unusual, but because of her activity, of course, she was well known. Police called our home, and my older brother, Ferd, went down to the station and brought Jack to the house. I think he was about, he was a great big boy, late teens, but he had a driving ambition to be somebody, to do something. And he wanted to find his aunt, so he came here. And his life, of course, has been more or less of an inspiration because of his dedication to Mother, and because of his adoration and the fact that he wanted to pattern his life after her.
And then my two aunts...one of them lived here and every Sunday when we'd have church, we went by her house. Her name was Annie and she was married to a gentleman named Bernard W. Fitts. And Fitts, he was an ambitious person. He had set up a newspaper himself, called the Searchlight. He was a printer, had been a printer in the South and he came here with his trade. He opened up the Crystal Printing Company. And he tried to get my brother to work with him, and my brother, as I say, Aked, the oldest boy, he just didn't like to get up early in the morning. He said it wasn't that he didn't like to work, it was just that it didn't fit into his plans, [laughs] So he would get to work when he wanted to get to work. And the fact that the office opened at nine o'clock did not interfere with his plans. But Uncle Fitts, as we called him, started in Chicago a very unusual thing. He provided the money and everything himself. He started an oratorical contest. Each year about, maybe, fall or winter, he advertised through churches for contestants. It was open, and young people would come to compete in this oratorical contest. And they had a beautiful subject every year and the young people were inspired to do the research and write on it. And whoever won got a diamond necklace or a diamond pin or a diamond ring. And that went on for about fifteen years. So I was of course influenced by that, because you see, that kind of research and that kind of presentation by young people was bound to have its impact. And I was there, of course, every time. I wasn't old enough to participate back in those days, but I was there. And so Uncle Fitts and Aunt Annie were very close to the family. Aunt Lil﻿20
AD: (cont.) and Uncle John lived out in California, and in those days it took a week to get from San Francisco to Chicago.
MG: What part of California were they in?
AD: They lived up in San Francisco. And of course, Berkeley is right across the Bay, or somewhere around there, so they moved to Berkeley. But Uncle John would come in about once, twice a month. He'd take a week to get here, he'd stay here for a week and then he'd go back. He saw his family about twice a month and he saw us about twice a month. So he was very much a part of our family. Aunt Lil didn't travel much and neither did her son. But they came here once and I can remember we had a whole summer of activities for them, and they went back to California. I didn't have any close ielationships, but during the depression I didn't go any place. I stayed at home. Two reasons: first, I had all five of my children, and in the second place, it cost a lot of money and we didn't have that kind of money in those days. My father had a first cousin named Alfred S. Barnett. He had a newspaper in Kansas, somewhere. He was very much interested in all these phases of black history and black literature and black journalism. My father had another cousin who was in the state legislature out in, I believe, either Omaha, Nebraska, or Oklahoma, somewhere out West. He didn't have any children, and I didn't get a chance to meet him, but one of my cousins has gone out there and tried to do a little research about our family. Every Barnett family had two family names, Ferdinand and Alfred. And so the Ferdinand in Omaha, see, was a Ferd, and then the Ferdinand in Wichita, Kansas, was a Ferd, and his brother was Alfred, and their father was my father's first cousin. So and then when Uncle Ferd went to Wichita to teach, he was a professor, they called him professor; he taught in segregated schools there. When I was in Tabor, in Hillsboro last week, the two persons who are the directors of the Minorities Enterprise student union there were both students of my cousin in Wichita when they were children growing up. The other one was an Alfred who went to Minnesota, and these two boys both went to school in Canada and they were educated up there. By the time I knew him, he and my dad were about the same age and they were both bald-headed, but Cousin A1 had a soft skin, a layer of fat under his skin. My dad was right over the bone and I used to have a lot of fun when I looked at both of them, in that respect. But it was all just a big family, cousins, you see, aunts and uncles and cousins. And whenever anybody would come to town, of course, they'd always get to our house. The young woman who has just now retired from teaching at Lincoln University in Jefferson City, Missouri, she'd been teaching there for a long time, she just retired. My father taught there way back in﻿21
AD:	(cont.) the 1870s when he first finished school...
MG: What is her name?
AD:	Dorothy Penn, she's Marshall Pern's wife. Marshall...I
think he just retired, but they worked together and she got her master's. They both got their master's and he went on for the Ph.D, but she didn't. She's been quite ill lately.
MG: Well now, with all this activity in the Barnett household, what constituted a special occasion? How were special occasions observed?
AD:	Everything was special. Every ... and we never knew, see.
Mother was liable to bring home somebody. And another thing, my father always brought home some of these boys he believed were innocent; someone that he'd gotten out of jail and didn't have any place to go, he'd bring him home. People used to foretell terrible things would happen, but in all those years, we never had an unpleasant incident. So it was just always... things were going on. As I say, when Mother would have people come in to speak for... Every year on January first, she had an Emancipation Day program. Sometimes it was down in the Loop, sometimes it was out south, sometimes it was in a church, sometimes it was at Orchestra Hall. But we always had an Emancipation Day program January first. And whoever would come, whoever was in town, would usually be at our house.
MG: Well now, how many people, about, would you estimate you might
have in the house on an occasion such as Thanksgiving or Christmas?
AD: We always had somebody for dinner who didn't have a home in Chicago. If they were students or if they were business people on a job„ if my mother knew they didn't have a family, then she'd have them to our house for dinner. And that is something I've carried on, too, all through the years. . . another one of the results of home influence. On Thanksgiving I try to have somebody here, small as my home is, who wouldn't have a Thanksgiving dinner otherwise, who wouldn't have a family dinner otherwise. So I can't give you any estimate on numbers, but we had a big dining room area, all we had to do was pull the table out and put in two or three leaves, and have as many people as could sit. Maybe sometimes eight or ten. But you see, the family, by the time I got grown, there was only my sister. My brothers had gone and everybody. So whoever came along was invited.
MG: Well, we've already talked some about your early education, where you attended school and the rest. How were you received by your teachers and fellow students?﻿22
AD:	Very well, very well. I don't have any complaints. What happened
is that I don't remember any adverse reaction from any teacher; except for the fact I talked all the time, was very jumpy and very impatient in school. By the time I got to high school, of course, I, as I say, was a good student. I always got good marks and so I was no problem academically. And evidently I was a pretty nice kid because I don't remember any adverse feelings about personality. Now, in algebra, geometry and math at Lucy Flower Technical, we had a very, very good math teacher. We had a very good English teacher. We learned. . .1 had to take dressmaking and I had to take lunchroom management and I had to take hatmaking. I remember making my own hat... wearing my hat with great pride because I'd made it. The technical aspect was very good at Lucy Flower.
By the time I got to Wendell Phillips, I was little and quick and I made friends very easily. And that last year, the only year I spent at Wendell Phillips High School, the students all liked me, and we had a lot of fun together. We had a special table in the lunchroom; nobody was to use that table but the six of us. The teachers there, the principal told me. . .when he found out that I had only had to take two majors—and I had decided I was just going to have a good time the rest of the time—he called me in and told me that it wouldn't be like that. That I'd have to take some more subjects to keep myself busy, which is why I had advanced standing when I went to college. I took agriculture, never been out in the country in my life, took agriculture and I took a lot of extra things. I had just a grand time in school. I don't remember any adverse. . .now, the assistant principal was a German named Mr. Schacht. And the principal was a Mr. Perine. We didn't have any black teachers in high school at that time, except the printer; I think the printer was a black instructor. Because they had printing there at Wendell Phillips. Those things didn't bother me, whether we had black teachers or white, it didn't bother me. I was just going on through.
And when I got to college, it was the same. Now there was some instructors that the underground said were prejudiced. The only time I had any problem in college was the first semester I got there. I enrolled in a course, because the time was nice, and I found out that I was in way over my head, in a class of Shakespeare, which was designed for maybe juniors or seniors that had been all the way along this literature track. But I got out. I had a C, I got out of it, is all I. . .1 think that's about one of the only C's I ever got. I didn't aim for the Phi Beta Kappa, I just figured I wanted to enjoy life too much. But we had two very studious girls there in 1924 and they were Phi Beta Kappa. One was Mary Link and the other was Vivian Mason. They were from out of﻿23
AD: (cont.) town. Vivian Mason, I understand, is an outstanding social worker somewhere. I haven't heard about Mary Link. I don't know what happened to Mary Link. But the lady who became Mrs. J. Ernest Wilkins was Lucille Robinson in Chicago. She's dead now. She married a J. Ernest Wilkins, and she was the oldest daughter of Reverend Robinson. The younger daughter was my classmate; we graduated in the same class. So when we went to university, she was a kind of big sister to us, and she showed us all around and got us started off very well. But I don't remember any unpleasant incidents.
The thing that I remember most that has impressed me, was that we had an interracial club, and we were trying to promote understanding and knowledge of the races back and forth. At that time, the white students who came to the University of Chicago had no idea of the lifestyle or the life of the black persons who had achieved and who had lovely homes. They all relegated and judged black people by the stereotype. So that when we took them to Jesse Binga's home (he was our first banker), who lived at 5922 South Park Avenue, and they saw him and his wife and his home, they were amazed. And what we did was to try to acquaint them with various outstanding people in the Chicago area.
And do you know, in 1978 it's not different. It's no different. You get a group of white people from out of town or from the middle or upper class, they don't have any concept of the lifestyle of the. . . interests and the things of black people. It's still the stereotype. They don't expect you to say anything but "dis, dats and dose;" and of course since this black language has come out, they want English as a second language. They want our boys and girls to continue to say, "I ain't been nowhere," "I ain't never been nothing, I ain't never going to be nothing." They want us to continue to not understand English and have to teach it to them as a second language. It's like they are here from Mexico or Spain or somewhere. This has been to me a very unhappy situation. And the fact that our boys through the sixties, who were involved in the revolution, are still now wearing their hats in class. At Tabor College, where I spoke, there were these three blacks in the assembly, and they were the only three with their hats on. And one of them had a pick hanging over his ear... the concept of "just because I'm black, you know, 1'ip beautiful, and I don't have to study."
I have one son who's a professor at the University of California at Berkeley, and they actually would come to him and tell him he should give them a good mark because they're black. Not because they deserve it, but because they're black. This is carrying﻿24
AD: (cont.) it a little too far, as far as I'm concerned, and I'm hoping that the pendulum will swing back to where children and adolescent students will want to excel. Nobody wants to excel. I've had parents tell me that they've had to take their children out of public schools if they'd previously been to private schools, because their children were so much further advanced, academically, and the rest of the class want to punish them for it. This is an actual fact. We've got to... the fellow upsets the curve and they want to pull him down. You know what I mean by a curve. So these are the things that are bothering me in recent years, because there's such a dramatic change in the attitude of the young black people that I'm hoping for the day when it will swing back to where each child, each student, will want to learn. Books are full of knowledge, but they don't read. And this is to me a very serious situation.
MG: What was the attitude of your family toward your education, and were their attitudes influenced in any way by your being female?
AD: My family expected me to go on to college. My second brother, Herman, had gone to the University of Illinois. He came back here and I think he took some work in law, but he was only interested in getting a law degree and being able to practice law. He did not take a degree from college, nor did he take a degree from law school, because in those days it was not necessary. As soon as one could pass the bar exam, they were admitted to practice. But for some reason, there was a family expectancy there for me to go to college. So I graduated in 1921. First I looked at the junior colleges, but the junior college to me that was available was too much like high school. And I decided I wanted to go to the University of Chicago, so I asked my father and he was very kind and said I could go if I wanted to. My mother was very happy that I was going to continue my studies and so I went over to the University of Chicago. Many people have asked me, just like it was in the Dark Ages, what the attitude was. My answer was, and here it is: The University of Chicago was created in the late 1890s as a full-fledged university. There was never any discrimination, either against women or against blacks or any other race. The only discrimination was that no female black could live on campus. The black males could live in dormitories, but no female black could live on campus, and that went on for a long time. It was even true when I was in school there.
MG: Did you ever hear any rationalization for that?
AD: The only rationalization that came to me via the grapevine was﻿25
AD:	(cont.) that the lily-white students from the South
would be offended if there was a black female in the dormitory. The only crisis we might have had was when one of the lily whites objected to one of our black students in the pool, taking swimming in the same class. But we had a very young and a very dynamic swimming teacher, who told her if she didn't want to swim that it was up to her, she didn't have to swim, but the school would not make any restrictions on who went swimming and who. . . and that was the only incident we heard about. We heard, as I told you, some different ones said certain professors were discriminatory, but I didn't run into that at any time.
Now the family expectation and the whole college atmosphere was one of achievement, one of a desire to learn all we could that would be useful to us in later life. And those of us who wanted to go to college had no barrier, because our high school diploma automatically proved that we had "satisfactorily completed the course." There were no grades or levels of graduation. If you graduated from a high school in Chicago, you were qualified to go to any college anywhere in the country. So that it was just a matter of course. I said that I wanted to go and I went, and I had all the backing and privilege of the family.
And during summer vacations, I had the ability to do what I wanted to do. I didn't have to work. But one time I tried to work and I can remember now, from this angle, that the lady I went to interview over to one of the white hotels about working for her, she must have had a big laugh when I left because I had none of the attitude of a person going to do domestic work. And she didn't say so, but she never called me after that interview. And I can judge now that she didn't want any part of it, of a young black female who had the same attitude that I had at that time about working. It was simply a way to make a little extra money, to go to college. I was already in college, I was going back, but I know I didn't have the right attitude as far as she was concerned. Then one summer I tried to sell some perfume and after I ran out of my mother's friends, that's when I ran out of the wish to sell door-to-door. So that one summer, I decided as a lark to take a course in religion for an eight o'clock class because two or three of my friends were going to take it and we thought it would be a grand thing. But I did have some tremendous experiences in studying the Bible and studying religion at the University of Chicago in a Sunday morning class. And it has stood me in good stead many years since that time
MG:	Well, that's great, because my next question was to ask you﻿26
MG:	(cont.) what's been the role of religion in your life, and
what churches you have attended?
AD:	1 was baptized in the Presbyterian church. I have been a
teacher in the Community Church and in the Methodist church, and I have attended Baptist services, but I never joined a Baptist church. When I was in college, as a freshman or a sophomore, there was a noted writer named Dorothy Thompson, who wrote a book, wrote an article, saying that our universities were turning out infidels. And I sat down and wrote a counter article to tell her that she was very much mistaken, that my own personal experience had been to learn at college level the great religions of the world and to know that Christianity was not the onlv religion, but that no matter where people were— in bushes or wherever they were—every group has a religion. That leads you to know that man realizes, recognizes, wherever he is, that there is a power greater than man and has something to do with our destiny. And that in opposition to creating infidels, the colleges are teaching people respect for religion. Not only our religion, which characterizes everybody else as heathen, but there are religions in the world which have a vast effect on mankind, wherever they are.
And religion has been, to me, stabilizing, a reassuring force. It has been a resource in time of stress, and it has been to me the background of daily thanks for my blessings. Too many times, I find that people only turn to religion in stress, in crises, in hurt. And maybe they never bothered the good Lord before and they say so, "Now Lord, I haven't bothered you before, but you just help me out of this mess." But mine has been that each and every day we should thank God for our health, our strength, or whatever we have, because whatever we have, it could be worse, and we ought to be thankful for what we have. I am thankful for the fact that I'm a resident of Chicago while much of this whole country has been devastated by floods and storms and blizzards. They've lost everything they've ever accumulated. Now I don't credit the Lord with saving me all by himself in Chicago, but I do feel that I should be thankful that where I live, I have not lost everything in life, my family. Some people lost their loved ones, some lost all the physical things they had, some have lost their own lives, some have lost their own sanity in the stresses and strains of a complex world. So I can only say that I really believe that people who believe in God should stop and thank Him every day and every night for their blessings.
MG: What has been the influence of nonrelated persons in your life and on your career interests?
AD:	There have been many. There is a woman who is ninety-one years﻿27
AD: (cont.) old who has never been to school a day in her life, who has been crippled for the last forty years, but who has such a remarkable relationship with God and with her fellow man, that she is constantly—after forty years of being crippled and house bound—that she can only think of doing something for someone else. She is grateful for what she has. So she is able to look at whatever happens to her in the light of "every knock is a boost." And while whatever her situation is, it could be worse. And she has had a tremendous impact on my life because she's completely illiterate, but some lady taught her when she was nine years old, down in the Deep South in Texarkana, Texas, taught her her letters. And she knows the letters, but she's never been able to put them together. So that if she gets a communication, you know, from the Social Security board or anybody, she can call me and spell it out, and I can tell her what it is, or I go by there regularly. So she has had a trememdous impact on my life.
Then W.E.B. DuBois, who was the person that my father and mother decided to adhere to his philosophy, against Booker T. Washington, has had a tremendous influence on my life because his life story was so much like my own, in that he grew up in, not an integrated, but in an almost all-white situation and that he went South; and that he wrote Souls of Black Folks, which is partly autobiographical, that he struggled throughout the years as the editor of the Crisis, that he tried to make the NAACP what he thought it ought to be, and that before he died, he finally gave up. He finally gave up and went to Ghana. He finally decided America was not ready to do what he wanted to do and that he could not have the impact that he wanted to have.
Susan B. Anthony, who thought she had lost the battle, who was dissatisfied with her life in the end of her life, who worked so diligently, year after year, and the courage and the determination she had to try to make things better. To have felt that she had failed, when I knew she hadn't failed, that's had a tremendous impact. Jane Addams, who founded Hull House at the same time my mother founded Negro Fellowship League, went into the same kind of situation. She went in to help people who needed help. This is what Ida B. Wells-Barnett tried to do. Jane Addams was fortunate enough in getting some of her peers, some of her friends, to substantiate and to help her carry the work along financially, where Ida B. Wells never did. She could never get the middle-class people to even go over into the bad neighborhoods and to try to help those young people who where coming here and looking for something and finding only the saloons open.
And of course, I told you, my father, who meant so much to me as a person... his strength and his dedication and his continuing efforts.﻿28
AD:	(cont.) He never gave up. He would go into court and plead
for a young man whom he believed to be innocent; because back in those days, it was well known that the "paddy wagon" would go up and down State Street and gather any black youths that they found hanging out in front, take them downtown and use what they called the third degree. They beat them until somebody confessed to the latest crime. And the police would go forth to the public and say the crime was solved * And my father was busy trying to prevent. . .my father and mother both worked in the court system, to try to extend and give help to those kinds of boys who had been mistreated. All these things were a part of my life, growing up.
And William Monroe Trotter, who used to come to our home who was a tremendous person, but who also gave up; he gave up and gave up his life because he decided life wasn't worth living. Those things have had a tremendous... If William Monroe Trotter had not given up and committed suicide, then he might have made a tremendous contribution to the race relations, to the whole attitude of people in this country. I don't think that he helped anything, himself or anyone else, by committing suicide. And I feel that just as, now I can understand DuBois giving up at the end of, say, eighty years and going to Ghana, because he just didn't see any hope.
MG: And he'd done everything he could think of.
AD: He had done everything he could think of. Now let's take Paul
Robeson. I saw Paul Robeson when he was at the height of his career, when he was the toast of the country from West to East, when he had the world at his fingers, as far as being a concert singer and a famous athlete were concerned. Most of his work at the time I knew him, in the early thirties and forties, was when he was a concert singer. He gave up his career, gave up his whole career, to fight for the lower man. He said until any black man and woman could stay at the Conrad Hilton, he wouldn't stay there. He wouldn't accept any special privileges because he was Paul Robeson. He fought for his people. And then I saw him as his career went down and out, as he went to Russia and spent time and finally came back to this country. And also... I'm trying to think of another person associated with Paul Robeson in his career. Roland Hayes, I knew Roland Hayes. I saw him when he was performing, he was a great artist. I saw him go home to Georgia and be thrown out of a shoe store because he wanted to buy a pair of shoes. All these things, you see, had an impact on my life and I've been able to sit back and rationalize on their behavior, in other words, the things that I felt Paul Robeson did for his people. When he wrote his book, Here I Stand, and I have read most of these—I've read the Souls o-f Black Folks, I've read W.E.B. DuBois's works, I've read the Autobiography of an Ex-Coloured Man, you know the story...﻿29
MG:	James Weldon Johnson, yes.
AD:	He was a novelist for so long, and I read that he found
out how a man who was capable of passing for white passed for white and lived and made money and was successful, but who in the final analysis felt guilty for having deserted his race and his people. All of these things have had a tremendous impact.
MG:	Well now, as you said earlier, your parents were acquainted
with many prominent leaders and certainly every black leader of reputation was known to them and many, many of these people were entertained in your home; and as you've said, you've had an opportunity to meet them. I just had a few more names I wondered about, that is, whether or not you ever met these people, or whether or not you ever heard your parents say something about them. T. Thomas Fortune.
AD:	Oh yes, he'a a tremendous man. He had a wonderful career,
but at that time he couldn't make money to support his family in journalism. He struggled, he worked, he wrote, and when he became a speech writer, what do they call it, for Booker Washington, when he became associated with Booker Washington, even though he disagreed with many of Booker's theories, he still wasn't able to maintain his home. And the tragedy of it is that in those days, there was not enough money for the kind of man that T. Thomas Fortune was, and the fact that he finally took to the bottle and ruined the last years of his life, as so many have done. But T. Thomas Fortune was one of my mother's very, very revered acquaintances, helped her, because T. Thomas Fortune, you know, gave her a position on the New York Age when she was run out of Memphis. And she was forever grateful for that, and has always spoken very highly of him as an intellect. When Emma Lou Thornborough spent twenty years researching his life and finally had it published under the same series... the story of T. Thomas Fortune, as she reveals it, is really illuminating and it's a very inspiring but very sad story.
MG: Yes, it is. Mary Church Terrell.
AD: Mary Church Terrell was almost a contemporary of my mother.
They were born just a few years difference and just a few blocks difference in Memphis, Tennessee. Mother wasn't born there, but by the time she was a young woman, she and Mary﻿30
AD:	(cont.) Church Terrell were both young women about the same
time. But there was a great span between them of poverty and wealth. Mary Church Terrell's father was very wealthy and he sent her to all the private schools, sent her abroad. She learned many languages and she was our finest, our best educated black woman in this country. And recognized as such and traveled as such. She traveled all over the world and learned to speak so many languages that she. . . one of her stories told how she delivered her report to the Women's International in German. And then she married Judge Terrell.
The biggest difference, I think, is that Mary Church Terrell stayed in the South. My mother came to the North, and their careers were so very different because of this difference in environment and location. And I can understand Mary Church Terrell'& attitude to my mother because my mother did not mince words at any time, to anybody, and she criticized Mary Church Terrell for her stand in many situations. So when Mary Church Terrell wrote her autobiography, she didn't even mention Ida B. Wells. As far as you know, she didn't even know her. But now Mother, on the other hand, tells a story of when the Federation* met in Chicago in 1899, and Mary Church Terrell was the president, and Jane Addams invited the Federation to come to Hull House, through my mother. And Mother then put aside her personal feelings and went to the Federation, even though she wasn't welcome there, and gave the invitation to keep the opposition—or any opposition we had—from knowing there was a division among us. And the Federation accepted the invitation and went there. But Mother felt that Mary Church Terrell should have done more, with the advantage of her education and all, in the field of race relations. And she didn't mind saying so, and of course that didn't sit well with Mary Church... nor with her family. Because when I was trying to get material for this book, any background material, and wrote to the Churches and the Terrells, they had nothing; they had nothing to give me, no references, nothing. Bob Church—now it mentions in there where Bob Church was the only one who was able to send my mother $150 to come back from California, you re-, member that. And she paid him back, every penny of it. And he wouldn't take anything like interest. But the Terrells, Roberta Terrell didn't have any knowledge of anything that ever included Ida B. Wells.
MG:	There was also the difference, I perceive, and you tell me if
you agree, that your mother was less bound by limitations of class. Her view was really all-encompassing when it came to
* Federation of Colored Women's Clubs﻿31
MG:	(cont.) her people.
AD: Yes.
MG: And perhaps Mrs. Terrell was a little bit more focused on the middle class.
AD: Might have been, but don't forget she was also limited because her husband had to be reaffirmed or reappointed every four years. Anything she might have done might have reacted adversely on her husband's career. So I understand why she didn't. But you know when she was ninety, long after Judge Terrell had died, she was in a picket line and worked to break down discrimination in Washington. She worked and she struggled... I have great admiration for her. Probably because I didn't know her any better, only from what I heard, but as I say, my mother decided she wasn't doing as much as she should do.
MG:	Now, Henry McNeal Turner was known to your mother. I don't
know, maybe he was dead before you were...
AD:	Old enough to know? That is right.
MG:	Did you ever meet either of the Washingtons—Mrs. Washington or
Booker T. Washington?
AD:	I met Booker T. Washington's son and his wife and children.
For a short time when they came to Chicago, that's E. Davidson Washington, he came to Chicago as a representative of Tuskegee in Chicago, and somehow or other he and his wife took the third apartment in our same home at 3624 Grand Boulevard at that time. They had, I don't think they had even the first child, but if they did, they had only one little girl, and when the second girl was born, of course there was necessarily too much climbing the stairs to the third floor. But they lived with us for a while and we had a very cordial relationship. Of course Booker T. had been dead many years by that time, and Davidson, E. Davidson Washington, you'll find him in all Booker T.'s material, he was sent here as a representative of the school. He was not as aggressive as probably Booker T., Jr., was. And so he was given this kind of, I'll say research or recruitment or some kind of public relations for Tuskegee in Chicago. And they stayed with us for quite a few years until, as I say, the second little girl was born, and then they moved somewhere where she'd be on the ground floor. But Mrs. Washington was a lovely person and Davidson was also.﻿32
AD:	(cont.) So I was coming and going, of course at that time I
was in school, but I remember them very well. What the misconception is, that DuBois and my mother and Dr. Bentley, and those who were in favor of higher education were, there was an antipathy between Booker Washington and this group. It wasn't that. Booker Washington stressed vocational education. He stressed it to the point where he negated all other academic education. Now, Mother and Father and Dr. Bentley and Mr. DuBois and those that were in their camp did not say, "Don't have vocational education." They only said that there are certain people who have the ability to go to college, who should go to college, so that this race can have its own doctors, lawyers, social workers, professional people. Because if everybody was a tradesman, who was going to be the teachers and leaders of the race? So it wasn't a matter of being diametrically opposed. Booker Washington, of course, had reasons to promote vocational education. He was trying to raise money for his school, and he traveled all over the country and part of other countries in order to solicit that money. And DuBois and Mother and Dad had no financial interest. They were trying to say that the race needed certain things, not opposed to, but in addition to vocational education.
MG:	How about Oscar DePriest?
AD:	Knew Oscar DePriest very well. My family did, Mother did, and
she was, as you know in the book, one of those who went all out to get him elected, he forgot all about those that had helped him get there. I'm not old enough to substantiate that. But I do know that Oscar DePriest was elected. I do know that the Alpha Suffrage Club, the first political club organized among black women in Chicago, did support him, that he came to their meetings and was welcome there. I knew Oscar DePriest as a person through my sister-in-law's family, who was very close to Oscar DePriest. He got Mae Coleman Barnett the first job in a stenographic pool down in Springfield. He lived over on Vernon Avenue. I knew his children, they were about our ages. One of the sons was tragically drowned out there on Lake Michigan, when he swam out too far. And the other son, Stanton DePriest, grew up and I knew him and his wife and all those. So the DePriest family and both his sisters, Mrs. Page and Mrs. Lightfooot, were known to me. They were my neighbors when I lived in Woodlawn back in the 1930s. The whole family and his daughters and his nieces and nephews have all been known to me, just as a part of the whole Chicago scene.﻿33
MG:	How about Madame C.J. Walker?
AD:	Madame C.J. Walker was also a contemporary of my mother's. And
my mother had great admiration for her. My mother met her early in her career. She met her when she had just put down her wash-tub, because she was a washerwoman, and had perfected this way of straightening hair. I understand that this is hearsay, but before that, when ladies wanted to straighten hair, they.'-'dfcs pvjt it on an ironing board and use the flatiron to straighten their * hair. So when Madame Walker came out with a comb, a straightening comb, and with the process, and with the products that she perfected, she became our first millionaire, really. Because she has the business acumen, or she got someone who did have it, to establish not; omly the Madame G«J. Walker School, to teach it, but to set up Madame C.J. Walker distributorships throughout the country, whe^e'they could also take the training, then be set up and then be part of this great Madame Walker chain. It was a national k,	chain. When she had this-place built on the Hudson...
MG:	This was Villa Lewaro.
AD:	That's right. And those L-E, W-A, and R-0 were the first two
letters of each name of her daughter, Lelia Walker Robinson, so it's L-E-W-A-R-O. Mother was there when Madame Walker had this big reception. And she tells in her autobiography how she went to the mansion on the Hudson River in New York, and Madame Walker had her butler to come in,and how she lived as if to the manner born. She had had training, and she was willing to subject herself to the kind of training that she needed to operate in that kind of situation. And as I said, Mother had the greatest respect for her. I don't remember her personally, but I remember Mother talking about her, and about this trip she made to Washington, New York.
MG: Marcus Garvey.
AD:	Marcus Garvey was a part of Ida B. Wells's experience. I didn't
meet him personally because at the time she went to New York to appear in his annual convention, she went alone. But she talked about Marcus Garvey quite a bit at our home, as she talked to my father and the family. And she felt that Marcus Garvey had hit upon a scheme that for the first time seemed to unite our people. In other words, he became a leader in his own right, not somebody that others made a leader. He gathered unto himself a tremendous following. And the UNIA, United Negro Improvement Association, caught on throughout the country. Its headquarters was in New York, and my mother often said that if Marcus Garvey had just lis-﻿34
AD:	(cont.) tened to her, he would not have launched the Black
Star Line; therefore.would not have gotten into trouble with the authorities; therefore would not have been put in jail and deported. She regretted this because she saw in him- and in the UNIA a potential for solidarity among our people.
MG:	How about Mary McLeod Bethune?
AD:	Mary McLeod Bethune was also well known to Mother, and to me, be-
cause she was coming up in the Federation. As you know, my mother was quite critical of the Federation because, although she was a real believer in the reason of the Federation, she thought that they were not doing what they could do in the whole overall program. So, she decided, about 1928, I think it was, that if she'd go back and become president, she could really get things working. In the meantime, she had been very active in the Federation. Mary McLeod Bethune had been working up, so they ran against each other for the presidency. I believe it was in 1928, but I'm not sure. It might have been '32. No, I think '28. Because Mary McLeod Bethune served two terms as president as they usually do. And was not allowed to run again. So that when she completed her term as president of the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs, Incorporated, she organized the National Council of Negro Women and instituted what she thought was a more dynamic program. Now the National Council of Negro Women is not an organization of individuals, but it's an organization of organizations, through which she hoped to spread throughout the country programs and other things that would be of benefit.
MG:	One more. Robert Abbott.
AD:	Robert Abbott, of course. Very well known. When Robert Abbott
came to Chicago in 1905 and started the Chicago Defender, the Chicago Conservator was already twenty-some odd years old. And there were two or three other black newspapers in Chicago which have started and stopped, many of them. The story is, and I believe it's true, that Robert S. Abbott went out to gather the news; went to his landlady's home, sat down at hex dining room table, wrote the news, took it to the printer, had his newspaper printed, went back and got it and got on the street and sold the paper. Now, from that kind of start came the Chicago Defender. And it has never missed an issue.
Mr. Abbott was quite controversial also, and he had ambitions and he had ideas. Back in the early 1900s, when nobody else was talking about it, he said American race prejudice must be destroyed. He had a masthead, he had a paper that went all through the South. He had a paper that inspired many people. In Chicago, he married﻿35
AD:	(cont.) a very fair young woman who came here from Florida, I
believe, and he was criticized for that, as all black men are when they marry either very fair or white women. And they took part in the social affairs of Chicago, in other words, Robert S. Abbott, not particularly himself, but through his wife and family. They were part of the social world, social whirl, as you called it. And took part in things that went on. He kept pretty much to himself, but he kept pretty busy. After he got to the place where he could have two or three staff members and the paper got on its own, he was able to do more as an individual. And with the backing of the paper, why, he was able to really accomplish many things. My criticism of the book that was written about him by [Roi] Ottley is that Ottley didn't do any research at all. He just sat down at the Defender and went over the old files and wrote a story from what he read in the Defender files. But I don't think anyone has made the definitive biography of Robert S. Abbott, but the story itself is fantastic. How he could come here and do, start from that in 1905, and to bring the Defender up to what it was when he turned it over to his nephew. Even the fact, the story of his name, Robert...
MG: Yes. Sengstacke Abbott.
AD: Sengstacke Abbott. And the fact that he was born Robert Abbott, his mother married this German man, I think he was German, Sengstacke, and had another family. So these were his half-brothers. And the son of one of these half-brothers came to Chicago in his youth, and Abbott took him in to the paper and coached him, I guess, and prepared him to take over. And he has built since that the Sengstacke chain, which has publications, I think, from coast to coast. And is himself very active in civic life in Chicago. It's a dramatic story and one which really should be told in detail. So I don't know who's going to take on that responsibility.
MG: What were relations like between the Chicago Conservator and the Chicago Defender?
AD: Well, in the first place, the Defender was a joke. There wasn't one single man comes here and challenges a paper that's been established for twenty-five years, or two or three papers. And they just laughed at Abbott. If it hadn't been for his landlady, why. there wouldn't be any Chicago Defender...[laughs] because he just had a room in this lady's apartment, but she let him use her telephone, her dining room. I think he walked out and got the news, came back and wrote it, took it to the printer, went back to the printers, and sold it, can you imagine such a thing? I know you've never heard of such a beginning of a newspaper which has gotten to be a national newspaper. But he did that, and so the Conservator in the meantime had its ups and downs. Several people are listed﻿36
AD:	(cont.) on the masthead as editor. You know it had to be
when my mother married him in June, and she was editor in July or August. She said in the book that she bought...I don't know where she got the money, but of course, she had made money and she traveled all through the country here, and she got so much for each lecture she gave. So that as I say, it had its ups and downs.
Now, off the record now, Booker Washington, when he got to be spokesman for all the black people in this country, wreaked his vengeance on the Barnetts in Chicago because they didn't agree with him. And in his papers, there is a letter from Emmet Scott, who was his secretary, "We've taken care of the Barnetts." And one of the reasons was to crush the Conservator. Now just how it was done, I don't know. But there's a young white professor at the University of Illinois who's done a tremendous amount of research on the black press in Chicago. And he's trying to find a publisher. He can't find one because they are not interested in such a local situation, the black press just in Chicago. So I don't know how it's going to come out, but he's been very cooperative with me, and he's sent me a twenty-five page bibliography of material he found on my mother while he was researching for his dissertation.
MG:	That's wonderful. Your parents are well versed on national
and local affairs, and they passed this interest in politics on to you. Were there any local, national or international events which were significant in shaping your thinking or your career interests?
AD:	I'm not sure, but I can remember when my mother wanted to go
to Versailles for the signing of the peace treaty after World War I and she was refused a passport. So was Monroe Trotter refused a passport, but he put on a cook's apron and got a job and got to Versailles through that ruse. I can remember when Jane Addams was castigated for her peace stand, when a woman who had spent years and years working in the interests of immigrants and poor people was just about pillorized because of her stand on peace; when Charles Lindbergh was stripped of everything because he went to Germany, came back and told what he saw of the imminence of another world war, and the president of the United States stripped him of his commission and he was disgraced before the world. It took about thirty-some odd years before he was recognized as a true American citizen, interested in America. The various organizations of which my mother was a part, and my father was a part--to know that they stood almost alone and that they suffered a lot of adverse criticism for whichever stand they took. I've seen my mother shed tears after she'd come from some organization where she worked so hard to try to get change, for improvement, and had met with just obstinate antagonism.﻿37
AD:	All these things had an impact on my life. I was determined I
would never have anything to do in public life, that I was going to marry and have six children and stay home and enjoy my life at home. But fate, you see, has a way of intervening. My husband died when we had been married exactly twenty years. I was equipped to go into social work. I therefore turned to social work to make a living. Before he left home to go to the hospital, my husband handed me $52, and with $52 and five children I had to start all over again. Put them all through college, to get them all past the bachelor. Only one to go on to his Ph.D. He is now a professor of sociology at the University of California at Berkeley. And the others, as you read, are in various capacities. My third son is now in the cabinet of the governor of the state of Illinois, head of the department of business and economic development. All of these things have happened, but these are the things that had the impact, you asked about an impact. I decided not to do anything for the public or for the race or for the world. I was going to multiply my ability and my husband's by six, because I felt that in that way I could do more for the country than just to go out and work myself. And this is one of the things that I feel, I felt then and I feel now, that those of us who have brains and ability should multiply. Not just hold the family to one child, but multiply by six or seven children. We are the ones who ought to have eight and ten children. Not the people that can't read and write. This is what happens. The prolific ones are those who need not be so prolific.
MG:	Now, look, let me ask you about a couple of specific events. You
were eleven years old when Birth of a_ Nation came out in 1915. Do you have any memories of that?
AD:	I have memories of my mother's bitter disappointment because she
was not able to rouse people's protest against the showing in Chicago. It had been done in other cities, and she walked the picket line. She was down there and she tried to get our people aroused to what was happening, to the terrible picture that was painted in the Birth of a Nation of our people just after slavery. It was so distorted and so bad, they showed all the terrible things, they made all our people look like jackasses and hooligans and people who were just looking for a dollar or a drink. And the fact that she couldn't. . .1 remember when she went to court, they went to court, and I can remember her going to court and her bitter disappointment that she wasn't able to rally any support, or enough support from our people in Chicago, to protest the showing of that terrible film.
MG:	You were thirteen years old when the East Saint Louis riot occurred
in 1917.﻿38
AD:	Yes, and I can remember that very well, because my mother went
there, and I can remember her going. I can remember her stories when she came back, and I have a story here, I have a...somewhere there is a xerox copy of the nurse that went with her. Do you remember, she says in there a nurse went with her to East Saint Louis, and of course they herded them all in a cattle car and were going to vaccinate all of them. And this nurse went with her, and I have the picture of that nurse somewhere here. If you'd like to have it, I'll try and get one to send it to you..
MG: I'd like to see it, yes.
AD: She told about my mother's activity in East Saint Louis. Now
Mother had a way of going and making all these investigations herself and coming back to Chicago and issuing pamphlets about...and she had one on the East Saint Louis riots; she had one on the Helena, Arkansas, riots; she had one on the, what was it, in Saint Louis...
MG: Yes, there was one in Saint Louis.
AD: East Saint Louis, Illino is. Dr. Bundy was a leader who was sent to prison, and Mother spent years in the fight to have him freed. Because you see, what the white people used to do, they'd go out there and shoot up our people and call it a riot. And punish the people who were responsible for organizing to try to get some rights. And this is what happened to Dr. Bundy.
MG: The so-called "Red Summer" of 1919, when there were riots across
the country following the conclusion of World War I, you were fifteen years old then.
AD: Yes, I can remember that very well. I can remember the fighting,
I can remember when it started. It started down there,.. ye lived at 3234 Rhodes, and the riots started over there at Thirty-first Street Beach, which was only a. . .what you might call a stone's throw from our house. And by the time we knew what had happened, the rioting was going on. Now, it never came close, personally, to our house, but we got word every day of the activities, of how many people were killed and how they were killed, some of them tortured. White people killed in a black neighborhood and black people killed in the white neighborhood. If they dared set foot there. They didn't have to be doing anything. And I think I told you, this brother of mine had problems on the north side where he worked, and they knew he was black although he looked like he was white. He had problems of being murdered over there. Had problems being murdered on the south side by people who didn't know he was black, and so he had to go into the house and stay for the whole duration of the riots, in order to be alive. So there were all kinds of incidents,﻿39
AD: (cont.) you know, that happened. And there were people whom I knew or probably had heard of, who had been involved in the fighting, who knew about the Hindenburg line, who knew about what would happen to a black person that crossed that line, this way or that way. Those who were coming home from work, coming from wherever they were, they stood in dire position of being harmed, even though they had nothing to do with it.
MG: Do you remember what your emotions were during that time? Were you frightened?
AD: No, because it didn't come close to the house. My mother was going out every day, I think I told you that. She didn't get into the fighting, but she did get to see people who were involved. I don't remember any personal encounters that she had. I have talked to people since who had personal encounters.
MG: Well now, was this...this was still prior to publication of her lynching record, wasn't it?
AD: Oh no, lynching record was published in 1895. It was called A Red Record* published in 1895.
MG: So these later incidents, then, just helped sort of fuel agitation for the passage of the antilynching law, which never happened.
AD: There's never been...she worked for it and she tried for it. I was with her when she went to see President Harding, and I wasn't with her when she went to see President Wilson, but I know about that day. But I was with her when she went to see President Harding, and the committee, and...once again, being the youngest, I went along with my mother. I went with her many times when I could ride free back in those days. And she used to take me with her. I was the youngest and I was liable to get in trouble at home, whereas my sister always was very content to be at home reading. She wasn't any problem. But [laughs] now whether that was her reason for taking me, I don't know, but I just know that I had a chance to go along with her. And I can remember being at the Federation meeting in Richmond and going over to the dedication of the Frederick Douglass Home in Anacostia. Her personal relationship with Frederick Douglass was meaningful to me. Because although he died in '95, the same year that my mother and father were married, and she wasn't able to go to the funeral because she was on a speaking engagement, it was very vivid to me because she had personal... and I have some of the xerox copies of their correspondence from Frederick Douglass, from England and from America, too.
MG: In 1925, you married Benjamin C. Duster, of Mount Vernon, Indiana, who was a law clerk in your father's office. Mr. Duster died in 1945. Could you tell me something about your husband? What kind of a man was he?
* Ida B. Wells, A Red Record: Tabulated Statistics and Alleged Causes of Lynchings in the United States, 1892-1893-1894 (Chicago: Donohue & Henneberry).﻿40
AD:	My husband was a very brilliant student, a very brilliant man,
but he was handicapped because of his. . . the places where, first where he was born and grew up, and second, because of the conditions of employment. Let me say first, as far as I know, he was born in Mount Vernon, Indiana, which is a tiny little town in Indiana, and part of my research is to find out about his family and his mother's family.
Going back to his grandfather, I have Benjamin Duster. Benjamin's father was Henry Duster, so my husband was Benjamin II, not a junior. Benjamin II. My son was Benjamin III; his son is Benjamin IV. Hd*was a studious person and when he graduated from high school in Mount Vernon, Indiana, there were four in the graduating class. I have a picture of their graduating class. Their teacher was a very brilliant man and a very dedicated man. He had given them a tremendous background, and when my husband finished high school, it was the practice then to go to Terre Haute, Indiana, where the teachers college was, take a six-week course or a six-month course, or whatever it was, and then come back out in the rural district and teach a school. So his mother looked forward to him going to Terre Haute and then coming back and teaching in the rural schools. They were paying $25 a month back then and that was big money.
So when he got away from Mount Vernon to Terre Haute, Indiana, and went to what was then called the normal school, he saw the big town, he saw the big college and the opportunity to study, so he did not stop with the six-month course, he decided to go on for the four-year. He graduated in the class of 1914. His mother was disappointed by him not coming back to work right away. Then to add insult to injury, he had to work his way through normal school. He didn't have any money or resources, so he had a job taking care of a large clubhouse. I think it was something like a country club, where all the wealthy people of Terre Haute had a membership. He became, as they so often do, involved with one of the members, and a certain member told him that his son was graduating in the same class with Ben, and his son was going to the University of Illinois and if Ben was interested, he could go and get the same kind of job there to help himself through school as he had in Terre Haute. He accepted that. He went to University of Illinois in Champaign-Urbana. That's where I became involved, because my brother was at the University of Illinois at Champaign.
When the war was over, the First World War, and Ben got back to Indianapolis—by that time his family had moved to Indianapolis — there was nothing particularly there for him to do. So Herman told him, "You come on to Chicago and you can work at the post office, work in my Dad's office. There are many more opportunities here." So Ben came to Chicago after World War I was over. As I say, he was a student, he was a brilliant student and a very fine person, he was a very mild-mannered person. His early background, I'm sure, had its impact on him being a very mild person, not aggressive, not
&
Benjamin Duster II﻿41
AD:	(cont.) outspoken. My mother's biggest objection to my marrying
him was that, "He had no get up and go." But he was a lovely person, and I liked him very much. And it looked like he might have liked me, 'cause he talked me into marrying him, instead of going to law school.
So when we married, we started out with nothing. At this time, the depression hadn't gotten there yet, but young people in those days started with nothing and built up. Now of course, they start with everything. And so we first—talking about family relationships—we first lived with my oldest brother, Ferd, who was married and had two children and a very lovely wife. They had one room in their house that they didn't use and so they let my husband and me rent that room, a little back room off the kitchen, just big enough for a bed and a dresser. Not a chair, but just a bed and dresser. And this is the way we started our marriage. And we stayed there for a year until we saved enough money to rent an apartment, and after we stayed there for about one year in an apartment, I had saved up $100 and I went to buy a house with it. I didn't realize $100 wasn't enough for a down payment, but I had always lived in my own home, so I decided I would buy a home.
My husband, in the meantime, found that working at the post office was not to his liking. Although he finished Indiana Normal State School and was authorized to teach school in Indiana, he didn't want to teach school. He was looking for, I think, a wider horizon. And unfortunately, Chicago was not quite ready with that wider horizon. So then he decided he would get a job in construction work. That's the way he put himself through school, doing construction work during summers before he went to Indiana State Normal. So he was very adept at that. For a while he worked at construction work, and then, since he couldn't get anything in the academic field that he wanted, he got all the equipment to do interior decorating, so that he was his own boss. He worked at interior decorating in Chicago for a number of years.
In the meantime, taking part in civic and sometimes political activities, he became interested in the seventeenth ward organization; he became precinct captain, and used his ability in persuading people and meeting people and forming political clubs. We worked in the seventeenth ward, and when I say we, of course wherever he worked, I worked, too. When we moved to Thirty-second Street, Thirty-second &nd Prairie, he became affiliated in the second ward organization. In the meantime, he was working all the time.
One interesting interval was when Madame Malone, who was the organizer and the founder of the Poro system, came to Chicago and bought the whole block in the 4500 block on what is now King Drive. Poro maintained an exclusive dining room in one of the buildings and Ben, because of his background in the club, became﻿42
AD:	(cont.) the banquet manager there. He would work all morning,
go out on the floor and take charge of the dining room. They served meals, lunch and dinner, and then all parties. Many people used to use the Poro dining room as a get-together for small groups, parties, receptions and things. It was a beautiful building. There were three great big buildings in that one block, and Mrs. Malone bought all of them. She brought the business to Chicago from Saint Louis. That's where she established it. And so my husband worked there for quite some time, at the rank of manager, and then in the meantime he was interested in politics. We were all Republicans back in the 1920s. You were a traitor to your race if you were a black Democrat. Now, it's the other way around. But in the work that he was given...he was given political jobs after he was successful in winning some campaign, I don't remember which it was, but then he was given a position on the secretary of State's staff, to license automobile drivers, right after our licensing law passed. He worked then at Forty-fifth and Cottage Grove Avenue to test the driver's license applicants. He worked there for a while and then that location closed down. The Democrats came in and he lost that job and finally, just before he passed, over a year or so before he passed, he was in the attorney general's office as a special investigator for the civil rights division. Because by that time, you see, by 1940, there were people who had complaints about discrimination and the attorney general's office set up a special office for investigation of those kind of things. That's where he was assigned. He was there for about a year or so before he died. So just about the time we were coming out from under the depression, and of course, I think he was hired at a tremendous salary of $120 a month. [laughs] Just about the time we were having a whole $120 a month to use for the family, he took sick. And as I say, it was unusual, it was unexpected. I didn't think when he went out and went to the hospital that that would be the last time he would walk. But that's the way it turned out. He was only gone about two months. He went to the hospital in July, and in September, he passed. So that left me with five little Dusters, the oldest was seventeen. He had just finished his first semester at University of Illinois at Champaign and he was initiated into the chapter of the fraternity that his father had founded back there in 1920.
MG:	What was the name of that?
AD:	Alpha Phi Alpha.
MG:	Well, let's move on. Talk about your children. You had five, four
boys and one girl. Would you tell me their names and something about each of them?
AD:	All right, we'll start with the oldest, as you usually do, I guess.
My oldest son was Benjamin, he never used the designation "III," he was very down to earth, he didn't want any flowers or anything﻿43
AD:	(cont.) about it. He won't even say anything about his present
position. I don't even know what he does. He's president of one of the MESBIC corporations, Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Corporation. He's been president of that since it was organized in, I think it's about the fourth or fifth year of its existence. This is the corporation which funds or helps to fund going, successful businesses that are operating for profit. If you need the money for expansion...and, as opposed to small business, Mama and Papa businesses, it has to be a corporation that has demonstrated its ability to operate and make profit. So that his organization is a combination of his law degree, he went to the University of Illinois, then came back here after he had put his time in the army. When he came back, he went to De Paul Law School and took his law degree, passed the bar examination and practiced law for thirteen years. Then he was invited to join G.H. Walker and Company, investment brokers. He was a representative, so he got into the investment banking field and stayed there until he was offered this position with MESBIC.
He married a lovely girl, Murrell Jean Higgins, who's the daughter of one of the outstanding Chicago women, Ora Higgins, and they have five children^ five lovely children, I might say. The oldest is Alice, who is a junior at Illinois State University, at Normal, Illinois. The second is Benjamin IV, who is at Yale. This is his freshman year and he's doing very well there. He's going to run track, he's going to do a lot of things he told me in his last letter. The third is Karen, who is going to graduate from high school in '79. The next is Kevin who is a promising youngster, very unusual kid, who is going to graduate from grammar school this year. He's just twelve. And the youngest is Muriel, nicknamed Mimi, who is now in sixth grade.
Their mother has been very active, and their father too, in educational situations, trying to do for their children what I tried to do for mine. In other words, in order to have good schools, the parents must be alert, they must be organized, they must be in a position to go to the board of education and voice whatever changes they see necessary to make the school a better place. And the only way you can make a public school better for your child is to make it better for all the children. And so they've been very active. He's been president of the sixteenth district council. They've beeri responsible in reviewing and having selected outstanding principals for all the schools in district sixteen. They've been part of the science fair in district sixteen, the oratorical contest in district sixteen, and generally have made a tremendous contribution. He was selected as one of the citywide people to work on a plan to desegregate Chicago's schools. And they just made their report to the board of education not more than six months ago.
So that his work has been as much in the community, civic and educa-