Gay Francine Banks:
Bazoline Estelle Usher:
My interview is with Miss Bazoline Estelle Usher, retired director of all the Negro public schools in Atlanta, Georgia. This interview is being conducted at her home at 591 Waterford Road, Northwest, Atlanta, Georgia.
Actually, before we get into the actual interview about your role that you've played in the black community, I would like for you to tell me a little bit about your family background. Could you tell me something about your parents?
Well, I was born in Walton County. It's just a rural area, actually ten miles away from the railroad. And my mother and father were very ambitious because they wanted, as their children were born—there were four of us in all—and as soon as we were born, they wanted to get where they could send us to school. So we moved from there when the fourth child was just about a year old. There were four of us in the family. I was the oldest and I have a brother who lives on the other side of town. And then there were two girls. We moved to a nearby town that had a small school and then later on... He wanted to send his children to college. So we moved to Atlanta. And that's how we got moving around, to find schools, to try to find some place where he could have better schools for his children.
And my mother and father were not slaves, but they were descendants of slaves. My father lived with his white father until he got married. And even after that. They were very nice to him and to all of us. It happened just like this, that my father's parents had several children. They were all much darker than my father. And of course they were all children of this black father, but my father was the oldest, and his mother had him before she married. So he was accepted, he was accepted in the family. And they thought well of him, and his black brothers and sisters were all nice to him.
But my mother was not so fortunate. She was a fourth or fifth child. Those other children never accepted her and so she had to be...﻿2
BEU: (cont.) Her mother sheltered her and finally her mother gave her to an
old couple that lived in their community, and this couple reared her until she got married, at the early age of eighteen. She was married early because she had nobody to take care of her. Of course, she was not accepted. There were other children in the family before she was born. When this fair child came, the child of this white man, the children did not accept her. So that's why she had this real kind of...
But my mother and father were attracted to each other, and they married and had these four children, and they never had very much education. My mother could just a little bit more than read and write. She had about a fourth grade education, just picked up from here and there. My father had about a seventh grade.4.but he was interested in mechanics. So being interested in that, why, he became first a carpenter, then an automobile mechanic. And then finally he was interested in having an automobile shop of his own, where he worked on automobiles and bicycles, ^nd where he did pretty good, pretty well, with that.
GFB: Okay. You said that your parents moved to Atlanta from Walton County, Georgia.
BEU: Covington, Georgia. They moved from Walton County to Covington, seeking better schooling. Then, when the time came for me to go to college, they said that I was a rather apt student and this woman who had charge of the school there in Covington recommended that I go to Atlanta University where she had gone to school. And so, because they couldn't, there was no way for them to do, they just moved on up to Atlanta where I could be in school.
GFB: BEU: GFB:
BEU:
BEU:
Okay. And so what was this woman's name in Covington?
Mrs. Dinah Pace Watts. She's an old graduate of Atlanta University.
You say your parents moved to Atlanta from Covington, Georgia. Could you tell us, were you born in Covington?
fiEU: No. I was born in Walton County in 1885, and we moved to Covington; I imagine we moved to Covington, about '91 or '92. I imagine that, because I was about seven years old. I went to school early, of course. And then we moved to Atlanta in 1903. We went to public schools there in Covington and moved to Atlanta in 1903.
GpB: So did you go to...
And graduated from Atlanta University in 1906.
GpB: Okay. When your parents moved here, when you moved here to Atlanta in 1903, did you continue your education in the public school system?
Well, I was at Atlanta University.' You see, they were able to send me to Atlanta University. I was boarding at Atlanta University. I came to Atlanta University in '99, 1899. And I was living on the campus, and when they moved to Atlanta, they found it difficult to... The fee was very small, but they found it difficult to get that fee. They only charged me﻿3
BEU: (cont.) six dollars a month, and they found it difficult to get that money. And so they moved on to Atlanta where I could live at home and I went home when I was in the freshman class and then I stayed home. See, I didn't board any more after that.
GFB: Approximately how many pupils were there attending Atlanta University at the time you were attending school?
BEU: There were about ten in my class, that was the senior class, but I'm trying to think now. How many were attending? Well, they had a large high school, see, the high school was on then. They had a very large high school, and I graduated from the high school at Atlanta University, and they had a large school that was on then. I imagine around 150 or 200, and in the college classes—see, my class was just about nine—there were, oh, in the combined college classes, the four college classes, freshman, sophomore, junior and senior, I don't imagine there were barely 100 students. They had a large high school class and dropouts were large too. They had a lot of dropouts» but they had a large high school class. All of the colleges in Atlanta had high schools onto them, for a long time. They had a high school class and a normal class. There were those who took two years of normal training. They were to become teachers. There were just about, maybe, seventy-five in that class. I would say they had a high school enrollment of about two hundred, and about seventy-five in the normal department and maybe seventy-five in the college. The college enrollment was small. My class, I forget whether it was seven or nine. I was the only woman in the class. And ahead of me there were just..• See, not many women chose to do the college work. They all just did the normal work, and graduated and went into teaching.
GFB: So, did you encounter any special problems, any difficulties because
you were the only female student in the senior class attending Atlanta University at that time?
BEU: I got along fairly well. I was very attentive to my work and I would have... I was leading my class, I know that was why I was recommended for college, because I was considered to be a good student. And I was leading the class until an older man, he came from somewhere.. .h is name was Augustus Dill,, He later worked with the NAACP, with Dr. DuBois.v Augustus Dill came in. He entered the school there in the junior college class and of course, having had a lot of experience, he outran me for the valedictorian. And I was salutatorian of my class. But if Mr. Dill hadn't come, I would have been the valedictorian. But he later worked with Dr. DuBois in Crisis, that's what he did, he went to New York and worked on the Crisis, that's the forerunner of this magazine that they use for the NAACP. But I believe they call it Crisis still, don't they?
GpB: Yes, they do.
BEU: Yes, Crisis. Mr. Dill worked for the Crisis long years ago, with Dr. DuBois, when Dr. DuBois was working.
GFB: Okay. As a student at Atlanta University, did you have a class under Dr. DuBois?﻿4
BEU: Yes, I had a class with Dr. DuBois. When I was	a	high school student, I
had ethics under him. And I had German. I had	a course in German under
Dr. DuBois. Then, when I was in college, I had	a course in history and a course in sociology under him.
GFB: So what type of person was he?
BEU: Oh, he was a very exacting type of person. For instance, nobody dared come to his room late. He was a stickler for time and for doing your work. He was a very exacting person. Well, he didn't mingle too much with students, but they all had great respect for him, for his knowledge, for the information. I was very proud to have been one of his students because I got a great deal from it. I'm a stickler for time now, and I think I got that from Dr. DuBois. Of course, I'm just ashamed of the fact that I forgot this engagement today. But I was glad to be under him. He had a number of students doing research under him. Of course, he did all those research magazines there in sociology.
GFB: How was his attitude toward you? Were you the only female in his class at the time?
BEU: No, I wasn't.	I was the only one that was a senior, or whatever I
was, I was either a senior or a junior, but college students from four classes were allowed to select that course. So we had fifteen or twenty people in the class. I never had a class so big. Now, in his class we had when we were in high school, we had a large number in there, about twenty-five or thirty people in the class. And they came from all grades. The course was elective. I don't know whether it was really a junior or senior college course, but it was a course of Dr. DuBois, so we took it for that reason.
GFB: So did Dr. DuBois leave school much that year? Did he do much traveling
around since he was so active? Do you recall anyone coming in, taking over any of his classes?
BEU: Not too much, not too much. I tell you what he did, he had people come to him for this research work. He was pretty regular in attendance of his classes. Occasionally he did have to go off from the school, but that wasn't often. He was there most of the time.
GFB: Okay. During this time you were a student at Atlanta University, what other people were teaching there at the time you were a student? Can you recall some of the other professors?
BEU: Well, I remember I was a math major. I had a double major. I was a math-science major, and I was very much interested in the math teacher who was Miss Swift. The science teacher was Mr. Webster. I forget their first names now, but Mr. Webster was the science teacher. He taught physics and chemistry, but his specialty was more physics. He taught the high school course in physics and a college course in physics. I was especially interested in that, in those two people.﻿5
BEU: (cont.) I wasn't too much interested in my classroom teachers any more than I was in some of the other people on...Dr. DuBois was one of them. And Miss Swift and Mr. Webster are the three that I remember.
GFB: Okay. Did the fact of you being a female and being black, did that have any influence at all on you making your decision as to going to Atlanta University, say, going into the particular field of study that you went into?
BEU: No. I didn't give it any thought, going to Atlanta University. You see, I was there, in this school, in Covington and they were sending students, promising students, to the school, and it was just recommended that I go there, so I went along. And most of the teachers were white, very few colored. They were very few colored; most of them were white.
GFB: In 1906, in Atlanta, I know that the race riot occurred.
BEU: Yes.
GFB: Could you tell me a little bit, maybe something about that?
BEU: Yes. Well, I don't know too much about that; it didn't touch me, it didn't affect me. I do remember staying in the house, because where I lived on Haynes Street, the car, the trolley passed right by our door. And we were very much afraid that somebody might throw something out of that trolley, so we stayed inside. I didn't go to school then. My brother was working for Western Union att that time, and something happened to a Western Union boy, but nothing happened t© my brother. He didn't see any part of it. It was all over. And be jmsst didn't know anything about it, so we really didn't know anything ab®at :it.
When we heard that this was happening, we stayed inside the house and never had any trouble. I just know about it, that it happened. It happened largely on Decatur Street. You see, that's where most of it happened, on Decatur Street, in some barrooms or something down there. They had some pictures of nude women, and the students had said that the blacks had put those women up and so whites went down the street and tore down all those things. They began shooting and catching everybody they could. Not too many people were killed in it, but it was a terrible...it scared a lot of folks. They scared us and we stayed in the house- But we went out, I think it was after two or three days; it didn't last long. It was over the weekend.
GFB: Did you remember hearing if anybody died as a result of this?
BEU: I don't remember who it was, but some people did... See, I didn't know any of the people, but it was a terrible something and innocent people were just dragged down. As I said, my brother was working for the Western Union and a Western Union boy was killed, and we were very scared but nothing happened to him.
GFB: Okay. Once you left Atlanta University, where did you go, education-wise?﻿6
BEU: When I left Atlanta University, I tried to get a position at Atlanta schools; I didn't. So I went to Virginia and I taught school in a town called Cappahosic, Virginia, at the American Missionary Association, which has charge of Fisk, you know, in Tennessee, and used to have Atlanta University. I taught there for five years, and after five years I transferred to Saint Paul's School in Lawrenceville, Virginia, and taught there five years. And from Lawrenceville, I came to Atlanta. I took the examination in Atlanta and was appointed to school, and then I stayed there in Atlanta schools until I retired.
GFB: So did you ever get your master's degree?
BEU: Yes. I got a master's degree. I attended the University of Chicago.
I was going up there during the summertime and it happened that just about that time, Atlanta University became a graduate school, and when they became a graduate school, so many people here were getting their degrees. I was supervisor and so I felt that I had to get a degree. So I left this degree in Chicago, that I just had one summer with, I left that degree in Chicago and came here and studied at Atlanta University with them, and they gave me credit for some of the work I did in Chicago. And because the people who were under me were getting this master's degree in Atlanta University, a master's degree was recognized. And it would take me two more years to do at Chicago, and so I came here to work in this...winter, did extra work in winter and in the summer and got my degree in 1938.
I have studied at the University of Pennsylvania. I did some work with psychology there, and I studied at the University of Chicago. I did a lot of work at the University of Chicago. And it was justified. What happened at the University of Chicago...when I went there, they examined my transcript from Atlanta University, and I had to do twelve, I forget what they called them now, units, before I could reach college. You see, when they examined my transcript from Atlanta University, they required so much more from me to get my high school diploma, so I had to do that before I got... AH these people here in Atlanta were going right along with what Atlanta University and with what the other schools had given them and getting their degrees, so I had to come home and get my degree so that I could say that I had a degree when those under me were getting degrees. You see, teachers who were teaching under me were getting their degrees right along from Atlanta University. So I left that degree at Chicago and came to Atlanta University and got a degree.
GFB: Once you moved from Lawrenceville, Virginia, back to Atlanta, is this when you became part of the educational system here in Atlanta?
®EU: That's right, the Atlanta school system. I began in the Atlanta school system as a teacher. I taught for five years. After five years I became principal of an elementary school. After five more years, I became the vice-principal of Booker T. Washington High School. After five more years, I became principal of a junior high school. And after nine years, I became supervisor of education for blacks in Atlanta.
Okay, could you name them...could you recall the names of these schools?﻿7
BEU: Oh yes. Well, let me see, when I came here, I was assigned to be the seventh grade teacher. My grades in the examination were high, so they made me a seventh grade teacher at Bell Street School. I stayed there five years. Then I became principal of Wesley Avenue School, that's the elementary school. I stayed there five years and became assistant principal of the Booker Washington Junior-Senior High School. See, that's when it was opened. Then after five years I became principal of the Howard Junior High School. And after nine years, I was transferred to city hall as supervisor of Negro education in the city of Atlanta. It really was in the capacity of a Jeanes supervisor, they have those Jeanes supervisors all over the South. They've just about gone out now. But they had them for years. But they made me Jeanes supervisor so that they could get state money.
GFB: So then it wasn't difficult for one to move up through the ranks like you did and become supervisor?
BEU: Very few people did It. It wasn't difficult for me because the only job I ever asked for was the first job. I got this first job, and then when they made me a principal at this Wesley Avenue Elementary School, they tapped me and sent me out there. Well now, as principal of that school, I was making more than the teachers were going to make at the high school so I didn't ask to be transferred. The white superintendent called me up and wanted to know if I didn't want to go to this other school. I said, "Well now, they're only paying the teachers out there $80 to begin with," and I said, "I'm making $105 a month here and I don't want to change my job and get less salary." Well, he wanted me to go to that high school and he would give me the same salary. So I went to Washington High School at an elementary school principal's salary. I got my salary and the other teachers got $80 a month and I was going to get $90 being assistant principal. He paid me and gave me the automatic increases and that's how I started off, ahead of everybody else.
GFB: BEU: GFB: BEU:
And then I was transferred to Howard School—I was in University of Chicago that summer-!—and I got a letter from the superintendent here that said I'd been appointed principal, and I had to rush home and had a week to get the schedule and everything ready for Howard. See, I didn't ask for that. Then they were looking around for somebody as supervisor, they wanted me to do that. So the superintendent called me up and told me she was transferring me to city hall. I asked not to be transferred because I had only ten more years, but she said she wanted me so the only job I ever asked for was the first job. And as to these others, I was just pushed into them.
Okay, but you were just supervisor over the black schools, is this right? That's right.
And so they had someone else totally different for the white schools?
That's right. Of course, when I left there, they chose Dr. Bowen as the supervisor; he was over everybody.
GFB:
So was he black?﻿8
BEU: Yes. See, that's when the change came. Times were changing.
GFB: So, when did you leave? You left in...
BEU: In '54.
GFB: In 1354. What do you consider as your most important achievement in life, if you were looking back over___
BEU: Well, I would perhaps say my contribution to education, to training
teachers. Because I have a very curious philosophy about teachers. I think it's very important... I have never been a stickler for having all scholars. Sometimes scholars forget about the pupils under them. I have always said this, that I'd rather have a teacher who knew how children learn. If you can study, if you can see how children learn, you can put that into practice. That's better than having a person who is an able scholar.
"So I have taken some mediocre people and trained them to be good teachers because I can show them, and they could take courses to help them to see how children learn. The trouble with our children nowadays is that they don't know how to learn. See, the teacher doesn't know how to motivate the child so that he will really get what is an understanding. If you know how people learn, then you can make progress. But if you don't... Why, sometimes you have teachers go into the classroom and they will do all of the reciting. The children just don't do it; they sit there passively listening and pay no attention. Some of them don't know what's going on. But if you can get those children doing something, doing themselves and figuring out some things, not too many people do that. Most people who are well educated are impatient. They just can't wait to let a child work it out and get it out for himself. So I would think one of my greatest contributions is that I have trained teachers all along, in elementary school and high school, all along. I have trained teachers. Teachers now are saying that they miss my contacts with them. Helping them all out and things, that's all. So my greatest contribution perhaps is my furtherings to education, to helping teachers become good teachers. I think I did a pretty good job at that.
GFB: BEU:
GFb: BEU:
It's often said by some people...so in essence, your philosophy in life meant any child was capable of making some progress.
Teaching doesn't follow. You may be a scholar and can yet not teach. Because you have to know how children learn in order to teach. This was my theory.
So has the church played an important role...
I became a member of the church early in life, and, until the past ten years, when transportation became a serious problem with me, have been very active in all forms of church work, especially the Sunday school, and young people's work in the church. I have been an active member of Friendship Church for seventy-three years. In 1947, I received a loving cup for perfect attendance in Sunday school for a whole year. Just three years ago, I received a plaque from the Uplifters Club, an auxiliary of the church to which I belong,for meritorious service to the club, the community, and the church.﻿9
BEU: (cont.) I am also a member of Kappa Omega chapter of the Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority, and was instrumental in a successful presentation of the choral group of the sorority, for which the club was grateful. I still keep my membership in the sorority because I believe in what they're doing. Of course, their fees are kind of high now, but I'm still a member because I believe in their program.
I have also been active in Girl Scout work. I have an invitation there now, mailed a letter this morning, to the Girl Scouts. I was instrumental in getting the Girl Scout movement in Atlanta among Negro girls,and I've kept that up. So I have an invitation there now to attend the annual meeting of Girl Scouts on the 17th of September. I don't know whether I can make it or not, but I have it. And I've just sent my twenty-five dollars this morning in the mail to the Girl Scout Council for an extra drive for sustaining memberships.
GPB: So vhen did you sort of initiate this bringing in the Girl Scouts into the black community?
BEU: Yes. Well, that was about, let's see, it must have been about, I don't know when it was. About 1950, something like that. I was recommended because I was with Mrs. Grace Towns Hamilton, you know her? She and I met with the Girl Scout people down in Rich's, and we became liaison persons between the Girl Scout board meeting... Of course, a lot of white women out there were worried if Negroes had it and some of them didn't. And so we became a liaison between the board meeting and the Girl Scouts, and we got a few leaders and we got a few Girl Scouts. We had one Girl Scout troop at Friendship Church, that's my church. Then they let them have them in schools. So it just kept on like that, and I was a leader in that. So I have been active in community services and church work. And I was never too much into club work, but I am a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority.
GpB: So when did you join that? Did you join Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority as a student at Atlanta University?
BEU: No, I didn't know about it when I was at Atlanta University. It was
organized at Howard University when I was there in 1904, 1905, something of that sort, but it wasn't brought to Atlanta University. It didn't come to Atlanta University until later, until fifteen years later. It came to Fisk before it came to Atlanta University. But I had been teaching in Virginia, went back home and I was invited to join by Thelma Whittaker. Thelma Whittaker went to school in Boston and I was invited to join after I had graduated and was a teacher.
GpB: Okay. So through this organization you did a lot of things helpful to the community?
BEU: That's right.
gFB: All right. At this particular point, I'd like to ask you another question about say, what are your attitudes toward being a black woman? What are your attitudes toward the women's movement that's going on today?﻿10
BEU: Well, I tell you. I think I really am not too much interested in that. ERA, you're talking about?
GFB: Yes.
BEU: I'm not too much interested in it, because I think if they get what they're talking about, it would be more than they could handle. I think women are making progress and doing nicely and doing very well. I'm not too much interested in ERA. I think women are doing very well, and if they get this thing passed, they'll have more over their heads than they bargained for. That's really what I feel about it. For instance, for some equal opportunities, I just don't think women belong in. I don't see much need for women to go into the army, things of that sort. Of course, they're doing it. But I'm not too much interested in the ERA. And I think women are doing well enough and forging their way and getting along all right. I don't know, I'm not too much interested in it.
GFB: So on this subject of the black male and black female relationships today, do you think the relationship between the black male and female today, has the gap between them widened in the last...
BEU: I think it has widened. It has widened because...1 don't think it's the fault of the women, it's the men. See, when men get into money, they feel that they're thinking, you know, associating with men of both races, and there's so many more white women in a higher echelon of society than blacks, it's easy for them to get a white woman. And you see, these poor few black women, they suffer. That's the way I look at it.
GFB: So how do you think the situation can be remedied?
I don't know how to remedy that. I don't know how you're going to remedy that. Have to do something about it, I don't know, something.
GpB: Primarily, Miss Usher, what we would like to talk about today would be to go back and discuss some more about your family background and your life at Atlanta University. The last time we met, you said you had two sisters and one brother. Could you tell me, what type of relationship did you have with your brothers and sisters when you were young?
BEu: We were a very close-knit family. My brother is still living in Atlanta; I call him every day. I wasn't as close to my brother as I was to my sisters. I'm living here with my sister's daughter, who was...given to me; she is adopted by me. And we all live together. My mother and father got along very well until we were grown up. You know how old men are, they like young women, and after we were older and out of college, my mother and father became estranged. They were good friends all the while, but he came to the city and he liked the city ways, you know, and my mother didn't like that, until they separated. But he always visited us and oh, we became very close friends, my father and I. Now this child here, excuse me just a minute, what is that...﻿11
GFB: You were talking a little bit about your parents, their relationship...
BEU: My sister was not in good health and so she knew that and so she passed
from this earth. [Her daughter] was eleven years old. And so then after she passed, I adopted her. Her father was perfectly willing because he thought the world of me and my mother. When we went down to the court, he said that he knew no other two women in the world he would want this child to live with. So she was then eleven years old, maybe twelve; I adopted her and I sent her on to college. I sent her to school, got her married off because I was anxious to get her married off because I couldn't have that responsibility. I had a mother too, you see. My mother and this girl and I lived together; we were very close, my younger sister and I. Now, the other sister and I were close, but we didn't live together and so there's no explaining the rule of...
GFB: So did your brother and sisters go to Atlanta University too?
BEU: We were all graduates of Atlanta University. He and I from the college
department, and the two girls from the normal department; they had teaching positions in the Atlanta schools until they got married. They had a law at that time, if you got married, you had to resign your job.
GFB: What about your brother? Did he go on to teach?
BEU: Yes, he went into it and he became a minister. He was an Episcopal
minister and he was retired from the Episcopal church. See, he's three years younger than I am.
GFB: The article you did with the Journal - Constitution in 1972, with Miss Frances Satterfield, the article entitled "The Remarkable Miss Usher," in that you mentioned an interesting thing about how you got your name. Could you tell me a little bit about that?
BEU: Oh yes, this was the child with whom I live; this is the girl with whom
I live now. Lavada was trying to call my name. My name is Bazoline, that's difficult, especially for a little child, saying "Bazoline." And in trying to say "Bazoline," she used to say "Babeen," and it got to be "Babeen," and my sister teased me about it. She said, "We're going to call you 'Babeen' because that's what Lavada calls you." Lavada called me "Babeen." She's called me that all her life. And everybody else calls me that now. It's just around. They know me as "Babeen." And she got her friends, her college friends to call me "Babeen," and so it's just sort of stuck with me.
GpB: Okay, could you tell me, according to Dr. Bacote in his book... Are you familiar with his book, The Story of Atlanta University? Well, in his book, he talks about how life was for the students at Atlanta University before and during the time that you attended school there. Could you tell me something about the relationship between the men and women at Atlanta University during this time? I mean, what type of activities were they involved in?﻿12
BEU: Well, I don't think the...you mean on the faculty?
GFB: No, like the students.
BEU: The students, oh. The students had very little activity. They did play baseball. My brother was on the baseball team and he was on the football team. But it wasn't on a very large scale. They played the colleges in Atlanta because see, there were two or three of them, Clark and Morris Brown and Morehouse. They played all these colleges, and two or three others, and Tuskegee, and that was just about the extent of their activities so far as baseball and football were concerned. There was very little of tennis or basketball or any of those things. I mean, they played baseball, well, of course they had a diamond, had some space for it, but they had no equipment for playing basketball and things like...
GFB: Okay, in essence, the students didn't have anything like dances? Were there anything like dances or get-togethers that the students had?
BEU: Yes, they had a dance. They had no regular dances or anything of that sort. About once a year they had this graduates dance, you know, the prom. That has been very popular all the while. The students who came were largely interested in studying, you see, these allocations didn't mean anything to them. They were trained largely to go out and teach school. See, there's no diversity of program.
GFB: Okay, was there a division between the students at Atlanta University, say, based on the color line, you know, if somebody was dark skinned. I think Dr. Bacote alludes to this in his book. He says there were two groups, the Owls and the Wolves or somebody?
BEU= Yes, that's what they had. I never could understand them. There were two factions among the men, Owls and the Wolves. And it seemed that the Owls liked these fair-skinned women here... At that time, I tell you, there were a number of half-white children going to school, of course. A lot of them had parents who sent them to school.
BEu: So, did a light-skinned person have a better chance of making it, than say a person of darker skin?
BEU: No. I tell you really, no. Not so far as the teachers were concerned. Of course, I thought the teachers were very much in favor of those who knew, who could deliver the goods. I didn't think the teachers were biased. They might have been, but I doubt it. See, we didn't have too many teachers. The school had a small student body, and I don't think they were biased.
G?B: Well, what about President Ware? Wasn't he president of Atlanta University?
During my years at A.U., Dr. Bumstead was president. Mr. Ware became president later. His father was the first president of A.U. The first president was Ware. I didn't know him. And the next president was Bumstead, and that's the one I knew. That's the one who signed my certificate. And then Bumstead either died or resigned,and the first president's son became president. He was just president for a short while.﻿13
BEU: (cont.) Let me tell you about the presidents in those days. This is what they did. They were at the school very little. They aren't like presidents nowadays. They were touring the country, trying to get funds to carry on the school and they came now and then. And every time the president came to the school, it was a special occasion. We turned out, it was especially for the president. We saw him just so often. President Ware just wasn't there. He was only president for a few years. But he was never at the school, he didn't even live there. They spent most of their time away from the school and the dean was the one who ran the school, the dean of the college. And this dean was Dr. Adams, under me, it was Dr. Adams. See, I was just there seven years and under me was this dean, Dr. Adams. And he later became the president when they joined together; he was the president of the first Atlanta University and he knew it because, you see... And that's when the presidents began staying at the colleges. Before that time, we seldom saw them. Some of them, we didn't know them hardly. Just now and then they came. Of course for special... they were there for commencement, they opened it, but all the work of the college, of the university, was done by the dean and the faculty members.
GFB: Okay. So how long did the president usually serve? Did it vary? Did he have a specific number of years or...
BEU: Stay at the college when he came?
GpB: Right.
^EU: oh, he just stayed one or two weeks, something of that sort. Just a little rest period, a week or two weeks and then gone again.
GFB: All right. I mean, how long did he serve as president of the college? Did he...
®EU: Oh, President Ware served just a few years, four or five years, I don't know exactly, I don't know those figures. But I know that Bumstead was there, Bumstead followed the first Ware. The first Ware was there a good long while, and Bumstead followed him and then when Bumstead passed on, why, this other man served a few years and then...he just served a short term. I wouldn't say it was over ten years. See, I don't know those figures exactly.
GFB:
BEU:
BEU:
When you were a student in Atlanta University, segregation was very prevalent in Atlanta during that time...
Yes.
How did most of the students feel about it? I mean, did you get together to voice your opinion about it, you know, just among yourselves?
They accepted it because they felt it was something... there was	nothing
they could do about it. They accepted it,and they accepted	even signs
of it among their own people. You see, girls of fair skin kind	of had a
rough time with some of those, because they were pretty nice to	them, but not﻿14
BEU: (cont.) as nice as they could be. Girls who were fair had to take a lot.
But I don't know, they just took it. Nobody had anything... they accepted that as something about which they could do nothing. Really nobody ever bothered about it. And in the meantime, Dr. DuBois was doing research work and trying to work out some problems, I don't know that he...he had students of his, classes, doing work all through the year for publications that he later presented. But there just wasn't too much done about it, they just accepted it.
GFB: Right, so then everybody sort of more or less went along with Booker T. Washington's...
BEU: That's right. That's right. But not all. Dr. DuBois didn't. We understood this, we were opposed to Booker Washington, opposed to his ideas about things. And in the minds of students at Atlanta University, there was Booker Washington to one side, advocating segregation and all that sort of thing, and TMBofs on the other, his ideas. The students got far enough along to do that, to know, to realize that there were two trains of thought among Negroes, but very little was done about it. Very little was said about it. And we had no outstanding people who spoke out for any of the... in fact, they didn't dare, they just took the words. Students at that time were rather passive, that's what I feel by looking back over it. The unrest began to grow afterwards. It just began to grow and it grew in the students, long time before it came right out.
GFB
beu
GFB
beu
GFB
beu
So what about lynchings? Were there many in Atlanta? Did any occur here? Yes.
Did the student body ever hear of many lynchings? Not too many. In that period when I was there? Right. Yes.
There were lynchings. See, the thing there, there were people who came down, these carpetbaggers who came from the North, came down and they didn't come just to themselves. You see, there were a few people spotted about in the South who accepted them and wanted things to be better. And you see, just like Jimmy Carter now. Now there, I think it has been in his mind a long time as a boy how badly treated Negroes were. But he has tried, he has lived along with it and has put up with it until now, he just now has opportunity to speak out against it. But you can see, from the things he has done all through his life, he has adhered to his principle of treating everybody fairly. But these people who came down here, they couldn't have stayed in the South, a large number of whites from the North couldn't have stayed in the South unless there was somebody here... For instance, the state board of education made a grant of so many thousand dollars to Atlanta University for education.
gFB: This was during the period you went there?﻿15
BEU: Yes, but the school didn't accept it because they couldn't accept it on the terms it was given. See, that's why Atlanta University just did without a lot of things.
GFB: So what kind of stipulation did they put on that money? What did they demand of Atlanta University before they got the money?
BEU: One of the things they demanded was this, that the students not leave.
You see, when students got a little education, they went to the North. That students not leave, they had something like that not long ago. You could get a grant for college or for medical school, if you came back and practiced in Georgia, for so many years, things of that sort. But one of the things was that you stayed here in the South, instead of going North.
GFB: it didn't have anything to do with the racial balance of the school, then?
BEU: I don't remember that.
GFB:
BEU: GFB:
GFB; BEU:
BEU;
Nothing with that.
Oh, excuse me, another thing. White children were not allowed to go to school in Atlanta University. The children of some of these teachers did go to the kindergarten, but when they left the kindergarten, when they went to the grades, they went to the private, to the public schools in the city.
GpB: So then, on the campus of Atlanta University, the white faculty members, they sort of intermingled with the black students?
Yes.
For the students who lived on campus, did they eat together? I mean.
BEU: Yes, that's one thing they did. Spelman didn't eat together. But at Atlanta University, every table had a couple of white people added and they were the sponsors of that table. And then Negro boys and girls were there. But Atlanta University, Atlanta University stood out doing little things like that.	You see, when they had their soldiers,
they all went together; when they ate, they ate together. But Spelman had its private dining room.
They segregated the white from the black? Faculty members from...
It was faculty from students, they said. But there were just a few faculty members who were black, see, but they did have some black, I think.
On this subject of Spelman, you taught at Spelman'; Yes, I taught at Spelman, after I retired.﻿16
GFB: So this was during when, about?
BEU: Well, this was when we were open there, this was just before the break that... What year was that? I taught at Spelman in '54,'55, '56. I taught at Atlanta University summer school before that. And things were being said, but we just didn't get to the breaking point. See, it was understood. There's always some kind of fighting going on. Somebody having some trouble because an individual would do something, let's say, go sit on a streetcar, sit on the front seat; they'd be fighting a white person because they didn't want to take their seat. And then, on the streets even, there was a lot of activity they tried to keep down. But times are so different from what they were. We just kept our mouths closed, and swallowed it and said nothing.
GFB:
BEU: GFB:
BEU:
GFB:
BEU: GFB: BEU:
GFB: BEU:
GFB; BEU;
So then, how did most of the people feel, you know, about the case of Brown v. Board of Education, Topeka, Kansas, in *54 when the NAACP was...
Well, they felt that the case ought to be settled in favor of the blacks.
So then, it was a definite change after that point. Could you see a change in the people that...
A definite change came after those children sat down in Greensboro. That's when really, when the real change, after Greensboro. Then we had the streetcar business down in Montgomery. All those things just changed things. Things have been changing since.
So what about the students from Morris Brown? Were you here in Atlanta then when they went down to the terminal station here, the train station here? The train station and they were trying, they sort of more or less took over to protest segregation?
Well, when was that, after...
This was in the fifties, actually.
No. Well, of course you know, I wasn't	in there then, but...no, I don't
know anything. I didn't know about it,	I didn't know any detail of it.
Okay then, let's...
But as a rule, back when I was in school, they accepted segregation as something about which you could do nothing. And of course, nobody likes to be treated bad, and so we objected to the things that were done to us, but what could you do?
So then did your parents tell you how... Did they tell you you had to act in a certain way?
No, my parents did not; my parents did not understand it. In our family we were religious. My father didn't bother; he didn't understand it. There are some blacks who do understand it and who say one way or the other, but my father didn't. He didn't have anything to say about it at all. Didn't bother.﻿17
GFB: Okay, so then going back to this thing of segregation again, the young ladies at Atlanta University, the ones who didn't make their clothes, let's say, where did they go shopping to get their clothes and things?
BEU: They went downtown.
GFB: Were they allowed to go in or did they have to go in the back way or something?
BEU: No. There were rules about shopping. They didn't have to go in the back
way because they went in the front door. But they could not try on dresses and hats and shoes. You just had to buy them.
GFB:
GFB: BEU:
GFB:
BEU:
You just had to more or less guess at your sizes then?
BEU: That's right.
And then if it didn't fit, you couldn't bring it back to exchange it?
I don't know about not bringing them back, but I know we didn't try on hats. That wasn't because they didn't want us to try on hats. That was because there were white customers who would see Negroes try on hats and wouldn't try them, you see. Wouldn't try them after Negroes had tried them on and that lessened their trade, you see. They wanted to have as much trade as possible.
GFB: So were there many black businesses that more or less just catered to the black people? The Atlanta University students, where did they go?
BEU: They had to go to these white stores. Somebody did open up a shoe store, but it didn't last very long. You see, it takes capital to do these things. If you don't have the money, you can't just go out there and do it. This shoe store was on Broad Street because you couldn't try on shoes in town, you see. And I think that maybe some white was behind this shoe store. The shoe store lasted for a little while, but it soon went out of business. And so they had to go back and dresses were tried on, they put you behind the counter. Put you behind, they had places for you. See, white women went out there and put on those dresses, and -strutting before the mirror and so they could decide what they wanted. But if a Negro woman wanted to buy a dress, she had to take the dress and take it back into a closet and try it on right there so the white people wouldn't know you had tried it on. And you weren't allowed to try on hats, you see. It was just something, just looked at them and bought them. And I don't know how we did it, to save my life. But that's what we did.
Okay. The last time we talked, we also talked a little bit about the ERA, the women's movement and everything today. When we ended our interview the last time, I was getting ready to ask you the question about, you know, the black woman and ERA. Could you tell me a little bit more about that?
Well, I tell you, the black women now are divided just about like the white women are. I don't see exactly why, but they are, and I think that some of them are just too lazy, you know, to go out and assert themselves and do﻿18
GFB:
BEU: (cont.) something. They figure, "Well, I'm just going to depend on my husband, because my husband's a..." Then, too, another thing, the more intelligent black women are for ERA, see, because they can see all the ramifications of it. But you see the lazy, indolent, uneducated women who are talking against it. And you have some of them sometimes are very outspoken. I see some of them on television speaking out about things, and I figure too that they don't know exactly what they're talking about. But the more intelligent women among Negroes, as I find them, as I try to find out, are in favor of the ERA. They want this equal rights passed. But there are also women against it.
Okay. Also the last time we talked, you talked a little about the church and its impact on your life. I know that you have been the recipient of many awards and honors because of all the work that you've done in the church. You also stated that your family attended Friendship Baptist from the first, when you first came to Atlanta in 1903, I believe. So could you tell me a little bit more about...was your father also active in the church?
BEU: Yes. When we were children... My father wasn't an educated man, about the seventh or eighth grade, but he believed in doing things for his family. And my father had when he was born...his father gave him some land to build a farm on and they tried their best to do it, but they just couldn't do it because it was so far away. It was out near the river and then too, there was nothing else out there. Nobody would come out there and live, so he had to get to town where his children could be educated.
My father was a superintendent of the Sunday school. He was the superintendent of the Sunday school while I was, oh, till I was, yes, I was ready to go to college. Of course, I went to college early, I went to Atlanta University High School. But he was super...and he carried us to Sunday school every Sunday I can remember. This buggy that he had, had a seat in the front. My mother and my father sat on that seat and had the baby in the middle. And then there was another seat, an extra seat that you put in, we called it a rumble seat,* he put it in the back and we three children sat on that seat. He carried us to Sunday school. That's all they had at that church. They had a Sunday school every Sunday with a handful of children there and preaching about once a month or something like that. But he carried us to Sunday school when we were little children.
And then, when we moved to Covington, of course he lost that job as superintendent of the Sunday school. He was superintendent because nobody else knew how to do it. And he could read the Bible. So we went to Covington and joined a church there. We always went on to church and went to Sunday school. And then when I came to Atlanta, I did the same thing. I joined the church in Covington; I came to Atlanta and joined Friendship. And that's in 1903, I believe it was. And I went to Sunday school, went to BYPU, they used to have that, they don't have that now.
^ Rumble seat - folding seat in the back of a car BaPtist Young People's Union﻿19
BEU: (cont.) You see, so many things have dropped... The church used to be
the only thing that the Negroes could go to. And there are so many things, outside interests now that it's taken all that away from the church. And I stayed in the church there and I became superintendent. I did everything in the Sunday school and I finally became superintendent. Then I attended Sunday school as long as I could go. I stopped Sunday school about ten years ago now, because I couldn't make it up there. And I got Dr. Smith to take me to church, but he won't get there on time. I've learned from Dr. DuBois to do things on time. That's one thing Dr. DuBois did not do, he didn't come to his class late; he didn't allow anybody else to come in there late for the morning lessons. So I have learned to be a stickler for time, so I went to Sunday school as long as I could get there on time. I could not afford taxi fare and I hate to be asking somebody all the time. So I don't go to Sunday school now, but I am a member of the Uplifters Club, an auxiliary of the church.
GFB: Right. Uplifters Club?
BEU: That's right. That's my church club. Now, I'm not an officer in that church club, but I'm the ruling force that gets everything done.
GFB: I've heard that from Dr. Bacote, whose wife was telling me...
BEU: Yes, well, she's a member of that club. Whenever they have something to be done... They presented the AKA gingers here last fall; well, I was behind the whole of that. You see, I have no office, I don't care for office; what I want to see, is see something going and something doing. So now what I'm active in is the Uplifters Club.
GFB: BEU: GFB:
BEU;
So, does your brother attend church there? No, my brother is Episcopalian. Oh, so he's Episcopalian.
B£U: But they don't go to church now. They go to church occasionally, and
when they go to church, they go to the white church on the other side of town, they go to the white church altogether now. When he began teaching school, he taught in this Episcopal school and that just took him away from the Baptist...he was baptized in the Baptist church. All of the rest of us are Baptists, but he's Episcopalian.
GFB: Okay, what type of people attended Friendship, whom you knew, whom your
father knew, when you first started going there? I mean from what socioeconomic background? I mean, were you middle class? Were most of the people middle class or...
Yes, they were always... Friendship Baptist Church is the oldest Baptist church in Atlanta. Friendship Baptist Church always had middle and upper class people, they're still that way. Friendship boasts now—of course, I don't see anything to boast about—but they have more professional people in all walks of life. The mayor is a member of our church.
GpB: Mayor Jackson.﻿20
BEU:
Mayor Jackson. His father was pastor there and he is always there; I imagine he was baptized there.
GFB: So did the Jacksons, the Maynard Jackson whose parents started going to Friendship about the same time you started, your parents, or...
BEU: No, no, no. They came here. They didn't live in Atlanta even. They lived in Texas. They came here from Texas, I don't know what time it was, I have to...it was in the fifties, I believe they came from Texas. Maynard was a little boy. Now he was a man who believed in speaking out about things.
GpB: How about Walter White?
®EU: Walter White of the NAACP, we used to call him "Fuzzy." He went to
^Atlanta University. He was at Atlanta University when my brother was there. Yes. You know, he always spread something around. But being white, he did a lot of things, he could go to a lot of places. He could go out... After he was in the NAACP, he went down here into these Southern towns and around. Everybody was scared he was going to get killed, because he was passing for white. See, he did a lot...if you're of white skin, in those days, it put you in a lot of places you couldn't go as a black.
Ella Yates Gaines is the city librarian. She is another member of Friendship. It just boasts a large number of people of education.
GPB= Okay, well what about during the movement of the 1960s, the civil rights movement? Was Friendship involved in that at all?
BEu= Yes. That boy's father, yes.
GPB= Maynard's?
BEU: Maynard's father, he was right along in there about that time. And they were very much in on that. Of course, you don't remember him now. That's what he was interested, his father was. He gets it from his father, his mother, and all the members of his family. They were working on that.
Where were most of the black population located? Where did most of the middle and upper middle-class blacks live in Atlanta during this time?
BEU: On the west side of the city. They still live there. See, they branch out, a few here and there, but they're still in the southwest section of Atlanta. That's where they were. Hunter Street was the hub of...all the streets run off from Hunter; all that's an intersection. There's Hunter Street straight through there, and when it came to Mozley Drive, it stopped. Of course, we didn't ever go... Out here, nobody dared come out here. Liable to get killed, see, in this section. We put houses all along here.
GpB: So what about Auburn Avenue? It was known as "Sweet Auburn?"﻿21
BEU:
GFB:
GFB:
GFB:
GFB:
GFB;
BEU:
Auburn Avenue, yes. On Auburn over there, that was the business section and there were a few houses on either side of Auburn Avenue, but Auburn Avenue doesn't spread to northeast. See, that's northeast, but it doesn't spread over to northeast Atlanta. Now, Hunter Street just spreads all over. See, you can't get houses, there's no houses over there for blacks. There was Auburn Avenue, the business section where professional people had offices and they spread out tenement houses on either side. Down to the Grady Hospital and on north, but in this side, it just burst out all over. All, the whole southwestern section. But not in the Auburn area. It's kind of like this: Here's Auburn and here's Hunter. Hunter spreads out like that and Auburn was sort of...
Oh, I see. So then, primarily what do you do now? Now that you're retired, what are some of your hobbies or interests?
BEU: Well, here's one. I keep this bag here, anytime I feel like doing, I pick it up.
Oh, that's beautiful.
BEU: I make them of straw. This is a hat, this is...I haven't finished it.
I'm going to put some more on top of... And I crochet. I crochet just anything. Then I do crossword puzzles. They take me a long time. And I play solitaire.
So that's what you...
BEU: That's what I do. When I get tired of one, I do the other. And the
only thing I have to do is, on Friday, I have to fix the yardman's dinner. And that's all I have to do. I don't need anything. Now, let's see, it's twelve o'clock. Generally this time of day I take a little nap. I take a nap until 2:30. At noon I get my lunch ready, you see me doing that. Then I take a nap. Then I get my program at 2:30 and then when I feel like it, I crochet; when I don't, I get out a good crossword puzzle. I do this, that, one or the other.
Before we,..
BEU: I have very little calling, I don't do any calling. But I use the telephone mostly. I've had more calls today. Some white woman with the Girl Scouts... I was in the Girl Scouts and they had a meeting Saturday, this woman, Dr. Scott, Negro, the first Negro in the Girl Scouts, president. She's president of the Girl Scouts and that's the first time that's happened. So I couldn't make it there, but I wanted to be there. I tried.
Right. Okay, before we close up our interview for today, could you tell me your views on marriage? You know, being a professional black woman, what do you think of marriage as a whole? As an institution.
Marriage as a whole?﻿22
gfb:
Yes, I mean, you know, just the institution of marriage.
BEU; Oh yes, by all means. As an institution, according to the law, personally, I don't know the law, but according to the law, I believe in getting a license and getting married in front of the law. I don't believe in living together.
gfb beu gfb beu
gfb
Like what people call "shacking" today.
No, I don't believe in that. I'm too old-fashioned for that. So then what about...
Nobody in my family thinks much of that.
Right. If I'm not being too personal, could you tell me... You've been a professional black woman and everything, you know...why you never married .. .
BEU: Well, I say, as Lavada said to me the other day, one of the reasons was this. That I was a person...I was the oldest in my family. And I had gone to college and had learned a little something about... trying to help them along, trying to get them where they could do something. I had to help my brother and sisters. I helped my brother through school. It didn't cost too much, but I went to work and did things like that. As Lavada said, I was busy helping and then when I woke up to realizing anything, I was past thirty. And after I was thirty, why, I didn't, I just didn't see anybody that I felt... All the good men were taken. I just haven't seen anybody since I was thirty-five years old, and that's^ about the time when I had these responsibilities lifted off me. And didn't have them all then, because I still had my mother, and I took care of my mother and father until they passed and it seemed to me, I was the only one in the family who would. I was the only one who could budget and really cover things, but I had some tough times because I've known the times when I had bills to pay and I didn't have money on hand. I paid, just had to. Something worked out. And so, but that's really the thing, why... I have nothing against marriage. And I would have married if I had found anybody. But I didn't find anybody.
And that's why, when Lavada...I said, "When you're in college, get a husband. Get you a husband out of those college grads, out of your class." And Lavada's daughter, there she is there, she teaches at Spelman. Dr. Browning. She has her doctorate from Harvard. She graduated one day, married the next. She graduated on Monday, she was married on Tuesday.
GPB: Where did she meet her husband? Was he from...
BEu* Her husband was from Ohio; he's from Springfield, Ohio. He was living here and that's where she met him, at Emory University. He was a graduate of Earlham College and he had this scholarship to do his master's at Emory. His master's is in teaching and he was teaching, he was doing his master's and teaching in a white school out there. Of course, he's never known anything but white, anyhow.﻿23
BEU: (cont.) And he had a friend who was a friend of Jane's father. His father
brought him out here on the Fourth of July, and he met Jane and after that he just liked her. Jane had another fellow she was going with, Dut she liked him. At first she didn't want to be bothered with him. But we talked to him, I found out how intelligent he was. We talked to him about some games we were playing on television and some of his answers were real smart, most of them, and he knew so many of them that I told Jane that I liked him very much.
See, he just started dentistry. He got a scholarship to Harvard, and while Jane was there, somebody saw her and offered her a scholarship. Then immediately after he got this, he got his doctorate. He got a doctorate in education from Harvard, but while he was there, he always wanted to be a dentist, so he applied to Tufts. That's a picture of him over there in the corner, see, way up there? Yes, that's Jane, her husband, and son. And he applied, he got his scholarship to Tufts and they sent him to Tufts to do dentistry. So he's qualified now. They want him at Emory, of course he was out there and they know what kind of student he is. They want him at Emory to teach a class in the dental school. But he hasn't been able to do that yet. But he's qualified to teach, because he's got his master's in education, his doctor's in education; got his master's in education from Emory, his doctorate in education from Harvard.
While Jane was there, she got this opportunity, so she went ahead and studied. And her daddy here said, and I too... In her book, her thesis, she gives credit to us for pushing her on. So we pushed her through, gave her a little money, as much as we could. See, I have a little^income from the rent of the house, that's what I'm saying. The others don't get anything and I was the only one who could get anything, and pay the bills, so that's what counted.
Gpfi: Okay then, Miss Usher, I guess at this point then we will close our interview until next time.
GPB:	Today, Miss Usher, let's talk a little bit more about Friendship
Baptist Church, 'could you tell me, exactly what is the Uplifters Club?
fiEU: Well, the Uplifters Club is an auxiliary of the church whose function
is to carry out the program of the church. That is, they help with the elder people, the elderly people of the church, and then they welcome visitors.
That's how the club got founded. The founder of the club was Dr. Georgia Dwelle, one of the older members of our church. She was on a vacation in Pennsylvania one summer and she had an automobile accident. And she went to a hospital there in Philadelphia and some people from the church there in the community came to visit her, and it was so nice she asked the name of the club. They said it was the Uplifters Club. So she came home and organized the Uplifters Club.﻿24
BEU: (cont.) When we first started, the job was this, to furnish flowers for the church. We couldn't do it all the time, of course, because it was expensive. But we used to furnish flowers as often as we could and that was just about once every month. And then a little later on, they decided that they wanted to furnish a rest room for women. They did that a while and then the church took over. See, they'd start these projects and the church would take over them. The church took over the rest room because they wanted it much more elaborate than we had. And then they changed to something else.
The object now is to further the program of the church in the church and in the community. And we have fund-raising drives in order to help the church financially and we have programs. We presented a cultural program here last fall, and those programs, we hope, help the people in the community. It's something, they're free, you see, and they can all come to them.
And then, occasionally, the pastor helps out the other organizations in the community. For instance, there is an organization now that has its base at another church,but they want clothing and food from other places, other than their church. But we have a representative of our club who attends that meeting, I forget the name of the meeting, it's citywide. But at Thanksgiving time, we collected clothing, old and new clothing, and then food of the canned variety and dried variety, that you can use. We have a nice collection then, at Thanksgiving time, and we turn that over to our representative who carries it to this meeting,and it was distributed among the people there. See, that's the kind of thing we do.
If the pastor becomes involved in something where he needs somebody to help him out, why, we do that. Last year also, this is what we did. We collected, we had a shower of cloths and tissue, Kleenex tissue, that we took to the cancer home. Because that's what they need, a lot of that. And we did that, you see, that's the kind of work we do. And then if we have some money, we give that money, now and then we give money, at least three times a year we give money for anniversaries; that's in April. Then we give money on Men's Day and Women's Day. We try to make a very respectable contribution on those days. Because those are the days in our church when we have fund-raising drives. We try not to have them all the time, but we have them occasionally and that's what we do. That's just about the work of the Uplifters and they keep busy at that.
GFB: Okay. Are there other types of clubs in the church besides the Uplifters Club?
BEU: Oh, yes. They have some other clubs that are similar. You see, we have
only fifty members. That's just one of the clubs. The choir even acts as a club. See, the choir does similar things. Of course, they do different things. Because they made a record last year and sold that record and made money like that. The choir and all the organizations of the church.
GFB:
So how does...﻿25
BEU: I don't see why I can't think of it, the other club that...and then they
have the young people's club and then the young adults. And they have the... I can't think of the one that works with us a whole lot but...I can't think of the name of that club.
GFB: So when was the Uplifters Club founded?
BEU: it was founded in the middle forties, just before Dr. Carter passed.
Dr. Carter was the pastor there for years and I think it was '44 that he passed. But the club was organized, I guess about '43, because it wasn't in existence very long before he passed. And then, let's see, I don't remember when...we went along for a while without a pastor and then we had this Reverend Jackson, and then Reverend Samuel Williams and now Reverend William V. Guy. But it was the middle forties when this club was started, about '43 or '44.
GFB: So how are the members selected for this club? I mean, can anybody who...
fiEU: Anybody who joins the church, if you want them, we just invite them and bring them along. We've had a lot of discussion about that. It's not a social club, it's a club for the church members. And we did at one time, with Dr. Dwelle,have a member there from the Congregational church, Mrs. Pitts. Mrs. Howard Pitts was a member from the Congregational church and she joined our club, but we don't advocate getting our members from other churches.
Now when we had our program last fall, in September, we presented the AKA Sorority Chorus. We have six members of the AKA Sorority in our club, in our church. Three of them belong to our club and three of them don't. So we invited those three members who were not members of the club to act as hostess, as ushers. We asked them to assist us with the ushering. And of course we were all dressed in full dress. They had long dresses and they liked that. So those three persons came and then we had our three members acting on the hostess list. And see, one of those members of the church liked our program so well and liked the roster that we have, so she asked to join. So we asked her to join. So she just came on and joined. So when we called the president, the president said, "Bring her on, we'll welcome her. We're glad to have her." And so we have her.
And since we got her, we asked the other two. It happens that the others are members of other clubs in the church. I can't remember why I can't think of that club. Wait a minute, King's Daughters, that's what it was, I think. But anyhow, she was a member of that. This other member of a sorority was a relative of Dr. Carter's and so naturally she had joined the church of his daughter, this club where his daughter was a member of The King's Daughters, that's what it was.
GFB:
So, could you tell me a little bit about Reverend Carter?
EU: Oh, Reverend Carter was there as pastor for a long time. And he's way
up in age. They brought him to the church and he came when he got ready. And they have, I got into a little trouble about this once, but it was﻿26
BEU:
GFB: BEU:
was one of the leaders in the Sunday school. And so all the folks went home and the church attendance was very low, just a few who came, and the giving was very small. You see, Dr. Carter didn't bother about the giving. All he wanted to do was come there to the church. And they said, they made up their minds they weren't going to get a new pastor as long as he lived. They decided that, you know. So we just came on, and accommodated him. They didn't have to take care of him. I don't know how he survived... But he has a grandson who's very active and who was working and taking care of him, but I guess he had some investments somewhere too. But anyhow, he didn't depend on the church. For instance, you know what I did. I was teaching school. Gave five cents on Sunday, and I just don't understand, see, giving wasn't like it was now. I just think, I gave him five cents on Sunday and that was generally, when you got it all together for the month, it was just about two and a half dollars, or three dollars. And now I give fifty dollars every month. You see, the difference between the giving, then and now. And of course we are stretching our gifts now because we're trying to paint the church. See, and when the church burned while Dr. Carter was there, he didn't do anything but take the insurance money and built it right back like it was. And everybody, most of the people wanted, then, to take that insurance money and add something to it and get it going. And then later on, he decided that that was just what they wanted and so that's what they had.
But everybody loved Dr. Carter. He was just a fine man and he was well respected in the community. And he was an advocate for Prohibition. So he used to laugh and say he'd preached his church empty twice. See, they got angry with him because he preached so much about Prohibition, and a lot of them just left the church. And so he said he just kept preaching and went on and they came on back. I don't know what was the reason, but he always boasted he preached his church empty. But he was an excellent speaker, and you could listen to what he said. I used to write for him. He was a contributor to the Baptist magazine that was published in Nashville, Tennessee, and he used to come to my house and dictate to me what he wanted written. I would write it and edit it for him, and he liked that. He liked me very much. And I liked him, I liked him very much. Since his passing, they have named the school for him and they've named that center, low-cost housing center for him.
(cont.) true. Well, the young people, we had a flourishing Sunday school. I worked in the Sunday school, always did work in the Sunday school. But they had a flourishing Sunday school with just large attendance, young people and old people as well. And when the Sunday school was out, you see, the natural thing for you to do is to have those people stay over at the church. But when Sunday school's out, they walked all the way home. And you know the reason they went home?
What?
Because Dr. Carter never came, seldom came on time. He got there when he could. He had a bladder trouble and so he had that kind of... And generally, when they started services, it was eleven-thirty. You know, I wasn't going to do it and the others weren't going to do it, stay there from eleven. You see, Sunday school got out at eleven. And we had a thriving Sunday school that began at nine-thirty and out at eleven. And Mr. J.M. Alexander﻿27
GFB: So then, as long as he was pastor of Friendship Baptist, the membership remained the same, it didn't go down?
BEU: No, it stayed right there, they stayed right there until... And when
he passed, oh, the city of Atlanta mourned his passing. I think, now I was in Fort Valley that summer that he passed, I wasn't here. And I think they had his funeral at the auditorium. I'm sure they did, because the auditorium was packed, the city auditorium. See, the church was small. It could accommodate a very few, just a handful. The church was small. Have you been to the church?
GFB; No. I've been by it.
BEU: Well, it's smaller than it is now. You see, they haven't increased
it because when Reverend Williams was there, he wanted a new site. Everybody was moving out. It's right in the city. It's right close to the Terminal Station. See, that's right in the city. And if you go there on a Sunday, it's surrounded by automobiles. Everybody who comes to church has to drive because they live so far away. And all live out here, in this community, other communities. They made a spot check of where the members lived when they were trying to choose a new location. They found out, here's the church and here are the people out here, all around. Most of them in the southwest section, they could have a church out here, but there were some there who just didn't want the church changed. And they were the giving people, they were the ones who give the money, and so Reverend Williams couldn't do anything with them, so he decided he's going to have a white church. They painted the church white. It makes it expensive, but we have something on it now that is not going to be so expensive because you can wash it. But what Reverend Williams had on there was just paint, they had to paint it to get it clean. But now you can wash it off, I forget what type of plastering they did, but they did a type that you can wash off.
GpB: So when did the church build the Friendship Baptist Apartment House?
BEU: They didn't build those; the federal government built those. But the
government wants sponsors, people who are interested. We have committees, who do various things there. For instance, Reverend Williams was the prime mover in getting one of our members as the manager of that apartment project. And of course he's going to see to it that everything goes on well in the area of the church, and then he will look after old members of the church too. And that's what he does, he's one of the very influential members of our church.
^FB: So do the low economic people live in those apartments or just anybody...
Anybody. Anybody, but of course being from our church counts, if somebody in our church wants to move into one, they do that. I've known several people who've gone in there, but it's open to anybody. They keep it full because it's right there, right in the college community and a number of people, young people who graduated from college and who have married, newly married, take residence there. Because they can qualify because they're﻿28
BEU:
GFB: BEU:
GPB: BEU: GFB; BEU:
(cont.) just out of school without a job, and I don't think the rent there is over $100, I think it's $72, or something, that's all. You pay according to your earnings, you see. So, I've known several young couples who've gone in there and so it keeps full, they don't have any trouble. And that shows, this is a pretty nice group of people.
Could you tell me, what did most of the black people do, you know, what type of work did they do, the ones that attended Friendship?
Well, I'll tell you about Friendship, because Friendship always has had a name of quality instead of quantity, so far as education is concerned. Now, if you take Wheat Street Church, they are a big church, they have a lot of people, but I don't want to say it in that kind of...in that sense, but it's just ordinary working people in service and things of that sort. But Friendship has always had a name of having a very large number of professional people, that's why they don't give any money. See, poor people, working people who believe in the church, just believe in their church, give money. They give their money to the church. When you take intelligent people, doctors and lawyers and teachers and things of that sort, you know, they have other places to put their money. See, they are interested in sororities, fraternities, social clubs and just other clubs. I know a lot of people now who go to Friendship,they spend so much money on their clubs and put nothing in the church. Don't you see, the average working person wouldn't do that. But Friendship has a large number of professional people in it, people have always said that about it. But, it just loses. They're doing fairly well, but you have to keep pulling them. But a minister there will have to work against the intelligentsia because that's what he will find. And that's why Reverend Williams couldn't move that church, because they had so many arguments, and if it had been the group out of Wheat Street Church, they'd have carried it over like they wanted to. Couldn't carry it with these folks. That's the type of people they have.
So what about the present minister of the church, Reverend... The present minister is Reverend William V. Guy. So is he a motivating force, can he...
Yes, he does, he's a good worker, he does very well. But you see, the thing about it is this, he has to do that plan, he can't...Reverend Williams built that plan and this man is trying to pay for it, get it down to where we can expand. We still need an educational building and need it very badly. And that's what he's trying to do, he's trying to get us to the place where we can afford one. You see, since he's been there, he needed somewhere to live, so we had to buy a house for him to live in. They got that house over near Dale Creek Drive; the house on Dale Creek Drive belongs to Friendship and the pastor is using it. And that's the only [thing] he had, he's done, other than pay these notes. When he started in there, they were just paying, the notes didn't come down very much because there was so much interest, it was new. He took it when we just had started and he's done all of the programming, the building, to get us working. He's just now getting us working. He's been there about three years, he's just now getting us to working because they just aren't giving like they ought to.., But they are now.﻿29
BEU: (cont.) In addition to what they call the tithe, it isn't tithe exactly, but it is, what do you call the commitment giving? Each member is asked to say how much he will try to give during the year and then they put that down as what they expect. In addition to the giving, the regular giving that they promise, he asks people to give to a special fund, called a retirement fund. Now this retirement fund just goes at the end of the year. For instance, last year, we had $10,000 in this retirement fund. That isn't too much because they have $100,000 in there. The budget is $110,000. But $100,000 of that was to run the church. And $10,000 was for the retirement fund. And you see, the retirement fund is just paid on the principal. That reduces the principal, but these other payments are notes and so much of it is interest, there's very little on the notes. So that*s what he's trying to do. He's trying to get this retirement fund up where we can get down some of it and can build this educational building. See, it's all in the plans out there. You can see the picture of it. They have a building that runs out from the church, but they don't have it.
GFB: So what would be the function of this educational---would anybody in the
community be able to go to this building?
BEU: This educational building is going to be for church schools, you see, they
take -everything out of the church. For church school and for club meetings, auxiliaries like our auxiliary and...little affairs that children have and they -might have a basketball court, you see? They certainly would have ping-pong tables for the children, games for the children. It would be a place where children can go, that is what is needed. When Dr. Carter was pastor, the emphasis was on old folks. He built an old folks' home, they tore that down and planned this new...the emphasis now is on young people. I lived through that, to see where emphasis changed from old folks. They didn't pay...there was a time when people paid no attention to children. Children just, you know, spoke when you're spoken to and otherwise. But now children will tell you what. Children are encouraged to speak up. But in that age, emphasis was on taking care of the old folks. Well now, something is done for old, the government does a whole lot for old folks, but churches and other organizations, Girl Scouts and Boy Scouts and girls clubs and "MCA, all that sort of thing, they are looking out for young people. So that's what we need, a building which is called, in most of the churches, an educational building, to help the young people. If we don't have young people, we're not going to have any church. You've got to have them to get the church members. We're losing nearly all of our young folks, they're going to places they know in order to have a good time at the church. And they do almost anything, bingo, they have that bingo at the church.
GFB: Well, what about the Congregational church? I know at one point Atlanta University used to be associated quite closely with that. Could you tell me a little bit about that?
BEU: Atlanta University was supposed to begin in the old Storrs School, a red frame building on Houston Street. It was in the same block as the First Congregational Church. It is quite probable that the school held its com-﻿30
BEU: (cont.) mencement program and other public programs at the church. After A.U. moved to its present site, they, Morehouse, and Spelman had their public programs at Friendship Church, the largest church in the neighborhood, until they could build auditoriums. Friendship was just the only church and that's where they went. And they went there and had their commencement exercises. See, they always went there before they had buildings of their own.
But there's no connection over there. They're just proud of their tradition, but no connection between the schools and the colleges. And it just so happens that the presidents of Atlanta University and Morehouse and Spelman all joined Friendship Church. Dr. Gloster is a member of Friendship, he and his wife and son. And Dr. Mays, his wife was a Methodist; she belonged to the Methodist church, but Dr. Mays is a member of Friendship...and Dr. Manley and his first wife> not his second wife; this is his third wife, I think. Dr. Manley and his wife are members of Friendship Church, nearly all of them, as I can remember. I've been here a long time.
GFB: Well, what about the Congregational church? What type of people went there?
BEU: Oh, the Congregational church is a very similar type. They were like that too. They never have been swell on the money giving, because they've had that one church that's been paid for ages and ages, so they just run on board and run the church. But they are the very same, they are very much like Friendship people. And they are maybe more socially inclined than Friendship, but they have a very elite membership. And it's different from Wheat Street. Wheat Street and Bethel have difference. But Bethel Church is down there on Auburn too. But First Congregational Church and Friendship Church have similar memberships. They are very proud of that too.
GFB: So what about Ebenezer?
BEU: Ebenezer is between the Congregational church...First Congregational
Church and Friendship Church have elite membership. Wheat Street has working membership—labor, and domestic, largely. And they boast, if they
get somebody___ Now for instance, Dr. McLendon, his wife belongs to our
church. She wouldn't go to Wheat Street. She didn't want to go over there, and he stayed there because he was a member of Reverend Border's class and Reverend Border invited him to come over there, you know, just have somebody in the church that they knew. And so Dr. McLendon joined Wheat Street Church. And she wouldn't join. See, that just shows you. She stays, still in the church, but he comes to Friendship all the time because of her. And that was the class of people they had, and Ebenezer is between them.
GFB: So they make up both the professionals as well as the working class?
BEU; Yes, that's right. But they tell me they run that church on a very
businesslike basis. You pay your dues or they bill you about it and all that sort of thing, you know. They can't do Friendship like that. They can't do First Congregational Church people like that. They have to beg them and they do it if they want to.﻿31
GFB: And if not, they won't put you out. That's interesting. So you said, Big Bethel was more like Wheat Street?
BEU: Big Bethel is kind of between. You see, when you have a choice, you can either go to Wheat Street, or to Friendship, or the Congregational church because Congregationalist and Baptist are very much alike. Their doctrines are very much alike. They baptize, they do the same things. The Methodists don't do that. Now, in Bethel, Big Bethel, they have mixed classes. You see, everybody has to go there, there's nowhere else to go. Allen Temple is another one. Allen Temple is a little higher class than Bethel. Bethel just has everybody in the African Methodist church.
GFB: Okay then. I was wondering if we could go back and talk a little bit more about the time that you attended Atlanta University. Dr. Towns, George A. Towns, was teaching at Atlanta University when you were there?
BEU: Yes, Mr. Towns, yes. Towns.
GFB: Could you tell me something about him, you know, the type of person he was...
BEU: Well, I didn't know too much about Mr. Towns. I believe he did teach me. He taught me a class in French. He wasn't popular or sought after like Dr. DuBois. See, everybody wanted to get in Dr. DuBois's class because there was something about his lectures and all that everybody liked, and if you got in his class, it was a privilege. And you stayed in there if you did a good job. He didn't put you out, but you know, you could tell whether what you were doing was up to his standard or not. You just didn't choose his work if you weren't a good student. But Mr. Towns, he was a good teacher. I liked him very much. I just forget now, but he didn't make any kind of impression on me like Dr. DuBois did. But I believe that was the only thing I had under him, the class in French. And I knew his wife. His wife taught school, rural school, a school in Covington where we moved. I didn't know too much about Mr. Towns. But I know he wasn't, you know, sought after like Dr. DuBois was. Dr. DuBois had this outside activity, his conferences, had publications from his conferences, and somehow his students liked that. They liked to be involved in writing and research and visiting, and finding out something for Dr. DuBois and his conferences. But Mr. Towns's work was confined largely to the classroom and the students didn't... I think that the courses given by Mr. Towns were required. I'm almost positive they were, because I don't know why I was in that French class. I had to take French. But I elected Dr. DuBois's class in history and sociology.
GFB: So was Dr. DuBois an easy person to relate to? Do you think that anybody, say from a low socioeconomic background, could they go into Dr. DuBois's class and relate to him?
BEU: Yes, he welcomed them. He'd be glad...yes, he'd be glad. Because you see, a lot of people pitted Dr. DuBois against Booker Washington. See, Booker Washington was for industrial education, and Dr. DuBois was for higher education...and the students chose his class.﻿32
GFB: So how did he dress? Did he dress any differently than any of the other professors at Atlanta University at this time, Dr. DuBois?
BEU: No, he didn't dress any differently from them, but he did wear a goatee. He looked different. He was a handsome man and his goatee was very becoming to him, you could see it hanging down. Mr. Towns, I'm pretty sure, was clean shaven. Dr. DuBois was impressive to look at and he carried on his classroom work in such a businesslike manner, like when time came to be in there, he was there. And you had to be there. And when the time ended, when the bell rang, he excused you. If he wanted you to have a conference with him, ask him questions...they were very few, and he advised students... I remember one thing he said to them, he said—they didn't allow students to smoke then—and so he said to the men, "Now listen, I take walks out"— he used to walk out after school. He said, "I take walks in West End... you know where it is... and if you want to smoke, don't smoke in West End, don't let me see you. See, because if I see you, I'll have to report it. As a member of the faculty, 1*11 have to report it." He had the interests of the students at heart, you see. If they were reported that they were smoking, they were sent home. S ee, he didn't want that. He was interested in the students. I remember him saying that to his class one day. He was talking to the boys, because the classes were mixed and he said, "If you're going to smoke, don't smoke in West End because I take my outing out there." I believe Mr. Towns played tennis, but I don't believe he did. He took his exercise walking.
GFB: It's been said by some people that Dr. DuBois was a very snobbish, hard to...
BEU: He wasn't snobbish. He didn't meddle with you if he didn't know you. Some people want to think of him as that, but he was a thinking man. He wasn't...I didn't find him snobbish.
GFB: So what type of relationship do you think he had with the faculty
members? I mean, could you pick that up in the interaction, how others felt toward him? Was there jealousy or...
BEU: I think maybe there might have been some jealousy. The faculty used to have socials and Dr. DuBois was very friendly with Mrs. Herndon, another black on the faculty. Mrs. Herndon was the wife of this Herndon, this Atlanta Life Insurance man. Dr. DuBois's wife was a very demure kind of a person, docile and had very little to say. She was the Indian type or somebody, she had long hair that she could just sit on, and she never cut that hair. She wore it in a bun in back and she took care of her child, Yolanda. She had one child. They had two children. One child died.
This was another thing too. One child had died, was embalmed in a white undertaker's establishment downtown. I don't know what that is, they say that this child was embalmed there, and there was no Negro who could do it, who would embalm his child till he could go home and bury him in Massachusetts. And they say some things about him, about that. But it wasn't any... You see, I think like this, if you're black, if you can do the job, why, it's all right. But if you don't have anything to do the job with,﻿33
BEU: (cont.) I can't use you. So at that time there was nobody. I believe
David T. Howard's place was the only person who had an undertaker's establishment. All these have grown up since. And the only way for him to have his child preserved until he could take him home was to have a white man do it and so I understand... that's what they say they did. I don't know whether that was true or not. But there were some of those things like that, they said against him. He didn't spend a whole lot of time, he didn't sit down, you know, talk with people on the street corners and things of that sort; he didn't have that kind of time.
GFB: So where did his wife and children live when they were here in Atlanta?
BEU: They lived in the dormitories. They had quarters in the South Hall.
GFB: That would be Ware Hall, right?
BEU: No, that wasn't Vare, that was South Hall. They were in South Hall. South Hall is still there, isn't it?
GFB; Yes, it is.
BEU: They lived in South Hall. Some teachers lived in North Hall but they had___
Dr. Adams had a little girl and Dr. DuBois had a little girl, and I used to go over there and play with those children. And that's how I knew they had those quarters; they had a sleeping room and a reception room. That's all they had. They ate in the dining room with everybody else. When the bell rang for dinner, Dr. DuBois, his wife and child, all came over there and he was host of a table. I never sat at his table. I sat at table with Dr. Adams and Miss Swift.
GFB: So what type of conversations did you usually carry on at the dinner table?
BEU: I wasn't at that table. They had various tables. Dr. DuBois and his wife
acted as host at a table that had ten or twelve students who were there, boys and girls. And I was never at his table, but I don't think they talked... anything they wanted to talk about, they'd talk about, some of his lessons, anything you talk about now.
GFB: But everybody was more or less relaxed with each other?
BEU: Relaxed, relaxed. And they had good food. Atlanta University had good food. And they were relaxed and just carried on conversation.
GFB: Okay then, also at Atlanta University during this time, I know that there
were some debating teams there. Did you ever participate on any of the debating teams?
BEU: No. I believe Mr. Towns had charge of the debating. He was the English professor. I don't know why he was teaching this course in French. I didn't take English under him, I took this French under him, I remember. But I think he was the manager of the debating team. I don't remember them too well, but they were successful at debates more than they were at sports. They were supposed to be pretty good.﻿34
GFB: So, were you active in any particular sports while you were there at Atlanta University?
BEU: I played basketball. It was the only thing I could play. And they had basketball and tennis. We had a basketball court out there,and I played basketball because they furnished you.... They didn't have a gymnasium, but they had a playroom and they furnished the basketball and they had the courts out there like that. But we had to have equipment. Equipment, tennis equipment, some of them could do that. Why, when I was there, we had a number of half-white children, you know, children who had white fathers who sent them to school, and they always had money to spend on things. But I didn't have it, so I didn't. I just got into the basketball.
GFB: So then, this basketball, it was just in college. It wasn't like a girls' basketball team?
BEU: No, no. You'd just go out there, you had an hour for physical education. They tried to give them a little of everything. I learned to sew at Atlanta University. I couldn't sew everything. I made several garments, but I learned about the machine and about stitches and things of that sort, and then how to be careful. When I went into college, I sewed out and was able to make a little money to help me in college, because I had learned to sew in the high school. See, I went to high school and college there. I learned how to sew in high school. But they had a building, the building is there now, Furber Cottage, they called it, where seniors lived for half a year and did their own cooking and cleaning and every thing. They took care of that house, they'd take care of it. That was good, there was an octagon shape at the top of the building over there, you know?
GFB: Yes, can you...
BEU: You know the campus, it's just before you go through the gate at the stadium, there's a little building with an octagon shape roof, a little red brick building. It's called Furber Cottage. It was the home where they had one person who stayed there in charge of it, but the girls did everything, all the cleaning, the cooking, and this was for the normal students. I didn't do it because I was college, but my sisters did it. My sisters cooked and cleaned and sewed—this child's mother. I had two sisters, all of us are graduates from Atlanta University. And my two sisters were normal graduates and my brother and I were college graduates. These sisters lived in that building and helped take care of that building... that building is standing there now. I don't know what they use it for now. I guess they use it for dormitories or something of that sort. But that's what it was. It was a cottage for training in...and they had sewing classes in there too.
So they gave them that and then they tried to give them the benefit of an education. So about once a week, we went to a playroom they had down in the basement of North Hall. That's where they joined the dining room; the kitchen and dining room were in North Hall, and that playroom for girls was in North Hall. That's where they joined the dining room; the kitchen and dining room were in North Hall, and that playroom for girls was in North Hall. And the boys had a similar playroom in South Hall. But they﻿35
BEU: (cont.) furnished basketballs, things of that sort. I liked tennis and afterwards I became a tennis player when I could buy my racket, and that's a sport that I excelled in. I have won two or three cups for...at one time I was the champion woman tennis player of Atlanta. I had that for two years and I won cups at that. Mr. Long over there always knows about it. And Mr. Harvey and I were partners, and I'm known for playing tennis.
GFB: So did you play with people here in Atlanta or did you travel outside of the Atlanta area?
BEU: That's right. I played people in Norfolk; I worked in Virginia, and I played people in Virginia and people in North Carolina and people here in Atlanta, but I've never played in a tournament or anything of that sort. But we just had the Atlanta tournament, over there on the Morehouse College campus. And it lasted two or three days,and I came out first in that for two years. I won a racket one year and won a cup another one.
GFB: So then would you consider tennis as your favorite sport?
BEU: That's my favorite sport. I watch tennis on the television, I always look at it. I enjoy it. Because I understand it, you see?
GFB: Right.
BEU: And I didn't do too much in basketball. I was too small for that. And yet, I remember that I played center; how I played center, I don't know.
GFB: So okay then, going back to Atlanta University again. Where did most of the students go if they got sick during that time? Where did they take them? Which hospital?
BEU: Let me see, what happened to students who...they had a school doctor to which they took the students. That's all they had, they had a school doctor to whom they took the students. And I can recall that some students were sick quite often, but when they had to go to the doctor's, most of them went home...went home to see their doctors. They had a woman who came every Saturday and took the girls to town to shop, those who wanted to shop. And so this woman would take them to the doctor, girls. I guess boys took themselves. But I think they were encouraged to go home if they got sick for any length of time, because they just weren't equipped to have the money to go back and forth, you see. So I think they were encouraged to go home. I never had any trouble with sickness while I was there. I lived on campus three years.
GFB: Okay then. What are your attitudes, say, toward illegitimacy today?
BEU: Well, it couldn't be very much, because illegitimates, there are so many of them, there were several. And you always find some people who are very outspoken, insulting, and there were a few who were insulted, but most of the children were sympathetic because there wasn't anything they could do about it, you see. Those illegitimate children had money, and they bought their way through. That's just about how it happened. They knew that there was some there who wouldn't consider them good associates, and they didn't try to rebel against them or anything else, they just took﻿36
BEU: (cont.) it easy. As I remember, oh, there*were so many. I guess they don't recall now, but I can recall how some of these children felt kind of toward them. I knew one dark girl whose parents were able to send her money, who felt she was superior to these other half-whites in there. But somehow they just got along somehow; I don't know how they got along. And most of the children accepted them. Because they figured, well, there was nothing they could do about it. But see, a child wouldn't be accepted now. Because they figured there's...we've come so far from that. But in those days, there were so many in all the schools.
GFB: So then today, you wouldn't...
BEU: Oh no, they wouldn't accept anything like that. There's just a difference. They accepted them because I think they figured there was nothing they could do about it, and then some others would just say, "Well, they got money to spend, and I can use it." I say, "What do I care about it?" And then there were some who spurned them. They were spurned largely by those who could get money of their own. For instance, I never paid any attention to it. I had some good friends, two of my best friends, one was from Savannah and the other was from Mississippi, and those children from Yazoo, Mississippi, just had everything. They paid full board. I paid half board, and they had money to spend; they could go to town. I never went to town, because I never had money to go to town with. If [there was] anything I needed, my mother would send it to me, and so I never bothered about that. I had some good friends among them, and I didn't realize really what it was all about until later years. Of course now they would not be accepted. Because you don't have them, you just don't have them now. You don't have them now.
GFB: So okay then. Could you tell me anything about travels. Have you visited any other countries or...
BEU: No, I haven't visited any other countries. I have, as I said...one of the reasons why I didn't get married was because I had other responsibilities. Of course, I studied at the University of Chicago; I've never been further west than Chicago. And I've been to Philadelphia. I've lived in Philadelphia, lived in New York; I've lived in Chicago and Nashville. And that's just about it. I've been to Washington lots of times. When I was younger, every time I got the chance to go...but I didn't ever go West because people weren't interested in going West until very recently. I've never been to New Orleans either. I've been to Birmingham and Savannah, places of that sort. And then I got to a place where I didn't want to go anywhere unless I could fly and so wherever I go, I fly to those places. I have flown to Savannah and Nashville. We laugh about it. I left here once going to Nashville, I left here at 7 o'clock and got to Nashville at 6:55. See, there was a difference in time. I tease them about that.
GFB: Right. So what were your reactions to these places? Do you think you would like to live permanently in New York?
BEU: Oh, the only place I would like to live...not in New York, or Chicago.
The only place I would like to live...I wouldn't mind Washington, D.C., but they tell me that's changed so much. When I used to go there,﻿37
BEU: (cont.) I liked Washington, because it's so clean. That's a clean place.
Miami is a clean place, and a pretty place. Jacksonville is, but the only place I would think of living in was...I didn't mind Philadelphia too much. Philadelphia's an old-fashioned... they were so old-fashioned. But Washington is about the only place I thought I wanted to live. Never New York or Chicago.
GFB: No? I mean, why not?
BEU: Oh, bustling, too much going on and too much for me...I wanted leisure time. That's too much. And Washington is above Atlanta, but I liked it, the way it's laid out and I liked the people there. Everybody in Washington is intelligent. Where's your home?
GFB: I'm from Virginia, Charlottesville, but I...
BED: Charlottesville, that's right. I've never been to Charlottesville.
I've been to Richmond. Richmond, and Norfolk, you know those places? All around through Virginia. I've been to North Carolina, Greensboro? Durham, Charlotte, High Point, all those places.
GFB: Did you stay in any of these places?
BEU: Yes, I stayed, I stayed in some of those places. I stayed in Washington? you know, of course, I lived a summer in Philadelphia. I lived a summer in Chicago. I lived several summers in Chicago, two or three summers in Chicago. And that's all. I just visited these other places. Washington, I visited...how much time I spent in Washington? I haven't been over two weeks in Washington. I stayed there, looking around the city, and doing things. See, I went to Washington once to Howard University Commencement. I went to Howard University's commencement and spent a week there and spent another week afterward in the city. Two weeks, that's as long as I've spent in Washington. Because I spent summers, three months, out I moved and spent twelve weeks in Chicago, at the university. And then I spent two summers, I used to go to Atlantic City too. Atlantic City, and stayed there two weeks on vacation. But I haven't traveled abroad, and I never have been interested in that. When I retired from teaching, the teachers gave me $1,000 and wanted me to take a trip and gave me the fares and all. But I wasn't interested in it, because I had waited so long to begin traveling until I wasn't eager. See, I was retiring then...
GFB: Oh, I see.
BEU: I was retiring and that was no time for me to be traveling. I won't go anywhere now. I'll just stay right here.
GFB: Because you just don't want to go?
BEU; Yes, because I don't want to.
GFB: So okay, Miss Usher, I want to thank you so much for giving me this time...
BEU: Well, I hope it's...the only thing is, I hope you'll be able to get something out of it.﻿38
GFB: I'm sure I will, thank you.
BEU: I thought of something else that attracted me to Dr. DuBois, it's
nothing too significant though. But he is very left-handed and so am I. And left-handedness was not popular back then, and my mother tried her best to keep me from being left-handed, but I was just destined to be a left-handed person.
GFB: Why, she just didn't...
BEU: She would put my hand in a glove. And I couldn't use it during the day and when the glove would be taken off, I'd go right back to using it. And it was just destined to be. And so it wasn't very popular, left-handedness wasn't. And see, Dr. DuBois was left-handed and I said, "Well now, if he can be as brilliant a scholar as he is and be left-handed, maybe it's all right for me." So it encouraged me.
GFB: Right, yes. We're interested in all things. You know, anything you have
to say about Dr. DuBois. So, I know the last time we talked, we were talking about some things, personalities in Atlanta. I asked you about Dr. Carter at the Friendship. Well, today I would like to go back and talk a little bit more about some other famous personalities in Atlanta. But before we
do that, I was wondering___you know, being a woman, I'm naturally interested
in fashion. How did the students used to dress at A.U. when you were attending school there? So I was wondering, what type of outfits did the young ladies wear? Could you just wear anything or did you wear pants?
BEU: Oh, we wore anything. They varied from today's somewhat. They didn't
wear any pants. And in fact, I was very small when I first went there and I wore pinafores...aprons...colored, with ruffles on the shoulder. And the girls dressed in just anything they wanted to wear. There was no uniform.
GFB: No set dress, right. So what about the young men? Did they wear knickerbockers?
BEU: No. They didn't wear those. Now, it seems to me that I don't remember any short pants, I was trying to think, but you see, the boys who played baseball and football wore their uniforms. And the uniforms, they were not modern at all. But that's the only thing I remember about the boys' buying into, other than the regular clothes. And they always wore their coats. I don't really recall, and I think they were very formal. It wasn't expensive or anything. The clothing wasn't expensive, but it was very formal. For instance, coats and shirts and ties. And the girls just wore whatever we had. And I can recall when we were going to services on Sunday, it was the very same thing. You see, the laundry was done right there at the school and many of our dresses were starched. So they looked very nice in their starched dresses, washed dresses, actually.
GFB: Right. So the students did their own laundry or did they have somebody do it for them?﻿39
BEU: Some of them did their own. Those who were on part-time basis and paid
just a part of their regular fee, did their own laundry. There was a place for them to do it and tubs and ironing spaces. But those who paid full board, there were a few who paid full board, had theirs done. There were women there who were laundresses and who did the work for the teachers. See, teachers had their laundry done too. And the laundry wasn't very much. But they were limited, quite limited, as to how much they could put into the laundry. So they didn't have very much. The girls and a very few boys paid full fare, so most of the boys had theirs done there. And I can recall how the boys used to come over with their bags. They had little laundry bags and they'd come over and get their laundry from North Hall, but whatever they had was very simple.
Just a few of the girls, as I can recall; I recall girls who were sent there by their white fathers, most of them were able to pay full board, as I can recall. And some others paid full board too. Full board wasn't very much. You did one hour's work a day. Everybody had a job, had something to do, everybody, regardless of what they paid. And those who were on full board had one hour and those who paid part time, did two hours. I was a part-time student, so I had two hours of work. But some of my work was like this. One, I sat at the table of the dean and it was the dean's business to collect absentees. And so during the meal, I went around all the tables; I think there were twelve tables in the dining hall. I went around all the tables and collected the names of those who were absent. Some of them having excuses would be absent. Very often, you know, the boys would stay out and things of that sort, so they took the attendance at every meal, and that was one of my jobs, and they gave me credit for about an hour a day on working on that. I did that three times, we had three meals a day.
GFB: So what about other students? What other types of jobs did they do?
BEU: Some of them took care of the teachers' rooms. They spent some time in
there, straightening up the room. Some of them did hall duty, swept in the halls. Some of them waited on tables. And most of them worked inside at various types of things. Some of them really worked in the laundry, and some of them worked in the kitchen preparing food, you see. There were certain chores that they had to perform. Some of them took a little time and some took more time. But it was expected that you did two hours of work. Most of the time it didn't take two hours, but it was a job and you did it and you got credit for that two hours of work.
GFB: Right. So how were the classes set up during that time? Did you have
all the classes, say, like in the morning or were you spread out all over the day?
BEU: Classes were just about all day. Because we had so many students who came from the city. They walked all the way from across town, over to Atlanta University, and see, they had to have classes for those. You just got your job in before school hours, see. I think the school ran from eight until twelve and then from one till four. That's about how it was. And there were no night classes. They didn't have night classes because everybody﻿40
BEU: (cont.) retired early. I can recall there was no one who stayed up late. And in fact, the preceptresses, we called them, saw to it that everybody went to bed on time.
GFB: What time was that?
BEU: At ten o'clock. Of course, we had lamps, oil lamps. That's another
thing, that's another job somebody did, filling the lamps. You take your lamp, every lamp had a name on it, you take your lamp down to the oil room and there was somebody who did that every day. There weren't too many jobs, but they were all figured out and assigned.
GFB: So did you have to eat breakfast, like at a certain time every morning, a set time?
BEU: Yes, we used to have breakfast at a set time. There is a clock over there that rings off, it strikes and rings too. But now sometimes the time was on the clock and other times there was an electric bell that rang through the building. But we had breakfast at a certain time and then lunch at a certain time and then dinner. Except on Saturdays. We didn't have three meals on Saturday or Sunday. We had breakfast and dinner and didn't have lunch. They took a lunch with them from the dinner table.
GFB: Oh, something like a little doggy bag?
BEU: That's right, a bag, that's right.
GFB: So, I wonder if it was similar to the one we get today.
BEU: Well, I guess maybe. They didn't have the third meal. And we had
something, they gave you something, I don't know what it was. I don't recall, just a little something, most of them didn't have...and what they would do, they would pass it on to somebody else or something of that sort. And they'd always be going down to the corner to buy something from the store. See, the students who boarded on campus couldn't leave the campus, but they could meet other students, you see. Other students would come to visit them and they would go to the store for them. I remember two or three stores right close by. They were always going to those stores, getting something, especially on a Saturday.
GFB: Why didn't they let boarding students, why didn't they let them go off campus?
BEU; Well, they went off campus only by permission and with a matron, with
somebody who took them. The girls would go to town on Saturday afternoon. Other afternoons, I guess some other afternoons, but there was a woman who came and chaperoned the girls. Boys were allowed to go off campus certain hours after school, but the girls were not. The girls stayed on the campus unless they had special permission and were accompanied by somebody who was in charge.
GFB: Right. Because I know that happened at Spelman, the young ladies used
to have to wear their dresses and gloves when they went downtown. Was that required of A.U. girls?﻿41
BEU: No.
GFB: No?
BEU: No, they didn't have to do that. They expected them to look presentable, of course. All I know is I just wore whatever I had. It was very presentable because I came from the country, and my mother made all of my clothes; they were very simple dresses and I was small. I didn't pay full board, but it happened that my laundry was done for a long period of time before they found out I wasn't paying full board. Then I began to do it myself. Sometimes there was a young man there who would take my things home. Sometimes my things were sent home and my mother did it for me.
GFB: Okay, I knew that you were a student at A.U., and you talked about some of the teachers and things that you used to have. I was wondering, do you recall Mrs. Herndon who was the dramatics teacher?
BEU: Yes, Mrs. Herndon. I didn't have very much from her because I wasn't inclined to...but she presented a Shakespearean play each year. And I remember that I was a witch in, what is the name of that play? It was Macbeth. I can always remember, the play was introduced with three witches. I was one of the witches in the play because of my size. Other than that, I had very little contact with her. But she lived right across the street, and she had a good friend who had an invalid daughter who was a hunch. Her name was India Pitts; her friend's daughter who was an invalid happened to be a good friend of mine. I would take time for her because she walked on crutches all the while. And I used to go over to Mrs. Herndon's house, not to see her, but to see this daughter of her friend who lived with her. And she lived for a while in the president's cottage. But it was torn down, and it now has the Morris Brown complex in it.
Then she built, you see over there, that big two-story house, big house? Right in front of the Towns's house. Towns's is on one side, hers is on the other. That belonged to Atlanta University. They tell me that Mr. Towns and Mr. Herndon leased those lots there for a dollar a year for a hundred years, something of that sort. I don't know, anyhow that land is supposed to belong to Atlanta University because there's something in their contract that you can't sell it. That's why they still hold on to Stone Hall. See, when Stone Hall was made, some kind of memorial building, not to be torn down, it was Atlanta University who sponsored that program. And there's something in the contract that says that you can't change, but when Morris Brown moved over there, they did that one-dollar-a-year business, you see, just a matter of transaction. And I don't know, I know they were never paid for it, so that land still belongs to Atlanta University. The will has to remain under Atlanta University. Some sort of thing, I don't know exactly how they got it.
But anyhow, when that Bumstead Cottage was torn down, Mrs. Herndon built this two-story brick house, it's old-fashioned because it's just boxlike. It's not modern, like the modern things, because it was built a long time ago. It was built about 1900, and maybe a little later than that. That was her home, and that's where she died. She wasn't in that home﻿42
BEU: (cont.) very long before she died. She was a very good friend of Dr. DuBois.
She was a graduate of Atlanta University... then went on to Boston University, and they were just glad to have her on the faculty, but she did very little teaching. She didn't teach many students. She was there to train those who had some kind of talent toward acting, and that's what she did. She was a very beautiful woman, and had beautiful clothes, and she had this one boy, who is living in that house now. Norris finished Atlanta University, and then he went to Harvard and graduated from Harvard. They had everything they wanted, and her husband was half-white. He claims he started this insurance on very little money, but I don't know how he started that building, Atlanta Life Insurance Company. But anyhow they built that home, and shortly after they built that home, she died. I remember, when she died, I was teaching in Virginia. I had graduated from school, but I knew her very well. She was a very fine woman. And she did a lot for Atlanta University. She'd come back, she'd go away and stay and enjoy the opera, the theater in New York and Boston, then come back in the spring and have these rehearsals for her program. And she always put on that Shakespearean program and some other plays. The Shakespearean play was around in May, April or May, near commencement time.
GFB: So when they put these plays on, did they take them around, did they take tours or were they just for the immediate...
BEU: For that school. And they had two or three performances of it so that the
people in the city could come.	I don't remember anybody paying anything
to come see it. It was kind of a part of the commencement program, but it wasn't during commencement week. But those plays, Atlanta University was noted for those Shakespearean plays. See, my sister was star in one of the plays. She was the star, I believe, in just about all the plays. Romeo and Juliet, she was a star in that, Juliet. And I was in Macbeth, I think it was Macbeth, which had these witches come in first. But I didn't know [Mrs. Herndon] very well, but she was a very fine woman, and everybody thought very well of her. And she was a very good friend of Dr. DuBois.
Dr. DuBois's wife was very quiet and retiring. She looked like an Indian. And all she did was take care of her house, and I don't know what kind of education she had, but I doubt she had much. She came from Massachusetts. They came from Roxbury, Massachusetts. And she had this one child, Yolanda. That's another thing I used to do: Dr. Dubois had this one girl, Yolanda, and Dr. Adams had a girl named Margaret, and as a part of my work, you see, I used to go over there on Saturday afternoons and spend a little time playing with those children. You see, kind of babysitting for Yolanda and that's how I knew Mrs. DuBois. She was very quiet, had very little to say and Dr. DuBois of course was speaking and doing all these things, and naturally he enjoyed going places with Mrs. Herndon and she enjoyed going with him.
GFB: Right. Okay. Some of the other people that I wanted to ask you about are more closely related to the churches, these churches in Atlanta. I was wondering about, did you know Bishop Henry McNeal Turner?
BEU: I didn't know him. I just knew of his name. You see, they were in the African Methodist church. But I knew Bishop Flipper, who was later. I knew him and I noticed that his son...﻿43
GFB: Henry...
BEU: ...Henry Flipper, was in the army and he was discharged. He was discharged illegally. And so there's a white man, who's down in the middle of Georgia, who became acquainted with Henry Flipper, this Lieutenant Flipper's niece, and he and this niece have worked and cleared Henry Flipper's name.
GFB: Yes, we had a memorial yesterday at A.U., and we had Senator Bond and everybody was over for...
BEU: Oh, yes. I didn't know about that. Well, I knew that man's father better than I did Bishop Turner, Turner was ahead of that. So I just heard of him, Bishop Turner.
GFB: Well, what about...
BEU: Flipper?
GFB: Right.
BEU: Well, the reason I knew him very well, we lived across the street from one of his wives. He had several wives, two or three wives.
GFB: So where was this, in Atlanta or in...
BEU: Right here in Atlanta. Right here in Atlanta. We lived on Ashby Street,
across the street from one of the women he married, Mrs. Rembert her name was. And he lived across town, near Morris Brown. Near where Morris Brown used to be, he lived there. When I went on to Howard School,* I found out that he owned a lot of property around in there. And he has a niece now living here in Atlanta, she lives up there in west Atlanta; but this woman who lived across the street and whom he married, was a good friend of ours. And so I used to visit her because she lived over there next to Morris Brown, and when I went to visit her, I would meet him and that's how I knew him. He was a very fine man, very strict about things and quite religious and quite an influence in the community. And this was his son that was in the army. He sent his son...he was able to do it because, see... I don't know how he got hold of his money; he was light, but he wasn't that fair. I don't know how he got hold of his money. But there's a mixture of white running through because I saw a picture of this niece of the lieutenant, and she was very fair. But he sent his son on to school and sent him on to West Point and of course they didn't want him there and they trumped up something on him, and so his niece was anxious to have that cleared because he was arrested that summer. But Mrs. Flipper was the one I knew. I didn't know Bishop Turner, and this Flipper was a very fine man and very influential man in the community.
GFB:
So how did he react, Bishop Flipper, when his son was court-martialed?
BEU: I just don't know. I think he just took it. Of course, they were perhaps angry about it. I'm pretty sure he was, knowing him. But I don't imagine he saw anything he could do and... Just like we have done as a race, just
*
David T. Howard Elementary-Junior High School﻿44
BEU: (cont.) accepted what's been put cm us for ages on down through the ages,
until that group of students up there in Greensboro, North Carolina, got it in their heads they weren't going to accept it any more. And that's when all this started, this not accepting and I guess about the time you were born, when that started. But I imagine he resented it, but he just accepted it and just thought there was nothing he could do about it. Now his niece, Patsy, accepted it at the time too, but it came to her they were doing things about other things, why not clear this up? So she got this white man to help her and so they worked together and cleared his name.
GFB: So even though you didn't know Bishop Henry McNeal Turner, personally, did you ever hear anybody talk about him?
BEU: No, nothing more than, you see, there's a school here named for him. And
they have what they call Founder's Day programs, and when they have Founder's Day programs, it's centered on what he did and so forth-•»and pictures of him and things of that sort. So, I don't know any more than that, but he is one of the very important men in Negro history here in Atlanta. This school was named for hira and that was a county school to begin with...
GFB: Is that Turner High?
BEU: Turner High. Turner High was a county school and when the city expanded
its boundaries, that was the only high school that the county had, the only high school. Fulton County had a good health department. You see, certain departments of Fulton and Atlanta had been put together. They did it like this, they tried to evaluate the health department in the city and the health department in the county. When they got through the evaluation, they found out that the county had a better health department than the city did. So Fulton County assumed responsibility for the health department. Then they evaluated the school systems, and the city had such a superior school system over the county, s© they took nearly all of the county schools and put them in the city. So the only county schools now are those in the outlying districts» nothing around Atlanta. Well, Atlanta of course is in Fulton County. You see, whatever Atlanta had, was of Fulton County. Some of those were schools. They took all the schools. So that's how Atlanta got a brand new building, a big building out there, Turner High School, and that was the only high school they had, because the county children went to Booker Washington High School. See, they came to Booker Washington High School, and the county paid fifty dollars a year for each student to come there to Washington High School, because they hadn't built a school for them. But since Atlanta has taken over all of Fulton County that is in Atlanta, you see? Fulton County is half Atlanta. And see, Atlanta took those schools and that's how they got this Turner High School, but that originally was built for, and the county named it, but the city would have named the school for Turner. In fact, they had a school on the other side of town, an elementary school. They changed the name to Butler School. But that's the only thing I know about him, just the history.
GFB: Right. So how many schools in Atlanta are named for famous black people like Turner? We have Turner and we have Washington High. What about David T. Howard?﻿45
BEU: There's that, and oh, any number of them now. They have a number of elementary schools, Carter Woodson School, and Dunbar School. They have, I forget now, but a number of them now. Walter White.
GFB: So where is the Walter White School?
BEU: The Walter White School is on Detroit Avenue. It's between here and, let me think, it's off Simpson Street, on Detroit Avenue. I have never seen it, but I know just about where it is.
GFB: Were you familiar with a Dr. H. Proctor, of the First Congregational?
BEU: Dr. Proctor? Yes. I remember him, Dr. Proctor. Yes, he was a very fine man, too, and he had a pretty large family. I taught one summer with a daughter of his. He was very influential. He was a Congregational pastor, of the Congregational church. You see, being in a Baptist church, I didn't have too much contact with these other people. You see, Flipper was African Methodist and Proctor was a Congregationalist. But most of them went to Atlanta University, and Dr. Proctor sent his children to Atlanta University. Atlanta University was kind of considered the Congregational school, although it was nondenominational. But the Congregational people just kind of felt like it belonged to them, just like Friendship, the Baptist people feel that Morehouse and Spelman belong to them. So that was my contact with Reverend Proctor and his family. It was a very fine upstanding family and he built that church over there.
GFB: Is that the one on Courtland Street?
BEU: On Courtland and Houston Streets.
GFB: Right. So about what time period was this?
BEU: Well, it must have been in the early 1900s, something of that sort. Because since that time, you see — how many pastors have they had? Reverend McEwen has been there for years. But I was just thinking, did they have a pastor? They had one pastor before Reverend McEwen came. I don't know who it was. I forget now. See, he's a man who was down in Talladega. I noticed in the paper this morning that Talladega has a new president, has a president from Morehouse College.
GFB: Dr. Gayles.
BEU: Yes, Dr. Gayles. But now, this is the thing about Dr. Gayles. They said he was director of the medical education. Now, what's the name of that man who was there, supposed to be assuming all the responsibility? It's a doctor who has come here with his family.
GFB: I'm not familiar...I just know a few of the professors...
BEU: Well, I've been trying to get his name because I remember his picture. I'm going to find it pretty soon, but I was just trying to get that straight because I thought he was the head of the whole thing...Dr. Louis Sullivan.﻿46
GFB: So was Dr. Proctor pastor at the First Congregational Church when Walter White was a member there?
BEU: Yes, that's right. He was there and see, Walter White lived on Houston
Street, just the same block. That's where Walter White's home was.	It's
all torn down now, something else there. But that church was right	in the same block. It's between Courtland and Piedmont. The church is on the Court-
land end, on the north side, and Walter White lived on the Piedmont	end, on
the south side, in the same block. It's a long block, though. But	he was there near that time.
GFB: Are any of his relatives still living in Atlanta?
BEU: Oh no, they all left it. They all left Atlanta. There are some distant
relatives, but I just think of those who were in the family. They all left it. Went to New York, they followed him. Now about Walter White. I don't think Walter White's father was white. He looked like a white man, but his mother and father both were of white parents and they were so white, and some people get things mixed up. For instance, they think Walter White was white, but he wasn't. Walter White wasn't an illegitimate child, he was born of these white Negro parents. I remember his mother and father. They were both very white, you couldn't tell they weren't white. But it was because they gave that strain, and Walter was legitimate.
GFB: So, going back, talking about Dr. Hope, who was the president of A.U. and Morehouse at one point at the same time. How did he happen to become president of both those institutions at the same time?
BEU: Well, I tell you, he was influential. Of course, Morehouse was his love, he just held onto Morehouse until somebody else could get that. But you see, he felt strongly, at that time, everybody felt that Atlanta University would swallow everything. You see? And they had worked on it. Now this Dr. Carter who has come in, well, people have wondered what was happening when he came in. You see, they have a theory Atlanta University is going to swallow...it's just going to be Atlanta University. And these other schools would kind of lose their identity, but they're holding on and trying for the
best. But there is coming a time---do you see that? Do you feel that?
That all these schools, they're going, they're not going to be so many. You see, here are these schools. You have a president of Atlanta University and all that staff. You have a president of Morehouse, president of Spelman. In all these presidents, that's duplication. You even have a dean, you have deans and presidents too. The people who give the money are going to say, "You've got to cut out some of these people." Just like they say, "Cut out some of the courses." "You got to cut out some of these people." And there will be deans...like in New York. Columbia is made up of several schools. Barnard College and several of those colleges. Well, they were big schools at one time, but since they had to come under Columbia, they had to get rid of presidents. Presidents and deans, they all have the same things Atlanta University has. Well, you see, when they get a strong... that man who they have up there now, is not strong enough. If they had, if they could have kept Clement...you didn't know him, did you?﻿47
GFB: President Clement?
BEU: President Clement was a smart, strong man. He was, oh, a really ideal president. He was taking Atlanta University places. It hasn't grown much since he left.
GFB: But I had heard that he and Dr. DuBois had confrontations that eventually led to Dr. DuBois's removal.
BEU: It might have...a brilliant man.	I wasn't bothered by it, because if they
could have a president like that, they could hold the things together. But Miss Read was president of Spelman, and Dr. Hope was president of Morehouse and Dr. Adams, that's the man that I worked for when he was a dean when I was in school. Dr. Adams was president...
It would be just like Columbia University. All these schools would be
under Atlanta University. Well, that's coming. It may not be coming in our time or yours, but it's coming because I say, it takes a lot of money to run these schools and as long as Spelman has as much money as Atlanta University has, they can be independent. But s ee, that's going to give out. And it's all there together. They brought Clark over here. See, Clark was way out. Did you know where they were?
GFB: No.
BEU: They were way out, south Atlanta. There's nothing out there now. It was
way out of the city. They brought Clark in and put it down there on Atlanta University's property. They brought Morris Brown away from across town and put it on Atlanta University's property. You see, it's all there together. And you see, they have done a whole lot of putting together and that's what that Carter man is here for. He's working, he knows what he's doing. He's working.
GFB: So where is he? I'm not quite...
BEU: He is working to tie this thing together. That's what he's doing. This Carter, Lyle Carter. You know him?
GFB: Vaguely.
BEU: He's what they call, he has a title...
GFB: Is he at the University Center? Atlanta University Center?
BEU: Yes. He has a title. It's not president, it's...what is that title? It's a title over the president. I forget now what it is, but anyhow he has a title, and they've asked him since he's been here, and he has defined his work as something to put together certain activities of the colleges, and there are certain things they can't do, one school can't do. Morris Brown drew out of it once. Do you remember that? Did you hear about that?
GFB: No, I haven't.﻿48
BEU: You haven't heard about it. Well, Lyle Carter had this contract for all of them to sign. I forget what, this man has some kind of title. You find out what title Lyle Carter is.
GFB: Okay, I'll do it.
BEU: He's head of the whole thing though. And there are certain things they can't do unless he agrees to it, and it has to come through his... But it's net anything like the studies and all, you know. But these presidents know their limits, and this money from this foundation is dispensed by Carter.and Morris Brown said they wouldn't accept. They were giving millions to these schools. To A.U. and Morehouse, Clark, everybody took it. Even I.T.C.* took it, except Morris Brown. They said they weren't going to take it, because they said the Morehouse man was dictating what should be done, and they weren't going to take it. And so that was a very unwise thing. Just the president did that. And of course he lost his job when he refused to take it, because the alumni came in and said, "Yes, we are going to take that money." They stayed out, Morris Brown stayed out a year, just about a year until they got rid of that president, got this new president and they got back in there. And so they're getting the money now.
GFB: So what about Spelman? Do you think Rockefeller is going to let Spelman, you know, become a part of the whole complex?
BEU: Yes. Yes. Because see, they still give money, that's all right. The money
comes from various places; of course now Spelman is better fixed than anybody, they say, and that man wrote his report and said that Spelman was in good shape. Well, I hope he keeps it in good shape. But Rockefeller is going to see to that. And see, on down into generation after generation,	there
is a time coming when they'll be closer and closer. The buildings are all tied together. They say you run from one to the other. You can go from one to the other. You start at Morris Brown and you go right on through Atlanta University through Clark and through Spelman and Morehouse. They're all there together. That's one thing they did, they brought them together. And see, they're going to cut out some of these things. I was surprised that they let Morris Brown build another gym, because they don't need too many of those.
So, coming back to Dr. Hope, the reason Dr. Hope took that, because he felt that Atlanta University was going to be the head and he wanted to be the head of the whole thing. So there was no other reason for him to leave Morehouse where he'd been and he loved Morehouse so dearly. He gave up Morehouse, but he had to hold onto that until they could get another president. They got Dr. Archer. His son just died here the other day. He became the next president and he wasn't very much. He was just a figurehead for Dr. Hope, but he held it together and did the best he could until they could get somebody. And then they got, let's see, another man over there, I forget his name.
GFB: Dr. Mays?
Interdenominational Theological Center﻿49
BEU: No, when they got Dr. Mays, Dr. Hope left entirely. He died shortly after that. But anyhow, that's what they're just waiting for, a good president. Dr. Hope was just holding it until they could get a good president. That was the only thing, he wasn't really the president. But he took this Atlanta University post because he wanted to be the head of it, and that's what Clement was. That's when he had some of the clashes because he was dictating to everybody and they kind of had to... If Clement had had the hands on the money like this Read did at Spelman, he would have done lots more than he did to bring them together. But he got Morehouse and Spelman and Clark pretty close too. They're pretty close, those three schools. Now Morris Brown is standing out because they're supposed to be, they were supported solely by Negro contributions... contributions from Negroes. But you see, that's why they didn't want this white money. But they are now getting white money because that's the only way they can live, because blacks can't support it any more. And they used to get all their money. I notice Mrs. Cochrane, she was the one I was telling you about, she's a fine person. Did you ever find out any more about her?
GFB: Yes. I talked to Dr. Bacote about her, and he told me that she's in process of writing the history of Morris Brown.
BEU: Yes. Well, I see her picture in the paper this morning.
GFB: Right and she's on the foundation or something?
BEU: She had a reputation for raising lots of money for Founder's Day. And she's kept that up. She's always raised more money than anybody else and so she's done it this year. But they laugh about her. She retired long ago, but goes up there to the faculty meetings, goes just like she hadn't retired, and has her say about it. And I see she's raising the money. Of course, they're not going to turn that down.
GFB: Right. That's true.
BEU: But she's not raising as much as she did. But anyhow, she's retired. She's a very fine person, and a very active person,and she's done so much for Morris Brown, for those girls and boys up there. I think very highly of her.
GFB: I was wondering if we could talk a little bit more about___I was wondering
if you can tell me what type of person was Reverend Bryant, who was pastor of Wheat Street Church?
BEU: Yes, Reverend P.J. Bryant baptized me. He was pastor, he was an orator.
He made his mark by being such an orator. He was very good. He charmed people. He had a wonderful voice and he just charmed people. He rose very rapidly. He had two or three churches in the country and one of them was in Covington where I lived. I joined the church when he was pastor there, and he stayed there about a year or so and he baptized me. And then pretty soon they heard of him. The pastor of Wheat Street died, and they hadn't built their church, and he came to Atlanta and was pastor of that church. He was very influential. He hadn't gone and gotten any advanced degrees, but he was just a natural born speaker, and he just charmed people by the way﻿50
BEU: (cont.) he talked. And he had a few choice expressions... the way he could
say it. And so we always called him a silver-tongued orator. And that's how he made his way. There's a school named for him, Peter James Bryant School out there on Georgia Avenue.
GFB: So do you think that Reverend Bryant then was really responsible for making Wheat Street one of the most important ones in Atlanta?
BEU: Yes, he was, that's the one they remember. They had another pastor after
he left, named Henderson. He went to California and they have this Reverend Borders now. But the beginning of that church was P.J. Bryant. And I just thought the world of him, of course, because he baptized me. And he moved to Atlanta shortly after we came here, but they heard of him. He went from small insignificant country churches up to this big church, which was the second church. Friendship was the first church, but Wheat Street was the biggest church. Wheat Street grew out of Friendship. You know, Baptist people used to split, split and split and split. So they split and went across town and became a big church. Reverend Bryant went there, he preached; for a long time he preached in the basement, and everybody on that side of town just flocked there to him. And that's why Wheat Street got to be such a big church...und er the pastor, Peter James Bryant. He was a wonderful pastor. He had a wife, Mrs. Sylvia Jennings Bryant, who pushed him. She was an excellent missionary. She was just about as good as he was with it. They had no children. They adopted one or two young fellows and kind of sent them to school, but I guess Peter James Bryant graduated from Morehouse, I don't know. I doubt that he graduated or not because he had a natural ability for attracting people. You see, some people are just like that. He was a graduate from Morehouse.
GFB: So was he involved in politics or anything?
BEU: Very little. Very little politics. He devoted his attention to the church, and organizations that were affiliated with the church. He didn't do too much in politics. But you see, in those days, the ministers didn't feel... that's a new something, for ministers to feel that it's their responsibility. Ministers didn't feel that it was their responsibility then to do anything about the voting status of people. But now, ministers feel that that's a part, and they're not a good minister unless they look out for that side of the thing too. But in those days, they separated the government from the state, from the religious course. So he didn't do too much about that, neither did Bishop Turner. I don't think Bishop Turner got anything... they didn't get involved in politics because they felt that that wasn't the sphere for ministers.
GFB: Well, what type of minister, person was Reverend Williams from Ebenezer?
BEU: Reverend Williams?
GFB: Yes, did you know him?
BEU: A.D. Williams.
GFB: Right.﻿51
BEU: Well, he was father of...he was a pretty steady person. He wasn't the
orator that P. James Bryant was; they were kind of rivals over there on that side of town for people who were Baptists, but he was just a fine fellow, fine... I think he had just that one daughter, and he was a fine fellow, but just a pastor of that church and worked real hard with Ebenezer Church. He wasn't the idol that P.J. Bryant was, though. He was just a steady worker and got his people to come into the church with him. Just like he was with his daughter. He sent her to school at Spelman and educated her in music and all. But he was a very quiet man, working very hard in his church. And he was responsible for, he got this man...this Martin Luther King was a country boy, and they said he took him into this church to help out, and he met his daughter and married his daughter. She was supposed to be one of these ugly women. Very ugly and A.D. Williams was very ugly. Homely, I say homely. She was a very homely person, and Martin Luther King, Senior, was supposed to be a handsome, a fairly handsome man, and everybody was wondering about his marrying this old ugly girl. But she had sweet ways. She was a lovely person, and of course she made up for her looks in her disposition.
GFB: Right.
BEU: And so he married her and had his children and see, he got along all right. They say that the church over there belonged to Reverend A.D. Williams, and they say that that church is deeded—I don't how how true that is—to that family, to the...
GFB: To the Williams family?
BEU: ...to the Williams family and it's passed on down, they say it really belongs to them. They dictate all the pastors and all, you don't do anything against their say-so over there. Now they have this new pastor they put over there...
GFB: Reverend Roberts?
BEU: Reverend Roberts. They put him in there and see, when Reverend Martin Luther King, Sanior, brought his son back here to be the assistant pastor, then they put the other boy in there, A.D. Williams; A.D., little A.D. came. He had a boy named for him called A.D. King, he was the one who drowned in the swimming pool.
GFB: Oh, right, right.
BEU: That was the other son. So they have dictated all the pastors. They
brought that man here from Ohio or Kentucky, somewhere like that. And he left, he didn't stay but a year because he said that Mrs. King...what's her name?
GFB: Coretta.﻿52
BEU: Coretta King dictated the policy of the church. He stayed here one year, that young man from Ohio, Reverend Otis Moss, but then he comes back occasionally, and he's a wonderful speaker. But they brought him there; he's a civil rights worker too. But anyhow, they brought him back here and he stayed one year, and he said he couldn't stay there because she ran the church.
GFB: Right.
BEU: And so now this Reverend Roberts is over there, he seems quiet, and I think he's letting her run it over him. But she's like this; of course, I like her myself. I like the things she does. Abernathy doesn't like her, of course. They want the money, but if she let them have the money, there wouldn't be any money. But she's taken the money and is doing something with it. And see, she wouldn't get that Abernathy for the voting, but...it backfired over her so a lot of people didn't even vote for Lewis because of her. And so it's kind of a mixed-up affair.
GFB: Well, what about Ben Davis?
BEU: Who?
GFB: Benjamin Davis.
BEU: Oh yes, Benjamin Davis was an insurance man. He had his insurances and he ran the paper too. He had a paper. I believe it was the Atlanta Independent; he was very influential and his son was a graduate of Morehouse. I used to play tennis with his son over there at Morehouse College. Benjamin Davis was in politics. He was a politician strictly. He belonged to Friendship Church, but he came seldom.	Dr. Carter didn't take his side. Dr. Carter
liked him and tried to push him as much as he could. Ben Davis would do things. For instance, he had a wife and he had two children, Johnnie (a girl), and little Ben, and he ran around with...he was just a man that...a ladies ' man. That's what he was. He wasn't an example for anybody to follow. But he turned things over in that insurance and built that Odd Fellows Building down there. He could do things, but he wasn't like these other men, just men. He'd take other men's wives and things of that sort, you know.
GFB: So Odd Fellows Building is on Auburn Avenue?
BEU: Auburn Avenue, right. The Odd Fellows Building; he built that. And he had this paper, the Atlanta Independent, that's the name of it, the Atlanta Independent, and he was a very influential man in the community, doing things of that sort. But he wasn't an example for anybody to follow socially.
GFB: So how did the white community react to his paper, the Atlanta Independent?
BEU: Well, it's just like the World now. They got the News and that's the only paper they had and they liked it. They took it and so...but he didn't mingle with people very much. His wife and two children lived on Martin Street over there,and he built a house right across the street for another woman. And that woman was his secretary, she was supposed to be.﻿53
BEU: (cont.) He was influential in getting things. In politics, he'd swing things his way. He would stoop to anything, but he sent his daughter and son to school. She went to Atlanta University, I think, and then went to some northern college, and little Ben finished Morehouse and went from Morehouse to Harvard. He ended up Communist. He was Communist and they locked him up. He stayed in jail, I think he died in jail. But he was a brilliant man. But you see, he was persecuted for his beliefs. He had communistic beliefs and he was persecuted for them; he joined the Communist group and for some reason they put him in jail. They always say he was never able to do what he could have done for blacks if he had, but you see, he spoke his mind. I don't think little Ben ever married. The daughter married somebody and she is living in New York now somewhere. But anyhow, Ben Davis was a moving figure, and he is the one who really brought out that whole block down there on Auburn Avenue, because he had contacts with people who could do things— whites, whites and blacks. Dr. Carter thought a lot of him, Dr. Hope thought a lot of him, but they were scared to go too far with him because you see, he was outspoken. When T see him, I never say anything to him because he's just...somebody else. And I used to play tennis with his son.
GFB: Right. So, moving from the religious sphere and other personalities, I was wondering now if we could talk a little bit about Mrs. Agnes Jones.
BEU: Oh yes.
GFB: Whom you succeeded.
BEU: She was the first supervisor of Negro schools in Atlanta and she had a very successful... she was principal before that time of Houston Street School, which was one of the leading schools and one of the largest schools. She was a very fine person. She was a very strict person, and because she meant what she said,and she meant you to do the right things, a lot of people didn't like her. But I liked her very much, and she was very ambitious. She became president of the state teachers association. She was the first woman who was ever that, and they just didn't think that she could do it, but she worked her hours. I worked with her; Mr. Cornell, who's principal of Washington High School, worked with her. She had some people work with her; and she got that thing and got to be president, and stayed president of that for the term of three years. While she was president, we all worked to get out those reports for her. And she was very highly thought of by the city administration of schools.
GFB: So was she an aggressive person?
BEU: Yes, she was. She was very aggressive and a lot of things happened, you
know. There weren't many of these schools, but there were a lot of things the principals could do, and she encouraged them to do that. And things grew for blacks during that time more than it had. It had been just nothing, and she brought it to a place where it helped.
GFB: So she was a graduate of Atlanta University?﻿54
BEU: Yes, she graduated from Atlanta University. I don't know whether she got any degree from anywhere else or not. But see, in those days there was very little employment where you could study. Now, I really don't know that she went away, but whenever they had anything special at Atlanta University, she was over there. They often had visiting professors come there, do courses in education. That's when I think I was at the University of Chicago and almost had my master's from the University of Chicago.
They had a professor, a visiting professor, who came down. I forget his name now, but anyhow, he was very aggressive and he had a number of teachers at Atlanta schools in his courses. I was in his courses, and he went away to Fort Valley once one Saturday; we had his courses on Saturday. He went away to Fort Valley on a Saturday, and so when he left, he asked me to take the class. I was just so shocked, I didn't know what to do, but I took the class. They were all in there working for a master's degree and I said, "Maybe that man thinks there's something in me." I said, "Now you know, I am here as supervisor of schools and I'm working, have to wait till summertime to work, at the University of Chicago to get my degrees. And here's you, working all through the winter." And I said, "Now I have to get this degree." I meant to go back and get it in Chicago, but I just didn't do that because so many other things happened. And so I got credit for that course. I had taken several courses and I had my credits counted to see how much I had.	I didn't have but a little more and had a seminar,and so I said,
these people who are under me are going to get their master's before I do, and I better go and get my master's.
So Dr. Troup, who was president of Fort Valley, do you know him? He's another fine person. It seems to me he's here in Atlanta. He and I worked together on some special work and I got my degree over there. Dr. Clement had just come here. Well, I was one of the first Negroes to go up there and get it, the master's degree. And that's how it happened. I was talking about Mrs. Agnes Jones, she would do that too, but you see, when she was doing it, she wasn't getting any credit for it because they didn't have the master's degree program at Atlanta University. She was a very good person.
GFB: I know there was a law that said that the public school teachers couldn't get married or something?
BEU: Yes. They could marry, but they would have to leave the jobs after they got married.
GFB: Right. So how did many of them react to it?
BEU: Well, they just stayed single. A lot of them stayed single and some of them just went on and married anyhow,and then one or two had certifications, they were so convincing. There were some very excellent teachers who got married, that's how all these things were broken down. Some very excellent teachers got married, that Mrs. Jones and some of the others
didn't want to leave their jobs. They let them stay and then gradually let some more of them stay. But if you weren't an outstanding teacher at the
*
Fort Valley State College﻿
55
BEU: (cont.) beginning, you couldn't get married and stay on in the system.
You had to resign. And they put them in the night school, that's what they did for them. My sister was transferred to the night school once she got married.
GFB: So do you think there was a reason as to why they didn't want, you know, the teachers to marry or anything?
BEU: I don't know why, what it was. 1 think people were trying to assume responsibility for the full life, for the life of a child. And they had some kinds of reasons about you ought to stay home and take care of your child. See, that's why we have so much trouble in schools, because parents don't take care they don't rear the children. So when they first started letting them get married, they'd have to have maternity leave, had to stay out three years, and my niece had to stay out three years with another child. You had to stay out three years on maternity.
GFB: What is it now?
BEU: Oh, listen now, they don't do anything, make you do anything. Anything, they say they live together and anything now. They try to get principals who will see to it that the teachers will deliver, and that's all they have to do now, for the good of the school. They can do anything in the world they want to outside.
GFB: So then most of the people who used to go on to the teaching profession then were females. Did they know before they went in that they couldn't get married, so were they more or less decided they were going to be single?
BEU: Well, if they had an opportunity to get married, or wanted to get married, they would have. They wouldn't teach. They took that job...that was understood that they would have to quit when they got married. And they had a lot of teachers who just went together for a long time and finally got married.
GFB: So then most of them, when they got married, in essence, they just gave up all of what they studied for and sacrificed...
BEU: That's right. Did something else.
GFB: Okay, so when you went back to A.U. in 1937 to get your master's—I think that's when you got it from A.U.—did you meet Dr. Bacote at that time?
BEU: No.
GFB: Afterwards? Because I know that he was there at that time.
BEU: He was there then? He was there?
GFB: Right, because his first student, Joe Bailey, graduated with a master's in 1931. I think it was A.U.'s first master's, in 1931.﻿56
BEU: No. The man I knew was Dr. Nathan.	You never heard of Dr. Nathan?
GFB: No. Which department was he in?
BEU: Education. Dr. Bacote was history,	I thought. I thought he was over
at Spelman. I knew him through our	church, that's where I first knew him.
GFB:	Right. I think he's teaching a course now at Spelman.
BEU:	So then he was a history teacher at Spelman.
GFB: No, taught at A.U., but now he's teaching a course at A.U. and at Spelman.
BEU:	Well, at first he was at Spelman, wasn't he?
GFB:	From what I understood, no, he came right to A.U.
BEU: Really? I didn't know that. I thought...
GFB: Okay. Could you tell me something about the theater, did you used to use 81 Theater?
BEU: The what?
GFB: The 81 Theater.
BEU: Oh, that's a theater on Decatur Street, that was a theater on Decatur Street. Negro companies from the North, because there weren't any in the South, came down and played. There were certain companies that played at 81 Theater and it was very popular. That's where all the Negroes went. I only went down there once or twice, but I was always afraid to go down there because it was such a rough house.
GFB: Right.
BEU: Most anything happened down there. It was very popular among the Negroes, but I never, I stayed...
GFB: So this was the only place where black companies...
BEU: Yes, unless you went to the peanut...the other theaters in town. You had to go up the back stairs at the Fox. I've been out to the Fox. But some of the things you wanted to see, sometimes you couldn't, didn't have the money to go North, you see. That's what Mrs. Herndon did. She never went to anything here; she spent her time in the North, going to the theaters and so on. She got to Washington, would go up there and visit the theaters there. But if you wanted to see something, and so I have for a time or two, gone up the stairs, those stairs were as tall as one of those trees, just keep going up, on the outside. And finally you get to that place and go inside and you're up, way up high up in the Fox. And that's where Negroes went. And I remember one time they said they had given those seats to the Agnes Scott**
*
Fox Theater
**
Agnes Scott College﻿57
BEU: (cont.) girls. I said, "Well, I wonder how they got up there." But that was the only thing you could do. If anyone was Negro, they went up there and had all the shows right on the stage and then they began to have movies there.
GFB: So blacks were mainly excluded from the Fox, I mean, you know, not unless you sat up in the colored section?
BEU: Yes, they were way up on the last row, last section. And they had it full, because people wanted to see something, they wanted recreation. They went up those steps. I went up there two, three times, I forget. It was too much for me. I just stopped going. That's where Negroes went, over there. And I began working with the Girl Scouts, and the Girl Scouts had two or three places open to them. They could go to the Jewish Center, go in any part in that. And they had a church, an Episcopal church where they could go in. And there was one other place where we could go, Life of Georgia Insurance Building. But just a very few places left. And I think they went in some other place. The Jewish Center was on Tenth Street at that time; they moved out on Peachtree Street, but they always had open doors for Negroes, Girl Scouts. That's why I worked with Girl Scouts, I don't know what other organizations they let come in, but they did allow the Girl Scouts.
GFB: So then, I was wondering if you could go back now and talk a little bit more about, you know, when we first talked, you were just talking about your family background. And you said as a young child you used to have some contact with your father's...
BEU: Yes.
GFB: ___parents who were white. I was wondering, do you still have contact with
them?
BEU: No, they passed long ago. And they had a son who was working here at Fulton National Bank and he lived out on Gabriel Road, something like that, but I just heard of him. This son had a son, that was at Georgia Tech and I used to read about them over there, but I never bothered them. You see, the old folks were very nice, they'd like me around. They've been gone a long time ago. But the young children, they didn't keep up with my father. If he were living, they would have known me, but these younger people, they don't understand it, the connections, you see. I lost track of them altogether. When those people passed out, they used to have us come there and we'd come. I used to go there in the summertime and I spent summers with them. And went round with them to church, just like they did. When the time came to go, they...I was there till I went to Atlanta University.
GFB: You used to go back and see them?
BEU: I didn't go back. We moved to Covington when I was at Atlanta University,
and I didn't go back any more. But I kept in contact with them. My mother, before I came, used to live there. But I didn't. You see, my father saw his father send his boys to school, Milledgeville and to Emory. That's where they went, Emory University in Oxford, and Milledgeville too—I can remember﻿58
BEU: (cont.) something about it—but he saw his father send his boys to schools
and he wanted to send his children to school. That's why we kept migrating. See, these people live in Walnut Grove, Georgia. We migrated to Covington where he gave...to Oxford first, Oxford, a little town ten miles away from his home town, where he gave my father some land. And my mother and father built a two-room house on that land. But it was so far in the country and there was nobody out there and they were so hard to get hold of, my father could make more. He just naturally took up carpentry and auto mechanics — iust took it up himself. And he could get more at that, so he left that farm out there and went to town and did carpentry work.
GFB: So was your father named after his white father?
BEU: No, no. My father's name was Joe Samuel. Well, Sam was his father's name. I guess he was. I never thought of it, because he named his boy Samuel after his father.
GFB: Right. So how did...
BEU: And I can remember that man was just as nice, he was a fine old man.
His wife was pretty nice too, but she was stuck on herself because she had the money, you know. They didn't have too much, but they had a little, and had this big house.	They had somebody who worked a little on the farm
there, who lived close by in a house, and somebody who always would come in and cook for them. And in the summertime, that's what I did. I just worked, ate most of the time, just around there and any little thing she wanted. When the time came to go to church or go anywhere, I put on my shoes and got— they had a surrey—got in the surrey, and went right with them. I went to church with them, and in the wintertime, of course, I was in my home, going to school. But when vacation time came, she always wanted me to come. I went two or three summers there with her. In fact, I didn't stop going there until I went to Atlanta University. I was very young when I went to Atlanta University; when I went there to Atlanta University, I didn't go back. I have seen some, and I didn't think she would want me to go, she wouldn't have appreciated my going off to college like her children did. But you know, that's interesting, she didn't know any better. But they weren't educated people, they just were people who had those children. They had three boys, no girls... three boys...the oldest, Colley, and Bose and George. And they thought a lot of me too. They never bothered too much about my brother. My brother was next to me, but he and the other girls were too young.
GFB: Right. So then your father took the name of Usher, when his mother married.
BEU: Yes, that's how he got Usher. I don't know what he was, I don't know what they called him when she got married to Mr. Usher. She married an Usher and then had these other children.
GFB: Okay then, at this point then I guess we'll just end. Thank you very much, Miss Usher.﻿BAZOLINE ESTELLE USHER
