Era Bell Thompson:
Marcia M. Greenlee: Era Bell Thompson:
Marcia M. Greenlee:
Era Bell Thompson: Marcia M. Greenlee:
Era Bell Thompson:
Marcia M. Greenlee:
Era Bell Thompson: Marcia M. Greenlee:
This is part one of an interview with Era Bell Thompson. The interview is taking place in Miss Thompson's home at 2851 Martin Luther King Drive, Chicago, Illinois. The date is the sixth of March, 1978. The interviewer is Marcia Greenlee. Miss Thompson, would you please describe your professional career as it is today?
Well, I'm semiretired as the international editor of Ebony. I still go down to the office occasionally, and for four or five years did freelance articles.
Are there any large projects that you're at work on now?
I'm working on book three—that is, I'm about to work on it. I've been threatening for a long time. That would be a continuation of American Daughter. But lately I've been involved with volunteer work.
American Daughter was published in 1946.
Yes, 1946.
And so this book, this book you're at work on now, will continue after that time?
Yes, but it'll be mostly on my travels. Most of the material will include things that I couldn't put in the articles that appeared in Ebony.
Are there projects that you anticipate after that? Other things that you'd like to do?
No, one thing at a time.
Okay. I'd like to discuss with you your childhood and young adulthood, and some of the early influences on your career interest. Perhaps we should begin with your family background. You were born in Des Moines, Iowa?
Era Bell Thompson:
Yes.﻿2
MMG: EBT: MMG:
EBT: MMG: EBT:
MMG:
EBT:
MMG:
EBT: MMG: EBT:
MMG: EBT: MMG:
EBT: MMG: EBT:
August...what was the date? August 10, 1905.
August 10. And you were the youngest of four children of Stewart C. Thompson and Mary V. Logan Thompson. Would you tell me something about your mother? What was her family background?
I don't know much about her. My mother died when I was twelve.
How would you characterize your mother? How do you remember her?
I don't, really, excepting as a very quiet person. It's quite vague. My father was the dominant person in my life. I was with my mother when she died, and that frightened me, because I had never seen anyone die before. I wasn't sure she was dying. All of that blocked out some of the memory of her.
Do you think your life might have turned out differently if your mother had lived while you were growing up? Do you ever speculate on that?
Not if we'd stayed in North Dakota, because we were practically the only black family—all black—in Driscoll.
Did the two of you... Do you have any memories of ever discussing with your mother what you might do when you were grown?
No way, no.
How about your father, then? What was his family background?
My father was the son of a slavemaster. His mother was the cook	in the
so-called big house, so he was born a slave. He played with his	white
half brothers and sister, who taught him how to read and write.	And
as a young boy, he in turn taught the slaves. He learned how to	type when he was seventy. He was a very outgoing personality, a very vibrant person.
Where was he born?
In Virginia.
So you really characterized him as ested in learning.
outgoing and vibrant, always inter-
And in people.
What sort of relationship did you have with your father?
He was extremely proud of me. He used to embarrass me by telling people that if I ever got to the big city, I could make a living writing, and I knew I'd starve to death. [laughs] We had a very good relationship. He gave me everything that I wanted, I remember, except a fur coat. He﻿3
EBT: (cont.'d) was going with a lady that advised him that I was too young for a fur coat, and I never quite forgave the lady. I was always fearful he was going to remarry, and I would be left out in the cold. I realize now how foolish I was, how selfish.
MMG: But natural enough, maybe, at the time. How old were you when your father died?
EBT: Twenty-two.
MMG: How did his death affect your personal and professional development?
EBT: Well, I was in Chicago. I'd already left home,trying to find a job.
When he became ill, I came home. After his death, I took care of the secondhand store, which he was operating at the time, and ran that until I paid off his hospital expenses. He didn't have any debts...
MMG: Had the two of you ever discussed a career for you?
EBT: We didn't discuss it. I was always writing something. He knew that I wanted to write. He just sort of took it for granted.
MMG: How and where did your parents meet and marry? Was that after they'd moved to the Midwest?
EBT: They met in Freeport, Illinois, where my father was a chef, cook, and my mother was the nursemaid for a wealthy white family.
MMG: And they moved from there, where?
EBT: Outside of Des Moines...a coal-mininp; town, where my father worked as a coal miner, among many other jobs.
MMG: He really did.
EBT: He did all kinds of things. One brother was born in Freeport, and the second one was born in Carbondale, Iowa, in the coal-mining town. And that's where he was reunited with his black half brother, Jim Garrison, who was married to an Irish woman, Aunt Ada.
MMG:	Aunt Ada?
EBT:	Yes.
MMG:	And then from Carbondale, then they moved to Des Moines?
EBT:	Des Moines, right.
MMG:	And from Des Moines?
EBT:	To North Dakota.
MMG:	Which town was it then?﻿4
EBT: In North Dakota?
MMG: Yes.
EBT: To Driscoll. That's where my uncle was homesteading. He encouraged my father to come there because the boys were teenagers, and there were no jobs for them in Des Moines. In North Dakota at that time, anyone who had sons was considered wealthy because people farmed without money. You just borrowed and you prayed that you'd have a good crop, and you went back in debt the next year. So with three boys, my uncle thought that my father would do well. He didn't count on my father being everything in the world except a farmer. He was definitely a city man. So he spent most of his time on the farm not being a farmer. We moved to North Dakota and lived with my aunt and uncle and their two children that winter. We had never experienced winters like that, hard winters, very much like we're having right now. Blizzards, snow and cold—you couldn't see the ground from fall until late spring. We moved from my uncle's place in the country to this little town of Driscoll, and stayed in an old hotel there until spring.
Then we rented Morton's farm, which was about two miles from town. Mr. Morton drove us out to see the place in a sleigh, but everything was under snow. We couldn't see the rocks. We didn't know that the land was almost impossible to cultivate. Morton showed my father the horses, which were so far away you couldn't tell what color they were. They were broncos who ran wild over the prairie in the wintertime. He didn't tell my father that he had to break the horses—catch them and break them before they could be used. So we moved to the Morton farm— that's where my mother died.
Just a few yards from where our house stood is now a national park, landmark. It's a spot where one of the larger Indian wars were fought. We didn't know it at the time. And there is a club called the Gay Thirties (has nothing to do with the gay connotation of today), but it's composed of couples, kids I grew up with. The government purchased two acres right there. The club put a fence around it and planted some trees. I went back a few years ago and planted two trees: one for my mother and one for my father.
MMG: Gay Thirties?
EBT: Gay Thirties. They had a three-day celebration for me one year.
MMG: How did that name originate? There were thirty in the club?
EBT: I don't know. Because it didn't exist when I lived there. I've
always been in contact with the people there. Olga Patterson, she used to be our neighbor. As fourth graders we would slide down the hill in the snow. I can remember my first dance at a little four-room school-house. It was a basket social, and ended up with the boys throwing the food that wasn't eaten at each other. And I remember I had sent to Sears and Roebuck catalog for a beautiful dress. It wasn't quite made for﻿5
EBT: (cont.'d) horseback riding. It was chiffon and satin [laughter] and
I wore a pair of my mother's shoes, high-laced shoes. There was no way to get to the party, except by horseback. So I rode my pony to my friend's house in town and then went to the dance. I think we spent most of the time giggling, but that was my first social event.
MMG: What were some of the most important influences that you think your parents had on you, your father in particular?
EBT: Well, my father's love of people, for one thing, and he always kept
clippings of poems that he liked, and I think maybe that had an influence on my interest in writing; I started out by writing poetry. He also loved traveling, and I think I got that from him. And he had a marvelous storytelling talent. He used to tell ghost stories, and he was so good at it that I can still remember them.
MMG: Okay, were there other influences you wanted to mention?
EBT: About my parents, you mean?
MMG: Yes.
EBT: Well, he had a blind belief in my ability to become a great writer, once I made it to the big cities. But that's about all I can remember about his interest in my writing. The first article I had published was in the Physical Culture magazine, a little article without pay.
MMG: You had three older brothers. Could you tell me their names and something about each of them?
EBT: Hobart was the oldest. His name was Hobart William. He now calls himself William H. Maybe that's the way it was. Stewart, and Carl.
MMG: And are your brothers still living?
EBT: Yes. All in different states.
MMG: Were you especially close to each other?
EBT: Well, being the youngest, and a girl, there isn't much closeness among us, you know. I was always one to tag along, and I preferred to stay out in the yard or help with the chores rather than help in the house. They are responsible for my fear of feathers.
MMG: How did that come to be?
EBT: Well, on the farm we had chickens, turkeys, and ducks, and they somehow taught the gobbler and the gander and the rooster to chase me. They didn't chase anybody else except me, and I, like a fool, ran. I had a dog named Sport, and he was the only one that would protect me. We had outside facilities, and there was a latch on the door. When I would go﻿6
EBT: (cont.'d) out there, the gobbler would parade up and down in front of the door, and sometime I'd spend half a day in the outhouse, [laughs] afraid to come out unless the dog came or my father rescued me.
When my father became messenger to the first Nonpartisan League governor, Mr. Frazier, he went to Bismarck for the sessions. The first year he sent for my mother and me. I saw the excitement of the last day of a legislature and it was quite interesting. But after my mother died, my father went again to Bismarck for the legislature, and left me in charge of my two brothers. My oldest brother had already flown the coop...
MMG: Is this Hobart?
EBT: Yes. Hobart ran away all the time. He started running away before we left Des Moines. He was always the wayward one. So the boys, knowing I was afraid of chickens, would kill a chicken and wring its neck. I would run outside in thirty-degree-below weather without a coat, and stand there, shivering and shaking till I thought they'd gotten the feathers off. One day, I remember in particular, my brother hung the bloody head over the door so that when I came in, it was supposed to fall on me. But it didn't fall, and I got inside, and I was afraid to get back out again. Since then I've been just petrified by feathers. If people have pet birds, I still won't go in their homes. I embarrassed my whole race, I think, in Africa because I was afraid of chickens. I embarrassed a very good friend down in Nassau about flamingos.
MMG: Flamingos?
EBT: Flamingos, yes. She knew the man that trained them, and he asked us to sit in the first row of seats around the flamingo pen. Well, I knew what was going to happen. Those things were going to come out, and I wasn't going to be there. So before he started the show, we were just sitting there talking. It's funny, if you're afraid of something, that they seem to know it. They come right to you. They don't bother anybody else. There were also some stray chickens, and these chickens were coming from the rear. So I left. "Pretend you don't know her,:: she said, "just don't look at her."
MMG: Now, did you and your brothers share any interests? Or was there just enough age gap that they tended always to see you as little sister?
EBT: The only interest we could have on the farm in North Dakota was work.
MMG: Well, you've told us part already, but what was it like being the only girl in the family, as well as the youngest child?
EBT: It was pretty rough. The Aplands had a daughter named Ruby. They lived about five miles away. Right after my mother died, Ruby came over to help me with my hair. I always wanted to wear ribbons on the end of my braids. Ruby had long golden curls, and I didn't have ends﻿7
EBT: (cont.'d) long enough [laughs] for braids. We tried to put them on,
and they kept sliding off. But I remember feeling that now I can do as I want to do. But it wasn't nearly as much fun as I thought it was going to be. When my father was grieving over my mother's death and for weeks on end, he just whistled and hummed spirituals or religious songs and wouldn't talk.
MMG: Did you understand what was wrong at that time?
EBT: I knew he was grieving, but it didn't affect me like that. I was
almost a celebrity at school, you know. People were being extra nice to me. I remember one instance when they were having a school play, and it was a slave play. I don't know why the teacher picked that one, but she had one overseer and the rest of us were supposed to be slaves. So when I came home and told my brother that I was going to be in the play and I was going to be a slave, he said, "Oh no, you're not." So when I went back to school, I told the teacher I couldn't be a slave. She wanted to know what part I wanted. I said I wanted to be the overseer. Then no one else wanted to be a slave either, so she had to abandon the play.
But most of the children were first generation Americans. North Dakota was about thirty percent Scandinavian, and the rest were Russians and Germans. They were unaware of prejudice and discrimination. As a matter of fact, very few of the people out there had ever seen a black person until I arrived. I finally got used to people just stopping on the street and staring at me. And at school, sometimes even the teachers didn't know how to react. They, too, had never seen a black child before. I remember one teacher who just looked at me for two days, and she turned out to be a very good friend after she finally made up her mind. The first time I took a shower with some of the girls on the high school basketball team, and I was embarrassed because they expected to see a different color when I had my clothes off. And I never could figure out why the bottoms of my feet and the palms of my hands were white. They just didn't match.
MMG: One of your brothers, as I recall from your autobiography, often assumed a kind of quasiparental role. Was that...
EBT: Stewart.
MMG: ...Stewart, right. Was that something he just sort of took on himself, and were you willing to accept his direction?
EBT: He was born an old man. And he'd take all of the money that he saved from working for the neighbors as a hired man and blow the whole thing on food, candy, and goodies at Christmastime. It was a big secret with him. He kept trying to make his list. I was his slave because he could order me to do anything he wanted me to do—until I got the goodies. It's funny, I thought of him as being a big person then, because I was small, and since I've been grown, I've found out that he was considered﻿8
EBT: (cont.'d) a short person. I did a story on short people for Ebony, and he started telling me about some of the problems that he had. It just never occurred to me that he was short.
MMG: Would you say that you have any special understanding of men as a result of the situation in which you grew up?
EBT: Well, no. It wasn't that kind of competition, except that I felt that I could do anything they could do.
MMG: That's what I was going to ask you. Do you think that it fostered dependence or independence, so far as you were concerned?
EBT: Independence, yes, because they didn't rule me. I suppose in their way, they were protecting me. I didn't do any of the heavy farm work until after they left home. They left home very early. I think Carl was about sixteen when he left. That was after Mother died. They never liked the farm. They didn't like North Dakota. They remembered the big city, they remembered Des Moines. I was the only one that had this love for the prairies. My father pretended that he couldn't milk a cow until I got lost in a blizzard one night. He was so nervous that he went out and milked all eight of them.
MMG: Just to pass the time.
EBT: Mm hmm.
MMG: Now, I don't think we've finished tracing the moves. It was from Des Moines to Driscoll, and then was it from Driscoll to Mandan?
EBT: Bismarck.
MMG: To Bismarck?
EBT: Bismarck. That's the capital.
MMG: Yes...
EBT: That's where I finished high school, in Bismarck. That's where I went into athletics and track.
MMG: And the last move?
EBT: Mandan, North Dakota; Saint Paul, Minnesota; Grand Forks, North Dakota; and Chicago.
MMG: Who were some of the other relatives important in your life?
EBT: Well, as a child, it was my uncle and my aunt.
MMG: This is your Uncle Jim and your Aunt Ada?﻿9
EBT: Aunt Ada, right. And she and my father were battling all the time, but it was a little role I think they played. I don't think they hated each other as much as they pretended. My father always managed to say something that made her angry. But she was very good to me, except that she also contributed to my fear of chickens. I remember she threw a setting hen at me once, because it was funny. But when my father died—he was running the secondhand store in Mandan, then—she took me to their house in Bismarck. I stayed with them for a few days, but every time someone would come to the house, she would say, "Oh, the poor little thing." I got so sick of that, I just couldn't take it any more, so I went back to the store and stayed there alone.
MMG: Now, we've already established that your father was less than pleased
about his brother's marriage to a white woman. Did you have any particular feelings regarding interracial marriage as a child, and did your perceptions change as you grew older?
EBT: I just accepted the fact that my father believed that interracial marriages were wrong. I don't know whether even he was that set on it. I just think it was this particular person that rubbed him the wrong way. But, you know, you assume a lot of things that you've heard all your life. You just assume that that's the way it is. One or two boys from school were nice to me—not that I ever dated them, because I didn't date. Then none of the kids did. When I got to the dating age, there just wasn't any black boys for me. I remember the basketball games and things I would have like to have attended. Some of my girlfriends had started dating. I remember one girl in particular, a friend named Gladys. She was a very attractive girl, and this fellow was from the South, a farmhand who worked for her father. He drove our school bus, and he was kind of going with her then. He resented me. And he would make all kinds of remarks. I wasn't familiar with some of the things he was saying, but I knew that they weren't good, and they were about me. Like, he would talk about dark clouds and that old sick humor about race, you know. I instinctively knew that he didn't like for me to be around Gladys when he was there. She was very uncomfortable because she was trying to get along with me and not offend him because she liked him.
When I was living with the 0'Brians when I was at Morningside College in Iowa, there were no black students there either. There were black people in the town but not students. And one of the white students one day, was talking to me about the future. He said, "Well, whom will you marry?" And what he meant was, there are no black college boys. In fact, I thought that everything would be all right when I got to the big city. Nobody would stare at me and I would be completely accepted. When we lived on the farm, I used to imagine how it would be. As a matter of fact, I used to pretend I was a cowboy, and write articles in Dewey Jones's column in the Chicago Defender. In my make-believe world, I was accepted.
MMG: Well, did your father ever articulate his feelings about interracial marriage, or did you just observe his reaction to Aunt Ada?﻿10
EBT: I think it was a little bit of both. He by no means disliked white people. I don't see any reason why he would have anything against interracial marriage as such. I think it was just this particular person that he objected to.
MMG: What are some of your other childhood memories? You've mentioned
several of them. Are there other things that you think of when you remember growing up in Driscoll? How much do you remember of Des Moines? How old were you when you left there?
EBT: Not much. I remember going back to Des Moines and seeing the school
get smaller each time. [laughter] I remember I had a new white coat-and-hat outfit, and I wanted to wear it to school. I always wanted to wear my good clothes to school. My mother waited until my father got out of the house and let me wear it. Then I'd have to quickly change when I got home to keep from getting caught. But I don't remember too much about it. When I went back to Des Moines to visit the 0'Brians, who moved there when Dr. 0'Brian finished up somebody's term as secretary of state, it was a different world—a white world.
MMG: He'd been living in Sioux City before?
EBT: Grand Forks is where I met them.
MMG: Grand Forks.
EBT: That was when I was going to the university that I met the 0'Brians. As a matter of fact, I had won a bedspring-r&ming contest with the United States Bedding Company of Minneapolis. There was a new coil spring out, and I had read all the literature about it. My uncle had a new and secondhand furniture store in Bismarck, too. I lived with him after my father died, for a while, before I went to the city. I was interested in furniture. That was my second love, I think. So I sent in the name of King Koil, and it won all of twenty-five dollars. So, by the way, about twenty or thirty years later, here in Chicago, the King Koil people had a dinner given for me. The first time they invited me, I went out of the house, stepped on some ice and broke my ankle, [laughter] I finally got the dinner a year later.
After I got the money for the spring, I wrote a poem about it. And then I sent them what they called an innovation, which I assume is too minor for an invention, but it was a contraption that fastened a table onto a couch.. And knowing absolutely nothing about blueprints, I drew this thing and I couldn't even draw! But I sent it to a woman, and they bought it. Several years later, I went to the Twin Cities to see my product.
MMG: Where were they located?
EBT: Minneapolis. They paid me fifteen dollars. Or I could have a bed, but I didn't want a bed. When I went to Minneapolis, I called the company and went over to see them. Up to that time, it didn't occur to me that﻿11
EBT: (cont.'d) they didn't know I was black. When this fellow came out into the office and saw me, his attitude changed completely. He was almost rude. He didn't even want to show me the bed. It was partly the money I won from the spring that paid for my trip to Grand Forks for a visit. I had had one year at the university, and went in for athletics in a big way. I worked for board and room with a Jewish family until pleurisy ended my schooling in my sophomore year.
MMG: This was Morningside?
EBT: No, this was at the university.
MMG: University of North Dakota.
EBT: I'm sort of rambling now; because this is going to be very difficult for you to sort out.
MMG: Well, I did want to talk to you about your education, and we'll come to that. But there were a couple of other things that I wondered if you could mention. You spoke of your brother—I suppose it was Hobart— sending copies of the Chicago Defender home every once in a while. What other links did you have to a larger world?
EBT: None.
MMG: So this newspaper was...
EBT: I had an aunt, my mother's sister, who lived in Illinois. After my
mother died, she wrote to me, always sending me a dollar bill in each letter. I used to correspond with some of the names I'd get out of the Defender, and their kids'column, the Bud Billiken Column. And lust things that my father used to talk about—the big cities, things like that. I remember one thing which stayed with me, one of the Defenders that my brother sent home had a picture of a lynching in the South. That was a very traumatic experience for me, because seeing this black person hanging by the neck, I got this terrible fear of the South, anything southern. I was sure I was never going South. I never knew anything about black history, I never heard of Marian Anderson until I was in my twenties, so I really didn't know anything about my people.
MMG: Well, let's talk some about your formal education. Where did you attend elementary school?
EBT: I started in Des Moines.
MMG: Do you remember the name of the school?
EBT: That was the Chesterfield School.
MMG: And then you finished where?
EBT: Elementary school in Driscoll and Sterling. We finally bought a farm
and moved from the Driscoll area to the Sterling—that was the next town.﻿12
MMG: That was the Morton farm you mentioned earlier?
EBT: Yes.
MMG: And what was the name of the school there?
EBT: Just Sterling School.
MMG: Just Sterling School. How would you characterize your early education,
in terms of content, for one thing, and then also the experience itself? How were you received by your teachers and by your fellow students?
EBT: Well, every time I changed schools, I had to go through this whole bit. The students and usually also the teachers having never seen a black person before, I was a curiosity. Little by little, they would become my friends. And I finally realized that no matter how bad it was in the beginning, it didn't last long. I found out that if you excelled, that if you push the swing higher or do something better than they could, they respected you. When they'd choose sides on teams, they found out I could play ball better or run faster or something like that, and I became more popular. It got to the point where they just assumed I could do anything. I couldn't really. So you become a legend. You put more effort in your work, you accomplish more.
MMG: How about the teachers? How did they receive you?
EBT: Very well, really. Compared to the way I treated them, [laughter] I had a lot of fun in school; it was a whole different life for me.
MMG: What were your favorite subjects?
EBT: Well, in high school, it was sports, of course, and I liked to write. My essays were always read before the class, and they were always humorous. When I was a sub-freshman, I sat among the seniors during study periods. I used to write poems for them. If I didn't have my lesson, I'd write a poem about the teacher. So I really got away with an awful lot. I had no problems, except for one teacher. I knew she didn't like me. I think she was from the South—at least, I assumed she was. I was a senior then, and it was almost the last day of school. She went around the class asking each one what they were going to do, and when she got to me, she said, "Of course, you'll be a teacher." And to her mind, that's the only thing I could be. I made my mind up that I would never teach. It would be the last thing in the world I'd do. And I never have.
MMG: What was the high school that you attended?
EBT: Bismarck High School. I took a postgraduate course at Mandan High
School when we moved across the river. That was simply because I was bored to death. My father was then operating a secondhand furniture store in Mandan.﻿13
MMG: What kind of a student were you?
EBT: In the things that I liked, I was an A student. Some of the things I
didn't like—I couldn't see any sense in Latin—I was not so good. While living with the O'Brians, I was having a lot of trouble with German...
MMG: You attended the University of North Dakota, 1930 to 1931, and then you transferred to Morningside College. Was that in Sioux City, Iowa?
EBT:	Yes. That's when Dr. 0'Brian became the president of Morningside.
MMG:	And that was where you received your B.A. in 1933?
EBT:	Right, 1933.
MMG:	In what field was your degree received?
EBT:	Morningside didn't have journalism, so I had to switch to English with a sociology minor.
MMG:	And how did you happen to attend the particular colleges that you did?
EBT: The University of North Dakota...I had a very good friend in high school, Barbara Register. We went out for basketball, track, hockey, and everything athletic. She was poor, too, so she told me that she was working her way through at the university, and I could do the same thing. She told me about the wonderful athletic program they had there. So it was purely to get into athletics, that I enrolled at the university. I went to the dean to try to find a place to work for room and board. There were two black families in Grand Forks. Grand Forks used to be a state Ku Klux Klan headquarters. I didn't know that at the time. Both the men of these two families worked for the railroad. The families weren't speaking. One was a light complexioned, the other was dark. There was a little black church just below the track—that's where we always lived, you know. And somebody had left funds for the church. Nobody had ever bothered to give the money to the people. So when Robert 0'Brian came to the First Methodist Church as its pastor, he found out about the fund and he revived the little church. Sunday afternoons, he'd go down there and preach.
So when I got the money from the spring-naming contest, I went back to visit Leona Turner, who was the daughter of the lighter of the two black families. She told me that Dr. 0'Brian had made it possible for her to continue school, had found funds for her to go to the university. Evelyn, the daughter of the darker family, who had children of her own, had an unusual, beautiful voice. Dr. 0'Brian got the head of the music department at the university to give her free lessons. So Lee was telling me all about this man who was doing all these wonderful things. I went to church that Sunday, and after the service, she introduced me to Dr. Robert E. 0'Brian. When he found that I had a year at the university and I wasn't going back to school, he asked me to come down to his office the next day and talk it over. And I did. I said I was going to Saint﻿14
EBT: (cont.'d) Paul that summer and work, and save enough money, and maybe I'd come back to school. Really, I didn't think I was going to return. So he asked me to write to him all that summer. I asked, "What will I write to you about?" He said, "I don't care. Just write, just keep in touch with me."
Toward the end of summer, I didn't have much more money than I had x^hen I came to Saint Paul. I was working in a little grocery store that belonged to some people my family had known in North Dakota. The woman's son was taking money out of the cash register, and the woman was blaming me for it, although she knew her son was stealing. I was most unhappy. I was ready to go back to school, anything to escape my predicament. I didn't see how I could make a living in Saint Paul. So I wrote to Dr. 0'Brian. He told me to come. I had only enough money to get back to Grand Forks.
I didn't know that Mrs. O'Brian didn't like black people, that she had a kind of a phobia about cleanliness, disease, and Negroes. She was quite upset about having me come and live with them. Dr. O'Brian was a very dominant man—I say was, because he was killed in an auto accident just last October. He had his own way, was master of his house. Mrs. O'Brian got him to agree that if I came to live with them for board and room, I would have to do the washing and the ironing. I was not to touch the food or dishes. They had an only son, Edward, who was four. She did a recycling job on him, a hasty one, telling him I was a poor little orphan and he should be nice to me. She overdid it, because when I arrived, she stood at the door saying, "Oh, oh, dear." I finally asked her, "Could I come in?" She had expected a big black woman, as I found out later. One of my dear, dear teachers, Dr. Korn, had told her that I would run the house, and run her out of the house, and a lot of nonsense. I got even with him before the end of school! So when I met Edward, he took me by the hand and led me in the front room. "It's going to be all right, little Era Bell," he said, patting my hand. "I'll take care of you."
MMG: Going to take care of you.
EBT: Yes. He was taking care of me! And to this day, he's still my big
brother. Dr. O'Brian had a younger brother, Roger. There were seven boys in their family. Besides Roger, all the rest of them were preachers because the mother, who was an Indiana Ku Klux Klan officer, wanted it that way. So you can imagine what happened when he brought me into his home. So they sent Roger to Grand Forks to go to school. All Roger wanted to do was play football. Roger and I got along fine. He finally found out he wasn't going to get the tuition money, so he split. [laughter] I had never washed for anyone before, and there was this thing about black people doing white people's dirty clothes. That irked me no end.
I had a room over the kitchen. They even bought a mangle for me to go along with the washing machine. Mrs. O'Brian was working on her master's in art, he was teaching, and Roger and I were going to school.﻿15
MMG: What was Mrs. 0'Brian's name?
EBT: Mabel 0'Brian. She had studied voice, and she used to sing in the very high soprano voice that I didn't particularly care for. After Edward and I became chums, and she'd put on a record with that kind of music, all I had to do was look at him, ar.d he'd turn it off. If they had something on the table that I didn't want to eat, I'd look at Edward, and he wouldn't eat it either. He'd raise so much Cain that both of us would be excused. Well, I had never seen fried green tomatoes before, nor pancakes that were an inch thick, served with gravy. And Dr. 0'Brian cooked breakfasts. He had a real Irish temper. Anything would set him off, like the table being unbalanced. During the first meal, when all of us were sitting at the table, the doctor had a toothache, and went into one of his tantrums. Edward got up and imitated him. I thought, "Well, this is where I came in. This is not for me. I can't stand the confusion." After the meal, Dr. 0'Brian told me to come into the living room, take a book, and sit down and read. I didn't want to read because I wanted to go to my room. He said, "Read the book." So I got The Rise and Fall of the Roman Empire. "Do you like history?" he asked. I said, "No!"
I hated the laundry, but I didn't want to cook either. After a while, I began typing her thesis, and she began taking the heavy work off of me and putting it on Roger. That's when Roger left. By the end of the school period, I really didn't have any place to go, so the O'Brians asked me to stay with them and help Mabel with her thesis. It was during that summer that he got this offer to become a college president. Well, he had two offers, one was from a Kansas school and the other was Morningside, a Methodist college. And I found out later they didn't take the Kansas one, because I couldn't have matriculated there, so they accepted the Morningside offer. That summer, Mabel went home to her parents in Indiana and took Edward with her, and I stayed and helped pack.
It was funny, the new minister that moved in to take O'Brian's place, had a daughter, too. I say too, because people assumed I was their daughter when I moved to Morningside—although they weren't prepared for a black daughter!
When we got to Morningside, and the dean saw me, she put Dr. O'Brian in one wing of the dormitory and me in the other. In packing, some of my things had gotten into his suitcase and vice versa. It was really funny. A lot of people couldn't understand the relationship. In fact, they went so far as to say that there must have been... Well, they intimated that I was probably a real daughter rather than a foster daughter. But that didn't bother Dr. O'Brian. He was the kind of person that loved to shock people. When they were invited out, he would say, "Of course, we have to bring Era Bell." And sometimes I'd end up with the invitation, sometimes I didn't.
MMG: Have you ever speculated, especially considering Dr. O'Brian's personal background, what made him iconoclastic?
EBT: He was a rebel, a brilliant person. A Phi Beta Kappa, a Ph.D.—the kind of person who could count with abacus beads, recite Shakespeare, knew all the Greek gods and—not gods... He had a brilliant mind. Just before he died, students would come to him, out in California where they﻿16
EBT: (cont.'d) retired, and he would help them with translation, and he translated his son's inventions. He is a patent attorney now.
MMG: This is Edward?
EBT: Yes, Edward. When he died, I went to California to be with Mabel. She was slowly going blind, so he did all the writing toward the end. He usually typed the letters and she wrote notes on the backs of them. Every letter I've received from them, from the time I left in 1933 to come to Chicago until now, has always included an invitation to come home. And last spring we had a get-together in Anaheim at Edward's house.
MMG: Now, how did Mrs. 0'Brian adjust to your presence after initial sort of reaction?
EBT: It wasn't long before she was criticizing him for giving me too much to do. She came around beautifully.
MMG: Now you had another occasion to live with a family...
EBT: Yes.
MMG: ...while you were in school. Could you say something about that?
EBT: Yes. When I first went to Grand Forks to go to school, I was looking
for a place to work for board and room. When I arrived, it was raining. I went to the YWCA to get a room, and they told me they were filled up. They wouldn't even bother to look, they just gave me the brush-off. I had written to the Stewarts, whose name I saw in the paper, the Saint Paul black paper, and told them I was coming. I left the YWCA and went back to the depot. From there, the agent pointed to where the Stewarts lived, below the tracks. I went to their home—a nice well-kept cottage—and rapped on the door. A brown-skinned woman cracked the door and stuck her head out. I asked if I could get a room there that night. She says no. As I was going out the gate, she came back to the door and called me. She said, "Are you Miss Thompson? Are you the lady that wrote to me?" I said yes. She thought I was a prostitute—those are about the only kinds of black women who came out there in those days. So they took me in the house and gave me some dry clothes. I was soaking wet, tired, and disillusioned. The Stewarts were very good to me.
MMG: You also lived with a Jewish family.
EBT: I told the Stewarts I was trying to find a place to work. They didn't have room because they had their daughter, Evelyn Wagoner, and her children living with them. Her neighbor, Pearl Radoff, took me in. She just lived a couple of blocks down the street. Pearl had a little boy, and her husband was a trucker. He would buy wholesale frozen fish and other foodstuff, take it into the country and sell it. Sam didn't have a formal education, but he had a computer in his head. I never saw a man that could count like Sam. You couldn't fool him on﻿17
EBT: (cont.'d) figures at all. Pearl was a lot of fun, but she swore all
the time, and she said words that I wasn't allowed to say, and didn't like to hear other people say them. And when she found out it embarrassed me, she had a field day.
MMG: Kind of like your brothers with the feathers?
EBT: Yes. I had walked up and down University Avenue looking for a job and gotten more than one door slammed in my face. So I stayed with Pearl. She didn't care when I did my work, just so I did it. Her mother, father, and brothers lived across the street, and it took an awful lot of getting used to a house full of people speaking a different language. They had a chicken coop in the back of the house, and over the kitchen table I had to face the chickens while I was eating. And it was pretty rough. And then when theshechet* came, he would kill the chickens, and Pearl would throw them in the pantry on the floor. If I didn't watch their son, Sydney, he would pull the chickens out. So I was living in constant terror until they were cooked. I remember the dean saying, "Does this woman treat you well?" I said yes. The only thing I had against her was swearing. I wasn't brought up that way, and I didn't like that kind of language. She said, "Well, if she's good to you, try to overlook it. Make the best of it."
After I left the Radoffs, Pearl ran away from her husband and went to Saint Paul. She was going with a Pullman porter there—she was passing for black! Maybe you could consider her dark complexioned, but not Negroid. She didn't look Jewish either. But anyway, she got away with it. And at home, Pearl wouldn't pick up her own clothes; she was frail and she was sick, and she couldn't do this and couldn't do that. I met Pearl in Saint Paul, at a carnival. When she saw me, she almost gave it away. This friend of hers had a car, and he took us for a ride. She was just bubbling over. She wanted to know about her son and family, but she didn't dare let on to her friend. I went to her rooming place, and found that she lived with a very nice black family. She was holding down two jobs—as a waitress. Of course, it didn't last too long before she went back home. She said she'd always liked colored people, and when she ran away, that's where she went. I saw her several years after her husband was dead, and her son was married. She had remarried—to a Scandinavian—and was living in Wisconsin. She came to Chicago and visited me.
MMG: We've mentioned on and off throughout about your interest in athletics.
You really were something of a track star, and it was while you were at the university level of your study that this athletic career sort of came to an end, not because you wished it so, but... Could you say something about that?
EBT: Well, I did have a physical breakdown.
MMG: Emphysema?
EBT: No. Anyway, I was going in for all of the teams, everything that was
being offered in athletics, and walking from Radoff's house all the way up to the university, which was over two miles. And going back for
* Yiddish word meaning a person especially authorized to butcher animals.﻿18
EBT: (cont.'d) practices and buying bismarcks and eating them along the way. And it finally got the better of me, and I was sent home. When my father told my cousin Mary Lou—she was Uncle Jim's daughter—that I had to leave school, she naturally thought I was pregnant. She went over to Mandan and caught the train there before it got to Bismarck. She wanted to be sure she saw me first. Pleurisy. Pleurisy is what I had.
MMG: Pleurisy.
EBT: Yes. I was so afraid my father wouldn't believe I was sick, that I
tried to catch cold on the train. Every time the train would stop—it was wintertime—I'd get off. [laughs] So I went to the hospital, and then the doctor told me that I'd probably never be able to run again. I thought that was the end of the world, because athletics were my world.
MMG: You had been in competition and won awards.
EBT: Yes. I had tied two national intercollegiate records and broken five state records in one meet. Played basketball and hockey, volleyball, and everything else they had to offer. And I was writing for the college paper and doing a humor column, and writing sports for the local newspaper.
MMG: How were you received by your teachers and your fellow classmates at the college level? Was it more or less a repeat of what you'd already experienced at the elementary and high school level?
EBT: Yes, mostly. There's always one teacher, you know, that just doesn't go along with the program—my program. I'm afraid I took snap classes, so I'd have more time for athletics. I remember I took sociology and that was a sop.
MMG: Still is.
EBT: Yes. In one course, I thought I'd see if I could make it without a book. And I got a B. I remember the assignment was to write a term paper, and I made up one about The Beginning. It was the biggest fabrication you could possibly imagine, but nobody could really dispute it, so I passed the course. I was writing poetry in class instead of taking notes, and when the teacher called on me, I'd say, "Would you repeat that again?" so I'd know what he was talking about. [laughs]
MMG: What were the communities like in which these schools were located?
Were your experiences of interest—I mean, in the larger community?
EBT: I was not a part of the Grand Forks community, except for this little
south side neighborhood where the Radoffs and the two black families lived below the tracks. They accepted me because, well, we were all in a sense, minorities, in the same boat. I played football in the streets with Pearl's younger brothers, the Second Avenue team. I never went downtown. There was no particular reason for going there, so I wouldn't know about﻿19
EBT: (cont.'d) Grand Forks.
In Morningside, while I was living with the 0'Brians, I was accepted by some people.
In Bismarck, I knew everybody. My father had had a Ford when I was fourteen, and he went into the taxi business with a partner. My father couldn't drive, so when they went out of business, which was very soon after they started, I inherited the car. I used to take the spark plugs out of the Model T Ford and take it apart, as much as I could. There were some "ladies of the night" who went to our little church. My father was a deacon, and every time we'd go to church, they wanted me to drive them home. I got tired of driving them home. This Ford had a running board on the side, you know, so I took them home one night, and I drove from the running board. [laughs] I never had any more trouble with them.
MMG: What was the attitude of your father and your brothers towards your
education? And were their attitudes influenced, do you think, in any way by your being female?
EBT: Well, my brothers were gone by the time I was of college age. They had to quit school early. I think Carl went to the eighth grade. I don't know what grades Hobart and Stewart were in. They would send money to me, and did everything they could to encourage my education. They were proud of anything I did. I had a cousin, my mother's sister's boy, who was very brilliant. His name was Dewey Lipscomb. He won oratorical contests here at Northwestern and coauthored a book on Carver, with Mrs. DuBois. But I only met him once, and that's not long before he died. I wanted to be like him, because he was a writer. I think he wrote to me once. He was one of my idols.
MMG: And how did your father feel about your education? He preferred to keep you with him?
EBT: At first he tried to send me to live with a wealthy cousin in Chicago.
There was some misunderstanding and nothing happened. After I left home, he was very lonely at the store, but like all black parents, he wanted his children to have what he never had.
After my father died, the people in the community of Mandan rallied around me. Our secondhand store was on Main Street—all these little towns have a Main Street and not much else. Everybody knew me in Mandan, too, people in the stores and shops, in the streets. There were a couple of neighbors, it wasn't an organized thing, but they made a point that one of them came over to see me every day, to see that I was getting the right kind of food. I remember one day, I was sitting on this woman's steps and just talking—just running off at the mouth, as usual— and I said something about going to kill myself. I didn't mean it, you know that, but she bawled me out, said, "Don't ever let me hear you say that again!" Most of the things I said, I didn't mean. I was just talking.﻿20
EBT: (cont.'d) It's like the time I said I was going to write a book, and Maude Hoyt's mother, instead of laughing, encouraged me; she said it was wonderful. At that time, I really didn't think I could really write a book. I was just dreaming out loud. But people in the town were that way. In fact, they kept me in the straight and narrow more than I really wanted to be.
MMG: You know, there's something else that you mentioned that maybe we should explain a bit more—this sort of informal, not organizational, practice of housing other blacks when they traveled around the country, which was very common during this time. Maybe you could say a little more about that. When a black person traveled from one place to another, they couldn't anticipate lodging in public places.
EBT: Aside from a track incident in Fargo, the only traveling I did was later with the magazine. Mr. Johnson said I didn't know anything about black people, so the only way to learn was to go South. He sent me on a long assignment. I did about twenty stories, you know, overcompensating.
But I was scared silly in the South. I remember I went to a town in Alabama. Just the word Alabama frightened the heck out of me. I was supposed to do a story on a Methodist minister. He was an old man who had married a young girl. He knew I was coming because I had written to him. I came on the train, expecting him to meet me, but he didn't. It was getting dark and other people were leaving the depot. A black man driving an old, broken-down horse and hack offered to take me to a place that kept black people. I was afraid to go with him, because I didn't know where he would take me. I went into the depot to make a phone call. I knew the places were segregated, but the phones were so high on the walls that I couldn't reach them. And here I was, trying to be inconspicuous, and had to ask this white person to get the phone for me. I called the minister and told him I had arrived. He practically said, "So what?" He said he couldn't come for me, he had visitors, or something like that. I didn't know until later that he thought he was going to have to pay for the story. He thought I was hustling like the early black journalists did, because the black press couldn't pay their salaries. He was playing hard to get.
I was desperate. By then, it was getting dark. I thought surely everybody who looked at me was going to lynch me. So finally I had to go back and find this old gentleman with the horse. I tried to talk a little rough, you know. "You be sure you take me to a nice place," I said. He took me to the home of a lady who kept black people who couldn't stay any place else. This was a town in which my boss's mother-in-law and her doctor husband lived, so I called them but they were having something done to the house, and couldn't take me. So I just gave up and stayed there. In the middle of the night, the woman knocked on my door and introduced me to a roommate, a traveling teacher. I thought I had rented a room and now I had to share it.
The next day was Sunday, and it was raining, and there were no sidewalks in the black part of town. I thought, well, I'd go to church and hear the reverend preach. I could better interview him if I had more back-﻿21
EBT: (cont.'d) ground. People were sitting on their steps, kept speaking to me. I wasn't used to speaking to strangers, so I said nothing. I heard about that later, too. So when I got to the church, I sat in the back. It was a long sermon, and after it was over, somebody from Chicago had a recording machine, and they decided to reenact the whole thing over again. That made two sermons. I was getting tired, and I thought everybody else was tired. The minister was going blind, they had told me, so I thought that he couldn't see me. He wasn't that blind! He announced that they had a visitor from Chicago, and asked me to say a few words. I thought, I'll just keep quiet, he'll think I've gone home, but everybody started turning around and looking at me. Finally I got up, and thinking I was doing everyone a favor, I said, "Thank you, but I have nothing to say." That was very wrong.
Well, I went up to this minister's house after church, but he wouldn't see me. A woman gave me a chair on the porch, then went inside to eat, and left me sitting out there. The minister finally came out of the house and I told him what I wanted. He said, gruffly, "Come to my office tomorrow." He called one of his grandsons and told him, because it was raining hard, to drive me to my rooming house. "And don't charge her!" So this is the famous hospitality of the South?
The next day when I went to the church to interview this man, I got a lecture. "Don't you ever say that you don't have anything to say," he screamed, "you always have something to say." [laughs] After he bawled me out, I finally got the interview. But I learned my lesson, I think.
MMG: But now, these were aspects of southern, and southern black culture that you had no familiarity with.
EBT: No, I certainly had not.
MMG: These were things that you could not have known.
EBT: When I went to the restaurant, where black people eat, they weren't
satisfied at serving me; they had to start picking, asking questions. "You don't live around here, do you?" I said no. "Where are you from?" I said, "Chicago." "What do you do?" You know, a little bit at a time.
MMG: This was all unfamiliar.
EBT: Yes, it was. And they thought I was terribly rude and uncooperative and unfriendly and everything else, but I was feeling the same way about them. Because I just wasn't used to that.
MMG: What period of time was this, that you made the trip that you...
EBT: That was about 1947, when I first started working for Ebony.
MMG: Miss Thompson, what has been the role of religion in your life?﻿22
EBT: The Christian ideals and principles were instilled in me by both my biological and foster families. When I first arrived in Chicago, I turned to the safety of the YWCA for friends and shelter, although the white Y had rejected me in North Dakota. I was disillusioned by Chicago Christians when a minister stood silently by while a female parishioner berated me for accepting an editing job that he had assigned me. It was just the last couple of years that I joined a church here in Chicago. My father was a Baptist, but there were no Baptists in Mandan, North Dakota, so he turned Methodist. They accepted me as I was, but he was the Christian. He never got over that. [laughter] I'm now a Presbyterian —I've never believed in denominations. Everybody's trying to get to the same place anyway. I've never felt an emotional pull. When my father took me to the camp meetings in Jamestown, North Dakota, I was just a kid. My mother and father and I slept in a tent. Everybody lived in tents. Everyone else was white, but it was Brother this, Brother that, you know, and Hallelujah at every other word.
MMG: It didn't move you at all?
EBT: It didn't move me at all. I- was playing with some kids one day, and I don't know how it came about, but we planted a penny, and some young preacher kept putting an extra penny in the ground every day to make us think it was growing. And I said, "Well, if you are foolish enough to put the penny in, then I'll go along with it."
But my father was concerned that I was not getting religion, that I would be born again. So I'd go down with a group of preachers' kids, and we'd peek under the tents to watch people fall out, and speak in tongues. One day they caught me peeking and brought me down to the mourners' bench. This preacher kept saying, "Just believe, believe." I said, "I believe. But I don't feel anything." So finally, to get out of there, I said, "I believe." I really didn't feel any different, but one of my pals at home, Vivian Finlyson, told me before I left that if there was anything to religion, "You get it and come back and tell me about it." When I came back, I told her, "Look, I tried, but I don't think it worked." [laughter]
MMG: Do you believe in such a thing as a religious temperament, as opposed to, not really a nonreligious temperament, but, say, nonemotional religious temperament?
EBT: I think... I'm not very emotional in anything. Maybe it's the Indian in me, I don't know, but somebody has attributed it to that. At school, I'd get everybody else laughing by something I'd say. I was always able to keep a straight face, I don't allow my emotions to show. Now that I'm getting to be an old lady, sometimes they do. This Sunday in church, everyone held hands,we touch, you know. And it moved me, for some reason. But normally, I'm not emotional. It started when we were living on the farm. I wanted to get out with my brothers, and I used to cry a lot. Then I wanted to be tough like the rest of them, so I stopped crying and started fighting.
MMG:
Go ahead.﻿23
EBT: There were other influences. The depression was in full force when I
came to Chicago in 1933, and if it taught me anything, it taught me how to survive. I found out that trying to get a job from an employer who didn't have a college education, was a disadvantage.
MMG: They were resentful?
EBT: Resentful is right, and I finally found that the best thing for me to do was not to mention my degree. I remember, there was something about some money—I have no idea what it was—but anyway, a man overpaid me for something. I went out of my way and called him and gave back the money. He thought I was trying to get more money. People in Chicago just couldn't understand that kind of honesty. Before I was working for the employment service, I was broke. I made up my mind that if I ever got a job, I would never be broke again.
My first real job was working for the doctor, a white doctor and his wife. I took care of the office in the morning, and went to the home in the afternoon to clean. His wife was a public health nurse. She wore a uniform—blue with a white collar—so she cut one down for me and dressed me up as a maid. I had never worn a maid's uniform before and it nearly killed me. But they were very nice to me. I had walked the heels off my shoes looking for a job. The doctor, who believed in sensible shoes, bought a pair of low-heeled, square-toed shoes that nearly killed me.
MMG: Orthopedic?
EBT: Yes. When she had company and wanted to put a white cap on my head, well, I balked at that. It was bad enough wearing the uniform. She put food aside in the fridge, saying, "This is what you're supposed to eat." I resented that, and wouldn't eat anything, so she got worried about me not eating, and began giving me everything she had. I wanted to take the civil service exam to get a better job, and I told them about it, because I didn't think it was fair to be trying to get a job without them knowing about it. They knew they could never keep me as a maid so they let me take the exam.
MMG: Do you think that's largely because you had the initiative and the desire yourself?
EBT: I suppose so. I don't know. But I've never been in a circumstance that was so bad that I didn't find somebody to come to my rescue. Even in South Africa when I was put in jail.
MMG: Why don't you talk about that. I'll make a note here. Now, you've mentioned the depression, and you're very well versed on national and world affairs. Have there been any other local or national or international events which you think were significant in shaping your work? We also mentioned that scene, that luncheon in the Chicago Defender.
EBT: Yes. That really stayed with me. During which period, now?
MMG: Well, let's say, up until the time you began to work for Ebony.﻿24
EBT: I thought that after I got a clerk's job with civil service status, that I could relax. But it wasn't that way. Everybody in civil service was taking more exams and trying to get a better job. It was the same old deal, the same rat race. So I found myself taking exams too. I was working at the Merchandise Mart at that time, and there were very few blacks working there. One of the black girls was very friendly, and the others, they went around with their white friends, ignoring me. It was a period in which blacks wanted to be the only one on the job. The white collar thing for blacks was fairly new, and I remember on the bus or streetcar going home, the blacks who had clerical jobs put their pencils behind their ears, to show that they were clerks.
MMG: Symbol of status?
EBT: Yes. It's hard to believe that that could have happened. Things have
changed so much. In one office where I worked, there was only one other black person, and he was so rough on me, that the supervisor had to speak to him. He resented my presence. Everybody wanted to be the one and only, you know, the first and only. But when I became an interviewer, I enjoyed having people come up to the desk for help. We had the Diction-ary of Occupations, which we studied in order to know how to ask questions about"intricate machinery, to know how to classify them. If you saw the machine staring you in the face, you pr obably wouldn't know what it was but you knew the questions to ask, you knew how it was supposed to work you knew what skills you had to have to qualify. And usually the men were amazed because they didn't think I knew what I was talking about. [laughter]
MMG: You had your book there.
EBT: Yes. That's right. In one office at the Merchandise Mart, I was working in the files, and we used little typewriter chairs on wheels. I'd get back of the files and create a dance on those chairs. Then we began housekeeping back there and we'd smuggle food in! Later, I started a newspaper. It wasn't very flattering to the supervisor.
MMG: Is this the Giggle Sheet?
EBT: Giggle Sheet, yes. Everybody cooperated with me. One day, the Giggle
Sheet ended up in the supervisor's office. I was watching it circulate, and finally somebody picked it up and sent it to the supervisor. I started getting all my things together. I just knew I was going to lose my job. So she called me in and asked me why I wasn't on the Writers' Project. And I said, "Well, that's where I want to be, but I'm not certified." You had to be certified for the WPA [Works Progress Administration]. There were a lot of people on the Writers' Project that hated it__they didn't want to be there, and I couldn't get on. She tried to help me, but she couldn't.
MMG: This was the WPA?
EBT: Yes.﻿25
MMG: Now, continue with that, and tell us about your work with the WPA since we've mentioned it.
EBT: Well, when I first started, I took the exam for clerk-typist. By the way, I still meet for lunch with some of those people.
MMG: That's what I wanted to ask you. Because you were in Chicago and on the WPA at the time that Richard Wright and Margaret Walker and...
EBT: But I didn't know them.
MMG: ...Ralph Ellison were there. You didn't know them?
EBT: They were on the Writers' Project. No, these people I worked with, that we still meet, were white. One was an Italian girl who was born in Chicago, and had never been to the University of Chicago. She used to come over my house and we'd go out to the campus and have dinner. Once we went to a restaurant downtown—there weren't very many restaurants that would serve blacks then—and the waitress stood by one of the columns the whole time I was eating, just staring at me. I was so unsettled, I couldn't eat. [laughs]
MMG: So far we've discussed persons and events that were important to your work. Have there been any places or geographical regions which have influenced you and helped shape your work?
EBT: I think the Midwest. There is something about people from the Midwest that... I was going through a cave in New Zealand—that's where the Maoris are— and someone behind me said something about North Dakota. I bumped my head, I was so surprised. This couple was from North Dakota, so we spent the day together. There was a rapport immediately, and I've seen it so many other places. There's nothing pretentious about a farmer in that part of the country. Nobody's trying to be something they're not. You're concerned about background, who your folks were and all that sort of thing. I remember I was blackballed by the black branch of the University Women's Club here because some woman doctor, they told me later, said that I didn't have background.
I remember in Sioux City, a black doctor's wife, who couldn't get over how the 0'Brians treated me. I was at her home one day, and Dr. 0'Brian called to tell me that when I got ready to go home, to call, and he'd come get me. So I went to the phone and I said, "Come and get me. I'm ready to come home." She couldn't get over it. She said, "You just say, 'Come and get me,' is that the way you talk to him?" I said, "Well, what else am I supposed to say?" She couldn't understand it. Well, anyway, once when the 0'Brians were away, I invited her out to the house for dinner. She sat there, trying to figure it out. She says, "I can't understand it. You have no background, you aren't good looking, and you don't have any money. What do they see in you?" Well, I asked Dr. 0'Brian that when I was out to the West Coast years later, doing a story on the black children reared in white homes. I said, "Why did you take me in?" And he said, "That day that you came to my office﻿26
EBT: (cont.'d) in Grand Forks, it had been raining. When you walked in,
evidently you had paper in your shoes because there was water standing on the floor. I thought that if anybody wanted an education that much, I was going to help her." That was his answer. But this woman questioned my background—not my future. To midwestern people, that isn't important. It's what you do and what you are that counts.
MMG: Do you think part of that difference might be because in some, especially large ci ties of the Northeast, and the South to an extent, too, there have been fairly large black communities for longer periods of time, with an opportunity to sort of divide themselves among the new and the old, and the established, and all the rest?
EBT: Yes. In fact, there's some of that here in Chicago—the old-timers that arrived first. The same woman who wondered what the 0'Brians saw in me, told a great librarian who had to work all of her life, that she was inferior, that she felt sorry for her. Think what these people are missing. I met so many blacks from the East who felt superior to the rest of us. It's a class thing. In some parts of the South, the feeling is also very strong.
MMG: In the Midwest and in the West, when so many people are coming, nothing's really much established where they arrive; those kinds of divisions, I don't think, get started.
EBT: No.
MMG: Well, maybe they start, but it takes a while for them to evolve.
EBT: Yes. My father worked at all kinds of jobs. He was a janitor in the
bank of North Dakota when we lived in Bismarck, but he called himself a custodian. He used to tell me about color differences in the East. When I was graduated from Morningside, and trying to get into Howard University, I heard about the color thing there. If a girl was dark, she didn't have a chance, she wasn't socially acceptable. And I said, "If that's the kind of school it is, it's no place for me." Much of that's been changed now, but there still is a tendency for dark men to marry lighter women, and that's true all over. When I did a documentary on Brazil, I found it very flagrant. It's a step up. If a black man has money, and an education, and a position, he marries a white woman, and is considered "white."
MMG: Pele?
EBT: Pele is considered "white."
MMG: I have a lot of questions I wanted to ask you about race, but since we're discussing color now, let's just digress a bit. I want to ask you whether or not you felt any, either when you were growing up, and now, later, looking back and knowing other parts of the West, whether or not there existed this color division among blacks.
EBT:
In the West? When we were on the farm, beside my uncle and his half-﻿27
EBT: (cont.'d) white family, there were the Johnsons, two black brothers who farmed near Steele, the next town on the other side of Driscoll.
MMG: Steele?
EB.T: Steele. They homesteaded, were there when we came. I thought it was twenty miles away, but they tell me it was only ten. When you had to go by sleigh and horses, it was an all-day trip. We went to their homes for Christmas-, which meant that we stayed a couple of nights each time. The sled was set on a wagon body with hot bricks and blankets to keep us from freezing to death. One of the brothers was hale, hearty, and well-met, you know, loud, and not necessarily wrong. He enjoyed himself. His brother was just the opposite. He had taken agriculture at Tuskegee. His wife was a schoolteacher, and she had this thing about culture, too. She us«d the proper silverware and dishes, but she didn't have much food on the table. As my father said, "All those dishes, and no food." We enjoyed the other brother best. Well, I put all this in American Daughter, as you know.
The brother that went to Tuskegee had two children. Helen was my age, her brother Louis was a little younger. Until recently, Louis was teaching school right across the street here at Dunbar. I didn't even know he was in Chicago. He knew I was, but he didn't contact me. I don't remember how I found out about Helen, who lives in Pittsburgh. When she was fourteen, her mother and father said, "This is no place to rear a black child, especially a girl." The thing that they were avoiding was the thing that I didn't avoid, because as things turned out, my mother died, and was stuck in the country longer than I should have been, for social reasons. So they moved to Indianapolis, to a large city. Helen got married and has eight children.
After forty years, we found each other. I was going back to North Dakota for a visit and asked her to come along. We took the bus on a sentimental journey home. She was one of the very few blacks. She was so excited the whole trip. I think she partly fantasized the life there, because when they did an oral history for the centennial, the interviewer asked her if she had ever been called a name. She said, "Oh, no." I said, "Helen, no way. No black child grows up under those circumstances who has not been called a nigger." After I talked to her for a while, she said, "Well, maybe." But she had blacked all that out. It's very easy to do that. You remember only the good things. We found her place,but the house was gone. Only a few willows marked the spot, but we found some of her old classmates.
Those are North Dakota weeds. [Indicates dried arrangement in vase in living room.]
MMG: Oh, is that right?
EBT: When I lived there, they were just that, weeds, but when I went back
they looked like flowers. I picked them and the sisters at the priory waxed them and sent them to me,.﻿28
MMG: Well, now, so far as whites were concerned, in the area where you grew up, do you feel that there was any distinction in their minds between black persons of varying color? Or if you could be distinguished at all, were you the same as anybody else who could be distinguished?
EBT: My cousin could go either way. Her brother, you would assume, was
white. He married a white girl and brought her out to North Dakota. I think I wrote about that in the book.
MMG: These are the children of the Garrisons?
EBT: That's right. I asked Mary Lou about color, and she said that if people asked her, was she black, she would tell them yes, but they usually assumed that she was Spanish or Mexican or something else. They didn't see that many black people. I think the difference is that most of the people there are foreign born, or once or twice removed, and they just don't know anything about blacks. It isn't instilled in them. They don't have the racial complex that most white people have. And for that reason, they may stare at you when they first see you, and they ask you a lot of stupid questions, stupid to me, that is, but not to them. The only thing they knew about blacks was what they saw in the funny papers or movies. I never could understand how little kids, white kids, in the most rural areas, would know enough to call me a nigger. I never could understand it. But they did. Once they got used to you, they'd say, "Your color doesn't come off."
The time that our team was in Fargo at a track meet, we went into a theater. The usher told me to go upstairs, and the girl that was with me, naturally she thought she was talking to both of us. We started upstairs but the rest of the group had gone to the first floor. I got
halfway up the stairs and suddenly realized what was happening. I was so dumb, I didn't even know it at first. Well, I bolted when''I realized what was happening, and just left the girl standing there, the girl that I'd talked into going to a show in the first place. When the girls got back to the dormitory, they said, "You could have sat with us." There weren't any black people upstairs either, so they couldn't understand. It didn't make any kind of sense to me, either.
MMG: Well, the usher must have heard something...
EBT: Yes.
MMG: ...about where black people are supposed to go.
EBT: Yes, she knew about it.
MMG: Would you agree then that, whatever distinctions were made, they
weren't refined to the point... these distinctions on the part of whites towards black, they weren't refined to the point of color gradations among the black population?﻿29
EBT: If a person was very dark, they were aware of that. They might say, "Well, you aren't as black as that person," or something like that. They were curious, more of a curiosity than anything else. They couldn't understand all the different colors and shades.
MMG: Well, we'll come back to this, as I do want to talk some more about
race. Now you have never married. Is this because of choice or just the way that things worked out?
EBT: Well, it was, I would say, more circumstance. The two or three black boys I saw in North Dakota were in the reform school. You see, black children who were deserted or neglected ended up in reform school, even though they had done nothing. As a matter of fact, one of the boys used to come to our store and just sit there looking at me. I thought he was silly. [laughs] Once a black musician came to the house and asked my father if he could take me for a ride in his car. He started to get amorous, and I couldn't handle that. He brought me home. I guess he was scared of my father. Then there was a white fellow who seemed to like me. He was with our church group, and came to my place for a meeting. After the others left, he stayed to say good-bye. The father of one of the girls kept driving around the block, wondering when he was going to leave! [laughs] There just was no choice. The boy in the reform school that I told you about called me several years later. I didn't even know he was in Chicago. He was bitter and he was angry.
MMG: About what his experiences had been?
EBT: No, he felt that I had made it and he hadn't. He took it all out on me. I think that he felt I had thought I was better than he was at that time. I don't know. You never know what goes on in people's minds.
MMG: How do you feel about marriage as an institution?
EBT: Oh, by all means marry. If you find somebody, let me know. [laughs]
MMG: Do you think that marriage is restrictive for a professional woman?
EBT: With the kind of life I was living, I doubt if I would have lasted, had I married. Traveling like I was, and working weekends and nights, there are very few men who could take it. Men were not beating a path to my door, believe me. The few that did, their attitudes, their theories, or their beliefs were so foreign to anything I had known. There was a feeling that they owned you, [laughs] and they wanted to tell you what to do, and what not to do. I was getting ready to take a long trip and this fellow had a business of some kind. The business wasn't going so well, and it all boiled down to using my vacation—my money—for his business. He finally asked me point-blank how much I was going to spend on the trip. So, you know, who needed him?
MMG: Well, do you think that being single has helped your career?﻿30
EBT: It's made it easier to do things that I wanted to do, yes.
MMG: Has it made it easier to have accommodated a public and a private life?
EBT: Mm hmm. Well, I wouldn't say easier, but I didn't have any problems with living alone. People get one look at me, and usually that's it. On safari in Africa, I shot a gazelle and a zebra. When the trophies arrived at the office, one of the fellows unrolled the zebra skin and said, "Did you shoot that?" I said yes. He said it again, and I nodded. "I ain't never going to fool with you.'" [laughter]
Some people have been kind of scared of me, I guess. I look much more serious than I am. The other part of it is, I know I'm not a glamour person. I am not good looking. If a person made a pass, half the time I wouldn't even know it.
MMG: You've mentioned the names of so many different persons that you had
various experiences with. How important have friends been in your life?
EBT: Oh, very.
MMG: And are there any friends that you'd like to mention who've been particularly close to you? Would you say you're more of a group person or independent?
EBT: No, I'm more independent. I don't like teas and receptions and that
sort of thing. I hate dressing up. For a long time I just refused to go to affairs in a long dress. It's disastrous when you're short. I'd step on the fool thing. [laughs] I had an awful experience in the Ivory Coast. One of the receptions was at the president's home, and it said on the literature that a long dress was mandatory. So I went out and finally found something that made me look like the proverbial fly in the glass of buttermilk. And I had it altered and put it in the suitcase, resenting the needed room. I usually travel with one suitcase, even when I'm going around the world. I put all my work things in first, and if I had any room for clothes, that goes in afterwards.
I was getting dressed for this reception, and I didn't know my wig had shrunk after washing it. The dress called for the buttoned gloves. I had a friend who said, "There's no need to buy a pair of kid gloves just for this one occasion. Why don't you use mine?" I pride myself in not borrowing money and not getting things on credit, and not driving other people's cars, or wearing other people's clothes. But she talked me into it, so I took the gloves. Well, I started to put on the dress with these little teardrop pearls and the double lining. When the woman altered it, she told me to try it on, but I didn't. It was going to be bad enough when I had to wear it. Well, the thing buckled. The inner side was shorter than the outer, and it... Well, I got a lot of safety pins, trying to make the dress look right. And then I put on the wig. It just oozed right on upon my head. I finally got it down somewhat, and pinned up the dress, then I started to put on the gloves.﻿31
EBT: (cont.'d) I had forgotten how many buttons there were, but one popped, and all the rest of them followed. That did it!
So I got on the phone, and I called the p.r. person, who was a good friend. "I can't make it. Everything has gone wrong." She said, "Well, you come on down to our apartment and I'll fix the gloves." She and her husband were going with their guest. No one was supposed to come in after the president arrives, but they had drinks in their apartment while she was sewing up my gloves. Her guest was important enough that it didn't matter for them to come in late. They took me to my seat so I wouldn't feel foolish walking in by myself. And guess what? The woman I sat beside had on a short dress! I said, "Well, how do you get away with it?" "I refused," she said, "to put on a long one." [laughter]
MMG: That probably cinched the whole business for you. Are there any other friends that you'd like to mention that you haven't already?
EBT: Oh, I've got so many...
MMG: So many.
EBT: ...friends. Every time the phone rings, I don't know whether it's somebody in Australia or across the hall. By the way, the woman who wrote A Patch of Blue is my friend.
MMG: Yes.
EBT: The screenplay was adapted from her book. I met Elizabeth Kata on my first trip to Australia. I was going around the world in 1961. I couldn't take Christmas, so I called a travel agent, who lined me up for a six-month trip. I had always preached to whoever would listen that after a lifetime of working, you owe it to yourself to take one year off to do exactly what you want to do. That is still my philosophy. I'd said that so many times, but Christmas was coming, and I had all these gifts to give, and cards to write, and relatives to anger again by doing the wrong thing. At the next staff meeting, I told the editor, "You won't be seeing me for a while. I'm going around the world." I didn't ask Mr. Johnson, I just told him I was going. "If the job is here when I come back, fine. If not, all right, but this is something I've got to do."
I went to all the places that I hadn't been, including Australia and New Zealand. I had heard a lot about Australia's color bar, and I went back later and did the story on race in Australia and their aborigines. I met Elizabeth on the first trip, when she was writing her book. It was about a little blind girl. Elizabeth was getting Ebony in Australia, and read about my trip. When I was in Melbourne, she called me from Sydney, and said her book had a black character. She wanted me to read it. I said, "Well, normally I don't read other people's books." You get in trouble that way, but I made an exception. She sent the book to me and I read it. And when I went back to Sydney to take the boat to﻿32
EBT: (cont.'d) go to Hong Kong, I met her, and I liked her instantly. It was one of those rare things when you see people and you feel you've known them all your life.
MMG: Yes.
EBT: And she was such a wonderful person, a kind of a mousey-like person,
who almost talks in a whisper. But with tremendous talent. She'd never known any black people, and yet she did this book. But she wanted Sidney Poitier to play a leading role, and he did. I came back to Sydney for four days, and Elizabeth introduced me to her friends. We went out to the beach and had dinner with more friends of hers.
[break]
MMG: You were just saying that you received a letter from your friend Elizabeth Kata.
EBT: What was I talking about?
MMG: Oh, I...
EBT: The movie. She came to the U.S. while they were making the movie, and
spent a weekend here in Chicago with me. I gave a party for her, inviting some of my literary friends. We were talking about the people I'd met in different parts of the world.
There is a friend I met in France who now lives in Iran. Roland Hill, "Mr. Travel," whom I met in Australia over twenty years ago, has the distinction of visiting one hundred countries and going around the world nearly ninety times! He always wears a carnation in his lapel and often visits me. Two English friends who met me through American Daughter, retired, moved into the country (where I visited them) and finally died. There is a West African, two photographers (one from Hong Kong and the other from Brazil), and oh, so many people that I have known over the years. It's funny when you're traveling like that, you're more outgoing with people than you are at home.
And so it is not a group thing. I'm not much good at belonging to organizations. In school I never belonged to a sorority and for a very good reason. Blacks weren't acceptable, and anyway, I was too poor then to join anything.
MMG: So you'd say you prefer the one-to-one kind of relationship.
EBT: Yes. I like that much better.
MMG: Well, let's go back and discuss a little bit more about the various aspects of your racial perceptions and experiences. Do you have any preference among the terms colored, Negro, black?
EBT: I used to detest Negro—it sounded too much like nigger. And when I was...﻿33
MMG: Especially with some pronunciations.
EBT: That's right. When they spoke a foreign language, I could tell when
they were talking about me. I used to prefer colored because I thought that sounded better. When I started working for the magazine, we had to set up definite rules, so we used the term Negro. When that went out, black took over. I'd traveled so much that every time I returned home, terms had been changed. I would catch myself saying Negro when I was supposed to be saying black, but it really doesn't make any difference to me. I am what I am. Thank goodness I couldn't be anything else. It really doesn't bother me.
MMG: You don't have any sort of philosophical or emotional things...
EBT: No.
MMG: Outside your own family you grew up mainly among whites, in small towns, mostly in North Dakota. And you were also in Iowa. You've had intimate contact with several white ethnic groups, including German, Norwegians, Jews. Were there others? Russians, you mentioned.
EBT: Russians, yes.
MMG: To what extent would you say your racial perceptions were shaped by white viewpoints?
EBT: Well, to a large extent, during my formative years. I was thrown iato
white situations. I was actually ashamed of being black in the earlier years, because everybody else was white. When kids first met me, it was nigger, until they got to know me, and then it was different. I was always leading the pack, but when I didn't know how I was going to be accepted, I'd back down, to see first how it was going to work out.
MMG: Would you say that the acceptance, after some of the initial exhibitions of hostility had been dissipated, would you say that white acceptance was real or conditional, superficial in some way?
EBT: I think it was on a one-to-one basis. They usually accepted me, after they got used to me, and found the color didn't rub off, that I had two feet and two hands. Generally they forgot the color thing. They'd see a black person, and they would forget I was also black and they would call them a nigger.
MMG: In your presence?
EBT: Yes. I remember in school, we were reading about slavery. That always embarrassed the heck out of me. Kids would turn around and look at me, to see how I would take it, so I turned around and looked, too, just like I didn't know what they were looking at.
MMG:
You've mentioned some experiences in your autobiography, apart from the name calling. One that I recall, was a white minister who included﻿34
MMG: (cont.'d) something in his sermon about "poor darkie" slaves, that aroused you to discuss the matter with him. Do you remember that?
EBT: Vaguely. I remember...
MMG: I just wondered if there was anything more before or after that, of that incident.
EBT: Well, a lot of times people would say nigger, or something like that,
in front of me, and then very effusively try to cover it up. I went on a bus from Bismarck to Fargo to a state track meet. The governor's daughter was along, and she knew me because my father was the governor's messenger. She felt she had an obligation to look out for me. I always fought for the window seat, but going through little old country towns where they never saw a black person, I soon gave up the window seat. There was always this possibility of being called a nigger. After they got to know me, then they would fight somebody else if they'd call me names.
MMG: There was another incident you mentioned that had to do with going to a lake where there were boats for rent, and there was a sign posted, "No Jewish Trade Solicited."
EBT: That's right. I had all sorts of apprehensions about going boating
there because I thought they would reject me, but instead of no Negroes, it turned out to be no Jews. I found that there were other people who were minorities, too.
MMG: So there was racial feeling, but there were several important differences in the way it was expressed.
EBT: Yes. It wasn't that hard, cold, handed-down prejudice that you get in the cities, because these were foreign-born Americans or first generation. To the mothers of most of the kids I ran around with in school, I was a good girl, and they wanted their daughter to be like me, even though I was giving the teachers fits. [laughs]
MMG: Now, so far as culture was concerned, you really knew more about white ethnic cultures than you did about the history of your own people.
EBT: I knew nothing about my people, really. My father was a very outgoing person. He was a public figure, and sometimes in politics. He never dwelt on race, didn't talk much about race. It wasn't a daily diet, you know, always talking about what you can't do because you are black. So I didn't grow up with those handicaps, and I didn't know about them until I ran into them head on, when I got into the cities.
MMG: Did your parents prepare you for any of the unpleasant racial encounters . . .
EBT: No.﻿35
MMG: ...that you might have?
EBT: No. I was twelve when my mother died, and we were living in the country. There was nothing really to prepare me for race, because people around us were neighbors. There were differences, I grant you. I even tried to fix my hair like theirs. I would shake my head until it hurt, but my hair wouldn't budge! It was only when a strange person would come to town or to school, and then I had to watch them because I never knew when they were going to call me a nigger or slight me in some way.
MMG: What was the nature of the black communities, where such existed in the places where you lived?
EBT: Black community? How far back do you want to go?
MMG: Where there was more than just your family. All pre-Chicago.
EBT: When we moved to Bismarck, I ran into a few more, but most of them
lived Below the Hill. There was one family, the Colemans, that had a clothing store, and they had two small children. The rest of them were mostly undesirables. They were prostitutes and gamblers, and drifters that came through these little towns and stayed a little while. They didn't even bother to put 'em in jail, but just ran them out of town. The black community was very fluid. There were all sorts of characters, weird characters. When I was in Grand Forks, one of these fellows took me out to dinner. While we were eating, a policeman had found a gun in the man's pocket. There were no black studies then, and I didn't know anything except the stories my father used to tell me.
MMG: Did you ever hear stories about the origins of other blacks that you might have seen or encountered, how they came to be where you were?
EBT: Well, most of them came up to North Dakota on riverboats in the early days. The women were prostitutes at one time, but they were very protective of me, extremely protective. They would say, "We don't want you to turn out like we are. You have a chance, an education." They were more strict, I think, than if I'd grown up in a normal two-parent family. Everybody in town, black and white, kept me on the straight and narrow.
MMG: Could you say that the other blacks that you encountered before you came to Chicago had any impact on your racial consciousness?
EBT: Yes, because I was curious. Something drew me to them. I didn't know it at the time that the girl was a prostitute, but she used to take a little suitcase and go out every evening. She roomed with my Irish aunt. [laughs] But she would tell me about the big cities and play music that I hadn't heard before. It was called the blues and I was intrigued by them no end.
MMG: At what time in your life would you say that your racial consciousness was first significantly heightened?﻿36
EBT: I suppose the first time somebody called me a nigger. [laughter] Is that sufficient?
MMG: Yes, certainly. I was thinking about when you began to know a little more about your racial group, and have contact with...
EBT: I couldn't learn much about race from my father, because he was sort of a man of the world type of person. He liked everybody, and he was very popular. And a mulatto, too. [laughs] But he never dwelled on racial hatreds. He never brooded about those things, and people accepted him as he was. My brothers left home when I was quite young, so I didn't really get into this racial thing until I came to Chicago and worked on a small black magazine.
MMG: What was the name of that magazine?
EBT: I think it was Pulse, or something like that. The editor was a veteran, and our office was in a community house. He paid me, oh, some meager sum—I don't what it was. But I was learning, I was anxious to try everything. Once a week I'd go out to Field Museum or a library or someplace interesting for my subjects. I remember the telephone was downstairs, and every time I'd get a call, the woman would call, "Miss Thompson." I wouldn't answer because I wasn't used to being called Miss Thompson. I was living with my cousin then.
MMG: This was your mother's relation?
EBT: Yes.
MMG: Now, what were your perceptions of the blacks that you encountered in Chicago? This is your first time that you see large numbers of black people, and how did they see you?
EBT: They saw me as some oddball. I wanted very much to be like them, and I don't think I ever made it. I lived between two worlds, the black and the white. It took me a long time to try to adjust because my background was so different. Even my language was different. People here used words that were pronounced differently. I lived at the Y for a while and most of the girls there used to laugh at me because I was so square.
MMG: Did you have a sense of being apart, of being in, but not of?
EBT: Not quite in.
MMG: Did you have that same feeling when you were in the Midwest and in a white community?
EBT: I knew I wasn't fully accepted, yet I was more accepted among whites there than I was here with black people. I was all right with my group, but the next person, well, you never knew. It was a new experience every time in this area. Here, I stayed an oddball.﻿37
MMG: How would you say that your race has affected the options available to you in your life, and the choices that you've made?
EBT: Well, it's certainly shaped them. I think it certainly had something to
do with my never marrying. The black males that I saw in North Dakota were usually drifters and musicians and strays. I didn't meet the kinds of people that my father or I thought that I should know. I had to change my whole attitude about blacks. I think I was prejudiced against blacks when I first came to Chicago. There was a girl that was working for WPA, and she was extremely dark, the darkest girl I'd ever seen. I was very conscious of that, but we became good friends. I think I made a special effort to be her friend, because I didn't want to be prejudiced. But in many ways I was more comfortable with whites.
MMG: That was what was familiar. Well, is there anything else you would like
to say about your racial perceptions and experiences that we haven't talked about?
EBT: No, not that I. . .
MMG: Okay. How might your career have been different, had you not been a woman? Do you think that sex has in any way affected the public reception of your work or your progress in your career?
EBT: I think I was more accepted because I was a black woman.
MMG: ...in white society?
EBT: That's right, in white society. I didn't create a threat in that sense, and maybe it's because of my stature. Because I was short, considered younger than I really was. Somebody was always protecting me.
MMG: You're a very petite, for those who will be reading this. [laughs]
EBT: Yes, petite! I lost nineteen pounds recently. And it helped, believe me. I found early in life that in winning, people respected you. When you could outdistance them in anything, could excel, 1 found it was just good business. But there was always that point of separation. I was very close to my schoolmates, but I never knew how their parents would react. It was quite the thing to spend the night with your chums. This new family moved in town, and they were fairly wealthy, certainly for North Dakotans. They had a nice new house and lovely furniture. Alethia, their daughter, just insisted I come home with her for the weekend. I don't know whether her folks knew that I was black before I got there, but it's amazing how much you sense when something is wrong. They never talked to me. The mother said nothing, [laughter] but I felt the strain. They had a younger girl, Beryl, and you know how little sisters are—she wanted to be in on everything. That night when we got ready for bed, Beryl wanted to sleep with me. That just made things worse. The mother stone-faced it, and we lived through it somehow. But I was miserable. I was so glad to go home.﻿38
MMG: What is the women's movement as you see it?
EBT: Well, very much like the black movement. It's all a matter of acceptance.
Practically everything the women go through, we went through with, racially. I sort of had the double whammy, being female and black, but if you get enough negatives, sometimes things turn into positives.
MMG: What's your opinion of the women's movement?
EBT: I think, in some instances, it's overdrawn, but that probably is necessary in order to get some equality as an equal.
MMG: What areas are you thinking of, in particular?
EBT: I don't think women really want to be fully accepted on the same basis
as men. I think you want to keep your femininity. You want to be treated with a difference. Some women probably don't, but look at Betty Friedan and some of the other people who come on the air. They're coarse and they're rough. I just wonder if that's really what they want. I think that there are differences between men and women, and that will always be true.
MMG: You think there are differences that go beyond biology and...I mean, emotional difference?
EBT: In treatment, yes. Mentally, no. Heavens, no. Every woman is every bit as smart, if not smarter, in many cases, than a man, but that is overlooked. I've been fighting for acceptance so long, that I can't get excited about this male-female thing, about the women's movement.
MMG: Racial acceptance supersedes it.
EBT: Yes. And I found that if you excel, if you can outdo the other fellow, well, usually they'll accept you. But you have to prove it, you have to forever be proving something.
MMG: Well, what do you consider to have been the most important achievements in your life so far? What are you most proud of, as you look back?
EBT: Survival? [laughs]
MMG: And certainly when you consider not just the few other^bj^ack women, but women in general, in the areas in which you grew up, would you say that they have been achievers?
EBT: In the North Dakota days, I didn't know any achievers, but I assume there were. As I said, there used to be sort of a circuit of prostitutes, as they called the people who lived Below the Hill, the bad people. But I was intrigued by them because they'd been out in this big world that I wondered about. But they were always extremely protective. I didn't look down upon them, because I knew that wasn't right. They were people like everybody else, and yet there was sort of a barrier there, a division. In fact, I think they stressed it more than I did.﻿39
MMG:
MMG:
MMG:
EBT:
But how about the white girls, for example, that you went to school with? Have you ever heard anything of their subsequent careers or development?
EBT: Oh, yes. I'm in touch with a lot of old schoolmates. I went back to a high school reunion in Bismarck a few years ago. It's funny, but in the old days, some of them who weren't too friendly with me, politely nice but we didn't exactly hobnob — but when I went back, I had gained a certain amount of status, and you would think that we were "boon coons."
MMG: Well, what else are you proud of? What other achievements really please you?
EBT: Other than what?
MMG: Other than surviving.
EBT: Oh. Well, I've enjoyed my literary career—that I was able to write.
Let's just stop a moment here. In looking back over your notes, I think you've discovered a few things to add to some earlier topics. Let's go back to race once again, and maybe you could include those things that we didn't mention earlier, points you wanted to make.
EBT: All right MMG:
This concerns the role of race in affecting options available to you in your life, and the choices that you made.
EBT: My options were limited. Usually the only black student from secondary school through college, race was often an advantage. I was unaware that blacks were not hired by the white media, and I chose journalism as my major. Having lived in a white community, and in white homes, made me less prejudiced against whites than the average urban black. Working for Ebony made me think black for the first time. I took tl.e job to learn about "my people."
Now, concerning the role that sex has played in affecting the options available to you, there were a couple of things there about your work at Ebony.
Well, it didn't prevent my promotion to a managerial job. Mr. Johnson was very liberal when it came to your sex. But some of the people I worked with weren't too happy about a woman boss, so I had to battle with male staff members. We had a white supervisor at one time who just didn't like people. If they were black, that made it worse. Mr. Johnson told us that as soon as Herbert Nipson and I were able to take over, he would get rid of this guy. I thought it would never happen, but it did. First he wanted to be sure that we knew how to run the magazine before he put it in our hands. As a matter of fact, most of the people on Ebony in those days, started at the top. We didn't have reporters. Everybody was managerial on our small staff. Sex, along with my race, short stature and plain looks presented writing obstacles.﻿40
EBT: (cont.'d) On my first trip to Africa in 1953, as a black American
woman journalist, I was taboo to both African and colonial officials. As an editor, ninety percent of my mail was addressed to Mr. Thompson. In Ethiopia, a black journalist did not bother to meet my plane because he thought the magazine editor was a man. Being sent all that distance for a story, I must be white. He got quite a shock when he met me. And at that time, in Ethiopia, if you committed a crime, they hung you on the spot. My second fear is dead people. So when they told me that a man was hanging over in another parish, and did I want to see it—well, the last thing I wanted to see was a dead person, but in the name of journalism, I felt obliged to go. Thank goodness, when we got there, they'd cut him down.
MMG: There were one or two things further that you might say about the women's movement, things that you liked and didn't like.
EBT: The woman's movement? Oh. ERA. ERA happens to be my name [laughter], but it's not necessarily my crusade. I've been fighting that battle all my life. After my brothers left the farm, I did all the chores and helped in the field. On track, I outclassed the boys of my own age, and after my father died, I operated a secondhand furni ture store. The only woman on the East African safari, I got my share of the trophies. I'm not much of a joiner, and dislike teas and receptions. I was blackballed by members of the black Chicago University Women's Club because I "lacked background." I definitely believe in equal pay for equal work, and full opportunity for women, but I also want to be treated with all the little niceties that were accorded women before ERA. I am tired of holding my own door and pulling out my own chair, and I don't like to be referred to in the press as "Thompson."
MMG: Let me ask you this, touching on the last part of your remarks. Do you feel that there are any ways of behavior that women ought to accord men, any sort of deference or courtesies, because they are men?
EBT: Yes. Let 'em pay the bills. [laughs]
MMG: How about bringing them pipe and slippers?
EBT: Oh, no. No way.
MMG: Back to most important achievements of life. We talked about survival, which was certainly an achievement, but you have a few more specific points there.
EBT: I was included in Who's Who in America and other Who's Who, and I received honorary degrees from both alma maters, University of North Dakota, and Morningside College. I was honored at a three-day celebration in Driscoll, North Dakota. I went back to Bismarck fairly recently, and the governor made me an honorary colonel in Teddy Roosevelt's Rough Riders. Just last year my portrait was hung in the North Dakota capitol's Hall of Fame. And I survived cancer.﻿41
MMG: "Sou have memberships and offices in many professional and scholarly organizations. Could you tell us what some of these are?
EBT: I was with the Hull House board in Chicago, the Metropolitan YWCA board, and a trustee of the Friends of the Chicago Public Library. Currently I'm on a Writing in Chicago committee, in connection with the public library, and a member of the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History. I'm a volunteer for the American Cancer Society and for the International Visitors Center. I've had almost twenty calls just this year from the Reach to Recovery program. This is open to people who have had a mastectomy. We take kits which include a book on mastectomies, a form or a prosthesis (a temporary one), a rubber ball and a rope for exercise. Men have mastectomies, too. I did a story on the subject once, and located three or four men in this country. It's very rare, but it does happen. In fact, there's one here in Chicago. So they are apt to call me at any time; now that I'm retired it's very easy to pick up a kit and go to the hospital. What we do is give them exercises so their arms won't swell. The very fact that we have also had the same operations gives the patient hope. We answer questions and talk to them. It's very fulfilling. I never know what age a person will be, or what nationality, or their station in life.
I also work with the International Visitors Center, because I've had a lot of experience with government people in other countries. In America, these people visit about eight or ten cities. Usually they have an interpreter with them or a guide. Almost all of them want to see Ebony, so I take them through the building. Often I drive them around town. You can either take them out for a meal, keep them overnight, or show them the city. Being a single lady, I'm not about to keep them overnight, [laughs] And food is so expensive, that I seldom take them out to meals. If you get a person that warrants it, that is, what they're doing makes it believable that they fit into the guest list at Ebony, I can have them as my luncheon guests.
MMG: [Are there other organizations?]
EBT: National and international groups—no. I'm not much of a joiner, as you have probably noticed by now. There are a quite a lot of things that I don't believe in, such as the differences in people. Sororities, where I came from, were organizations you belonged to in college. It is a very social thing here, long after college is over.
MMG: A lifelong affiliation.
EBT: Yes. Although I was very athletic, I never really learned how to do
ballroom dancing. I tried it when I first came to Chicago. I was living at the Y, when we went to an affair and a fellow asked me for a dance. We were sitting down, but when all six feet of him stood up, everybody screamed! [laughter]
I also belonged to Zonta International. They had no black members, so someone mentioned my name and I was asked to join. I stayed with them for﻿42
MMG EBT
EBT: (cont.'d) quite a while. It was interesting until crime here in Chicago was all white people talked about. When they'd say crime, they were usually referring to black crime, and I decided to resign. I worked with the regional Manpower Advisory Commission as a public member of the United States Information Agency selection board.
I still belong to the Society of Midland Authors, which I joined when my first book was published. I was on the board from 1947 to 1975. Then they began meeting at night and, well, you just don't go out at night. I am also an honorary member of the Sigma Gamma Rho, but never joined. I like people on an individual basis.
MMG: How about your awards and honors? We've mentioned some of them. Are there additional awards and honors to mention?
EBT: I won a few track trophies when I was in high school and college. After
my father died, I was running the secondhand store by myself, and I learned a little about furniture. There was a contest put on by the United States Bedding Company which I entered, and won. I called the spring King Koil, and it is still being manufactured. I was given a Wesleyan Service Guild scholarship when I was a freshman at the University of North Dakota, thanks to my adopted family.
When I came to Chicago, I was awarded a Rockefeller Fellowship, given by the Newberry Library, to write a book. I had been bragging about writing a book for a long time, but I was mostly spinning my wheels again. Then I happened to read about this fellowship in the paper one morning, and called Dr. Pargellis who headed the project. He seemed to be interested, so I told him I was black—at that time we said Negro. He said, "So what?" I went on with my idea and he and the University of Chicago promised to give me the miscellaneous funds, if I did not win. But that's how American Daughter was written. I went to the Bread Loaf Writers Conference in 1949. I had heard about it, so I wrote to them and I asked Mr. Johnson, of Johnson, our publishers, about it. He said, "Well, you write the letter and I'll sign it." I had already written the letter. It was in my desk, so I just pulled it out for him to sign! [laughs]
MMG: Fantastic!
EBT: He didn't get a chance.
To change his mind. Go right ahead.
Then the Capital Press Club Award—that was in Washington, D.C.— for journalism. And the 100-year anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation Merit Award, the Iota Phi Lambda Outstanding Woman of the Year award, and the Society'of Midland Authors Patron Saints Award. There was money on that one. Mostly you get just a plaque. Morningside College Distinguished Alumni Award, National Council of Negro Women's International Year plaque, the Teddy Roosevelt Rough Rider's plaque and scroll, and the North Dakota Hall of Fame. I think that's about it.﻿43
MMG: Now, I was talking to you earlier when the tape was not on, and you indicated that you really didn't have any hobbies to speak of. Have you just not had the time, or not the interest, for that kind of activity?
EBT: My hobby was writing, that turned into my occupation. That's probably why I enjoyed it so much.
MMG: Could you name for us your publications?
EBT: American Daughter was the first one. I had read about the Newberry
Fellowship to write regional books, and I was going to write about North Dakota. Every time they had a parade downtown in Chicago, and the North Dakota contingent would go by, people would say, "North Dakota? What's that?" When people asked me where I was from, they never could distinguish North Dakota from South Dakota. To them, it was one big Indian territory. It's a beautiful country, and it has a whole lot to offer, so I wanted to write about the country. When I was being interviewed for the fellowship, Pargellis was so intrigued with my background that he suggested I do an autobiography. Later it was reissued by Follett.
MMG: And you added a forward to that.
EBT: MMG: EBT:
Yes. Then it was brought out again in paperback in 1975. Do you know what the paperback publisher...
Yes. University of Chicago, where it first began. The second book, Africa, Land of_ My Fathers, that was about my first trip to Africa. I went all over the continent. I didn't know that you didn't do that. There were places where, being black, I wasn't welcome in Africa. I thought because it's a black country, I can go there. But right after leaving Liberia, going south, it's like going south in this country. And I did get to South Africa, but they let me stay just long enough to get on the next plane going north. Then in 1963 I coedited White on Black. I have written two books.
MMG: Numerous articles.
EBT: Yes.
MMG- This is part two of an interview with Miss Era Bell Thompson. The interview is taking place in Miss Thompson's office at the Johnson Publishing Company, 820 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, 60605. The date is the tenth of March, 1978. Marcia M. Greenlee is the interviewer.
Miss Thompson, you've done a great deal of traveling in and outside of the United States, both in connection with your work as Ebony1s international editor and independently for your own enjoyment. We've already discussed your American travel, so let's move on to a discussion of your international travel. In 1954, your book, Africa, Land of My Fathers, was published.﻿44
MMG: (cont.'d) It was an account of your experiences during a three-month tour of Africa, which began on the sixteenth of April, 1953. Which experiences stand out most in your mind from that first trip?
EBT: The book was supposed to be a return to Africa to see whether or not
my African cousins remembered me and I remembered them. African countries, at that time, were mostly colonies; South Africa was white-ruled and independent, and both Liberia and Ethiopia were free. So instead of it being a productive interview with my long lost relatives, the trip turned into a rout. The colonial officials literally chased me out of Africa.
MMG: Aside from the presumed pleasures of the trip, what did the experience do for your personal and intellectual development?
EBT: I realized more than ever my heritage was African. Before that, I was
denying my African heritage. I came out of my African ordeal and rested in Europe. The Europeans asked me, Was I African? Did I come from Africa? My first reaction was the old one, you know, slug him. But I realized that I did come from Africa in more ways than one.
MMG: Now the book, Africa, Land of My Fathers, published in 1954, it's been
twenty-five, almost twenty-five years now. Did you make subsequent trips to Africa?
EBT: Yes.
MMG: And how were they different?
EBT: Altogether I've been there about eight or nine times. All of the trips were assigned articles written for Ebony. In 1968, I retraced my steps from the first trip, and did a documentary comparing the Africa that was colonial with the current Africa that is independent. Everybody was writing about the woes of Africa, the problems they had, but nobody was mentioning the advancements that were being made. For instance, I attended some of the independence affairs like Congo or Zaire. I was there when their independence was announced, staying at the same hotel as Dr. Ralph Bunche. When I say we, I mean the photographer and myself- It was so calm and quiet right after the celebration that we went on to the Cameroons.
A few days later, the Congolese were pointing guns at Dr. Bunche. When I got to Ghana, I was able to meet the first refugee plane coming out of the Congo. I was staying at the hotel where they took them. The same day they landed,Time magazine came out with an article on Congolese atrocities, such as raping nuns and murder. It did not happen. So much of the information was concocted in bars, where foreign correspondents sat around drinking and relying largely on rumors. They had to turn out something for their papers or they would be sent home.
The same thing happened in the Mau-Mau affair. I was in Kenya when that was going on and of all the gory stories, less than a hundred whites were killed. But there were literally thousands of Africans who were murdered.﻿45
MMG: Do you think a lot of those stories were motivated by persons who were not interested in seeing Africans gain their independence?
EBT: Definitely. Everyone had a negative attitude. They said, these
people just came down from the trees. They couldn't make it, the way it was written up.
MMG: Where else have you traveled, outside of the United States?
EBT: I did a two-part documentary on Australia's white policy, and also their aborigines. In Brazil, I did the same thing on amalgamation. Also how blacks were treated in many other countries and islands, including Vietnam, Japan, the West Indies, Surinam, Argentina—you name it and I've usually been there. In 1968 I visited about fifteen African countries and talked with their leaders—with the exception of Haile Selassie, Nyerere and Kaunda. I got a lot of good material from them. One question I always asked was, 'Would American blacks be welcome in your country?" Some said outright, "No, they'd be happier in their own country and among their own people." It sounded like something whites say about us. Frankly, blacks didn't want to believe that Africans weren't sitting over there waiting for us with open arms. They had enough problems, why send our problems to them?
MMG: Why was it Haile Selassie wouldn't see you?
EBT: Well, he was the Elect of God, Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah,
King of Kings, Emperor of Ethiopia, His Royal Highness and His Imperial Majesty—why should he see me?
MMG: He was just too busy?
EBT: Most African leaders looked down on American blacks. We'd been enslaved and carried away to another land. They hadn't. On the first trip, I had a dramatic experience at Christiansborg Castle. A guide showed me the hole where the slaves were kept. My ancestors went through that hole and down to the sea, where ships awaited them. The guard could not speak my language, and I couldn't understand his, but there was understanding without words. I looked at him and he looked at me. Yet we were saying things to each other. "You went through that hole and were lost. I stayed. This is my country now. Where is yours?"
MMG:	What time period was it when you made your trip to Australia?
EBT:	It was in 1966. The Brazilian trip was in 1965.
MMG:	The articles, then, are available in Ebony?
EBT:	Yes. In fact, the Brazil article was incorporated into a textbook.
MMG:	What text is that, do you remember?
EBT:	It was a social studies book, Tradition and Change in Four Societies. I was in Liberia when the students were studying it in school.﻿46
MMG: Well, that brings us to the conclusion of the questions that I had
prepared for you. Are there any other remarks, bits of information that we've not discussed, that you'd like to add to the record?
EBT: No!
MMG: I want to thank you very much, Miss Thompson, for a very interesting interview. Thank you.
EBT: Thank you.﻿ERA BELL THOMPSON
