Marcia Greenlee:
Dr. Sadie T. M. Alexander:
This is an interview with Mrs. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander for the Black Women Oral History Project at Schlesinger Library on January 26, 1977.
My paternal grandfather was an interesting gentleman. He was a free Negro and his wife was, too, but he would not have any children born in slave territory. He owned a brickyard in Baltimore and owned a brick house. He sold his house and his brickyard, and he and his wife, who were both free, went to Hamilton, Ontario, because he would not have, as I said, any children born in slave territory. There, three sons and a daughter were born.
After the Emancipation, he moved back to the United States and started his brickyard in Lockport, New York. When the children came over from Canada, they didn't know anything about segregated schools, so they went to the nearest school which was a white school. And they wouldn't let them come. I had been told these things, but I always hesitated to repeat them as I had no proof.
One day I got a letter sent to me, to Philadelphia, with no other address on it. It was received. A man had been employed to write the history of public education in Lockport, and in reading the minutes of the Board of Education he constantly ran across this name, Mossell. And he would ask around town, What happened to this family? They couldn't tell him. But somebody did tell him that there was one person that they had read about, and that turned out to be me.
When he published the book, he sent me a copy. He had also confirmed what I﻿2
STMA: (cont.'d) had heard told in the family ... that the children insisted upon going to the school. And apparently in those days, they taught very much by spelling bees, and the kids were so smart that they were ... marvelous. They couldn't understand this, so they finally decided, the Board did, that they would admit these unusual children. And that was the beginning of the integration of the schools in Lock-port.
Now when the children had finished high school, my grandfather decided that they didn't know anything about their people and they should go to Lincoln University. So one by one the boys went and all three of them graduated from Lincoln University.
As I stated, my uncle Nathan Francis Mossell graduated from the medical school at the University of Pennsylvania. He went to see the Dean— when he finished Lincoln—and told him that he wanted to go to medical school. The Dean said, "Well, Harvard and Yale have admitted Negroes, and we've got a better medical school than they do, so you come on." My uncle had learned of a colored student who had been admitted to West Point where the students had allegedly attempted to lynch him. My uncle went to the hearing to see just what had happened, to prepare himself for what might happen to him. But he said when he saw the cord with which the colored student was tied, he said, that wouldn't mean anything to him, who was six feet five tall, mobile and strong. Because, to digress, Grandfather never let his sons think that they had lost their ability to work at a trade.
When they came back from Lincoln, they had to go out in that brickyard, and start knocking down the kiln and throwing the bricks to each other, and if they missed them, why that was terrible because the edges would be broken, and their hands tender from not working. [laughter] So he was strong.
The morning he appeared for his first class at University of Pennsylvania Medical School, the teachers, the professors said to him he could sit behind a screen. So what they did out in Arkansas wasn't so strange. It had been done before. And he said, "No, that wasn't in the bargain." So he went to the amphitheatre where they gave the lectures. And he said not a professor came in to protect him in any way. And all of a sudden one fellow stood on the bench on which the students were seated and said, "Let's put the Nigger out. Put the Nigger out." And before this could be taken up, another fellow got up and said, "Let the Yanks put the Rebels out." So he said, then he knew he was safe. But for a year nobody spoke to him. However, my mother said that the night he graduated the provost had to get up and ask the students to stop applauding. And the ambidextrous surgeon Agnew trained him as a surgeon.
Well anyway, now my point in telling you all this is to give those who may read this oral history a picture of my background, which prepared me to face opposition with strong determination to attain my goal but without spending time or my energy on rancor.﻿3
STMA:
MG: STMA:
(cont.'d) My maternal grandfather was a Bishop in the A.M.E. Church. His name was Benjamin Tucker Tanner. That's my mother's father. Now I've been talking about my father's people. Now my mother was the daughter of Benjamin Tucker Tanner and Sarah Elizabeth Tanner. My grandfather ... I have about seven books that he published. He established the A.M.E. Review* which was the first magazine, cultural magazine, that was published. It is still published. And he was editor of the Christian Recorder, a weekly publication by the A. M. E. Church. My mother said that Grandma used to say to him, "Poppa, why don't you go preach a sermon sometime and you could get maybe twenty-five dollars or fifty dollars." They were poor because the Connection (national body) did not always pay salaries on time. My grandfather always replied, "I can not waste precious time talking to about 100 people when I can reach hundreds by publication of my messages." My mother has four sisters — Hallie, Belle, Bertha and Sadie. So she was the fifth. And two brothers, Carl and Henry. My aunt, Hallie Tanner, graduated from Woman's Medical College and was the first woman admitted to practice medicine in Alabama, and I mean the first woman. She started the nurse training school at Tuskegee. Booker T. Washington came to my grandfather when he heard that she had graduated, and asked him, "Will you let her come down," stating he needed a resident physician at Tuskegee.
What was her married name, or did she marry?
Yes, she married twice. Her first husband, Charles Dillon, died from pneumonia about two years after her marriage. Thereafter she married an A. M. E. minister named J. Q. Johnson. My Aunt Bertha went to the University of Pennsylvania but never got a degree. I don't know how many years. (I moved over here ... I was going to retire, and these men asked me to come over and I agreed to come and I finally agreed

The curator of the archives at Penn gave me the volume of all the graduates of Penn, but they haven't done it since, oh maybe 1900, and I could tell you what year she was there but that's not important.
But only I'm trying to tell you, my mother didn't have anything but a high school education, but she was educated. She'd been around books all of her life and they were a part of her. My grandfather had two huge rooms with books up to the ceiling ... I was brought up in that atmosphere. In addition to that, one of my aunts, Aunt Sadie was her name, same name I have, married Lewis Baxter Moore who was the first Ph D from Penn. My maternal uncle, Carl, was a graduate of the Episcopal seminary in Philadelphia. My father was the first colored graduate from University of Pennsylvania Law School. With this background it wasn't anything ... it was just supposed that you went to college. It wasn't anything unusual, it was to be expected.
My mother gave birth to three children. My sister, Elizabeth Mossell Anderson, was a widow and had only been to normal school, but after her husband died, she went back to Penn and got her bachelor's, and then she went to Columbia and got her master's degree.
*A.M.E. Church Review﻿4
MG: Her married name was Anderson?
STMA: Yes. Her husband was Page Anderson. She lived in Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, while he was living. (Oh, I saw this mailgram and I asked her if it was anything pressing, but this is from Alma Daley. The Deltas are having a brunch for Pat Harris at the John F. Kennedy Center.)
MG: I was going to ask you later on about membership organizations and I didn't have the Deltas down, but I'll add them.
STMA: I was the first national president and was elected President Emeritus in 1923, which honor I still hold.
MG: Well, I'll add that right away.
STMA: "On Sunday, January 30 from 11 o'clock in the morning until 2 o'clock in the afternoon." I'll have to go.
MG: You were discussing your siblings.
STMA: I was the third. My brother was from Howard University and was a pharmacist.
MG:
STMA:
What was his name?
Aaron. Same name as my father's. Now my father deserted my mother, and I tell you this because it is often thought that without a man in the house you can't do anything, but my mother did it all. And I often thought that perhaps it was God's will that he got out. So there wasn't any arguing. Everything was peace. [Laughter]
You know, one day I was at a luncheon and the women, didn't know me, I didn't know them, and they got to talking about the homes in which there's no man and so forth, so I spoke up and said, "I come from a broken home." And a woman across from me said, "So do I, Sadie Alexander." She was one of the broadcasters in Philadelphia. She said, "I'm so glad you're willing to say it. I do too." She said, "It didn't hurt me." And I said, "Apparently it didn't hurt me either." [laughter] Now the important events of childhood, youth and young adult. Oh.
MG:
STMA:
I just wanted to know what kinds of memories you had, maybe your earliest childhood ...
Oh, the most pleasant ones, the most pleasant ones. As I tell you, we had a happy home. Very happy home. My grandparents were pretty well fixed, and they used to want ... they liked me, and they wanted me to come live with them. But although we didn't always have money for everything, they were very good to us, they were very good. I never would have had the education I have if it hadn't been for my grandparents. But I preferred being at home with my mother than living separately in a great big house, not with my mother and family. I was devoted to my mother and she to me. She took me everywhere she went, praised my smallest effort,﻿5
STMA:
MG:
STMA:
MG: STMA:
MG:
(cont.'d) and always stated how proud she was to go to a parents' meeting at my school, knowing she would receive a report about me of which she was proud, which was not always true of my sister and brother.
Was there anything during those early years that was already awakening your interest to the fields that you later studied?
Well let me tell you ... My mother left Philadelphia and went to Washington. I've never known why she left, but I think, from what I picked up, that she was terribly embarrassed to be separated, with a young baby, I was one year old, and two children, and to have to change her standard of living, which used to be very high. I was in the eighth grade before I knew my father wasn't dead. I just thought he was dead. The children told me he wasn't. And so he just didn't exist. But I went to M Street High School, which is now Dunbar High School, and we had a wonderful school there. They would put in Section A all the students who had promise, and looked as if they had the ability, and would get to college. But we had the best teachers ...
Was Rayford Logan in your class?
No, Rayford was not in my class. I don't remember Rayford in high school. Charlotte George was in my class, Lydia Montgomery, Irene Twigg McDuff, George Herod, Phyllis Terrell, Eleanor Rivers.
I know that name.
STMA: You do? Ellis Rivers's sister. You remember Irene Twigg, the Twigg name?
MG: Yes.
STMA: Irene was in my class. And we had good teachers. Nothing was thought of but that you were going to go to college. It was inbred.
MG: How long were you in Washington?
STMA: Well, when I was in grade school, I was both in Philadelphia and
Washington because when mother was sick ... I think it was emotional sickness ... and every time she got sick, she went home. Well, there was six years difference between me and my sister, and five between me and my brother. So she'd leave them with my uncle, Dean Lewis Moore, and his wife, and she'd bring me to Philadelphia. So I would go around the corner to Blaine School. I never did go to the seventh grade.
When she brought me up here when I was in the seventh grade, they put me in the sixth grade. I never did have paper hanging and any of those other things you get in the seventh grade. (laughter) So when we returned to D. C., she'd just put me in school and I'd go right along with the girls and boys that I had been with. But when I got in high school, she moved back to Philadelphia permanently, and left me with my uncle who was a dean at Howard University ...﻿6
MG:
What was his name":
STMA:
MG: STMA:
Lewis Baxter Moore. He was the first colored graduate Ph. D. from University of Pennsylvania. He was married to mother's younger sister, Sadie. And you know what it would be like living on Howard campus, what do you think of but going to college? The only thing was, I thought I was going to Howard, and I didn't go. I got the scholarship to go to Howard when I graduated. My mother didn't tell me until September that I was going to go to Penn. I remember, I screamed, I cried, I jumped up and down on the bed, I tried to break the springs; she let me perform, and told me that she'd be very foolish to be sending me back to Washington when there was a great university here.
Had she made application for you?
Yes. [laughter] And there I went. Oh boy, it was a hard adjustment. I knew everybody at Howard, on campus. However, she made the right turn, because if you go to a big university and you make good in undergraduate school, they see you through graduate school.
MG:
STMA:
Yes.
Now as parental views ... I didn't know anything from my family, not only my mother and my grandparents, but my aunts and my uncles, but get an education. The fact that I was a girl ... Well, I will say that
I had two aunts, I think they were a little bit jealous. They thought my grandfather was doing more for me than he did for their children, but they had husbands who were successful, and all I got was tuition, which was very meager in those days. The rest of it—by the time I finished undergraduate school, I got the rest from the university.
Significant influence of nonrelated persons Washington were an influence on me.
Well, those teachers in
Religion, local and national events ... No, I can't say I received any support or encouragement from these sources. Only annoyances from the two aunts and other similar women, asking my mother, "What is Sadie studying now? She will only marry and never use it." My mother had a reply: "You can not receive too much education to be a helpful mate and mother."
MG: STMA:
There was no pivotal kind of event ...?
Oh I met my husband at Penn. He was in the Wharton School. In fact, he'was the first colored student to go to Wharton School, and they used to tease him, "Why would you come to college to study bookkeeping, accounting?" I had read in the papers that he had won a scholarship from Central High School. Central High School was like Boston Latin to people in Philadelphia; their professors are still professors. Their principal is president, and they get a bachelor's degree when they finish. (laughter) It is the school. You have to have a certain average to get m. It's all right.
And he won a scholarship to Penn.﻿7
STMA: (cont.'d) His sister, Virginia, the same year, 1917, also won a scholarship to Penn. So this was much written up in the papers. I met his sister out at Fairmount Park when I was playing tennis. She told me about her brother and described him to me: that he was tall and he was about my complexion and that he was thin and so forth. So one day in the fall of 1917 when school first opened, I was in the library, and I saw this young man who answered her description, and I went over and asked him was he an Alexander? And he said, "Yes." And I said, Well, maybe I could help you. I'll show you where the Wharton alcove is. And of course for years after that he said that I was an older woman and I started it ... he just loved to tell it, [laughter] loved to tell
it.
Well anyway after a while he started coming to the house. He said that'the^ mistake he made was what his aunt had told him he should never do. Never accept a meal from a girl in her house. He said my mother s cooking was so good ... (laughter]
MG:
STMA:
He was hooked.
and she was behind it all. You know, of course, he had a vivid imagination anyway. When he finished he had everybody in the place so bending over ... how I had yoked him.
Family's attitude towards career ... Why everything was done to encourage me and to help me. I left home every morning about eight o clock, and I lived in North Philadelphia, not the North Philadelphia you see today. We lived on Diamond Street which then was a beautiful, beautiful wide street the drive way to Fairmount Park. I got a dollar a week to buy my paper Lid my carfare. And the carfare, I think it was ... yes, it was five cents, plus three if you got an exchange. And I saved those three cents and had it in a jar. When Raymond graduated from Harvard Law School, I gave him a brief case which I bought with those pennies I had saved, [laughter]
So what I was going to say, the encouragement I got. My mother packed a lunch for me. My first year there was only one other colored female student We couldn't eat at any restaurant near the university ... In 1918 when I received the B. S. in Education degree, there were just about four colored girls there. Virginia Alexander came, and some others I didn t mention. And I didn't have to do anything at home. Six P. M. I started to walk across the bridge to come home. When I came home, my mother had my dinner ready for me, and I went to bed because I had done all my work at school. And on weekends, I could go to the library and do my research if I wanted to do it, or if I wanted, I could bring the work home. But everything was done at home to make it conducive to my studying. Only my grandfather, mother, and housekeeper lived in the home. In the heat of July and August in Philadelphia my mother had the cellar perfectly cleaned and a desk plus perfect light installed for my use.
MG: It was a very supportive﻿8
STMA:
MG:
STMA:
Yes very, very. I didn't have to do my laundry. See, my grandfather was living then; we had help in the house. So my mother wasn t a slave to me, because we girls didn't believe that Mama should be working for us. No.
Well, how about after you were married and had children, did your daughters ever resent your public life or ...
Why I ... let me tell you ... Yes, they resented it. But I didn't find it out until later. Well, the first thing I should tell you, I had premature babies. I had four prematures. I lost my first two and fortunately was able to save the second two. They were born in the depths of the depression and you could get a trained nurse very reasonably. I think I paid $40 a week. I was not able to take care ... to give them the kind of care that they needed. And, yet, I couldn't do it. I could pay .. I could work and pay for a nurse ... even when I increased to $100 a week. It was easy for me to make that. Although we worked hard to make it, because what you did, you just ... if you got five dollars to go to court, you went to court for five dollars. (Laughter) You were gaining experience, and you were building a reputation so you counted all that in.
So then when my children got to younger adolescence, and my older daughter had a very good mind. She was getting all A's, and I found that she was ashamed for the children to know that she got it, because they would call her teacher's pet. Next I found that this Jack and Jill thing was a terrible nuisance. There were parties every weekend. On Monday when they got home, they started to talk about the party that had been on Saturday or Friday or whatever it was, all the parties they had been to. And then they wanted clothes; different clothes for the Parties
And I said, I can't beat this thing. I'm going to lose my child, because I refuse to let her go to houses I don't know anything about And then she can't keep up her lessons with this constant partying. When they finished talking about the party that was, then they talked about the party that's going to be.
So I had been invited up to Smith College to speak, and I decided to stay over for chapel the next morning, because I wanted to see what kind of chapel they had. And in the chapel, a Mrs. Penton, Carmalita Penton who founded the Putney School spoke. And I said, "Well, if I can get my daughter into Putney, that is where I'm going to send her. So I did And I got both of them admitted. And I said, "Well, Raymond and I sent both of them to Putney. And, as a result, they were able to get into a good college without a problem." Mary, our eldest daughter, graduated from Barnard and Rae, the younger daughter, graduated by Boston University, had a master's degree from Bank Street and is hopefully working on her doctor's degree at University of Pennsylvania.
When I was on the Truman committee* I know that the president of Dartmouth, John Dickey, spent almost a half a day defending the right of the private colleges to select its students. And when I finxshed hearing all that he had to say, I said, "Put a pin in that for me." Because
* President's Commission on Civil Rights﻿9
STMA:
MG: STMA:
MG: STMA:
MG: STMA:
MG: STMA:
(cont 'd) he was bragging about the percentage of students Dartmouth took from public high schools. I said, "Well, if I have girls, colored girls, and if I want to get them in good colleges, I see one thxng, they have got to come from a good private school." Now my older girl has resented the fact that I sent her to Putney, but I notice she has her son to a private school.
To Putney?
No!... To a very exclusive private school. [laughter] See, if you live long enough it will all come around. I've always worked. My husband had a very prosperous practice, so that we lived very well. We always had household help. Now it's kind of hard, so hard to get any qualified household help.
It's so expensive too.
Yes, but I ... I'm at the point where I just cannot ... I can't even keep house now. I am not going to do it.
Well, at any rate, I was just saying that we got along well, because the children were well taken care of. And my husband of course respected me no end. Otherwise I would never have been a lawyer. He sent me to law school one year after we married.
Is that right?
Yes. He sent me to law school, and then I went right in his office. One of the lawyers in his office was going to leave when I came in, and he told him to leave. He had great respect for women. His sister, Virginia Alexander, studied medicine. I think that had something to do with it. Very protective of women in the professions.
Well, I guess that answers that fourth section about tensions between public and private life.
We didn't have any at all. We came to work together; we went back home together, and all the way going and coming we were discussing ... I'd say to him, "What kind of day did you have?" And he'd tell me, and I'd tell him about mine and ... Oh, it was just a beautiful relationship we had. And we could sit at the table and just talk and talk. My sister used to say to me, "Sadie, I don't want to ruin your happiness, but you and Raymond live too closely together. It's going to be terrible when you part."
Race and the effect on options ... Well now, let me tell you about that. It's my opinion that white women are doing all this talk about equality and so forth, because first they don't know anything about prejudice until they have received their degrees and passed their state boards or whatever they have to take, and then the doors begin to slam in their faces. Instead of opening the door, as they have been, treated like ladies, the doors slam back and forth. Now you see, I never looked for﻿10
STMA: (cont.'d) anybody to hold the door open for me.
MG: Right.
STMA: I knew well that the only way I could get that door open was to knock it down; because I knocked all of them down. I had a girl friend, Scotch-Irish, Protestant, and because I got a "D" in my course—"D", "Distinguished"—I got "D" on some of my papers and she didn't pass hers. She told our professor, "Well, I know that Sadie copied her book review out of the same book I did." And he said, "Well, she knew how to copy better than you do." [laughter] And I'm going to tell you ... You see, I didn't have all these nice things happen to me at Penn at once. ' I had to push myself right ahead. Everybody knew me, and so I wasn't and I'm not discouraged.
MG: You expect to ...
STMA: Yes, I expected it. Well, I expect also to beat it. That's what I expected. What has happened to women since they got this equal rights is really unfortunate in many respects. It used to be that it was the responsibility of a father to support his children. The sole responsibility. But today, think what the judges immediately ask: How much does the woman make? They never let a man today carry home more money than the wife carries home. See, in other words, if she brings home say, a week ... Suppose she'd brought home $500 a week, and he brings home $750. They're going to let him have a net of $500 and she, the only amount she can hope to get is that $250. They're going to be equal. Every day they do it.
And it used to be that the minute a man filed a divorce complaint, wife takes it to a lawyer. The lawyer files a petition for counsel fee and alimony, and then you come into litigation. No more. No indeed, you have got to pay to fight that divorce. And the women, they're very foolish. They're teaching school, they're nurses, they are officials, district superintendents ... Do they save anything? When they get in trouble, they don't have one hundred dollars to fight their case. Very good. They got a fine automobile and beautiful clothes, expensive boots ...
MG: But no savings.
STMA: Very few of them. And now, as I say ... they say equal responsibility and equal rights.
MG: Do you think that's a step forward or not?
STMA: Do I think that's a step ...?
MG: A step forward or not?
STMA: Well, I think it's not. I mean, after all, you know a woman who gets to work, and even who is as fortunate as I, that my husband was able to give me good help at home, I had the responsibilities in that house. I had to see that the silver is not stolen; that it's taken care of properly; that﻿11
STMA: (cont.'d) the linens are taken care of properly; that the food is in the house in the quality we want, and that the meals are what your husband likes. The only thing I found was that when I was planning the meals, he'd always come home and say he had that for lunch. So I just said,'I'll fix that." So I told him, you just leave word every day what you want to eat, then you won't have the same thing for lunch. It worked fine. It relieved me. I would see that the food was there.
MG: Do you think there were any aspects of your sex that affected your life differently than those of race, or did they pretty well go together? Would it have been easier at Penn, say, if you had been a black man instead of a black woman?
STMA: Oh, I think it's harder being a woman. I think it's much harder being
a woman, because the first thing is, the men are athletic, they're going to get into it. You know, they're crazy about athletes. But a woman, first ... other women are very jealous, you got them to fight. I don't think men have to fight jealousy as much as we do. What do you think?
MG: I think that's probably true, probably true. But I think a lot of that goes to the fact that so many women are excluded.
The next one was your perceptions and attitudes towards the woman's movement. What do you ... how do you see it? What is it, and then what do you think of it?
STMA: Well I think I told you what I think of it. I think that the white
women are the ones who are worried, because they didn't know, they didn't realize that they were going to face this terrible competition from men. And I think we realized it. Therefore we are not ... We are not as upset as they are.
MG: We've been better prepared.
STMA: Yes. No question about it.
The most important achievement of my life ... I think marrying a good man, and living with him for fifty-some years. Yes, that's an achievement .
MG: Yes, it is.
STMA: And having a good family.
MG: You don't need to really enumerate all those memberships and all, because I think we'll get them from your vita and other sources.
STMA: Yes. This is a more recent one. And I'll have her type it up for you and put it in here ...
MG: All right. What I really want—which do you think have been most important in your life in terms of your memberships and involvements in all the﻿12
MG: (cont.'d) different groups that you've been in? Do you sort of focus on certain ones of them as you look back?
STMA: Well, you know what I got the most out of? Out of the sorority, as an undergraduate.
MG: The Deltas.
STMA: Yes. I learned how to organize a public meeting, how to get the crowd
there, how to speak. I met girls from all over the country, and I began to broaden my friendships, knowledge of people and the way people lived.
I remember my first trip to Chicago came because I was a delegate to the convention. And I didn't know anything about Chicago and I ... Percy Julian's wife Anna, Anna Johnson, which was then ... she went to Penn. My sister-in-law, Virginia Alexander, Anna, and I went to Chicago for a Delta meeting. I think I got more out of it, I learned more, and I remember one year we had DuEbis over to speak at Houston Hall on Penn campus and Carter G. Woodson. Of course, because of my family, I had met these men, but to have a chance to sit down with them as my guests, not my parents' guests, you know, it was ... and to have them out to the university, and to get the place at the university where they were going to speak, and arrangements and all that, it was ...
MG: Good training.
STMA: Yes. I mean, as a young person, that is what I got out of the sorority.
Now let me see, going back. I enjoyed the years I was on the board of the National Urban League. I worked on that twenty-five years. I was secretary. I enjoyed that. And it also gave me an opportunity to meet people all over the country. I would say that because of my activities in different organizations, when I did get on the Truman committee, I had a pretty good idea what was expected. I learned long ago that you don't wear all the rings you own, and that you dress modestly, and you don't try to know everything. You sit back and you learn a lot.
I would say that I have traveled widely. If I had all the money I spent traveling, I'd be a rich woman. But you can never lose the memories of travel—the money can disappear, I found that out in the depression—but your memories of travel live with you forever. Things with which you'll never part. My husband and I went to Russia way back in the thirties.
MG: Oh, that early.
STMA: Yes. Well, you know my husband started practicing in 1923, and I started in 1927. I'll make my fifty years this September.
MG: Is that right? When you look back similarly at all the awards and honors that you've received, are there certain ones which you feel especially fond of? I guess that's kind of a bad thing to single out, awards or honors but ...﻿13
STMA: No, I'll tell you truthfully that when the University of Pennsylvania granted me an honorary degree, I felt that that was the highest thing that I'd ever aspired to, and it reminded me of something. I remember the day I got my Ph. D. That was a great event. That was really a great event. Because while two other women that year got their degrees, mine came first, and I got all the publicity. And we marched down Broad Street to the Academy of Music, right in the middle of the street, and the photographers were shooting me from every side. The newspapers all over the country were carrying it. It was a great day, not only for me but all women, so few of whom had qualified for this coveted degree in the year 1921. Jessie Fauset, remember her?
MG: Yes.
STMA: Jessie said to my mother, "What degree is Sadie going to get next?" And my mother said, "Well, I don't know, but perhaps some day the university might honor her with an honorary degree."
MG: And sure enough ... [laughter] Could you ... I meant to ask you early on, when you were talking about family background, could you just say a little about Henry Tanner.
STMA: Oh, yes. My mother was Uncle Henry's favorite sister. And every time
he came to this country he came to see my mother. My husband and I also visited with him in Paris. He was a very delicate child and had a lot of illness. He had told me what my mother had said, that my mother would sit up with him at night and see that he got his medicine. He never forgot it. His last trip to the United States ... He was in our home, and I had one of his very famous paintings—in fact, I have several of them— but this one, he looked up at the wall. It's the Sabot Maker. And he kept on looking at it, and he said to my mother, "It's very good." He was very soft-spoken. "Mamie." He called my mother Mamie, my mother's name was Mary. "Mamie, it's very good. You know people think I have money, but I don't have any money. I sell my paintings. I go back and have to work to get more paintings, so I can live well. I live well, but I don't have any money. I'm going to give you that painting. I have but one request. Don't sell it too cheaply." So I spoke up and I said, "Uncle Henry, that painting will never be sold ... not as long as Mother lives. Because it's just a part of her." He said, "I know you and Raymond are very good to my sister. And I do appreciate it. But it's nice to have something of your own."
MG: That's nice.
STMA: And of course, when his son, Jesse, was younger, when he would come, he would leave Jesse at our home.
MG: Just one last question, do you have any hobbies? You have so many activities, do you have time for them?
STMA: Well, horseback riding is my favorite hobby. But unfortunately from the weight of a baby, I had a kidney drop into the kidney pelvis, the kidney﻿14
STMA: (cont.'d) is floating ... And I didn't know what it was. I knew I was having fever; I didn't know what it was until finally, the doctors diagnosed the problem. I had to have a very serious operation. And the doctor told me no more horseback riding. Now, about five years ago I saw the doctor in a restaurant and I said to him, "You know, one thing you took away from me that I love is horseback riding." He said, "You now have so many adhesions," he said, "that you will never fall." [laughter] Well, it was nice seeing you.
MG: I thank you very much.
STMA: Nice indeed, to have had the privilege and I thank you. May I add, some years ago, I commissioned Laura Wheeler Waring, an honor graduate of Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, to paint a portrait of my uncle, Dr. Nathan Francis Mossell, physician and surgeon of Philadelphia. Although he died in 1977, I gave it to the College of Physicians of Philadelphia. The college held a well-attended convocation, followed by a formal dinner. While the College has colored members, the walls were filled with portraits of distinguished Philadelphia physicians, but none had a black face. I decided to offer the portrait of such a qualified person for this honor. I said to myself, "They can not turn down my Uncle Nathan," and they did not. In fact they showed their delight at receiving this addition to their collection of distinguished Philadelphia physicians. Yes, they hung the portrait in a prominent place.﻿SADIE T. M. ALEXANDER
