Diana Lachatanere:
This is an interview with Mrs, Katherine Flippin at her home in San Francisco on March 5, 1977. The interview is for an oral history project on "Blacks in San Francisco Prior to 1945." The interviewer is Diana Lachatanere.
Katherine Flippin:
Diana Lachatanere: Katherine Flippin:
Mrs. Flippin, how did your parents meet?
My parents were both enrolled at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis, Minnesota. My father was in the law school; he was the first black graduate of the University of Minnesota School of Law. My mother was a German major, preparing for a public school career, and also she was attending the Manning School of Oratory. It was during that time that they met in Minneapolis.
Did they know each other a while before they got married?
Oh, yes. Yes, they were both young people, and they knew each other, I guess, some years before they were married. When my father graduated, he went to Portland, Oregon. He took the Oregon State Bar and passed, and established his office there. And then he went back to Minneapolis and married my mother, and on the same day as they were married, they took the train for Portland, Oregon. And you know what... I've got the wedding pictures.
Diana Lachatanere:
Katherine Flippin:
Diana Lachatanere:
Katherine Flippin:
So both families, obviously, must have been living in Minneapolis, your mother's...
No, no, my father's family had been then in Brooklyn, New York, if I'm correct.
How come he had gone to the University of Minnesota to study?
Well, he had attended school in the South. Let's see, how was that... How did he come to Minneapolis? My grandfather had two marriages, and in his first family, there were two sons and a daughter. And the two sons were sent to undergraduate school in the South—what's the peanut man's institution?
Diana Lachatanere: Katherine Flippin:
Tuskegee?
Tuskegee. The two boys were sent to Tuskegee. And I guess when my father finished, he decided on Minnesota, and the other son, Gilchrist Stewart, I think went to Columbia. But that's all in the records at the marvelous Moorland-Spingarn Research Center at Howard University. Well documented .﻿2
DL: And your mother, how had she chosen...
KF: Well, that was where she lived with her parents and her sister. She had one sister, Harriet Anna Weir.
DL: Do you know why your father went out to Portland, why he chose that particular city?
KF: I don't know why. No, I don't know why he went to Portland. I guess he felt that the Pacific Coast was developing, and there would be greater opportunities there for his profession. But when he got there, he found it wasn't true. He had a very hard time in the courts, because Oregon had been settled by southern whites, and there was much prejudice. He struggled along and struggled along, but he finally had to give up and come to San Francisco, where the prejudice wasn't as vicious as in Oregon.
DL: What was your mother doing in Portland? Did she start a family or...
KF: Yes, that's where 1 was born. I was born a year after they were married. In Portland.
DL: So your mother did not do any kind of outside of the home work?
KF- No, she cooperated with the local PTA and the schools, because this had been her activity in Minneapolis. She loved children and loved to work with them, and she was active in that way.
Now you say that your father came to San Francisco and found that it was a little easier here to practice law.
Yes, the prejudice here was not as hidden. It wasn't as vicious, but it still existed. I think he first came to California in 1914 to look the field over before he moved us down here. He had to take the State Bar down
here also.
Did he establish his own firm, or did he work with someone?
He had his own office, and we did not move down here then. He went into an office with a man named Edward Mabson and also Attorney Oscar Hudson.
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
DL: Were they also black attorneys?
KF: They were black attorneys, yes.
DL: So you and your mother stayed up in Portland?
KF: We stayed in our home in Portland, and my father would go back and forth.
DL: How long did he do this?
KF: Well, let me see, I think that he came down in 1914, hecamejusttoget the feel of, and talk to people. Then I think it was 1916 or 1917 that he came down and opened his office on Kearny Street. It was in a building at Kearny and Bush Streets. You know, there's a man now visiting m San Francisco who worked as his clerk.﻿3
DL: William Patterson? KF: Exactly. Do you know him? DL: No, I've read his book. KF: Oh.
£
DL: The Man Who Cried Genocide. He mentions your father.
KF: Oh, is that so.
DL: So, once he opened his office, did the family then move down?
KF: Well, not right away. We came down in 1918 after he had found a place for us to live.
DL: So that's a span of four years when your father was making his plans to
come down here. How did your mother support the family, or was he sending money?
KF: Oh, he supported the family. My dad was the kind who told his wife she
didn't work. And I know he had a hard, hard time. Because in some of the old ledgers, I could see where he was accepting as payment for his services things other than money. Like stick pins. You know, men used to wear stick pins in their ties. Or books, he was a great collector of books. I noticed on some of those old ledgers, in payment would be listed books and various things.
DL: So were the difficulties with the firm in terms of whether clients could pay him, or was there opposition on the part of the court system itself? What were the problems?
KF: Well, the problem in the courts was that the white southerners resented a
Negro attorney on their level, completely qualified, having his license, and being capable before the court. This was resented; they just didn't want us. And so they made it very, very difficult for him to complete cases.
DL: When your mother moved down here, where did you move?
KF: Oh, from Portland?
DL: From Portland .
KF: We moved to 2540 Sutter Street. I remember that very well. And it was so unlike our home in Portland, because here in San Francisco everything was jammed up right together. And there wasn't any elbowroom. The only place to play was a little bit of a back yard or out in front of the house on the sidewalk.
DL: How old were you then?
KF: Well, let's see, I must have been eleven or twelve.
DL: Oh, so you were quite old.
A
William L. Patterson, ed., We Charge Genocide: The Crime of Government Against the Negro People (New York: International Publishers Co., 1970).﻿4
KF: And I can remember my father having introduced me by mail to another
little girl who lived in the same block. Her name was Freda Phillips, and my father said to me, "Now she's a nice little girl, and I want you to be friends with her." And you know, we became friends and we remained friends, well, throughout her life, and she died two years ago. And our husbands were friends and all four mothers were friends.
DL: Your husband's mother.
KF: And my mother, and Freda Phillip's mother, and her husband, Waldo Bethel's mother. And we used to take them on picnics, and oh, have birthday parties. I've got some pictures that are just riotous. They called themselves "The Mothers," and each one would vie to see who was going to have the first grandchild.
DL: Okay. Now your mother, once she got down here, since you were going off to school, did she still stay at home, or did she get involved in activities outside the home?
KF: Oh, not until my father's death. Now that occurred in 1919, and yes, it was after that that my mother went to work.
DL: What did she do?
KF: That was during World War I, and she became executive director of the Victory Club.
DL: What is the Victory Club?
KF: The Victory Club served as a recreation center for enlisted men just as our USO serves as a recreation source for enlisted men. The Victory Club was located a block from the entrance to the Presidio on the corner of Baker and Lombard Streets. And that old building is still standing. In this Victory Club, just as we have the USO hostesses now, there was a group of young ladies called Minute Girls. They were supposed to be ready at a minute's notice to come down and entertain at parties or whatever when the troops were either coming in or going out. There was much activity here through the Presidio during World War I, and this was the recreation center one block from the main gates to the Presidio.
DL: How did your mother get that job?
KF: She applied to War Camp Community Service, which was an organization comparable to USO. She was made executive director of the Victory Club.
DL: What did she do... You said she didn't work before your father's death, but how did she occupy her time?
KF: As executive secretary?
DL: No, before your father's death.
KF: Before that time. She affiliated herself with again, school, and various church activities. Reverend W.J.J. Byers and his wife were interested in the way she could organize programs and that kind of thing for young﻿5
KF: (cont.) people. So she was working with them. The churches here were the only recreation facilities. Everything happened in the churches. We didn't have a community center.
DL: What church was this?
KF: This was A.M.E. Zion Church, and W.J.J. Byers was dearly loved by both young and old, as was his wife.
DL: Okay. Now given that your father had a rough time making a living, how did the family get by? Were there any other children?
KF: No, I was the only one. We had a hard time, yes.
DL: What are some of the things that you remember?
KF: Well, let's see...
DL: Was rent paid?
KF: Well, the rent was always paid. The thing I remember most is the change in status we had. You see, when we came down here we had a living room,
two bedrooms and use of the kitchen. We lived with Mrs---Well, it'll
come to me pretty soon. But anyway, this building was a three-flat, old Victorian type. And this lady, Mrs. Saunders, had the whole flat on the first floor, and her bedroom was to the rear of the house. Then there were two more bedrooms and the living room; we had the living room and the two bedrooms, and my mother had use of the kitchen. And this was so limited in terms of what I had remembered. We lived at 513 Union Avenue North in Portland, and we had a tremendous great big yard with fruit trees, and a big maple tree. My Aunt Maria lived next door and she had a great big house and cherry trees and baby chickens. My, you know it was like being cramped into a little...
DL: Did your father own the home?
KF: No, no, no, it was my Aunt Maria's home. She and her husband had come to Portland over the Oregon Trail in an ox cart in the early 1800s.
DL: Was this your father's sister, or his aunt?
KF: Well, this was the Weir's side of the family.
DL: So, on your mother ' s...
KF: On my mother's side. So when my mother married McCants Stewart, he came
to Portland and set up offices, and Aunt Maria, you see, my mother's relative, had us live there. I guess we paid rent to her, I don't know. But I know it was just wonderful.
DL: And when you got here, besides the space thing, was there a problem in terms of buying clothes, or getting food?
KF: If there was, I wasn't aware of it. I was never made aware of it. And﻿6
KF: (cont.) in terms of friendships I had formed in Portland, Oregon, six months after we got down here . . .you know how little girls have bosom buddies that they just can't part with? Well, they had to send my little bosom buddy down from Portland to spend the summer. So Freda Phillips Bethel, the little girl to whom I had been introduced by mail, became friendly with Nell Allen, my bosom buddy in Portland, and had a nice summer together. And when it was time to go home, then it was on the promise that I would go up there next summer.
DL: And did you?
KF: I can't remember. I think by the time the next summer came I had probably gotten over it. And I think my father had died by that time, and of course everything had changed.
DL: When your father died, did your mother have either relatives here or friends who kind of helped her through that period?
KF: No, she didn't. No. My grandmother came as soon as she could, but she couldn't come right away. She had her own home in Minneapolis, and she was also involved in lecturing and demonstrating at Donaldson's Glass Block there, and she was under contract.
DL: What is Donaldson's Glass Block?
KF: Donaldson's Glass Block is a great big department store. And in those days, they had demonstrators, just as they do now, to present various kinds of appliances, or products, and Grandmother was a demonstrator.
DL: That's interesting, because it appears from what I've read that black people were not allowed into department stores under any circumstances as workers or employees. How did your grandmother get that?
KF: Well, I'll show you a picture of Grandmother Weir. And I think that'll tell you the story.
DL: Okay, she's very fair.
KF: Well, not only that. Grandmother Weir had a commanding personality, and as soon as Grandmother Weir opened her mouth, everybody paid attention. And I don't know whether... Maybe they didn't know what she was. There's Grandmother Weir. -[Shows picture] Victoria Frances Weir. And when she spoke everybody jumped.
DL: So when did she get down to San Francisco?
KF: Well, she must have ccme to San Francisco about 1920.
DL: Oh, so just a year later.
KF: Probably a year later. I could look it up, I'm just not sure. It could have been a year or two, a year and a half.
DL: Who was there to kind of help your mother just get over the shock...﻿7
KF: The shock of my father's death. I think she received most support from
my Sunday school teacher, who was a Christian Scientist. And as I remember it, when I was told of my father's death and how it occurred, my mother had taken me to the Sunday School teacher's home, and she told me. I think she was the one who gave my mother the most support, as did Reverend Byers. And there were a few other people. Now Laura Tombs Scott's mother and her aunt, Mrs. Frazier, were supportive, and of course, Mrs. Bertha Phillips was right there on the same block.
DL: Who was Mrs. Phillips?
KF: Mrs. Phillips was the mother of the little girl to whom I had been introduced by mail. They became fast friends. And also, there was another couple right around the corner on Baker Street, and that name was Garrott, Mr. and Mrs. Langston Garrott. And they were also supportive, as was the clerk—just said his name a few minutes ago.
DL: Patterson.
KF: Patterson. I want to talk to him while he's here. Because he took over the office and got things straightened out, insofar as he could.
DL: Now, your father had two partners, didn't he, Edward Mabson and Oscar Hudson, or was that in Portland?
KF: No, no, no. Mabson and Hudson were down	here in San Francisco. Now Mabson,
well, I guess both of them, as my father	had to go back and forth, he would leave his business in their hands. Well, after the death of Maria Waterford...
DL: Who is that?
KF: That was on the Weir side, my mother's side of the family, who owned the property where we lived in Portland. When she died, of course my father had to come to Portland and stay, and he left his business in their hands. When he came back, probably it was a month later, he found that it had been sabotaged.
DL: What does that... What exactly happened?
KF: Well, what happened was, these two attorneys stole his clients right out from under him. So, the work he had done on the cases he had underway...
DL: So this probably also contributed to his depression.
KF: Yes, I'm sure so. Yes, I'm sure so. What happened was, he lost his sight, and a lawyer without sight has a pretty bad time.
DL: How did that happen?
KF: It was psychological blindness, they said later, probably would have passed, given time. But I guess he panicked, and shot himself.
DL: So when he passed away, Mr. Patterson —﻿8
KF: He was working in the office with him then, as I understand it, and he's the one who took over and got things straightened out.
DL: How come? He was not one of the partners?
KF: I think by that time... You see, there was never a partnership. My father had his own separate office. But these other two attorneys were the ones to whom my father had gone in 1914, or whenever he came down to get the feel of the field.
DL: These are black attorneys.
KF: Yes. Yes.
DL: Your mother, did she go to work right away after your father died, or did she kind of take a little time to recuperate and then go out to work?
KF: Right after my father died, I can remember we moved from 2540 on the first floor, up to the third floor on 2544 Sutter with the Simmons sisters, Vivian and Myra. There Mama and I shared one bedroom, and we had the use of the kitchen.
DL: So your situation definitely changed.
KF: Yes. Yes. Because there just wasn't anything left. The Simmons sisters were old, old California residents, both cf them spinster ladies. Mama had gotten acquainted with them during the period we had lived on the first floor, and they took us in. Mama rented a room with kitchen privileges.
DL: Did she get a job?
KF: Yes. The first job I was aware of—and I'm sure it must have been the same time, because this was in 1919—-was executive director of the Victory Club. And her work had to do with planning programs, developing committees, taking care of problems that the servicemen might have that they could help with—family or whatever problems servicemen had then, they took care of.
DL: How long did she have that job?
KF: That lasted until the war was over. And when the war was over, and there was no longer... Well in fact, I think the Victory Club went on for a few, it must have gone on about two years after the war was over. There were still troops coning in and out of San Francisco, and a recreation center was needed. About two years after that the Victory Club was discontinued, and there were funds left in the Victory Club treasury. Yes, there were funds left and there was a Mr. Sidney Peixotto and a Mr. Kaiser on the executive committee of the War Camp Community Service. By that time, my mother felt the need for a social service agency or a recreation agency to meet the needs of the Negro community here, even though it was small. So she went to Mr. Peixotto and Mr. Kaiser and told them about her idea for a community center, and asked them if the funds that were left from the Victory Club couldn't be used to establish such an organization. They agreed, and Booker T. Washington Community Service Center was born.﻿9
DL: This War Camp...
KF: Community Service.
DL: Right. Was that federally funded, or statewide, or city?
KF: I don't know. I think it must have been a federally funded, or a partially federally-funded operation, but I know it was statewide.
DL: Why was the name Booker T. Washington chosen? Do you know?
KF: Well, I guess because Booker T. Washington was the name that everybody in the Negro community knew and admired.
DL: Did your mother ever talk about him, give you an idea how she felt about his beliefs and some of the things he had been talking about?
KF: No, no. I can't remember her doing that.
DL: Okay, once the Booker T. Washington Center got off the ground, did your mother become employed by them?
KF: Yes. You see, War Camp Community Service just extended my mother's employment to get the center started.
DL: So she remained.
KF: So she remained as executive secretary. Funds came from War Camp Community Service, and also lots of support from the Negro community.
DL: Financial?
KF: Financial in terms of what they could give, but largely volunteer help. The first place we had was, I think it was 1629 Geary Street, in the basement and the first floor of another one of those three-story, old Victorian buildings. The basement was remodeled, and I can remember helping, with the rest of the kids, to drag out all the old stuff, and the older people would paint, and finally the center had its opening. Oh, it was a big time. And in the same block was Reverend W.J.J. Byers and his church, A.M.E. Zion, and the two organizations worked together very well.
DL: What was the purpose of Booker T.?
KF: Booker T. Washington Community Service Center housed a recreation program for the whole family. It was a family-centered program. There was a boys' program, a girls' program, and an adult program. And as the years went by, each segment was developed to meet the needs of the community. And of course, as the years went by, the center grew. When we left that very first place, we went to 45 Faron Avenue, which is no longer there, but anyway, it was again an old Victorian house. This time we didn't have the basement and the first floor, we had all three floors.
DL: And the employees, were they basically still volunteers, the people who worked?﻿10
KF: Yes, yes. Because the center had no money. In fact, by that time War
Camp Community Service had been dissolved, and the funds had to come from the community. And so people did volunteer their time and their efforts. Also there were a number of people who were financially secure in the city, and they contributed. One of them was Miss Alice Reese, and another one was J.H. Thompson. I remember those two names so well.
DL: These are Negro citizens.
KF; Yes, these were Negro citizens. There were Negro citizens in the
community who recognized the need for this kind of organization, and contributed to it. Then when we left Faron Avenue, we finally got to the point where the community by that time had grown and there.were many committees working, and entertainments were being given. We bought an old bakery on Divisadero between Geary and O'Farrell, 1433 Divisadero, and this old bakery was remodeled then. And of course this gave much more room, and we could rent the upstairs to lodgers, and we had some income. By that time, there was another organization who contributed—San Francisco Community Chest was formed.
DL: What year, about, was this when you bought the bakery?
KF; On Divisadero? Well, I'll have to look it up. I don't want to take your tape time. [1923]
DL: Okay. All during this time, even though they couldn't afford to employ people, your mother was being salaried?
KF: Not all of this time. Not all of this time. My mother was salaried only for a few months after the first center was established, and her job then was to develop programs, which she did. A family-centered program which could be satisfactorily effected in this basement and this one floor. Then as we went to Faron Avenue, by that time she was employed by the Viavi Company.
DL: What was she___ What is that Viavi?
KF: Viavi Company had a homeopathic medicine that was supposed to heal everything. It was a kind of salve you rubbed on yourself or you took it orally in capsules. Oh, they had just all kinds of things. It was one of those homeopathic kind of medications that had been developed in Europe by somebody's grandfather. The people who had developed it lived over here in Presidio Terrace and were very wealthy. That manufacturing plant was housed where the old Metropolitan Life Insurance Company used to be, and is now Cogswell [Polytechnical]College, I believe. It was that big building.
DL: What did your mother do?
KF: My mother was in the department that packaged these products. And then she had several other jobs too.
DL: With them?﻿11
KF: With them, oh yes, everything was right there. And I have some pictures,
too. Sometime, I'll dig those out, and show you when, here in San Francisco, one year we had a freeze, and there are great long icicles hanging off of the bucket that held the water over the wishing well, and we had snow here one year, too. Anyway, my mother worked with the Viavi Company, oh, for years and years.
DL: Doing a variety of things?
KF: Yes, I'd say she went from that chemical department where the material was produced, to the packaging, to the office.
DL: Now your mother was trained to be a teacher.
KF: Yes.
DL: Did she seek that kind of a position?
KF: No. Here in San Francisco, American Negroes could not go into that field.
And you know, when I went last year of high school, or at least the semester preceding graduation from high school to San Francisco State College on the old campus, the registrar said to me, "What do you want to enroll here for? You could never teach in San Francisco." And that was Florence. Vance.
DL: She was the registrar.
KF: She was the registrar.
DL: And this was in the thirties?
KF: Yes. No, no, this was___Wait a minute... Well it was, it was about 1929.
Because when this happened___It must have been earlier than that, it must
have been around 1923. Because when that happened... T,his had never happened, I had never bumped my nose against this before. I must have really been protected. I'd never felt the agony of prejudice, and when that happened, I ran home into my mother's arms, and bless her heart, she let me play tennis for one whole semester. She thought I was going to school, or at least I thought she thought I was going to school. But I would just... I couldn't. So I played tennis, for one semester. And of course she knew it, but she didn't let me know. Bless her heart, she was so understanding, and she knew what a stab I'd had and how it hurt. Well, when I finally got myself together, I told her I wanted to go to work. And there was an opportunity to work in Davis Schonwasser Company. Davis Schonwasser Company was located at Grant and Sutter, downtown, across from the White House department store. Straughter, who then was living with the Simmonses, as were we...
DL: Oh, you were still with them?
KF: Still with them. Wait a minute, were we? No. By then we were at 1909^ Divisadero. And my grandmother was out here by that time. But anyway, Mama let me go to work at Davis Schonwasser Company.
DL: We'll get on to your educational thing again, because that is interesting.﻿12
KF: It is interesting, because I lived to...
DL: Before, you mentioned that your grandmother had come out in 1920. Did she work to also help support the family, or did your grandmother just stay and take care of the...
KF: No, my grandmother stayed at home.
DL: And your mother was supporting all three of you?
KF: Yes. And that was at 1909h Divisadero. When my grandmother came, we moved there, and my mother had rented that flat. It was a whole flat, and my mother had rented that flat from Buxby Thorne Realty Company. They didn't know she was a Negro. But when they saw me, of course, they knew.
DL: What happened?
KF: Well, after a period of years, they finally said that the building was being sold, and that we would have to move. That was when Mama bought this old Victorian out here in the middle of the cemetery, at least surrounded on two sides by the cemetery. We moved into that old building, and that's where I, you know...
DL: So your financial situation kind of picked up, that your mother could buy a house?
KF: Well, Mama was thrifty, and by that time she had made advances in the Viavi Company, and Grandma had her pension.
DL: Aside from her activities with the Booker T. Washington Community Center, were there any other nonsalaried things that your mother was doing?
KF: Oh, yes indeed. Mama was kind of a watchdog. There was what was called Divisadero Street Improvement Association, and it was the members of the Divisadero Improvement Association who had said to Buxby Thorne, "You have Negroes living on Divisadero Street. We don't want them there." So these Divisadero Improvement Association people didn't know who Mama was, nor did they know who John Fisher was. He was another one who could pass. So they would go to these meetings and then they'd report back to the Booker T. Washington Community Center board, and to Reverend Byers, and whoever else was being active, in terms of trying to solve some of the prejudice that existed. They'd report back as to what was going on in those meetings.
DL: Did anything come of that?
KF: Well, I suppose so, because they were all working diligently, writing letters and doing that kind of thing.
DL: Were there any...
KF: But what actually happened... You see, my interests by that time were other places. Like climbing the fence at Hamilton Playground after it was locked up and you were supposed to stay out. But to climb back in was a great thrill, you know, and play tennis till it got dark. And Freda Phillips was right along there with me.﻿13
DL: You were about how old by now?
KF: Oh, by then I must have been, I guess I was fourteen, fifteen.
DL: Were there any other things that your mother was doing? Was she involved in any political kind of activity?
KF: I can't remember Mama ever getting involved in any political thing. No, her activities had to do with recreation centers, as she started with the Victory Club and Booker T. Washington Community Center. That's where all her free time was spent, and then of course, the USO. But all her free time was given in a volunteer way to recreation agencies, or in the development of activities that had to do with bettering the lives of Negroes who lived in San Francisco. In 1940, when the census was taken, that census, if I remember correctly, showed under four thousand Negroes. And everybody knew everybody else by sight, if not by name. And if you saw, if Mama saw a strange Negro, she'd go right up, "How do you do, I'm Mrs. Stewart. You're a stranger? Oh, where are you from? How long are you going to be here?" That was Mama. Mama was interested in...
DL: Did she invite them home?
KF: Well, no, she didn't invite them home, but she would find out who they were and where they came from and how long they were going to be here and why. Then she might direct them to the center, or to the church. She didn't bring them home.
DL: You said that one of the things she was interested in was the improvement of Negroes' lives here. Was her activity directed mainly through the center, as you say the recreation center, or did she...
KF: NAACP she was active in, and Booker Washington Center, and Reverend Byers's church, and also there was a man here named Dennis, Reverend J.A. Dennis. I think his church was Bethel, but that was way over on the other side of San Francisco.
DL: Since your grandmother was here, what were some of the things that you remember about her?
KF: I remember that Grandmother didn't approve of me very much.
DL: Why?
KF: Well, Grandmother was very orderly. Grandmother kept things meticulously, and in the kitchen, you did everything the way you do it in a cooking school. I was all for taking shortcuts, and I was all for not being as orderly as Grandmother wanted me to be. I seemed to irritate Grandmother, and I'm sure I did. Grandmother loved me very much, just couldn't stand me. [laughter]
DL: Did you have any specific chores that she would assign you?
KF: No, I don't believe I had any specific chores. This is what should have happened to me. That's what should have happened, but I didn't. I had a lot of freedom. And if I hung my clothes up, instead of pushing them﻿14
KF: (cont.) back in the corner of the closet and closing the door, Mama didn't get after me. Grandma would, but then I didn't pay too much attention.
DL: Your mother was very lenient. She was the one you would always go to.
KF: Well, Mother was lenient. Grandmother was a disciplinarian, and I'm sure I was responsible for many an argument between them.
DL: Why?
KF: Why did it happen? I think because I was an only child, and because I
was loved by both Grandma and Mama, and they sort of worked these conflicts that I created, out between them. Now Mama's sister, she took action when I did something she didn't like. She took action! As for instance, when we were living over there in that old building on the bottom floor, I was never so surprised in my life. My Aunt Harriet sent me to the store to get some things, and I didn't bring back all the change. I bought some candy or something I wanted from the store. And when I got back with the things and put the change in her hand, she said, "Where's the rest of it?" And I said, "I guess I lost it." And before I could draw a breath, I felt a bucket of water all over me. Do you know I never lost any more change.
DL: Now, you didn't mention her. Did your Aunt Harriet come out with yotir grandmother?
KF: Aunt Harriet? No, Aunt Harriet didn't, Aunt Harriet was teaching in Lead, South Dakota. And Aunt Harriet, like my mother, was trained for grammar school, as we called it then. Grammar school teaching, she had followed her career. She had never married, and she at that time had achieved a principalship in Lead, South Dakota. Now Lead, South Dakota is one of the most prejudiced places you'd ever want to set foot in, and they didn't know she was a Negro. So she had reached this position, and was enjoying it. And she would come for vacation period, and go back. Summers, she could come.
DL: Did your mother discipline you at all?
KF: Mother didn't discipline me like spanking. She didn't believe in spanking. I don't think a few would have hurt me, but she would talk to me and I'd feel just terrible. I'd rather have had the spanking and avoided the talk But she was very kindly, and very understanding from a young person's point of view. And I think she shielded me all the way along. So we were close, and I knew I had a protector in my mother.
DL: What kinds of things did you do together?
KF- Oh my, when she was working at the Victory Club...my mother was a great walker. She would walk over the hill to Lombard Street, and I'd walk with her. And other things we'd do together, on weekends, when she was free she'd take all of the young people out to Land's End for a beach party or she'd take us hiking over to Marin County, up to Mount Tamalpais All kinds of things like that. Through Golden Gate Park, and then, you know, you could go to Golden Gate Park day or night. And we'd have weenie roasts on the beach, and we just did all kinds of fun things like﻿15
KF: (cont.) that. And then, when the Easter sunrise services started on Mount Davidscn, we went every year. Mama would go with us for twenty-five years. When the twenty-fifth year came, Mama said, "This is enough. Go by yourself."
DL: Did you mind sharing your mother with other friends?
KF: Oh no, they loved her, she loved them, and she was the one who made it possible for us to do all these things. Just as with Father Wallace's June Entertainments at the Saint Augustine Episcopal Church, Oakland. This was a big thing for young people in the Bay Area. And Laura Tombs Scott, whom I told you about, was the piano teacher, and she also taught dance. She would get the San Francisco young people together and rehearse them for this June Entertainment. And Mama would see that we'd all get over there for rehearsals. She'd cooperate with us in things we wanted to do. She just loved all of us, and we loved her, and she was one of us.
DL: Did your mother, in terms of a career, did she sit down and discuss anything you were interested in?
KF:
Discuss anything I was interested in? Oh, yes, yes. But it usually wouldn't be just sitting down, because it would be going somewhere, or walking, or at the beach. Or another thing I used to love to do with Mama, and so did Freda Phillips Bethel, that was to go out to the end of the "K" car line and hike over those sand dunes to the beach. Then there weren't any houses out there, and it was like being on the Sahara Desert. Now Mama made my life a very happy one, and I often think back now and realize how extremely difficult it must have been for her.
DL: In terms of...
KF: in terms of making a living and in terms of putting me through school. In terms of trying to be two parents.
DL: But your grandmother helped her.
KF: Oh, yes, Grandma took care of the house and the laundry and the cooking. DL: Did she discipline you?
KF:
Grandma? She tried her best, bless her heart.
DL: Did you at any point have to, want to go to work to earn your own money while you were still in school?
KF- While I was in school? Yes, but there were no jobs for Negro girls that Mama approved. You see, in the last year of high school you had to pre-register for the teacher-training course. And Mama sent me over to State College to register. This is when this thing happened to me. "Why do you want to enroll in the teacher-training program? You can never teach in San Francisco." And naively I said,"Why?" "Well because you're a Negro." You see, they called them Negro then, they didn t call them black. And I was appalled. I couldn't speak, I just fled. That had never happened to me before. I dropped out then, and I played tennis the rest of the year. I thought Mama thought I was in school, but Mama﻿16
KF: (cont.) knew better. And it was after that that I told her I wanted to go to work at Davis Schonwasser Company, and she let me do it.
DL: But you did not work before that?
KF: No. One summer Charlotte Straughter and I decided we were going to make some money, and we went to the cannery, and they employed us. We lasted one day.
DL: What happened?
KF: We didn't know what to do. We were too slow. And the cannery workers,
of course, come year after year and are experienced. And we just couldn't cut the mustard. We got fired after one day.
DL: But there was no need, really, for you to work. Was that the impression?
KF: Oh no, there was need. I knew my mother was having a hard time. But you see, Grandmother had taught me how to sew and make my own clothing, and then she insisted upon my going to cooking school, so I'd know how to "move around the kitchen properly," and so I cduld take care of the house, I could sew for both of us, and finally achieved expertise. I made all Mama's hats, coats, suits, dresses, everything. And my experience at Schonwasser taught me materials.
DL: What is the Schonwasser Company?
KF: Davis Schonwasser Company was an exclusive shop for women, children, and infants wear. After the summer was over, they had an opening for a stock girl in the women's ready-to-wear department. So I went in there marking stock, and hanging, and doing all the duties of a stock girl. After a period of time, I went into the children's department, and there I did the same thing. Except that I started reordering. Then they sent me back down to the women's department, where I spent more time with the ordering end of the business and also previewing lines that would come in from the East, making notations for the buyer. So I worked up finally in that organization to the point where I was doing the buyer's job. Well, the dear buyer, Anne Jacobs, was an elderly lady by that time, and she had to stop work. I was next in line. But instead of making me buyer, which was my rightful advancement, they went upstairs to the children's department and brought Anne Rosenberg down, and put her in as buyer.
DL: And what years were these?
KF: Well let's see, this must have been around 1940. Somewhere around in there. But anyway, that was when I felt the sting.
DL: Again.
KF: Again. And so I thought, now what are you going to do? So I decided I'd go back to school. So I went back to San Francisco State College and I confronted the same registrar, Florence Vance, and I said I would like to enroll in the teacher-training program. And we eyed each other, and I enrolled.﻿17
DL:	Now were you the only black student at this time?
KF:	Oh, no.
DLr	You were, in the teachers' program.
KF:	In the teacher-training program?
DL:	Yes.
KF:	I can't remember. I know there were other blacks in the school, but you see, by this time we were in World War II, weren't we?
DL: That would be '42.
KF: Yes.
DL: Mrs. Flippin, I'm going to backtrack now, and deal with your high school, your whole educational process in San Francisco. Where did you go to elementary school?
KF: Elementary school was Hamilton Grammar School. That was within walking distance. Hamilton Grammar School was located on Geary Street, between Scott and Pierce.
DL: Did you enjoy that experience?
KF: Yes, I enjoyed it.
DL: Did your friend Freda go there?
KF: Freda Phillips Bethel was going there too, yes. She was in advance of me and she left there shortly after we came to California. She was three years, I think, ahead, and she went to Commerce High School. So that separated us only for as long as we could get back together again after school, climb the fence to play in the playground. Then after grammar school, I went to Girls' High School. Girls' High School was right next to Hamilton Grammar School on the corner of Geary and Scott. That was an all-girls school, and when I entered, there was only one other Negro and her name was Emily Roberson. Emily Roberson's father and her two brothers and her mother lived at the bottom, almost the bottom of the Fillmore Street hill, and at that time it was a very exclusive neighborhood. The father was employed, well, I've forgotten, I'm not sure. I think he was a postal employee, I'm not certain. But anyway, he had one of the executive jobs and they lived in a great big beautiful house. And the brother, Mason, was active in Polytechnic High School sports. So I came to know the whole family through Emily. And' they have quite a history here in San Francisco, the brother does. Mason Roberson.
DL: Were you friendly with other girls in the school besides Emily?
KF: Oh, yes. In fact, Emily was in advance of me and you know, a junior sort of looks down her nose at a freshman. She didn't want to be bothered. But my friends at Girls' High School were not close, close friends, because real closeness had grown between Freda Phillips Bethel﻿18
KF: (cont.) and me, and also several other little girls on my block, on
Sutter Street. And also at that time, I'd met another Negro girl whose name was Lillian Jorgenson, and we became real close girlhood friends. And so at school, you see, it wasn't like it is now. The white girls just didn't make a close, close friend of a Negro. They were polite, but there wasn't the close association which young girls can create for themselves.
DL: Did you like the school despite those kinds of things?
KF: I liked the school. I liked the school very much until I found out about the Polytechnic High School. Now Polytechnic High School was coed, and that's where this girl Lois Davis was going, that's where, oh, many of the other young Negro girls in San Francisco were going. And that's where a lot of their brothers went. So I started worrying my mother to death to transfer to Polytechnic. Well, I kept at her, and I kept at her, and I kept at her, and finally I think that had something to do with Mama's coming out here to buy this house. And it was then that I got to transfer to Polytechnic. Finally. And I could walk right across the park to school every morning.
DL: This was—what—the second year of high school, your sophomore year?
KF: Yes. And also Golden Gate Park had tennis courts along the way.
DL: Tennis was a popular activity. How was Polytechnic? How did you get along over there?
KF: I got along very well over there, because there were many of the young
people whom I knew through the community center, through Reverend W.J.J. Byers's church, through the various activities that young people took part in. And there were so few of us here, you see, we were all taking part in the same thing. So I thought Polytechnic was just...
DL: Academically, how was it?
KF: Academically, how did I perform?
DL: How did you do? Yes.
KF: Well, I performed in a mediocre way, because I was interested in other
things. Like playing tennis, like meeting everybody after the last period before lunch on Friday and going to Chinatown with them. Of course, nobody ever told they did that, but we did. And also I was interested in cutting those afternoon classes on Friday and going down to the Loew's Warfield theater to hear John Dewey Washington sing "California, Here I Come." We even got so brave we went backstage once and talked to him, and he used to give us passes. So then, you know, there was nothing to do but cut all the periods after lunch on whatever day those passes were good for, and go hear John Dewey Washington.
DL: What about your teachers? Did you like them?
KF: I enjoyed everybody, I think, but my biology teacher. She made me do my work. But I had great respect for her, because I guess she's the first woman who really let me know that she meant what she said. She's the﻿19
DL:
KF:
DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
KF: (cont.) first one that really disciplined me, and I knew that I'd suffer the consequences if I didn't perform. So I had to, for the first time.
Your mother had no idea, looking at your grades, that something was wrong between...
Well, they were not the lowest, and they weren't the highest. We had, let's see, one to five—they used numbers then—and they fell in the middle bracket, and Mama did not demand of me high grades. Now, had she demanded of me higher grades, I would have performed, but I did no t do so.
What about socializing with the white kids in the class? Were you friendly at least in the classroom situation?
Oh, yes. Yes. Yes, they seemed to be friendly enough. But they were never included in our little group.
How many people were there in the group?
I think at one time that, let's see, at Poly there must have been about ten. Of course, they were at various levels, I can remember Emily . Roberson's brother, who had red hair and freckles. He was a senior and he was a star on the football team. And of course, I think he didn t pay any attention to us; he was with an entirely different group We were small fries. In terms of including some of the Caucasians, I don t think we ever did. In the individual classes thereM be friendships, but outside of school, no. We were contained in our own little group. We didn t
socialize.
Did you participate in any extracurricular activities in the school? Sports or clubs?
Oh ves I participated, and of course, there were the tennis courts. For a while! But, let's see, there was one other portrait club that was in Girls' High School, and one other group in Girls High School. But I just didn't feel, I wasn't with the ingroup.
And the ingroup were the whites.
KF:	Caucas ians.
DL:	Caucasians. Now did you graduate from Polytechnic?
KF:	Yes.
DL:	Did you attend the ceremony?
KF:	No, I did not.
DL:	What happened?
DL:
KF:
DL
KF:
No, I didn't. Once again-this I have long forgotten. A year before graduation, or six months before graduation, Mama sent me to State﻿20
KF:
DL:
KF:
(cont.) College to enroll for the following fall school year. That's the time I got my notice, that's, when I ran home screaming. That's the time I played tennis for the last six months^.
DL: So you couldn't even get to your graduation, you felt so badly?
KF: Well, I had stayed out playing tennis, you see, for six months.
DL: Oh, this is the last six months of high school?
KF: This is the last six months of high school. The last six months of high
school. And Mama sent me down there to preregister and enroll, to be sure to get in the teacher-training course for the coming year. And all that spring was when I played tennis.
DL: Did you talk it over with her? What kinds of things did your mother say to you when you told her what had happened? Do you remember that?
KF: I don't think I ever actually told her. She just made me aware that she knew what had been going on. And I don't think we ever really discussed it.
DL: Not even the incident with the registrar?
KF: The incident with the registrar she knew, because when I could finally
get my breath and stop crying, I blurted out what had happened. I don't remember what she said to me, but she calmed me, soothed me. We didn't talk about it. But I can certainly remember going back to Poly, but then I just absented myself, first one class, then another. Oh boy, my absences mounted and mounted and mounted.
DL: It was that traumatic a situation.
KF: It was a traumatic one. That State College situation had its effect. And I was angry. I was hurt. It was the first time in my life I knew I was different.
Had any of your friends ever encountered this kind of behavior and discussed it with you prior to that?
No I don't think so. I was aware of prejudices because I'd hear my mother and her friends talk about this Divisadero Improvement Association, and how other neighborhood associations, throughout San Francisco were organizing the same kind of thing to keep Negroes out of various neighborhoods, or make it difficult for them to purchase property, ^So I knew it existed, but it had never touched me. And to go thinking, Oh, now I'm going to be a college student," and to hear, "What do you want to enroll in this program for?" "Because I want to teach." "Well, you can never teach in San Francisco." "Why?" "Because you're a Negro. [It] just put me down.
So you really never got a chance to discuss with your mother what it meant, what that meant to you?
DL:
KF:
My mother knew what it meant.﻿21
DL: Without words?
KF: Without words. You see, when I told her what had happened, she knew
immediately. And being the wise, wise person she was, and knowing her child, she gave me enough elhowroom to recover and succeed in another area. This is where she was so wise. She didn't force me to go back to school. She didn't force me to go to that registrar and insist, because I guess Mama knew for me it would just make the wound bigger, and would probably create kinds of feelings within me that would affect my relationships with other people, and she didn't want that. She was a very wise person. So, when she found I was cutting classes and playing tennis, she felt, "Well, this is a good way to work it out."
And when I went to her and said, "Mama I want to go work, I don't want to go back to school, " she let me go to work. And I worked successfully, and made a name for myself right there within those four walls of Davis Schonwasser Company. Until came the time when I realized that, "You're doing the work, but you aren't going to get up on that last rung of the ^ ladder because you're the wrong color. And it's the only reason." That s when I decided to go back to school. And that was during the war years, when they had instituted this great training program all up and down the coast. And San Francisco State College had Lynette Maas Messer who developed the program, and so I went in under her wing.	L
DL: Training program for what?
KF: For child care teacher. And also I enrolled in courses that would lead to the B.A. degree, at the same time. So I was doing two things.
DL: You got your B.A.?
KF: when I completed this eighteen- or thirty-six week course or
whatever it was, Lynette Messer hired me. Apparently I had a flair, and had the expertise to work with children. And I climbed the ladder in child care right up to the top. I kept on, at the same time taking courses and I achieved the B.A. degree in '52, and the M.A. in 54. And when Lynette Messer left on a sabbatical for Europe, I became a member of the faculty, and directed the demonstration nursery school, and took over Lynette Messer's college classes. And was so pleased to go to faculty staff meetings and say to Florence Vance, "How do you do, Miss Vance?" And Miss Vance was forced to say, "Oh, Kay, I m so glad to see you." And wanted to be all buddy, buddy, buddy, buddy, buddy. Well, I was buddy, buddy, buddy, buddy too. But with tongue in cheek. And I tell you, I think that's why I performed so successfully at San Francisco State College. It was because Florence Vance was still there, and I wanted to show her.
DL: You said you worked for Lynette Messer, doing what? Was she with the public school system?
KF- No, she was on faculty at State. She was the one who had developed this
training program for child care center teachers. So I wanted that quick-it's either an eighteen- or thirty-six-week course. And when you completed that course in her group, you were sent to various child care centers, all up and down the coast during the war years. One of the heaviest concen-﻿22
KF:
(cont.) trations. was up around Seattle, where the shipyards were. But when I finished, she put me on staff, child care center staff, in the demonstration school on the old campus, you see.
DL: To do training?
KF: To do training with other groups of students coming in. So this is
how I learned to handle students, how I learned to develop curriculum material. And at the same time as I worked half the day at that, the other half day I went to the State College and worked on courses that would lead to the B.A., which I finally achieved. It was an exciting experience to he involved in something that was aiding in the war effort, and to be able to train other people who were interested in aiding in the war effort, but in a nonviolent way. And on that campus, I had some rich opportunities to develop auxiliary programs. Just as during the war, you know, many things were being done to help war workers cut down their absenteeism. Well, people with children, when the children got sick, of course they would have to stay home. They couldn't get somebody to take care of their children. So in connection with this preschool, we established what we called an isolation unit. It was a twenty-four-hour child care situation, complete with teachers. So, when a child got_ measles, mumps, chicken pox, they could be isolated in this unit with both teaching staff and medical staff, just like a little hospital, plus a school. And there they would stay twenty-four hours a day, until they could go back in with the regular groups on campus.
DL: You developed that?
KF: Lynette Messer developed it, and I had a chance to work with her in the development of it. I supervised the isolation unit for a period of months. So it was a rich learning experience for me.
DL: How did you come to the decision that you wanted to be a teacher or work with children?
KF: I just liked kids. I think I really decided when this notice appeared in the paper about the child care centers and their need for trained staff. And I felt well, this is something I can do while I work toward my B.A., all on the'same campus. So that was when I went over and applied to Lynette Messer. She screened everybody before they could enroll because some people are auited for work with children and some aren t. So she personally screened the people she put into her groups before accepting them for this training program.
DL: But back when you were in high school, when you first went to enroll for college, you had made a decision that you wanted to teach.
KF- Oh, listen honey, I couldn't escape it. My mother was a teacher, my auntie Harriet Weir, was a teacher. My grandmother, in a sense, was a teacher. On my father's side, my father's sister, Carlotta Stewart Lai, was a teacher. I mean, I couldn't escape, I just couldn t. I came from a long line, I tried.
DL: How did you try?﻿23
KF: Well, I wanted to play tennis, I wanted to be a pro. But anyway, I couldn't escape. I'd been surrounded by teachers and the teaching atmosphere from the beginning. I just couldn't escape it. But anyway, I wound up teaching, and every level, from the preschool level through the college level, and I've enjoyed every minute of it.
DL:
KF:
I'd like to continue by asking you some questions about the Victory Club. Was the Victory Club integrated?
Yes, everyone was welcomed, but it was used largely by Negroes. And the Minute Girls were all Negroes. You see, in 1919, San Francisco was quite prejudiced. The Red Cross was the other organization that offered enter-^ tainment and facilities for servicemen to get in contact with their families, to find people they needed to find. But Red Cross didn't welcome us at all. So this Victory Club was set up by War Camp Community Service for everybody, but really and truly, for Negro troops coming in and out of the San Francisco area.
DL: How were the Minute Girls recruited?
KF: Minute Girls were usually the daughters, or at least those I knew, were
the daughters of San Francisco residents. The San Francisco Negro community then was so small, everybody knew everybody else and the parents all^cooperated and sent their daughters to act as Minute Girls . They had blue and white uniforms and little caps they wore with the War Camp Community Service insignia on it... Well, the Minute Girls were the cream of San Francisco s society from 1920, 1921—no, it must have been before then. It must have been 1919, as I remember...
DL: Did you ever go down there?
KF: Oh, yes. Yes, I was there all the time because that's where I had to go after school was out. I went to Hamilton Grammar School then, and I d walk over the hill, over the Baker Street hill and go to the Victory Club. And Mama would let me go out and play on the mud flats. Lombard Street was the last street before the edge of the Bay. And when the tide was low, there'd be these great cracks in the mud flats where the water would go down and I'd jump from place to place. We used to play a game out there with some of the neighborhood kids. So I was always at the Victory Club and, because I was, I got to have a uniform, too, and become a Minute Girl.
Did you ever do anything inside the club, helping serve cookies or whatever they did?
Oh yes My goodness, I not only served the cookies, I baked a lot of them, and made the punch, and oh, I just took a great part in that, and had a lot of fun doing it. And then when the Victory Club closed, Mama and I would walk back over the Baker Street hill to 2544 Sutter Street where we lived. And that's how I became such a hiker, because my mother liked to hike. Well, Lombard Street is... My goodness, do you know where it is?
I know where it is, but not in relation to Sutter.
Oh, I see. Well, I guess Lombard Street would be about fifteen blocks.
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:﻿24
DL: That's quite a walk.
KF: It is quite a walk and it would be up over a very steep hill and down another steep hill. But the interesting thing about that area, in comparison to its- development now, is that there wasn't any land beyond the right-hand side of the street going toward downtown area. All that was just mud flats that would be covered with water at high tide. Now that land is all filled and it's all built on. It's filled, and built on, and is the most expensive property in San Francisco,
DL: It may sink any day!
KF: Oh, yes. That's what's predicted. It's going to fall into the Bay.
DL: In your first interview you indicated that you were quite involved in the activities of the Booker T. Washington Community Service Center.
KF: Oh, yes.
DL: Did you do volunteer work there, or were you just helping your mother out?
KF: I was helping my mother, and I participated in all the activities _ that were set up for my age group. And one of those was the dramatic club. The Booker T. Washington Center Dramatic Club developed into a well-recognized group of amateur performers.
DL:
KF:
Did you just perform at the center or did you go to other places to put your plays on?
Well, after the years passed, we kept getting better and better. We were participating in the Northern California Drama Ass-ociation, and had won the Northern California Drama Association silver cup for four years in a row. We performed at the Palace of the Legion of Honor and...
DL: Were these plays or dramatic readings?
KF: These were one-act plays.
DL: Written by...
KF: Well, various people; not any of our group. The one that made us, really made the drama association recognize us was titled Kin£ Argamenes. It was a fantasy, and the lead was played by Kenneth Spencer.
Kenneth Spencer became one of America's well-recognized baritones, concert artists Kenneth Spencer and Dorothy Fisher, who became one of Booker T. Washington Community Center's directors, were married. And Dorothy Spencer, let's see was here just a few weeks ago. She winters in California and summers in upstate New York, where she takes care of somebody's bookstore while they're on vacation. Kenneth Spencer had a notable concert career, both in the United States and in Europe. He was lost on a plane. He d been on a trip to visit his mother in Louisiana and as he left, the plane didn't make it; it went down in the Gulf.﻿25
DL:
KF:
So was most of your socializing done at the Booker T. Washington Center as a young...
Well there and Father Wallace's church, the Saint Augustine Episcopal Church, all'of those social events. And Irma Tyrell Reid was a young
person' who developed the Oakland-Alameda-Berkelev-San Francisco group Jf high school girls' clubs. And these clubs became part of the social scene. So my activities took me to the East Bay as well as the San Francisco area.
DL: Were these Negro girls?
KF- All Negro girls. And Irma Tyrell Reid came from an old family named Tyrell She had one brother Wendell, and they lived way out on Chenery Street, out in Mission. There were very few Negroes who 1-ed out there in fact, there were very few Negroes, period, in San Francisco.
What kinds of family activities did the Booker T. Washington sponsor?
Oh, there were family nights, and there would be entertainments of various kinds There would be dinners, study groups, games, all kinds of games. The young people would have games that were suitable for them on one floor, and the parents would have games that they liked to play on another floor; discussion groups, dances. There were lots of dances and partxes developed for the young people. I can remember Mr. Jake Peyton, who was a great big guy oh, he was tremendous. He would always lead the grand marches for these parties and dances that we had. And all the kids, the girls, liked to dance with Mr. Peyton because as big as he was-he was tremendous-he was Tight on his feet, like a feather. And he liked to waltz, and waltzing then was very, very popular. These dances and these partxes were formally held. It isn't like it is now.
DL: Where were they held?
KF- Well, they were held at the center. All the young girls always used to have'sixteenth-birthday parties, make a big to-do or the six ee^V birthday party, and that was the kind of social thxng. Plus the dramatic cSb, and also there was a hiking club, and one of the parents' groups would usually act as chaperons for the hiking club, and the parents would all participate.
DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
Did you and your mother participate in most of them?
Mama was the one who was organizing and promoting and developing these activities that were family centered She's the one, of	jho
liked to hike. She and Jess Whitfield, and oh, dear me, if I co^daee that picture I might -^--^e other names ^ Well, ggay, we'd take the boat to Txburon there w	^ ^ ^ ^ tQ
San Francisco over to Tilburon and the	and miles away.
"Big Lagoon," which was the ocean that	^ Qf ^^
Sometimes we'd hike up to Mount™ icnlcs at the we'd have weenie roasts at the b^, and all day P	oh,
beach. I ran across some of those old pictures
1925 or '26, today...﻿26
DL: The beach party?
KF: Yes, the beach parties. I've got to find them again, I had them in by hand.
DL: Did all of your friends belong to the Booker T. Washington Community Center?
KF- Well, yes. You see, other than the churches, we didn't have any kind of clubhouse or recreation agency in San Francisco. The churches were where the social activities took place. Then around that same time there was a club of San Francisco and East Bay residents called the...
DL: The Cosmos?
KF: The Cosmos. Club, I'd forgotten about the Cosmos Club.
DL: But is that the one you were thinking of?
KF- That's the one I was thinking of, and Mr. Joe Forman was always the
master of ceremonies at the Cosmos Club, as well as—oh I can t thxnk of his name. I can see him in my mind.
DL: Lashley...	1
KF: Lashley. Mr. Lashley. Emma Scott Jones has some of those old invitations and all.
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
Yes. Did you go to any of those dances?
After I was much older. Girls then didn't go to puhlic dances until after they were eighteen and had had their eighteenth-birthday parties.
Was that also a big affair, the eighteenth birthday?
The eighteenth-birthday party was a bigger affair than the sixteenth! The sixteenth-birthday parties then were confined to just your own immediate peer group, and that was held either in your home or a place like the community center. Mine was the community center But you d think it was Scottish Rite Temple from the way we d start decorating days in advance, oh, the excitement. And then, young girls weren t permitted to go to things like that unaccompanied. You'd always have a chaperon with you. Or if you went to a school affair-there were a lot of school activities, social activities—xf you got to go to those, if your parents would let you, you'd always be accompanied by someone of your own set whose parents knew each other. It was a very strict kind of situation. If you wanted to go out alone you had to sneak out. Which Freda Bethel and I often did because we d go to the library you see, to do some homework and we'd meet the guys over there.
DL: And then where would you go?
KF:
Oh, we'd just stay around the library and talk.
DL: And then you'd come back home?﻿27
KF: And then they'd walk home with us. Of course, we always had to be home by dark and in the summertime, it stays light a long time. Then I can remember when I got to high school and got transferred to Girls' High where there was no fun, all the rest of my friends were going to Polytechnic. I remember the guys, if they weren't going to Polytechnic, too, they'd meet us after school and we'd all walk home through the park together. And I've got some of those pictures with this group. I can't find them.
DL: Now you said before that the A.M.E. Zion Church worked with the Booker T. Washington...
KF: A.M.E. Zion was in the same block, and that was on Geary Street between Webster and Buchanan in the early days.
DL: Now, in what way did they work together?
KF: Well, Reverend W.J.J. Byers was very much interested in the development of the Booker T. Washington Community Center. He was one of the ones, with Mr. John Fisher and Mama, who sold the idea to utilize funds that were left from War Camp Community Service Victory Club treasury for the development of this community center.
DL: Now, was the association just when the Reverend Byers was the minister or with other A.M.E. Zion Church ministers...
KF- Oh other A.M.E. Zion Church ministers who followed Reverend Byers also
participated, yes, but not to the degree Reverend Byers did in establishing
the center.
DL: So how did they work together? Was there financial assistance or...
KF: No, not that so much. Well, by publicizing every fund-raising event the center had, by publicizing in the church groups.
DL: Did the Third Baptist Church work with the Booker T. Washington Community Service Center?
Not as much as A.M.E. Zion, but I'm sure in the early days they must have. The whole community would have had to, to get it off the ground.
You mentioned before, the Reverend Dennis, in terms of your mother. Was he with the Third Baptist?
Oh yes. He was with Third Baptist. I can't get a mental, visual picture of him He didn't identify with the young people outside his own church situation the way Reverend Byers did, because Reverend Byers was right there. Reverend Dennis was way over across town on Hyde Street and he just didn't come in contact, you see, with the center group.
Because you had mentioned him in terms of your mother working with him on something.
What was that? I think Reverend Dennis was active when the Divisadero District Improvement Association was having meetings that were under-
KF:
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:﻿28
KF: (cont.) ground," and they were trying to keep Negroes out of the Sutter Street and Diviaadero Street areas. The Fillmore area then didn't have, any Negroes in it. And it later became the Negro neighborhood of San Francisco.
DL: So when you were living at the address you give on Sutter, what was that— in the Western Addition, not Fillmore?
KF: That was not Fillmore. Fillmore Street in 1919 was, well, it was all white. There weren't any Negroes- around there, there weren't any Japanese either, that I can remember. There may have been a few. There had to be a few, but I wasn't aware of them..
DL: Where did most of the black people live in those days?. Scattered around?
KF: Well, they were scattered around. I think one of the largest concentrations, which you can count on two hands, was, let's see, right there from between Broderick and Baker, and then they went up to Lyon and over...but there were just a few spotted, over to Pine, Bush, and as I remember, back to Baker again. I don't remember any..-and just a few families, I can list them, in that area. Then the others, let's see, there were some that lived over by Hyde, Leavenworth, but you see, I was aware of the ones who lived right around close to me and those that were associated with the center and with the Third Baptist Church...
DL: Third Baptist?
KF: I mean A.M.E. Zion on Geary. And we used to go to Third Baptist Church. I can remember, yes, I wanted to go to something. Oh, I know, it was Lyceum, we called it. This was during night school period. This was a YWCA in Oakland, and the Lyceum was held on Sunday afternoons. At the Lyceum would be discussed current issues of importance to the Bay Area community. And I'll tell you who was director of that program, Lulu Chapman, and that attracted the high school group and the young college group. Of course, we didn't give a hoot about the issues that were important to Negro community around the Bay Area, we went to meet the guys, so we didn't miss Lyceum. That was held once a month, as I remember, East Oakland, Berkeley, Alameda young people. We had a lot of fun together and it was a good, healthy activity. Tennis tournaments were always featured by the director and her fiance, who were pros. Lulu Chapman and...
DL: You don't remember any of the issues that were discussed?
KF: No, none except who was going to go home with whom and where the next party was going to be held, and who was having the next picnic. What else do you think about when you're sixteen?
DL: Right, right. Now after your mother was no longer the salaried director at the Booker T. Washington, what role did she play with the center?
KF: Oh, she became a volunteer worker, and gave guidance, and she directed the dramatic club until we got to the point where we attracted other directors who had notable positions...﻿29
DL: To the drama club, or to the Booker T.?
KF- To the Booker T. Washington Dramatic Club. And they began to take over. We had one husband and wife team who were both teaching at the Katherme Branson School here, which is an exclusive girls* school, but no Negroes.
attended.
DL: Oh, so then you had white people come and direct the dramatic club?
KF: Yes, when we began to be noticed by the Northern California Drama Association, you see, here they came.
DL: I see. So did your mother continue to develop these youth and family activity programs?
KF- Well yes, she assisted, we'll say. Then, as the center grew, and it was on sound footing, she stepped away and became a member of the board of directors, and kept a finger in the pie. And of course always had actxve interest because this was her creation, this was her baby.
DL: Did she continue to participate in the activities as, you know, a member would?
KF: Oh, yes indeed. She played the part of Granny Maumee in one of the^one-act plays that was presented at the Palace of the Legion of Honor out
there on the hill.
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
The Legion.
The Palace of the Legion of Honor, yes. And this is when we once again captured the Northern California Drama Association cup. And one of the things my age group teased Mama about-Granny Maumee was supposed to be dying and we thought, all of us, Granny Maumee would never die she dramatized! How we did tease Mama about that! And Albert Broking who loved her dearly, and she him, he was in one of those P^ys also and I think that was the one he was in, he said to her later he said "Mammy I thought you were never going to die. Was it really that pain ful?" and they just laughed. She loved the kids, and the kids loved her.
Was she the only adult who would participate in the play?
No if an adult role was required, there were other people other adults
who iould participate. Judson Whitfield was one of those also, and let s who would Partic p ^ ^ ^ pictureg> and rn identlfy some 0f the
oJh« participants. Mr. Peyton played Santa Claus for us once. He was a perfect Santa Claus—needed no padding!
Do you have pictures of some of the plays?
The center has, they should have them, I hope they aren't lost Because when we really began to produce notable one-act plays, professional photographers came to take pictures, and a lot of those pictures are in the center, as well as the silver cup. We got to keep that after
winning it four times.﻿30
DL: I gather that your mother had a very close association with the Reverend Byers. Did she attend A.M.E. Zion Church?
KF: No, Mama was Episcopalian and she attended all the churches because we didn't have in San Francisco a Negro Episcopal church then.
DL: She couldn't go to the white Episcopalian church?
KF: She could have gone, but she would have had to pass, and she didn't want to do that. The only place she wanted to go and pass was the Divisadero District Improvement Association and Other organizations of like kind. And she often did, to see what was going on. She and Mr. Fisher both did this because they couldn't be identified, and then they'd report to the appropriate organizations that needed to know.
DL: Now you had mentioned, when your father died, that you found out at
your Christian Science Sunday school teacher's. Were you being raised as a Christian Scientist?
KF: Yes. My Aunt Harriet is the one who decided that. Aunt Harriet had a lot to do with my religious education. Because one time Aunt Harriet came to Portland, and she decided that I should go to Christian Science Sunday school, and so I did. And also in Portland was the Allen family. I think I told you about them.
DL: Yes, Nelly Allen.
KF: And Duncan and Bobbie. They went to Christian Science Sunday school too. And so when we moved down here, there was a Christian Science Sunday school on Sutter Street between Pierce and Steiner, and that Christian Science Sunday school was housed in what is now—I can't remember the name of the church, but I'll remember and tell you what it is. And that's where I went to Sunday school here and it was Science Sunday school.
DL: Did they hold meetings, Sunday services?
KF: Right there in that building? Yes, there were several Science churches in San Francisco then, but this one, of course, was within walking distance. And that's where I had to go until I rebelled.
DL: Were you the only Negro in the Sunday school classes?
KF: Yes.
DL: Now you said that you rebelled. When was this and why?
KF: Because all the other kids were having fun in Reverend Byers's church, and going to Christian Endeavor. All those things, and I wanted to go, too.
DL: Did your mother give in and let you do that?
KF: Oh, yes, yes. If I went to Sunday school first.﻿31
DL:
KF:
Christian Science Sunday school. And then what would you do, go and participate in the other church activities?
Yes, sometimes I would, but usually on Sundays Mama would have some kind of an outing planned. I think what Mama wanted me to do was not to participate regularly. Once in a while was all right, but not on a regular basis. She felt that I should have more interest in school activities and that kind of thing. Don't all mothers? My mom really did it so beautifully, though. She really understood how to get me to do things I didn't want to do.
DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
Do you know how she did that?
Now I'm beginning to see. It took me all this time to know what a wonderful human relations diplomat my mother was. She just knew how to get along with young people, she had more young friends. Well, I do too. I don't get along with my contemporaries—I get along with them, but I don't have many old friends. Most of my friends are young, or very old, older than am I. Considerably older than am I. They make me feel young.
I'll keep that in mind when I get to be... Now, do you feel that religion has been important in your life, because your Sunday school experience has been...
...was varied, it was varied. I feel my total religious experience much of it is a reflection of my mother's: attitudes. I feel that over the years I've developed my own philosophy, and I lived by it, or I try to live by it, and that has to do with what my grandmother used to say all^ the time. That is, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. She would delight in using that little phrase when I had done something-I had no business to do and she was aware of it, and it might have been an unkind verbalization of something. So over the years I ve just sort of developed my own religious philosophy, and I can t say that I have any well-defined religion or that I follow any particular church.
How long were you a Christian Scientist? Or did you follow that?
Well, for as long as I had to go to Christian Science Sunday school. But I have found that the teachings in Mary Baker Eddy's philosophy have stood me in good stead in times of stress.
So, there was something...
So there is much that carried over, yes, there was much that carried over. And I often, without even thinking about it, think to myself, "Divine Love always has met and always will meet every human need, and it s just become part of me. So I've tried to reflect on that, just that, m stressful situations. Don't always succeed...
But you try. Now you were one of the founders, or one of the people involved in the founding of the Fellowship Church, is that right?
Oh yes when Dr. Alfred Fisk, who was professor of sociology at San Francisco State College on old campus, decided we needed, here in San Francisco, an interracial church, he invited some of us to come to a﻿32
KF' (cont.) potluck dinner. That potluck dinner was held in a building on Post Street at the corner of—then X guess it was ahout Laguna, xn a Basement. It was a great big, big old Victorian home and I've forgotten what was housed in it. But anyway, he called a group together and we all took a casserole or something and went to the potluck supper and Dr. Alfred Fisk presented his idea. And so Fellowship Church was born.
DL: How did you know Dr. Fisk?
KF: Well, I knew him at State College. So this was—what—late forties?
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
Oh, this would have been within the forties, yes, late forties, and maybe mid-forties.
Why were you attracted to the proposition that Dr. Fisk...
Well, because of my husband. I was married by that time, and my husband was working very closely with many community agencies. He was on the Speaker's Bureau that had to do with the San Francisco Community Chest agencies, he was also then director of Booker Washington Center...
DL: This is your husband.
KF- Yes and he was taking an active part in low-cost public housing in San Francisco5 he was involved with the Neighborhood Centers Group. Well, he was interested in everything that had to do with the development of the community and was involved in it. So, I went because of hxs xnterest, and also because I knew Dr. Fisk and Mrs. Fxsk and...
DL: Were both you and Mr. Flippin invited, or just you were invited?
KF: No, we were both invited. Our mothers were, too.
DL: How long did you remain a member of the Fellowship Church?
KF- Well I never did become a formal member of any church. I have never,
I doA't think I've ever been baptized. I'm a heathen! No, I have never
"joined" the church.
DL: Did you attend any of the sermons?
KF-	Oh ves I did. I think that was where I first listened, really and
t^ly! io what a minister was saying, within Fellowship, when Dr. Fxsk was speaking.
DL: Were you there when they invited Dr. Thurman to co-pastor?
KF- No I think after the church, began to grow and there were co-pastors, I
didn't attend as frequently because then there wasn't time I can ma.be, I was so involved with school and various projects I didn't feel the need for a church, nor have I ever felt the need for a church. X thinkwhat Christian Science Sunday school did for me was to help me establish behavior patterns that were sufficient not to need to go to church, if﻿33
DL: That's interesting.
KF: I don't know. Well, for instance, why do we go to church? Why do we go to church?
DL: I don't know, I'm not a churchgoer.
KF: But I think, really and truly, I think lots of kids go to church because
of the fear that's been placed deep in their hearts in terms of what God's going to do to them when they die.
DL: Right.
KF: And this was never done to me, so I just don't have any fear. God is my friend, God takes care of me, always has and always will. I have no fear because "Divine Love meets every human need."
DL: And then your mother backed this teaching up, so that she wasn't forcing you into something necessarily.
KF: As did my grandmother and as did my Aunt Harriet.
DL: Was your Aunt Harriet a Christian Scientist?
KF: Yes.
DL: Oh, she was.
KF: She was the one, you see, who came to Portland, but...
DL: Even though she was raised an Episcopalian...
KF: Yes, she changed and became a Scientist. Aunt Harriet was the one who at my birth had my name changed because I was named Harriet Catherine, with a C, Harriet Catherine Stewart. Aunt Harriet trotted out here and said, "No, indeed, that child will not be saddled with such a name, change it right now." So, Dr. Merimam didn't do it...
DL: Who was Dr. Merimam?
KF: Dr. Merimam was the one who delivered me, and I have a picture of Dr.
Merimam. He was quite a figure in Portland, Oregon. I think he was the first or second black physician in Portland, and his wife was also an active person in Negro affairs at that time. So anyway, he didn't do it, Mama didn't do it. So when I needed a birth certificate to get my passport, I didn't have one and I almost missed the trip because I was listed as Harriet Catherine Stewart and they couldn't find me. Also Dr. Merimam made a mistake in the year, he made me a year older..
DL: And we can't have that. [laughter]
KF: Oh boy, such struggle to get affidavits, to get people who knew me
there and people who knew me here, and to check into the census records to get that passport. So in Portland public birth records I'm listed a year older...﻿34
DL: KF:
DL: KF: DL: KF: DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
DL: KF:
And as Catherine, Harriet Catherine?
No, you see I didn't use that name ever. And all my school records, are Mary Katherine Stewart with a K, for my paternal great-grandmother.
Grandmother, right, but she's with a C.
Is she with a C?
Well, that's the way Mrs. Price wrote it down, anyway. Did she? Well...
We'll have to see.
Yes, we'll have to see Moorland—Spingarn Research Center,
It's on her picture and they've got that at
Howard University. I'll check that,
Now, in the first interview we did, we talked about your mother's reaction to your father's death. I never asked you what was your reaction, do you remember?
To my fatherrs death? I remember very clearly, I can see the room in my Sunday school teacher's house, I can see her. I remember she took my mother out of that room, somewhere else to the back part of the house. It was one of those long San Francisco flats, I can remember her saying, "I have something to tell you," And we sat down and she took my hand and she said something to the effect, "Your father is dead." She said, "Your father is dead." I said, "No, he isn't." And she said, "Yes, he's dead, he took a gun and shot himself." And I remember I jumped up and I ran
out of that place and I ran for blocks and blocks and blocks know where I went, but the next thing I remember, I was home.
I don't
Did your mother find out at that same time? tell her?
Did the Sunday school teacher
No, you see my mother... Someone, I guess, had found my father in the office, I think it might have been William Patterson, and had told her. But Mama didn't want...she couldn't' tell me. So she apparently told the Sunday school teacher what had happened and took me there, for her to tell me. So that's how I remember it, I remember running and running and running.
What do you remember most about your father, your most vivid memories of him?
I can remember, oh, my goodness, I can remember, oh, that great big front yard, and how he'd take me on his back...
In Portland?
In Portland, yes. And we had steps that came down from the house, down to the walk] and there was a long walk under fruit trees. And I can remember how he'd take me to his office, and oh, the things in his desk drawer were so fascinating, all kinds of little things. I guess they were like paperclips. They had a little round head, you could bend the﻿35
KF: (cont.) prongs back and put all kinds of things on them, and Papa would make some funny little things for me with business cards and these little clips And, oh my, I'd love to go with him down to his office. Then I can remember when we came down here to San Francisco, he'd take me to_the circus. And I can remember in Portland too, the fun things he d do with the Allen kids and with me. I can remember going out to that ranch, way out in the country—what was the name of that. „-Rutherford.
DL: It belonged to someone you knew?
KF- Oh yes- A Portland resident of that area had a big ranch and lots of of'horses, and it would be an all-day excursion to go out to the ranch. And that's where one of those boys pulled a hair out of a horse s tail and told me to take it home and put it into a glass of water and it would turn into a snake. And I can remember we watched that thing for days, nothing happened. Oh, just so many things. And I can remember when my Aunt Maria died, my father came back from Oregon—I mean from California— he... I remember he'd be gone, too, on business trips, and^I can remember the feel of all the disturbance when he almost got killed m one of the southern states, when they had to ship him out of there in a piano carton
in the dead of night.
DL: What happened?	I
KF: He went down to investigate a case, and he didn't know you couldn't behave the way he behaved down there. He was walking along the street and he was on the curb side, and some white people came toward him and he didn t step aside for them, so they shoved him off the curb. Well, you don t do^that
in various places in the South, or you didn't then. So he took a swing m various places in u	'	automobile who knew him, saw him
at them, and some people going Dy m	... A
and they jumped out of the car, and grabbed him and threw him m and sped
away, or he would have been killed.
DL: And then they shipped him out...
KF: And that night they shipped him out of there in a piano crate to save
his life They had-what do you call them?-posses.	They organized
their own group to find this nigger who had struck...	So I can remember the feeling I didn't understand the words, but I can remember the feeling
that there was something wrong and there were so many	people...
DL: This is after your father got home?
KF: After he got home.
DL- That's when everybody learned what had happened. Do you remember anything about the cases that your father had besides that incident?
KF: I can remember hearing discussions about how he got paid, and I can remember also looking at and handling some of the stickpins he used to get paid with instead of money. Some of them I have now on a little bracelet. I'll show them to you if you'd like to see them.
DL: Was your mother upset with him because he was being paid in stickpins instead of hard cash?﻿36
KE:
DL: KF: DL:
KF:
DL: KF:
DL:
KF: DL:
KF:
Well, this was something I didn't know about. I guess they were very careful to keep things away from my ears. Because I don't remember any kind of conflict at home. Everything was always just a very happy situation. Even when I would do something, as I look back now, and get into trouble, I wouldn't get spanked. I'd have to sit down and it would be talked about, and oh boy, I'd wish for the spanking.
Did both your father and your mother. ..
My father didn't discipline me.. My mother did.
Not at all?
I can't ever remember his having disciplined me. I remember once I got mad at him, he was on his way to work and there was a chair right by the front door. I jumped up on the chair, and I said, "I'm not going to be your little girl any more, I'm never going to be your little girl again." So, apparently there was something I wanted to do and he had said no. But in terms of corporal punishment, no. I remember getting whipped with the newspaper once, but Mama did that and it made an awful noise, but I knew I wasn't getting hurt because she'd already talked about it at PTA and...
And said that...
...it wouldn't injure the child, but the noise would be as effective as the pain. Oh, I was a witch! {laughter] But you can imagine why...
You were spoiled, they loved you to death. [laughter] I'd also like to talk about your aunts Carlotta and Harriet.
All righty.
Okay. Now, let me start with your Aunt Carlotta. either here or in Portland?
Did she visit the family
Oh, yes, Auntie Carlotta came from Hawaii when I was around one year old, and then she came back when I was about six. At that same summer, I can remember that summer, Aunt Harriet came out too, so the two aunties were there.
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
Oh, that's the picture that we...
That was a fun time.
Yes in the airplane. And oh my, what a gay time. All'kinds of social events, and Mrs. Weeks had a tea, and oh my, I had to take off my shoes before I could come in the house because I'd been playing in Mrs. Weeks's garden. Oh yes, that was a nice summer, I can remember all the fun things that happened.
Now, your Aunt Carlotta, was she teaching at this point in Hawaii?
Yes, she was teaching. She's the one who established the public education system on the island of Kauai. She was not married then, she later married a Chinese. She worked in the public education system over there for forty-some years before retirement.﻿37
DL: When she had gone to Hawaii, she had gone with her father, right?
KF; Yes-..
DL: Was this before you were born, when they had gone out to Hawaii?
KF: Yes, I think so.
DL: So you never met your grandfather?
KF: No, r never got to meet Thomas HcCants Stewart. No, I have letters he wrote me, they're at Moorland [Spingarn Research Center], and I have pictures of him, but I never got to meet him. And my Uncle Gilchrist, his other son, I don't think I got to meet him. I don't have any recollection of him, but I have letters he wrote, too. He wrote one to be read to me on my eighteenth birthday.
DL: And was it?
KF: Let's see. Was it? I don't remember, X don't remember. But I know I ran across it among Mama's things.
DL: She probably forgot about it.
KF: Probably.
DL: Now, did your Aunt Carlotta continue to visit, since she was fairly close, over the years?
KF: Oh, yes, she continued to visit and she liked San Francisco very, very much. And she'd always stay at the Stewart Hotel down on Geary Street. Geary and Mason, Taylor, around about Taylor--I guess it's still there.
DL: Did she have an affinity because of the name?
KF: No, she liked to dress up and go to dinner in formal style. Carlotta Stewart was an elegant lady. She had an air about her. Because she lived in the islands so long, most everyone took her for one of those kinky-headed Hawaiians. She didn't do anything to her hair, and it was real crisp and full, and she wore it like they used to wear it, up, so it looked like, not hair, but hat. And then she'd sometimes wear a little circlet of shell or a little circlet of brightly colored feathers around the top for decoration. I've got some of those shells, and I think I've got some of the feathers in the box. Well anyway, she was a very attractive woman and beside that, she had a very cultured, refined demeanor, an elegant air, and she attracted people.. So she'd go down to the Stewart Hotel and enjoy herself, going to dinner with people whom she met on the boat and other friends, and played the grand lady. And then when she'd had enough of that, she'd come up here and stay and associate with the ragtag.
DL:
What do you remember about her in terms of her relationship with you?﻿38
KF: Oh, very warm, loving relationship.. She loved me very much..
DL: Did she have any children of her own?
KF: No children. She wrote often for Mama to send me over there. Even
after I was married, she wanted me to come, and I'm sorry I didn't go.. No, it was all arranged once, and at the last minute I couldn't leave my mother. I said, "Mama, you go too," and Mama said, "No, I don't want to go over there with those heathens." And so I didn't go, I was that closely attached.. You see, I'd never been away from my mother..
DL: This would just be for, what, a couple of weeks? When you were going to go, would it have been for a few weeks?
KF: Oh, well, I would have probably gone for a month, but I couldn't, I just couldn't. And I was married, I think, then too. I couldn't do it. And I'm so sorry I didn't, because I missed a rich opportunity to really see what contributions my auntie had made. Now all I can do is look it up in the archives. Though I have been fortunate, the first year I went and worked over there, I met some of the teachers.. She had been here to visit some years prior to her death, and she left with us some photographs of her graduating classes and the faculty. I wanted to see if I could £ind any of those teachers and any of the students and have them tell me about Carlotta Lai as a principal, as an administrator. I wanted to hear from them. And also the students, a lot of them are still living, married and grown up with children., Surprisingly, from one of those graduating classes I found and identified by name every one of the students in one class.
DL: You met with them?
KF- Yes, right there on that island. Of course, they were all married
and grown up and had their own families. But it was fun, they were very outgoing and very cooperative. And all of those people seemed to love her dearly. Another thing I found out in talking to these various age groups, she was a disciplinarian and they had great respect for her. And they liked her at the same time. I think maybe we need to pay a little more attention to the kind of discipline we're using now in our classrooms. Sometimes I think these young people are really asking us to stop them, and when we don't, the behavior doesn t improve, it gets worse So this is one of the things I found out about my Auntie Carlotta, that she required a certain kind of classroom behavior and she got it.
DL: When did she organize—was it—the public school system?
KF- Yes you see, when she graduated from the normal school, which is now
the'university of Hawaii, there were no public schools on the island of Kauai. They were all private schools or church schools, and she saw the need for public education because those poor Hawaiians couldn't pay the fees.. Then of course, later on, the Kamehameha system was established.
DL: What is that?﻿39
KF: Kamehameha schools? There you have to have a certain percent of Hawaiian blood to attend Kamehameha schools.
DL: So this- is public, or is that a private system?
KF: No, that's paid for by the government, but it's limited in terms of enrollment to those Hawaiians who have a certain percent of...
DL; It must be a high percentage of Hawaiian blood.
KF: Well, as the years go on, it decreases. The requirement decreased because there's so much intermarriage.
DL: How did your aunt organize, and who helped her organize the system?
KF: Well, let's see if I can remember the names of those teachers.
DL: Was the government supporting her efforts or did she do this on her own and then pull the government in?
KF: The island supported her. When Hawaii became a state, then of course, there was this system.
DL: So was this in the thirties, twenties, that she organized this, or before?
KF: Oh, that was before. Yes, that was way before. And they started out in Anahola. There was a little school in Anahola, and Kauai is not a large island.. I think her efforts were confined to organizing these public schools between Lihue and Anahola. No, there was another one in between that, Lihue, Kapaa, Hanamaulu, and Anahola...
DL: These are cities?
KF: These are little towns on one side of the island of Kauai. There was where I found most of the families who had appeared in those school pictures.
DL: Were any of the teachers alive?
KF: Yes, I met two, and there's one I think still alive. She's curator
in the museum at Coco Palms, that's a motel. Incidentally, Coco Palms is staffed by residents of the island of Kauai. These residents offer all the entertainment and do all the work that's done there, and they have a share, an investment. That was made possible by a woman whose name.. . she was a Caucasian woman who was born over there and stayed to live her life out there. Well, I can't remember. Correspondence between us can be found in my files..
DL: I'm interested in knowing, when your aunt would stay at the Stewart
Hotel, you said that she had all these exotic hair styles, and what have you. 'was the hotel management aware of the fact that she was a Negro, as opposed to Hawaiian?﻿40
KF: They thought she was. Hawaiian. Because there are a lot of kinky^headed Hawaiians, you see...
DL: So that she was allowed to stay there. If she had been a Negro...
KF: No.
DL: I'd like to move on to your Aunt Harriet now. Did your aunt often visit you in Portland and in San Francisco?
KF: Yes, she came to Portland to visit and she came out here. Harriet had
a bad time after she lost her principalship in Lead, South Dakota. There was lots of prejudice there, and they found out she was a Negro and she lost her job, pronto.
DL: First of all, did she ever teach in Minneapolis prior to...
KF: Oh, yes.
DL: She did. Why did she go to Lead?
KF: Lead, South Dakota? She went there, I think she was passing, she could. I think, you see, they knew what she was in Minneapolis, and I think she went there to Lead to make progress in schools, and she did. She achieved a principalship.
DL:	And no one was aware of this?
KF:	Nobody knew it, but it got out somehow or other. I don't know why, or how.
DL: How did your mother and grandmother feel about her passing?
KF:	Well, I never did hear them say. I never did hear them discuss it.
DL:	So what happened after she lost her principalship...
KF: Then she came to San Francisco. And by that time my grandmother was
associated with the Baha'i group here and was learning Esperanto. Harriet got involved in that, and also Harriet was studying numerology, and she got involved in that here in San Francisco.
DL: Did she work at all while she was out here?
KF: Let me see, did she? I don't believe she did.. Or if she did I wasn't aware of what she was doing.
DL: Do you remember anything about how she lost her principalship and how she arrived in San Francisco? Was it a terribly distraught situation for her? Was it a scene over there?
KF: No, there was no scene. She went through a period of depression and she was ill for a long time. She kept everything within. I think that tremendous disappointment must have affected her physically. She wasn't well for a long time, and I think it may have affected her mentally as well.﻿41
DL; Did she come here straight from Lead...
KF: I don't know. This part is real hazy in my mind. I donft remember
whether she came directly here or... She must have, because my grandmother was out here then. She would have no reason to go to Minneapolis.
DL: Was she a teacher of high school or...
KF: She was teaching high school when this thing happened, she was principal of a high school.
DL: In terms of your relationship with your Aunt Harriet, prior to this situation where obviously she went through a lot of changes..,. When you were much younger she would come out for summers. Did she spend time alone with you?
KF: Well, I don't know. I don't remember her, I remember her being there, but as far as our spending time alone together... I don t remember. It always seemed to be in a group. Because she and her sister fK.F s mother] and Aunt Maria and Uncle Milburn and Dolly [the Waterfords] lived right next door. There were always people around when we d have company m the
summers.
DL: That was in Portland.
KF: Yes.
DL: What about here?
Well, here we didn't have as much company. Here, I can remember Carlotta coming over the last time she came. We lived in the old building, and I had looked forward to her coming very much.
Was Harriet living with the family after she got here?
You know, Harriet would live here for awhile and then she'd go away again. The channels of communication weren't too open between Aunt Harriet and me, so I just don't know, I don't know about those years I know she was not well, and I know she went to Hawaii after Grandmother went over there. Grandmother got sick over there, and Harriet went over to bring her home. But I don't remember too much about Aunt Harriet except that she would go and come, go and come, and she was unhappy. I remember now she did suffer, what they called a nervous breakdown then but it was probably the result of the anguish she suffered through the loss of her
life's work..
So by this time she must have been, what, a middle-aged lady, when all of this happened to her?
KF- Yes Then she got involved with the Baha'is and where did she go? Oh, she lived here in San Francisco, she had her own apartment.
KF:
DL: KF:
DL:
DL:
Oh, so she didn't live over here with the..﻿42
KF: She lived over there with us for awhile. Then maybe it was me she couldn't stand, got her own apartment. That could very well be..
DL: I know you had told me about that incident with the water.
KF: With the water. That's probably what it was, she just couldn't stand
me. Because teenagers, you know, can wear on people's nerves. Especially when they're maiden ladies, when they haven't been exposed to these fresh young whippersnappers that know everything. That's probably what happened. Poor Aunt Harriet couldnlt stand it.
DL: I'd like to move on to Father Wallace's June Entertainments.
KF: Oh boy, Father Wallace's June Entertainments were always looked forward to by the teenage group.
DL: First of all, who was Father Wallace?
KF: Father Wallace was an Episcopal minister who liked young people, and he had an Episcopal church in Oakland. He had quite a following around the Bay Area, because he did things in his church that young people liked to do. So he attracted them, and he also attracted the cooperation of thg parents who felt similarly toward young people and liked to work with them. So when Father Wallace would have his June Entertainments every year, he'd enlist the help of every organization, I guess, around the Bay Area. Laura Tombs Scott happened to live in our neighborhood and she cooperated. She would get us together and rehearse us for some one part of the program at Father Wallace's June Entertainment. And the year I remember most vividly is the year she had us all dressed up in costumes of the past, with pantalets, and the high waists, and the full skirts and the sunbonnets. Some of us played the part of men, and we had the satin coats and the satin vests and the wigs the men used to wear, all waved and curled, and oh my...
DL: Were you rehearsed for a play or...
KF: We rehearsed the minuet. We did the minuet, as well as one or two other dances of that era. And if I think hard enough I'll remember the names of those other dances. But there were about four dances we did. Let's see, in that there were three groups of two, and we had to rehearse and learn all those forms. Laura Tombs Scott was a perfectionist and we really learned those dances and did them. I have some snapshots, too, of those groups in the costumes around there somewhere.
DL: Oh, I'd like.to see them.
KF: You'd like to see those, well I'll fish them out.
DL: Now were the entertainers... Were you all teenagers, or did adults participate as entertainers,?
KF: Adults participated also. There were some groups, yes, some were younger children. I was interested in teenagers then. There were other parts of the program, but of course, we were interested in our own and what we had to do. I can remember, Freda Bethel had a beautiful voice, and Laura Tombs﻿43
KF: (cont.) Scott would always give Freda a singing part in whatever we were doing. I'd always get the recitations to do because Mama had taught me, you see. Oh, "In 1842, Grandmama"—what was it?--Grandpapa in his coat of blue and Grandmama in her green silk gown, proudly walked through the town." [laughter and smatter of applause]
DL: But where did the finances come to put these entertainments on?
KF: Well, Laura Tombs Scott gave of her time, as did everybody else.
DL: The costumes...
KF: Now the costumes, where did those costumes... I think they rented them. No, I guess they rented the men's costumes. Ira Graves was one of the men, because we had to have three men and three girls. And I can remember I made my pantalets with Grandma's help, because Grandma knew how to sew, and I learned how to sew. And I not only learned how, I went to sewing school on Saturdays when I wanted to do something else.
DL: I know of Ira Graves through Naomi Johnson. Did Naomi or any of her sisters ever participate?
KF: No, they were always a little bit older. Ira was a little bit older, but Ira and Freda, who was older than was I just by about three years, they were close friends. So let's see, in that group, there was Ira Graves, Freda Phillips... Who were the rest of them? Oh, I can see them in my mind's eye... But I remember the three of us because we used to go hiking all the time. Well anyway, when I see those pictures maybe there'll be some names on them. They were all girls, but three of these girls had to take parts of boys, you see, to do the minuet.
DL: No boys participated?
KF: No boys participated, no boys, no...
DL: Why?
KF: Well, they had other things to do, but to dance the minuet with a girl... Learn how to dance the minuet? Well, that wasn't the kind of thing boys would do at that particular stage of development. But they were in the June Entertainments. They'd have other things.
DL: Oh, so the program had a variety of activities of...
KF: Oh my, yes. All age groups, from the young to the old.
DL: For how many years did the June Entertainments come on?
KF: Oh, for years and years, until I outgrew them. They were still going on, I guess, for as long as that minister lived.
DL: This is a Negro church?
KF: Yes. Episcopal church.﻿44
DL: In Oakland, right? Is it one of the African Methodist Episcopal or straight Episcopal?
KF: No, it's—what is it?—African Methodist EpiscopalFather Wallace's... Episcopal church is all I can remember. I have a program, too, around here, so I can give you the name of it, and the address, I guess, would be on that program. I don't know whether it's still in existence.
DL: Now did the community come out... Both the San Francisco and Oakland and Berkeley communities all came out to see these entertainments?
KF: Yes, there were those who were associated with the Episcopal churches and they affiliated.
DL: So it wasn't a general thing that the whole...
KF: Oh, it was known. Yes, it was one of the social things of the year, and it was known as "Father Wallace's June Entertainment."
DL: Did all classes participate in it? Social classes, I mean. Or was there any real class division in terms of social activities in San Francisco?
KF: I don't think the community was large enough then to have any... Well, yes they did, too. By and large, I'd say it was limited to the people who were involved in community affairs, and others. But it was a little clannish, I think.
DL: You had said before, that after 1919 the Minute Girls, for example, were the cream of San Francisco society.
KF: They were the daughters of the old families.
DL: So these are pioneer families, that's what an old family would be?
KF: Well now, some of them had come in the early days. Doesn't necessarily mean they're native daughters and native sons. But they had been here, and they were established and they were "accepted" by the Negro community. And then there were so few Negroes that there almost weren t any others. There were a few in the Fillmore area, but they were transients, they didn't have well-established families.
DL: So they were basically men?
KF: Yes could be. Railroad men or... Let's see, who could they have been working for then? Well, Southern Pacific was about the only jobs there were. Of janitors or... What did men do? I don't think there was anything. I can remember a great lot of talking about one Negro man who had°achieved his Ph.D. in some field or other, and he couldn't find work. He had to go to work for the Southern Pacific. There was a lot of dissatisfaction expressed then in terms of lack of jobs.
DL; And people who were San Francisco society, what kinds of jobs did they have?﻿45
KF:
KF:
They had doormen's jobs, like Joe Forman. They cooked places or they waited tables. The Chickery was filled with them.
DL: What was the Chickery?
KF: The Chickery was out on Great Highway and it was a restaurant. It was
a very popular restaurant. They specialized in steaks and they advertised "As many steaks as you can eat." That's where all the college kids used to work, and older people too, older men as well.
DL:	Older Negro...
KF:	...men.
DL:	Right. And these are white college students you're talking about?
KF:	I'm talking about Negro college students.
DL:	Negro college students.
KF:	Yes, they had Negro waiters out there. They didn't mix them. It was an all-Negro crew.	i
DL: Where is the...
KF: Chickery. C-H-I-C-K-E-R-Y.
DL: Where did Negroes go to college in those days? Out here, or did they go back East?
KF: No, no. University of California. I think there was one at Stanford.
I think he was passing. No, he wasn't either. He was taken in by the dean and was working in his home. Or was it the president? It must have been the president, took this young man to work in his home and sent him to school. I can't remember his name, but Harry* will know.
DL: Was there much discussion among your friends or among your parents about Negroes out here passing?
KF: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. John Fisher and Mama used to go to the Divisadero Street Improvement Association...
DL: You had told me about that. But that was for a particular reason. I'm talking about passing totally, or at least on a job basis.
KF- Yes I did. Now, my best friend's mother passed. She worked in the Emporium Beauty Salon and she passed. Come to think of it, Mama must have passed when she applied for the job at Viavi Company.
DL: This is Freda's mother?
Freda's mother, yes, to raise her family. She had to.
DL: But she came home at night and everybody knew who she was.
*Harry Miller﻿46
KF: Yes, oh yes. But in the daytime she passed. Then let me see, who else do I know... I think Emily Roberson's father was passing on a job.
DL: He was a doctor, no?
KF: Emily Roberson's father? I'm not sure. I don't think he was a doctor.
DL: Now did the Negro press report on the activities of the Negroes in the Bay Area?
KF: Yes, the Negro press did. There was the California Voice which was published across the Bay. And then there was the Spokesman on this side of the Bay. And then every election year Mr. Peoples would put out a newspaper, just at election time.
DL: Now who is Mr. Peoples?
KF: Mr. Peoples was a politician in San Francisco. His daughter Neva Peoples is living, and she could probably give you a lot of information.
DL: What is his first name, do you recall?
KF: Wesley C. Peoples was his name. Everybody called him Mr. Peoples, and that was Mr. Peoples's newspaper.
DL: That was the name of it.
KF: That was it. That wasn't the name, actually, but that's the only name I ever heard of and it came out only at election time.
DL: I assume he was a Republican in those days?
KF:
DL
Oh yes, yes. Everybody was a Republican then.
DL: What kinds of things would the Negro press report about in terms of these society activities, just the parties and dances?
KF: Usually church activities, social activities, anything bizarre that might have happened in the community. Church news took up most of the paper
then.
'Cause most of the social life took place...
KF: Centered around the church.
DL: The other thing I wanted to ask about in terms of the social life was the Cosmos Club which you mentioned. Did they only give dances, or did they do other kinds of things?
KF: The Cosmos Club met during the year, and they may have had, among their own membership, various things. But they were known for this great big formal dance, program and dance, that was held at Scottish Rite Hall at the corner of Van Ness Avenue and Sutter. That was the big event of the year. It started at eight o'clock with a program. There was- usually a﻿47
KF: (cont.) concert artist or two. There was always a vocalist, a pianist, and various speakers. James Lashley, I think his name was James, Lashley, and Joe Forman, and I think Jake Peyton were the three whose voices you'd hear most at those affairs. And it was Mr. Lashley, I can remember hearing this talked about, that said anybody who got there after eight o'clock would not be admitted. He wanted everybody there on time, so they could hear the entire program and not just come for the dancing.
DL: How many years did the Cosmos Club have these dances?
KF: Oh, a long, long time.
DL: Into the forties, past the war?
KF: Let's see, did they? I've forgotten, I'll have to ask Emma Scott Jones, she'll know.
DL:	Did you ever attend?
KF:	Oh yes, yes. I went to them.
DL:	Who were the club members? Were these also members of "society?" L
KF:	Yes, until the war years came. Then the character of the club changed.
DL:	So it did go beyond the war.
KF:	I guess it must have, because I can remember my mother saying to somebody, "We used to know everyone, and now we know so few."
DL: That's a good note to go into talking about your mother. In the other interview you had said that Reverend Byers was very interested in your mother's ability to develop programs for young people. Now did she ever develop anything for the A.M.E. Zion Church specifically, any programs?
KF: For the church? No, because you see she stayed home until my father's
death, and when my father died she had to go to work, and she went right into the War Camp Community Service Program. And from that, with the funds that were left from War Camp Community Service Victory Club, she established Booker T. Washington Community Center. And when that was on its feet, when the funds for her salary had run out, she went to work for the Viavi Company, here in San Francisco.
DL: So all the programs that she really developed, she did prior to getting a job outside of the Booker T. Washington?
KF: Well, she continued to work with the Booker T., and developed programs
and guided groups, like the dramatic club she took over. And she continued to be active in the Negro community. Then, you see, I was growing up, too, and she had to chaperon me everywhere I went. My mother had a time.
DL: Oh, she had to chaperon you?
KF: Oh, yes, the young girls weren't allowed to go out without chaperons﻿48
KF: (cont.) until they were eighteen years old. You could go out with one of your classmates after you'd had your sixteenth birthday party. But until then you were chaperoned. After sixteen, you could go with your high school friends, but your parents had to know who you were going with. That's when Clarence Taylor used to come over. Mama would let me go with only two guys, one was Clarence Taylor and one was Harvey Whitfield. Clarence would come over and get me to go to a party, and then turn me over to the boyfriend I liked across the Bay. Clarence was cooperative.
DL: Yes.
KF: And you know on this trip back East, I talked with him, and I stayed
with his daughter Karen in Philadelphia. And I told her all about the things her Daddy used to do.
DL: Now, did the A.M.E. Zion Church, the church programs, the ones that
they had for the young people, did they in any way supplement what the Booker T. Washington was doing, or was it just for church members?
KF: No, you see the San Francisco Negro community was still small. Though we had, I think, prior to the war, three churches that I can remember. Reverend Dennis's...	L
DL: ...which would be Third Baptist.
KF: Yes. And Reverend Byers's and... Then there was another one. No, I
guess that came later. No, there were two. But most of the people went to either one church or the other. Or they may not have been churchgoers. Or they may have been involved in—like I was—in another Sunday school which you had to go to first.
DL: Right. So that the Reverend Byers's interest in your mother's ability to develop programs really was something that she did within the Booker T. Washington. He encouraged that.
KF: Yes, you see Booker T. Washington Community Center opened in the block where Zion Church was. So, of course Reverent Byers's church being right there, Booker Washington Center attracted the same group of people. So that was the association. That's why it was a close association, because of proximity. It was in the very same block.
DL: Did he provide any administrative leadership for the center?
KF: Oh, yes, yes indeed, yes he was very cooperative. He served on the board of directors.
DL: You had said that your mother was interested in improving the quality of life for Negroes. In what ways did she try to help people, on an individual or group basis, or both?
KF: No, she helped by providing family-centered activities within the Booker T. Washington Center. And I guess where a problem presented itself... Of course, there weren't the city agencies, then, for assistance that there are now. We just didn't have them. But I'm sure that there were﻿49
KF: families in the community who had needs that were met through the community center, by the board of directors, probably in the beginning.
DL: Do you know why she felt that recreational or family-centered activities were so important?
KF: To improve communication between family members and between the Negro community itself. She was community conscious. She wanted to also encourage people to take part in community affairs, so we wouldn't have to have things like the Divisadero District Improvement Association. She wanted people to become aware of what they as a family group could do to improve living conditions for all of us.
DL: Were there leadership activities that she also developed in the center?
KF: Well, yes, the adults had their groups, and what they did, I don't know.
But the younger ones had a variety of activities that were well developed, and that we pursued because we were interested.
DL: Did they have a leadership potential within them, when you look back on them, on the activities, do you think?	-
KF: Yes, there were dedicated members of the community who gave of their time, like F.L. Richardson, for instance.
DL: What did he do?
KF: He developed a boys' work program and supervised... He developed a summer camp for the youngsters.
DL: Where did they go?
KF: They went down the coast to King's Mountain, and they had summer camp
there for several years. Then I remember one year they went to Yosemite. They had trucks and things.
DL:	What boys participated, members of the Booker T.?
KF:	Yes, every boy in the community who wanted to go.
DL:	Did you have to pay or —
KF:	Yes, you had to pay. Now, I don't know, it was a small sum.
DL: Did F.L. Richardson have any activities for the boys during the nonsummer months?
KF- Oh, yes, he was in charge of boys' work and he planned programs, he and
Bob together planned programs for boys' activities for various age groups.
DL: Bob would be...
KF: Bob was the executive director. F.L. was boys' work director.﻿50
DL: Bob is your husband? What years were these that your husband became involved with Mr. Richardson? Do you recall, when he...
KF: No, but I can look it up.
DL: Okay. Now, did the girls have any summer activites?
KF: Yes, the girls had a girls' worker. F.L. was the boys' worker and Melfaun Pinkney was the girls' worker, and Dorothy Fisher also. And they planned programs for various age groups.
DL: Did the girls get to go to camp?
KF: Girls didn't get to go to camp, no. They did other things. They did
things such as San Francisco Park and Recreation Commission activities. They'd have a daily kind of a camp program, but they didn't go away and stay for two weeks. The center at one point sent the boys to camp for a month, but it proved to be too big a task, though they benefited greatly.
DL: Was this during the years that you were a member as a teenager, or was this much later?
KF: This was later.
DL: Okay. Now during the years when you were a participant-member, a teenager, did girls have activities as well as the boys?
KF: Well, yes, we had sewing classes, cooking classes, that kind of thing.
DL: But no camp activities..
KF: But no camp activities. No, the center hadn't grown to the point then
where it could handle as large a project as summer camp. But there would be all kinds of hikes, candy pulls, parties, and dramatic club. All kinds of activities were going on, but not away from home.
DL: When F.L. Richardson had the camps, was that also later, not while you were a teenager?
KF: That was later, yes, that was much later. And remind me to show you those pictures of boys' camp, because they had it well done, they had it well set up.
DL: Now going back to your mother, 'cause we were talking about her and then
got off on other things, aside from her work with the Booker T. Washington Community Service Center, did she belong to other organizations or work with other organizations?
KF: Yes, she belonged to NAACP, and YWCA, during the late 1940s, and as I told you before, she and John Fisher would attend all the Divisadero Street Improvement Association meetings, and let me see...
DL: What about the Urban League?﻿51
DL: KF:
KF: Oh yes, when Urban League came in, Mama took part in that, but that was much later. Urban League didn't come here until the war years, World War II.
DL: Now, was your mother a club woman?
KF: No, Mama was not a club woman, she devoted her free time and energy to
the development of the center program. She affiliated with the churches and whenever they needed her to do something and asked her, she would. Particularly Reverend Byers's A.M.E. Zion Church, because the center was housed in the same block and the two organizations cooperated. And let me see, what other... YWCA did not encourage us, during that period, to come.
That would be, what, the twenties?
This would have been twenties, early thirties. And that's why I think the War Camp Community Service cooperated in helping get the Booker T. Washington Community Center started. Negroes needed a place for themselves and they just weren't welcome in the Y. But anyway, we had our ways of making them know that we could become valuable supporters of the Y.
DL: What ways were these?
KF: Well, for instance, this reminds me of the Girl Scout movement. Negroes were'not invited to become members of Girl Scouts, nor Campfire Girls, nor were they welcome to become Girl Reserves under the wing of the Y. So I can remember organizing a group of Girl Reserves and for the first time, I believe, we were allowed to hold our Girl Reserve meetings at the Sutter Street branch of the YWCA.
DL: So they let you organize it.
KF: Yes, they did that, that came later.
DL: Now later, that would be when you...
KF: That would be in the... Let's see, that would have been in the forties, I think. No, the war started '42, didn't it? That would have been late
thirties.
DL: So you were an adult then, working with the Booker T. Washington or some-thing...
KF: well yes. Yes, I was working with them because I was taking an active part in the dramatic club. Also, I think I organized this group of Girl Reserves because the request must have come for a leader through the center. That's probably how that happened.
DL: Now in terms of your mother again, did she	ever work with Irene Bell Ruggles?
KF: Yes. She didn't work as a club woman, she	didn't belong to the California State Federation of Colored Women's	Clubs. My mother was never﻿52
KF: (cont.) a member of that, but she went to all their affairs and cooperated with them.
DL: Mrs. Ruggles was a member of this?
KF: Mrs. Ruggles was one of the biggest club women in the state. And this was her life, the Federated Clubs. I can remember when the High School Girls' Clubs, the Oakland-Alameda-Berkeley High School Girls' Clubs joined the State Federation. Mrs. Ruggles came to some of our meetings. We decided that we wouldn't attend any more State Federated Glub meetings that were held yearly, because we weren't being allowed to use our voices.
DL: Seen but not heard.
KF: Yes, yes.
DL: But your mother didn't work directly with Mrs. Ruggles, she just might have attended some meetings and knew her?
KF: Oh, she knew Mrs. Ruggles socially, yes, and Mr. Ruggles.
DL: What did Mr. Ruggles do?	-
KF: He was Mrs. Ruggles's husband. [laughter] He did whatever Mrs. Ruggles told him to do.
DL: Did you know her, Mrs. Ruggles?
KF: Oh, yes, yes. I remember...,
DL: What do you remember about her personality?
KF: Oh, I was scared to death of her, and I always remembered to be on my best behavior whenever she was around.
DL: Now, I read she organized the Home for Working Girls. What is that exactly?
KF: Well, that was one of these great, big, three-story mansions on Pine Street, a beautiful great, big old home. Mrs. Ruggles took into that home girls who had come from other parts of the country and were working here. Or she may have taken local residents, but most of those who lived here had their own homes with their own families. So this home, I think, was primarily for girls who had come from out of state, or from other parts of the state, and were working and needed a place to live.
DL: What kinds of jobs did these women have?
KF: Mostly in service. Then there wasn't anything else, much. Stock work, maybe in some of the stores, but very few. You could almost count them on one hand.
DL: You mentioned your mother in connection with the Divisadero Improvement
Association. Did she join any other white organizations on the same basis, to find out what they were doing?﻿53
KF: She didn't join them, but she would go to the meetings in any area. There were these improvement associations, or neighborhood associations, all over San Francisco, and if anyone would ask her to go and see what was going on, she would do it. She and Mr. Fisher did this together because we needed to know what was being plotted against us as a group, and this was the only way to find out.
DL: So they went as "white" people because otherwise they couldn't...
KF: No, they couldn't have. They went as "white" people, and just sat in on these neighborhood meetings.
DL: Now what about political affiliation, was your mother involved in any political activities?
KF: No, I can't remember Mama's being involved politically in any way at all.
DL:
DL:
KF:
What was the political situation here during the twenties, let's say?
KF: Well, during the twenties there were under 4,000... There were, I guess,
3,000 probably. Anyway, there was such a small group that our vote didn't mean anything, so politically we had no clout.
DL: Does that mean the blacks didn't do anything politically, or...
KF: Well, every year when it came election time, Mr.. Peoples's paper would
come'out and a slate of candidates would be published, and that was about the extent of it.
DL: Besides Mr. Peoples, what other black men or women were involved in political activities?
KF: Ah, let's see. Lieutenant A.P. Alberga, Joe Forman... oh yes, Attorney
Mabson, Jeff Wilson, he was another old-timer, and there was also the man who worked in mayor's office for years and years and years and years.
DL: Sanford?
KF: Sanford, Walter Sanford, Sr. And let me see if I can think of anybody else... I don't know, I thought I had it written down here. Oh, here it is Anderson Tybitha's father Orval, and a man named Elbert A. Daly and another man, last name [of] Rose.. I don't have the first name for Rose.
Now, they got the vote out, and encouraged black people to vote for a particular slate of candidates, was that it?
I don't know whether they were all cooperating.. As I remember hearing politics discussed, these people who appeared during the time the vote was being taken, I heard people say, were all pulling a different direction. We needed to get together and vote as one. Because the men had different interests, you see, it wasn't a coordinated kind of effort. They all had people whom they were sponsoring, and for what reasons I don't know, various reasons.﻿54
DL: And since your mother wasn't too interested in politics...
KF: No, she didn't take any part in... But she voted. And she saw that when I got of an age to vote, that I did too. My mother called it "doing my civic duty."
DL: Now, with the NAACP, how extensive was your mother's involvement with that organization?
KF: Well, NAACP. Mama was president at one time and then secretary for a number of years. I guess she was president after she was secretary. I have a whole list of names of those old-timers that I copied from the files at Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, in her handwriting.
DL: Oh. Do you recall the years of that, that she was president or that she was secretary?
KF: No, but it's on that list. I'm sure that you'll see it.
DL: Now she joined shortly after she came to San Francisco... Do you recall?
KF: Well yes, I guess so. When she was organizing the center and takings part in community activities, was when she joined.
DL: Do you recall much discussion about her NAACP activities?
KF: No, you see then I wasn't interested in NAACP. I was interested only in what my little gang was doing at Hamilton Elementary School.
DL: Do you have an idea of when approximately your mother was president of the NAACP?
KF
Yes, it would have been in the late twenties or early thirties, DL: This would have been the San Francisco NAACP. KF: San Francisco branch.
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
Now during the mid thirties, about '34, '35, when Tybitha Anderson ran for president of the NAACP, do you recall any of that.
No, I don't recall any specifics about it. But I can remember all kinds of entertainments being given and money being raised. And I know Tybitha's name was always before all of the organizations. But I didn't have any real personal contact with the organizations that were promoting these benefits, I was probably in some of the entertainments, but that's as far as that went...
Do vou recall if your mother was concerned with national issues that were affecting black people during the twenties and thirties, such as education, economic conditions, violence?
During the twenties and the thirties here in San Francisco, in the Bay Area...﻿55
DL: But not national?
KF: The only national word we got was through the Negro papers, the few that came to us.
DL: Which ones were those? Do you recall?
KF: The Chicago Defender, that's the only one I recall. There was another great big one, out of the South somewhere that we didn't get, but it came to somebody or other in the group. But national issues in the twenties and thirties here in San Francisco did not affect us emotionally because, as I told you before, there were so few of us, we didn't have the problems then we have right now.
DL: Now in terms of the Bay Area... You were going to say that the problems of the Bay Area were a concern to your mother?
KF: Well, the lack of employment, the limited kind, it wasn't the lack of it, but the limited kind of employment in so few areas available to us. No matter what educational level we achieved or how competent we were, there were no jobs, period, because we weren't being hired. Just as, for instance, that young man who went through the University of California Uit Berkeley, graduated with honors, and he had to take a Red Cap position or a Pullman car porter's position with the Southern Pacific.
DL: When was this, twenties?
KF: This was in the twenties, early thirties. And that I remember. I remember the uproar that went and sort of reflected itself on us through the churches, through the Lyceum, but nobody did anything about it. I don t know whether we didn't know what to do. I don't know whether it was because there were so few of us. Or, I don't know whether it was because
we were kind of blase.
DL: Even though the jobs available weren't very good, was everyone employed... who wanted to be employed? Let's put it that way.
KF: All righty, there was another area too. Men were being employed on the
waterfront as stevedores. But see, they may not have been employed where they wanted to be, nor how they wanted to be, but there was employment.
DL: Did the Viavi Company know that your mother was a Negro?
KF: I don't think so.
DL: She was working in the factory at first, and then eventually she got into the office, is that right?
KF: Yes. Mama made herself indispensable to the firm by memorizing numbers, dates, customers, and mailing addresses over the years. She also made
friends.
DL- I see Now, did your mother discuss any of these things with you when you were a teenager, the economic situation in San Francisco or what she read
in the Defender?﻿56
KF: No, no. No, she didn't.
DL: Did she discuss them within earshot with your grandmother?
KF: Occasionally I'd hear discussions, but none of this disturbed me. I was living in my own little world, and I was concerned with what went on with my own particular group. When I took over the Girl Reserve group, I can remember my blood pressure going up when I found out there were certain things we couldn't do at the YWCA. But I accepted that. I think what I was doing, it was as Mama had always said to me, "A negative attitude will not accomplish anything, you need to work with these people instead of against them." And she said, "You will be accepted if you make yourself valuable enough to the program," or some such. This is the way I had done, always, whenever I'd be faced with racial prejudice, I've turned my back on it and seen how I could circumvent it. And this was, I guess, because of Mama's indoctrination of the nonviolent approach to problems. Rather than get angry when these things would happen, I'd get hurt. I'd feel hurt and I d go away and cry somewhere, and hide. And then, pretty soon the hurt would be gone, and I'd come out, and do what I felt I needed to do in terms of resolving this problem for myself.	L
DL: Do you think that on the whole that that's what the black community
in general was doing in San Francisco, trying to cope with the racial
relations situation?
KF:
DL KF DL KF
I think we were accepting of it. I don't know. I can only speak for myself and my little group. That was our approach.
What were race relations in the twenties?
Race relations in the twenties, well, we could go to the theaters... And sit downstairs?
We never had to sit upstairs in theaters. There were some restaurants we couldn't go to—in fact, there were a number. We couldn't go to the hotels When Roland Hayes came and Marian Anderson came, they could not be housed at the St. Francis Hotel. There was a patron of the arts whose name was Noel Sullivan, who was very, very wealthy ived^n a mansion at 2323 Hyde Street. And when Marian Anderson, Roland Hayes, Paul Robeson, when they'd come to San Francisco for concerts and were refused housing at the Fairmont Hotel, too, Noel Sullivan would take them into his mansion and house them elegantly. Noel Sullivan also had beautiful dinner parties for I guess just about everybody of note that came in and out of San Francisco. He did a lot of entertaining. And he had a whole staff of Negro employees from livened chauffeur on down to gardeners. And Charlie Mitchell was one of his valets. Charlie Mitchell was a Negro. Charlie Mitchell cooked for Noel Sullivan for a long time As did Yula Farr, and it was Yula Farr's husband who drove for Noel Sullivan. Yula Farr was kind of like his housekeeper. F.L. Richardson told me that he could remember being a guest sitting at the table at that house on one night, and waiting table, possibly, the next night. Depending upon who Noel Sullivan was entertaining!﻿57
DL: Isn't that rich!
KF: Because he, F.L. Richardson, you see, was struggling along, trying to make it, and go to school and all. So he did whatever he could get to do. So that gives you an idea, as to the structure of the society here.
DL: When was this that Paul Robeson and Marian Anderson and Roland Hayes, when they were coming through, in the thirties?
KF: This was way back, yes, when they first came. And the first time that original cast of Porgy and Bess came, Noel Sullivan's mansion was thrown
open and the stars were all entertained...
DL: Where did they stay?
KF: I don't know whether they stayed there or not, but they were beautifully entertained at Noel Sullivan's.
DL: So did the three main performers, Roland Hayes, Marian Anderson, Paul Robeson, did they come every year?
KF: No, they didn't come every year, they came frequently. I think Marfan Anderson, and Roland Hayes too, for a while, did come every year. Then it began to be every two years. Paul Robeson did not come every year, but he would come every two or three years.
DL: They would perform at the Curran, you said?
KF- Well no let's see, it was this other one who performed at Loew's
Warfield I can t ^hink of his name right now. It'll come back to me. No theS; people performed at the opera house or the Civic Auditorium.
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
That's a big crowd that would come to see them.
Yes, they commanded a crowd. But before we had our opera house, they w coming. Now where did they perform? I guess it must have been t:he auditorium or it could have been the Scottish Rxte Temple.
Now, during the depression years, did your mother belong to any organizations that were helping black people cope wxth that dxsaster?
During the depression? Yes, she was working with... Well, of course, Booker T. Washington Center did lots to aid the community, She was also working with Reverend Byers's church.
Okay. What did the Booker Washington Center do during the depression specifically to help people?
Oh my procured all kinds of surplus food. The foods were distributed to needy families. That was the biggest thing, because I can remember these great wheels of cheese that came, great big things that would have to be cut and packaged. Then there was flour, cereal, and fresh vegetables, and just all kinds of produce, and lots of canned meat,
canned corned beef...﻿58
DL:	Now where did they get this food from?
KF:	War surplus material.
DL:	So it would be from the government?
KF:	Yes.
DL:	And who was eligible--I mean, did people have to prove neediness?
KF: Eligibility? I think the center would do the screening and would determine... And not only that, I can remember clothing was collected. Yes, there was a lot done within the group, to ease the pains of the depression.
DL: And you mentioned also Reverend Byers's church, the A.M.E. Zion...
KF: The A.M.E. Zion, they did a lot. All the churches did, but A.M.E. Zion
was in that particular locale, and of course I had more association there than I did with Third Baptist, which was way up on Hyde Street, in a different part of the city.
DL: Were there any other organizations besides the church and the Booker T. Washington that were set up to help people?
KF: Negro community...
DL: Negroes, yes, during that time, that your mother was involved with?
KF: That Mama was involved with. Well, of course the California State
Federation of Colored Women's Clubs, but Mama was not so involved with them. They had their program and I remember they were collecting clothing and I guess they must have had a big program going. But not being actively involved... I can remember the High School Girls' Club having candy pulls and that kind of thing.
DL: Was that for fund-raising purposes?
KF: Fund raising. Cake sales, pie sales, that kind of thing.
DL: And what would you do with the money?
KF: Turn it over to the California State... See, we were members by that time, of the State Federation, so we would turn it over to them, and they'd use it in whatever program was being developed at that time by them. That's why we decided we didn't have any voice, so we absented ourselves.
DL: When we talk about your activities, I'll get more into why that... Now what about during the war, what war activities, Second World War, did your mother get involved in during that time?
KF: Yes, during the Second World War she was involved with activities having to do with the entertainment of servicemen through the YM and YW which were combined. The YWCA on Sutter Street between Buchanan, and Laguna﻿59
KF: (cont.) had been established to meet the needs of the Negro community,
because they didn't want us downtown in the main branch on Sutter Street, so that was established. Well, they didn't say so, but it was established out there in the Fillmore district to keep us out there where we belonged. So when the war came, the YM and the YW combined forces, the YM was on Buchanan Street, I think that was a new building then. So everything was combined in the YM, YWCA on Buchanan, and my mother became one of the Y's women. Their activities had to do with the very same thing the Victory Club did during World War I, and Mama pitched in and belonged to committees and worked very hard there. Then also around that same time came the Urban League and—what was that other one? The Urban League I remember... Let's see, there was another one---
DL: Was it a national?
KF: Yes.
DL: Was it CORE?
KF: CORE was active here, but that wasn't it. There was another organization similar to the Urban League. Oh, organizations just sprang up all around during the war years. Well, I'll have to look up the names l of those...
DL: Did she do anything with the Red Cross?
KF: Oh yes, yes. You see, Red Cross classes were being held all over the
city, and arrangements had to be made for places to hold these classes. I think Mama had a part in that committee, finding places for various classes the Red Cross was offering: first aid, the one that stands out in my mind; auto mechanic, but that was only in various locations throughout the city where there were more mechanics shops and equipment.
DL: Now was your mother aware that the Red Cross had a policy of separating blood? Negro peoples' blood from white folks' blood?
KF: I don't know. I know the story was told and I can remember my mother discounting it, saying no, it's not true, blood is blood.
DL: How did you feel about that, were you aware?
KF: Well, I had heard the story too, but it didn't have any effect on me
until I read Langston Hughes's little jingle, "The Angel of Mercy's got her wings in the mud, all because of Negro blood." And I began to think of the young people I knew who were threatened, you see, with loss of their own lives, and their families were giving blood.
DL: You're talking about soldiers, young men who were fighting...
KF: Oh, yes. And I can remember the anger that rose. I think that's one
of the first times I didn't run away and hide and cry about it, I really got angry.
DL: When you were talking about the Buchanan Street Y, I forgot to ask, did your mother work a lot with Mrs. Sylvia Magruder?﻿60
KF: Yes, she did.
DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
DL: KF: DL:
KF:
DL:
Do you recall, do you remember Mrs. Magruder?
Oh, I remember Mrs. Magruder so well. She and I were real close friends. I was with Mrs. Magruder just the night before she died, two nights before she died. Yes, Mrs. Magruder and I were friends throughout our long association.
'Cause she was running a lot of the Buchanan Street Y activities also, wasn't she?
She was working on the committees, just like Mama. She was much involved. And you know, you asked me about NAACP, Mrs. Magruder was very much involved in NAACP. She and Bob Flippin would sit out in the car, he'd pick her up for a meeting each time they were held, and they'd sit out in the car and go over the agenda. So one of them must have been president at that point, and they'd decide how they wanted things to go. They'd plan their strategy, and then after the meeting was over, they'd sit out in the car and rehash it and decide what steps needed to be taken. And they used to have lots and lots of fun. They'd talk on the telephone for hours about some of those issues that would come up in meeting. At one point I can remember—it's been so long ago it's all right to tell it now— somebody who was a newcomer in the organization wanted to cash some war bond, war savings bonds, that the NAACP had purchased. And Mrs. Magruder, I think at that time, was treasurer, and had all of these things in her possession. Mrs. Magruder did not agree to what this money was going to be spent for. She said this was an investment and we didn't need to spend the money on whatever it was. So Mrs. Magruder very conveniently couldn't find those war bonds. When an emergency of some kind came up many, many, many years later, and money was needed for something that wasn't as frivolous as had been presented, then the war bonds were found and were used.
Was she a very strong, impressive woman?
She was strong, friendly, outgoing but reserved, a cultured lady.
She and your mother, were they good friends, or were you more of her friend?
Well no they were good friends, they were good friends. Her children and I were friends, I was one of the bridesmaids in her daughter Fredonia's wedding Mrs. Magruder and Reverend Magruder attracted the young people. They knew how to make friends with young people and the young people loved them and just sort of rallied around them. That's why they had such a large youth group in their church, because the girls would go to meet the boys and the boys would go to meet the girls. Christian Endeavor would be a real fun thing, if you got to go. Well, they just attracted young people, they both did.
Reverend Magruder came in about 1926 to be the reverend of A.M.E. Zion Church. Did you continue your association with the church during that
time?﻿61
KF:
DL:
KF:
During the twenties? Yes, I guess I did, because that's where we all... DL: ...would meet.
KF: We would, but not on a regular Sunday basis. There were other things going on in the church. And the church, you see, was our only social center before the BTW Center was established and before the W was established. Somehow or other, the YW on Sutter Street didn't seem to
on with that older group of residents It wastheneweronesthat came into the Fillmore district that attended the YWCA at Sutter and
Laguna.
m IT	J,-j rtpv nut on USO kinds of activities
Did the Booker T. Washington, did they pun on
for the troops, or did they do anything specifically for the war.
Yes, they had not USO activities, but they certainly had open house and parties all of their programs were open. I remember they developed a reading room, a card room, games and that kind of thing. Yea, they kept their own programs, and expanded them to accommodate the interests
and needs of young men and women.
r	^Hvii-ies did they train black folks
What about in terms of wartime activities,	y	L
in Red Cross kinds of things?
• •	in all the Red Cross- efforts that were made
Oh, yes, they part:LCipated :w to o with protecting the citizenry to train people for any job that had to ao witu v
in the event of invasion.
Were they made the official Negro organization or something? with wartime activities?
Oh vps I'll tell you another thing that the Y*s women did, and also Oh, yes. I 11 texi y	nutting on war savings bonds drives.
Booker Washington Center, that was puttins
And this the community did effectively.
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
DL: KF:
DL: And black folks bought.
ru^r pprtainlv did, insofar as they could. But
KF:	supported in every way all Efforts toward war worU.
DL:
KF:
j j j „nv of the organizations that she belonged to, r^r^dSid^fdifsS; I^sAhe black. who came here during the war years to work in the defense plants?
,	_ vttr workers came from the South, they were﻿62
KF: (cont.) Mama didn't have anything to do with that. This was a much
bigger thing. It was like San Francisco's Negro community had exploded. All of a sudden it was filled with people with whom we had difficulty identifying, because they spoke a different language, their behavior was unlike ours. They came from a different, yes, it was a different world. I think one of the problems was that they came from communities where they had come to accept the restrictions placed on them and when they found the kind of elbowroom they had here, they enjoyed the freedom, the kind of freedom they hadn't been able to have before, and they got kind of carried away sometimes.
For instance, on Mission Street, I remember when we first began to have Negroes on the streetcars-. We didn't have motorbuses then, we had streetcars. And coming down Mission Street, the trolley came off the streetcar wire, and the motorman—we had then a motorman in front and a conductor in back who took the fares—and the motorman stopped the car. The conductor climbed up on top, pulled the trolley car onto the wire, stomped his foot twice on the roof and shouted, "Take it away, this is mah car!" And down Mission Street went the streetcar with the conductor riding on the top of the car, and telling the motorman to stop by stomping his foot on it, and announcing to all and sundry, "This is mah car, mah car." And this is one of the evidences that we had of how this new-found freedom and authority was affecting some of the new residents.. We didn't approve of this, and we didn't know what to do about it, so we retreated. And pretty soon after a period of years, we became the minority and they became the majority. And when these things were happening, just as we almost had a lynching at the corner of Post and Webster, and that was...
DL: What happened then?
KF: Well, you see, in this evacuated section... All of these people had been brought out here from these small communities in the deep, deep South by the shipbuilding industry, and plunked down in this evacuated section of the Fillmore district, there were blacks and whites, and they had never had to live side by side in close communication. They had never had to sit next to one another on a streetcar. They had never been so offended as they were here in San Francisco, and they were forced to live side by side with each other, and to adapt themselves to the mores of this San Francisco community. So they brought with them, you see, all of their tensions, all of their angers, all of their prejudices. They couldn't just set them down and step away from them, so there were all kinds of incidents happening in that Fillmore area between the southern blacks and the southern whites who were forced to live next door to each other. There was nowhere else. So there was some kind of a difficulty and the southern Negroes decided they were going to lynch a white man.
DL: Oh, in reverse.
KF: In reverse. And that happened at the corner of Post and Webster and was narrowly averted, by a very narrow margin.
DL: Were the Negroes then in the majority in the Fillmore, even when they were still being brought in, being recruited? Numerically were they in the majority?﻿63
KF:
DL: KF: DL:
KF:
DL:
KF: DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
Wait a minute. There were more whites than blacks, there were more whites. It's the reverse. I wish it could have been that way... I don't wish that either. No, I don't wish that; no, it was the reverse.
But now the lynching situation, was that... The lynching situation was at Post and Webster.
And the blacks were going to lynch a white person, or was that the other way around?
It could have been either way, but I think it was the whites going to lynch a black man. And it grew out of a dispute that occurred in that area where they'd all been placed to live. That was right around the Japanese Language School..
So I guess your mother didn't continue her practice of going up to strangers like she did in the past.
No,
there were too many.. No, there were too many strangers.
DL:
Now, were there any other organizations either set up by the San Francisco city government, or the federal government, or by the recruiters to help these newcomers adjust themselves, to find housing, schooling for their children...
Oh, there were organizations, but what they were, I'd have to look back and find out.
None of your associates were involved in any of that, you don't recall?
Well, I'm sure that many of these citizens were involved in trying to help them get adjusted, but you see, the shipbuilding industry had handled housing for them. So they didn't just bring them here and release them and say, "Report such-and-such a place for work No, they housed them, certainly they handled the housing. They had to have housing when they brought them. But the need for shipbuilders was acute all up and down the coast. Also, I can remember all of us who had homes or rental property of any kind were urged to take m war workers as roomers. And lots of people did. I know Mama converted her top flat into two apartments. And I guess she did what she could do in terms of housing people who had to have housing, and took them m.
Do you know how your mother felt about the changes that were taking place in the city due to the large numbers of people that were coming m?
Yes Mama felt that their behavior was a part of their culture, the culture they had come from, which was an entirely different one than ours Mama had the attitude that we must not criticize them, we must not make fun of them, we must help them adjust to the new community and the new way. It would be difficult for them, and it was up to us tohSp thlm! to be patient, and to be kindly. This was her attitude.
Do you know if the other old-timers felt that way, or were they more hostile? Her age group.﻿64
KF: From her age group, some were outwardly hostile, some expressed themselves when they'd get together among themselves. Some, like Mama, would try to figure out ways and means to deal with the problems the newcomers were creating that had never existed here in San Francisco before. And they'd talk about what they could do to help the group adjust, or how they could get them organized, that kind of thing, in a helpful way. And Mother's attitude was always a positive one. Though she didn't like some of the things that were happening, she did not completely reject everything and turn her back. She felt effort was needed to help these people adjust to this new community, because she could see they were here, they were coming in increasing numbers, and they were here to stay-
DL: Now this is both the white and the black population. How did she feel about the effect of the increased Negro population on race relations, in San Francisco?
KF: Well, the increased Negro population didn't improve race relations at all, because here again were a group of people whose behaviors were different than the group of people all San Francisco white residents had been familiar with.	i
DL: Was your mother concerned that this would have an adverse effect...
KF: She was very much concerned about it. That's why her attitude was one of acceptance. You can't solve a problem by being critical, by taking a negative approach, you have to take a positive approach.
DL: Now, any of the organizations that she belonged to, were their activities geared towards helping this adjustment?
KF: Oh yes, yes, the Y, the center. Yes, doors were open, and they were welcome and encouraged to come, and special groups were set up, too. Let's see, I can remember... Oh, there was a kind of like an "orientation to the Bay Arei'class that they had at the center. They invited newcomers to come and learn their city.
DL: Did they?
KF: Yes. I guess they did. Classes went on. I remember hearing discussions about a language barrier.
DL: And now, on another subject. In the forties, when Audley Cole applied for this position with the MUNI [Municipal Railway], were you or your mother or your husband involved in supporting him, or is this something that he did totally by himself?
KF: No, no. The community came out, the papers, and certainly there were letters written and much community support. And I'll tell you, the Communists, I think at that time, were very supportive and took positive action in terms of his employment.
DL:
Were these white and black Communists or just the black Communists in the area?﻿65
KF: No, no, these were white Communists. We didn't have many black Communists here. We had a few, we had John Pittman, Mason Roberson, we had Matt Crawford across the Bay. But you see, during this period was when the Communists here in San Francisco were trying to organize the Negro community and get them to participate in their, the Communists'', activities, and they had a program—as I look back on it now, I can see how it was in operation, in the center particularly. I remember how the young people who represented the Communist Party—I didn't know it then, but I now know they were Communists—would come to the center and join in the dramatic club activities, would take part in whatever they could get into and participate in. There was a lot of that going on in all the organizations in the Negro community. Young women and young men from the Communist Party were infiltrating the Negro community by participating and inviting us to their social events. It was reported that they threw "wild" parties—this was during the Prohibition—served wine and hard liquor and always made our young men most welcome by arranging dates with their hostesses. And I think then, at that point, was when some of the young ones joined the Communist Party or became sympathizers. You see, our young people did not fraternize with white peers.. It was not approved. And when some of our young men began "keeping company" with white girls, it was talked about in whispers.
Because there wasn't any such thing in the late twenties, early thirties. We didn't know what Communism was, or if we heard about someone whom we knew having joined the party, it wouldn't be one of us.. The young boys joined in order to get invited to their parties and meet white girls. Marriage was illegal in San Francisco between whites and Negroes.
DL: Now in the Communist support of Audley Cole, were Pittman or Crawford or Robersonj were they actively involved in supporting...
KF: I'm sure they must have been, because by that time they were well entrenched in the party, yes., Mason Roberson was working on the Daily World and so was Cayton Revels.
DL: Was the black community aware of the Communist Party's involvement in this support of Mr. Cole?
KF: I'm sure they must have been. As I remember, they were disapprovingly aware, saying, "Communist publicity will ruin his chances and damage the whole Negro community!" I know there were some very conservative people who wouldn't have anything to do with any effort the Communists made. I know they had membership drives for a while, and there was a group of conservative blacks in San Francisco who wouldn't have anything to do with them. Then came the war, and you didn't dare identify with party members.
DL: So during the early forties when this was happening with Mr. Cole, you feel that there was some awareness. But were many blacks involved, do you think, with the Communist Party during that time—young men, not women?
KF: Not to my knowledge. But they became involved in increasing numbers when they found that there was the kind of acceptance they didn't get﻿66
KF: (cont.) from the white community. At these white Communist affairs they were always welcome and they were sought instead of seeking. It was an entirely different kind of social climate than they had experienced before. So this is when the Communist Party made inroads, and gained membership in their organization within the Negro community,
DL: Now did it touch you personally? I mean, were you in any organization that you felt was being infiltrated, or your husband, was he in any organization that was ,..
KF: ...that was being infiltrated by Communists? Bob Flippin knew who they were, their affiliations, attended their meetings, and became a member of the professional "white collar underground group,"
DL: Even though at the time you didn't know that that was happening,
KF: Well, my husband and F.L. Richardson used to talk this over a lot, and I don't know whether I didn't know or whether I ignored it or what. But anyway, the Communist Party would send, to participate in center activities, very beautiful young people and very acceptable young people. They were really nice youngsters and, of course, they became friendly with our groups, and would gradually get them to come to their meetings., and one thing and another, and sign up. So yes, there was infiltration and there was participation, but not an open, active participation with the Communist Party on the parts of the Urban League, the community center, or the churches. We would let them come. We would welcome them. At the same time some of these people then could begin to see what the Communists were doing in terms of promoting their own organization and organizing the Negro community here. They were making concentrated efforts to do this.
DL: You're talking about what years?
KF: This would have been during the war years, World War II.
DL: Again, back to your mother, when did she buy the house you own now?
KF: Oh, 1922, I guess. '23, '24. I'll get that deed,
DL: Was it unusual back in the twenties for a Negro to own his own home? In San Francisco?
KF: In San Francisco? No, it wasn't unusual. There were many homeowners. There were some out in the Mission, Where's that list and I'll tell you who they were—it's right here on this list. The Garland Andersons owned their home; J.M. Thompson owned his, he was one of the big BTWCC supporters; Laura Tombs Scott's family; Mrs. Frazier, she owned hers; the Halseys, I think, RussellHalsey,.. Oh, Mrs. Hetty Jorgenson owned a home right out here on Eighth Avenue; Emma Scott Jones's mother owned her home.
DL: And this was out here in the Richmond district?
KF: Yes, on Eighth Avenue. Jorgenson was 727 Eighth Avenue. No, it wasn't unusual. There were many black homeowners in San Francisco, in terms of the population.﻿67
DL: And real estate agencies didn't discourage you from buying homes in particular areas?
KF: Well, I don't think any of us had enough money to go into the wealthy areas then. But we certainly, I don't think, would have been welcome.
DL: So the Richmond wasn't off limits then, to have so many, three or four families living there.
KF: Well you see, the way we would do it would be to go to an area where there was nothing around us and buy . Just like Mama bought out here, when all of this was cemeteries. There was no Turk Street, there was no Stanyan Street. There was nothing around here from Fulton Street over to Geary, from Masonic down to Arguello, and from Geary also, but these old overgrown cemeteries that were practically beautiful. And every once in a while you would find maybe one little block with a few houses in it. Just like here, there were probably four houses or five in this block. And this one, the one Mama bought, had been an old Victorian home, a single-family home. Then it was converted into three flats, and when she bought it, the cemetery ran right into the back area almost.
DL: You weren't scared?
KF: Oh, no! We used the cemetery as our own private park. Mama would take the Sunday paper, and we'd go out there and sit among the wild flowers on a tombstone and read the paper. Why, what's to be afraid of? The birds and the little animals, oh, it was just beautiful. And marching up the hill and over the hill was a line of eucalyptus trees that were real close together. I guess they'd been planted years ago to serve as a boundary for the cemetery, and those trees were magnificently tall. And when the wind would come, it would be like a symphony of sounds, the way the leaves would rustle and the branches would sway, and when we'd have a storm, oh, it was just exciting. You want to hear some more about the cemetery?
DL: All right. [laughter]
KF: Well, I can remember the time when they were getting ready to build in this area, but of course the cemetery had to be removed. So what they had to do'was to get a token from each grave and take it elsewhere for burial, and the cemetery removal people put an eight-foot high board fence all the way around the cemetery. It took years to remove the Odd Fellows Cemetery. Irll tell you one of the funny things that we observed from Mama's back porch right over there, because we could see right over the top. We'd see these beautiful limousines with liveried chauffeurs driving up this eucalyptus-strewn path, right next to the board fence, little old ladies and little old men would get out of the limousines and go and peer through the knotholes. And a few days after, that work would stop. What they saw made them get down to the city hall, and get out an injunction to stop work.. Because what they saw going on behind that fence should never have happened, and that would be somebody playing ball with a skull or something.﻿68
DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
DL: KF:
DL:
KF: DL:
Something equally gross.
Equally gross. That could be dear old Uncle John, you know, or dear ^unt Mary. That wasn't proper. So it took years to get that cemetery removed, because work was stopped so often. Just on account of those clowns in there who weren't paying attention to what they were supposed to be doing. But of course, that didn't mean anything to them, they had to have some relief, I guess, from... That was what they did.
Now, did you know why your mother decided to buy a home at that period in time?
The rental agency gave us notice to move from 1919 Divisadero saying that the buildings were going to be remodeled. They are still mtact-no changes as of today. I think the Divisadero Street Improvement Association put pressure on the realtors And, because I wanted to go to high school outside of Girls' High, and Polytechnic High School, right across the park, was where all my little friends were going and I wanted to go to. Mama knew by that time that she had to have Grandmother out here to see that I stayed on the straight and narrow, I guess So Grandmother came, and subsequently, Mama bought a home out here.
So that's when your grandmother came.
KF:
Well, Grandmother came when we were living on Divisadero Street, but Mama, I'm sure, then had all of this in mind.
Did she rent the other flats right away?
Yes, they were all rented, I think, when she bought it. And we lived in the bottom one when we came, downstairs..
Were your tenants Negroes or Caucasians?
u	a firot hnusht it. they were Caucasian* But
In the beginning, when Mama tirst Dougnx. -lu, i- j
over the years we've had-oh my, we've had friends, we've had relatives we ve had a series of interesting people. And Gertrude Roundtree-you'11 hear that name as I keep on talking about this; family-Gertrude: Round tree came to live here. And Harry Kendall Cowes and his wife when they came up from Allensworth, they were here for several years. And when Tarea Hall Pittman was married, she and William Pittman occupied the front part of the middle flat as bride and groom.
Okay now I'd like to talk about your activities, your organization memberships, and just begin talking more about you now.
Organizations?
.orhool Now you've mentioned before that you ItlonsTX^an^d^e/ey High School Girls' Club How did that get off the ground? Were you involved at the beginning? How
was that organized?
No, in the beginning, Irma Tyrell Reid, it was her idea.﻿69
DL: Was she a young person like yourself, or was she an older woman?
KF: Well, she would have been, I guess, then she would have been in her twenties, and she was active in the California Federation of Colored Women's Clubs. She decided that youth groups needed to be developed within the federation. There weren't any, and so she decided to organize a High School Girls' Club. It started with one club in San Francisco. I remember then it was very popular to have taffy pulls and costume parties, and things like that in your own home, so Irma Tyrell Reid had a movie star party, and she invited youngsters to come dressed up as movie stars. That was the first meeting, getting people together. Then as the club grew and interest increased, an Oakland chapter was formed, and then Alameda, and then Berkeley, and it became a Bay Area...
DL: Right. Now was the San Francisco one called, was that the Marguerite?
KF: Marguerite Benston Evans High School Girls' Club, that was the first one.
DL: And who was Marguerite Bens-ton Evans?
KF: Marguerite Benston Evans, I can tell you where she lived... Letls see, she lived on Scott Street between Sutter and Post, and that old house is still there. And Marguerite Bens ton Evans, let me see..,. Well, I frankly don't know what she did, but I know it was a name that was known throughout San Francisco and she was a relative of...
DL: Willa...
KF: ...Willa Evans, yes.
DL: So you don't really recall if Marguerite was a teenager or if she also...
KF: No, she was much older.
DL: Who was in charge of the High School Girls' Club? Did you elect officials among yourselves, or did older women come in and really direct the group?
KF: No, Irma Tyrell Reid was the one who directed us really, or supervised us, I'd say. We had our own officers and we functioned just like any adult club would function, but it was just young high school people.
DL: Who were some of the members: with you when you were there?
KF: Oh, let me see.
DL: Was your old pal Freda with you?
KF: No, she wasn't in High School Girls' Club. She was a few years older
than I, and I think she had graduated by that time. Anyway, I remember one, Alma Thomas, she lived down in Cow Hollow., And I remember two sisters, Mary and Agnes Thompson, Lois and Alberta Davis, Lottie McClain, Lillian Jorgenson.﻿70
DL: Now, the Lyceum was organized by the YWCA, is that right?
KF: Yes. Yes, it was the YWCA in Oakland and it was on Linden Street, and the director of the Y was a tennis star, Lulu Chapman.
DL: Now, was this for Negroes only, the Lyceum?
KF: This YWCA was a Negro Yin Oakland. You see, the YWCA then did not encourage us to come to their central branches. They established other branches to serve us, and this was in West Oakland, which was a Negro community, just as the San Francisco Sutter Street Y was established because that was a Negro community also then.
DL: Now, you attended the Lyceum as a teenager also...
KF: Yes.
DL: I remember you saying that. They were organized to do...
KF: Well, the Lyceum was a Sunday afternoon discussion group and they talked about matters that were of importance to the communities in and around the Bay Area, mostly matters that were important to West " Oakland. My little group went, of course, to socialize and have a nice time, because afterwards there were always refreshments served. It was kind of like a party. It was over at seven o'clock and everybody went home.
DL: It was for young people mostly. All age groups could attend, but it was composed largely of young college students and upper class high school students.
Now, I forgot to ask you this when we were talking about the High School Girls' Clubs. Before, you said there was a time when the young women decided that since they didn't have a voice in the larger federation, they decided that they would back out. Could you explain some of that?
KF: Well, yes. If I remember correctly, after we had been meeting for several years and the Oakland-Alameda-Berkeley branches were formed, there were other branches formed.. There was one in Sacramento, there was one in Los Angeles. We went to Los Angeles for a state-wide meeting and sent delegates, and all of the branches sent their delegates to the Sacramento meeting also. I think it was at the state-wide meeting in Sacramento where we, by that time, had something we wanted to contribute to this state federation, but nobody would hear us. We were told that we could communicate through the San Francisco branch of the California State Federation, but that we couldn't have floor time during the convention, nor could we vote. This sort of discouraged us because we felt we had no voice. Though we did send a committee to meet with, I believe it was Mrs. Ruggles, and what we had in mind, as I remember, wasn't interpreted the way we wanted it interpreted, so we lost interest.
DL: So it dissolved, or what was the outcome?
KF: Well now, the outcome I don't know, because the club was still in existence when I stopped going.﻿71
DL: When did you stop going, do you remember? Had you finished school...
KF: I think it was my third year in high school when I went to San Francisco State College and wasn't able to enroll for the coming school year.
DL:	Also, when you were in the dramatic club of the...
KF:	Booker T. Washington Community Center.
DL: Was that during your high school years or was this after high school?
KF: During high school years and after, also..
DL:	In the productions, or...
KF:	Oh yes, in the productions.
DL: Were you in any of the productions that won some of these awards...
KF: Yes, I was in all of those that won that Northern California Drama Association cup, four times in a row, and we were allowed to keep it. And also, Kenneth Spencer, who was a great baritone singer, was the star in that production and he was husband of Dorothy Spencer. I guess I told you all that, though.
DL: Yes. Now what other organizations as a high school student did you participate in besides Booker T. Washington, the High School Girls1' Club, and the
Lyceum?
KF: Well, of course, school clubs like the tennis club, and I played basketball, and well, whatever was associated with school.
DL: Now, in the twenties, when you were a young adult, no longer in high school, did you consider yourself politically or socially active and aware?
KF: Politically active? No, I don't think I was politically active. I didn't have much interest in what was going on politically in and around San Francisco. In fact, young people then, weren't. They just weren't interested. And then, out here in this area, young people's opinions weren't solicited. They had a place and they stayed in it. It just wasn't the thing for young people to interfere in politics; that was handled by the adults.
DL: What about social awareness?
KF: Social awareness, you mean, in terms of...,
DL: Concerns either to your community or to Negroes, or nationally, any of those things.
KF: We were aware of NAACP, but most of us had no active part in it. Young people then just didn't, it wasn't the thing to do.﻿72
DL: That's interesting.
KF: Young people's voices were not heard then as they are now.
DL: What about in the thirties and forties?
KF: In the forties, yes. In the thirties, certainly, there was more awareness on the part of the adults as to the participation and the eagerness of young people to take part in various organizations that were being formed.
DL: And you personally, did you consider yourself socially aware, active during the thirties?
KF: Oh yes, yes.
DL: What kinds of things were your concerns during that time?
KF: Well, let's see, during the thirties, that was the deep depression. During the thirties, I can remember taking part in the group that was packing and distributing surplus materials for needy families. I can remember taking part in a group that the Little Sisters of the Poor developed, that was at Laguna and Haight Street. They had a sewing project going on and they were getting people, young people to come and make clothes for needy families.
DL: What was the group which you were distributing food through?
KF: BTWCC.
DL: That's what I thought. Were there any organizations or other concerns that you had during that time?
KF: During the thirties? I think during the thirties I had the Girl Reserves group, the Negro group from the YWCA. But insofar as doing anything in terms of aiding the community, I don't think that group did.
DL: What did the Girl Reserves do? What were they about?
KF: Girl Reserves were interested mainly in the Girl Reserve program as it was laid down by the YWCA. They were following the same program as the central branch Y followed, and that had to do with nature study, all kinds of sewing and cooking projects, hikes, picnics, and self-improvement kind of things.
DL: Did you take part in any of the activities at the Booker T. Washington during this time, at the center as a group leader?
KF: No, I don't believe I did. I don't remember. I was involved in the dramatic club, but that was always led by a professional.
DL: What about the NAACP, did you join at all during this time?
KF: No, I don't believe I did. In the thirties and the forties the young people did become aware, and in the mid-thirties there was a group of﻿73
KF: (cont.) young people associated with the NAACP, but I did not join. Mainly, I think, because they weren't my group, they were a little older.
DL: And your political activity, not even during the thirties when Roosevelt was coming up, were you at all concerned about political things?
KF: Oh, yes, I was aware of Roosevelt's administration, very much aware of that.
DL: Did you vote for him during the second time around, I guess?
KF: As soon as I was old enough to vote, my mother saw to it that I got to the polling place before closing time, every opportunity, and I grew up with an awareness of the value of my single vote. So I did vote, but that was the extent of my interest. I knew that I needed to do that, that it was "my civic duty."
DL: I'd like to go into the depression a little more. When the depression came, you were working at this time for Davis Schonwasser and Company.. Now where was that store?
KF: That store was at the corner of Sutter and Grant Avenue.	L
DL: It's not there now.
KF: It's the same building, but itts the Hibernia Bank now. And the same old sidewalk elevator is there on Grant Avenue.
DL: To carry money in, I guess.
KF: No, they take the stock in that would come from New York and various other places.
DL: Oh, the store, right.
KF: Down the basement to be marked, on this freight elevator.
DL: Now when the depression came, did they pay you less money, or in any way did it affect your job?
KF: Well, when the depression came, our salaries were not reduced, but we were working for $12 a week, believe it or not. Just think of that, $12 a week.,
DL: That was the forty-hour week, right?
KF: Oh, Monday through Saturday.. It was longer than a forty-hour week.. This was in the early thirties. And then gradually it got increased to $14,. When it reached $18, oh my, everybody wanted a job at Davis Schonwasser. Imagine, $18 a week!
KF: Now what was your reaction to the depression as it affected you and your family? Was your family seriously affected—I mean, your salary wasn't, but was your mother's or your husband's?﻿74
KF: Well, the depression came at the time I was married in 1932, and the depression was certainly with us. My mother's job was not affected, hut my husband's was. He had a difficult time; he had been working for Dr. Shumate here in San Francisco and...
DL: Doing what?
KF: He was doing, oh, several things, I guess. He was working in the drugstores. Let me see, what was he doing? He had to do with the packing and delivering of orders that came in by phone and by mail, and whatever else there was to do for Shumate. He drove for him, he was a janitor at times; I guess he did everything, just everything that needed to be done. I remember once he had to stay in one of those stores all night because of burglaries, or something had happened. And then he lost that job. And what the reason was, I don't remember. It might have been due to the overall effect of the depression on Dr. Shumate's chain of drugstores. He had a hard time getting a job because there were no jobs then.
DL: This is after he left Shumate or---
KF: Yes, after he left Shumate. So he went to work at night and he worked as doorman in an apartment house at the corner of, I think it was Pacific and Fillmore. It was a great tall—it was a tall building for San Francisco then, it would be dwarfed now—an apartment house that was occupied by wealthy people and he worked as a doorman.
DL: It's still there.
KF: It's still there, and he used to come home in the mornings looking green.
And he waited tables at the Chickery. Chickery was a restaurant out on the Great Highway. And he waited table at Topsy's Roost. He did just anything he could get to do, and this went on until he decided he had best get back in school and get into a field he was familiar with and stop fooling around.
DL: So then economically or financially the depression was very hard on you and your family.
KF: It was hard on us, but we didn't let it affect in any way our attitudes
towards each other. We always seemed to be able to make ends meet somehow, and we just held ourselves together.
DL: Where were you living at this time?
KF- We were living in half of the middle flat in the old building, and Bob's mother was living in the other half of that flat. Mama lived on the top floor and Gertrude Roundtree shared that flat with Mama.
DL: What happened to your grandmother? Wasn't she with your mother?
KF: Wait a minute. No, Grandma was with us when we lived downstairs in the bottom one. Grandma died before I was married, Grandma died about a month or six weeks before I was married in '32. And after I was married, I lived in the middle flat, half of it.﻿75
DL: Since everybody knew each other in the building, did you help out with food when it got rougher for someone else?
KF: Well, it never seemed to get to that point. We shared things, certainly, but it never got to the point where nobody had anything. At one point during the depression there came a time when we could both get away from San Francisco, and we didn't have any money to go anywhere on a vacation. So we decided to take our camping equipment and just use the money we had to buy gas and food and go wherever an interesting road took us. We started out without any plan and we drove from here to Reno. When we got to Reno, it was nighttime, and we decided we'd better stay overnight right there. We couldn't find a place to camp and, not knowing the area, we felt we'd better go to a minister's house and find out if there are any rooms for rent for a night, or where a good place, safe place would be to go. So the minister sent us to a lady's house who had rooms for rent, and she greeted us and after we got settled, she said, "You people here for the cure?" and I said, "Oh no, I don't have tuberculosis and neither does my husband." We didn't know what the cure was. The cure in Reno was staying so many weeks to get a divorce., [laughter] So anyway we had a very pleasant evening with this dear lady, and we left the next day and went on our way.
Well, we followed any road that looked interesting and finally we found ourselves in Utah at Bryce Canyon. Bryce Canyon was fascinating. During this trip we would camp in national parks because they were the safest places. Then you didn't have to pay to camp in a national park; everything was free, and we certainly took advantage of the wonderful campfires they'd have, and the guided hikes that the rangers took charge of. We had a wonderful vacation that didn't cost us anything but gas and food. And we had our camping equipment, did our own cooking, it was
just very wonderful.
The Zion National Park was close to Bryce Canyon as is Strawberry National Forest I think it is, so we explored all of those areas. One of the things that is so dramatically beautiful about Zion is the red, red earth and the green, green trees and brush, it's just very dramatic. The red earth makes the green look greener. It must have been a volcanic area at some time.
DL: How long were you gone on the trip?
KF: We were gone a month, almost a month. From Grand Canyon we came on up
through Los Angeles and up the coast.. Our little car held together, but the tires didn't. I think we had to buy one, but we bought a retread.
DL: It didn't overheat or anything?
KF: Oh yes, it did, and its gas pump acted up, way, way up in the mountains. I think that must have been way up in the mountains where that herd of sheep was. We coasted—we were up so high, we could coast down to a little community which was several miles away. When, in the one garage there, the mechanic took the top off of the gas pump, the little interior part just sort of dissolved into dust, so that would have been rather a traumatic experience, I think, had it dissolved into dust way up there in the mountains. We'd no AAA [American Automobile Association] then.﻿76
KF: (cont.) Nothing but hundreds and hundreds of friendly sheep all around us.
And I can remember how they talked in their friendly voices; they had voices from the lowest bass to the highest soprano. All baaing in different tones, it was like a symphony. What do you want to hear about this vacation, what else?
DL: You got any more?
KF: Oh, it was just the most wonderful vacation we have ever had.
DL: Just the two of you.
KF: Just the two of us, yes.
DL: Was that way into your marriage?
KF: No, that was before Bob went to school. I can remember another vacation we had after he came back.
DL: Was that depression time, or was that a little later?
KF: No, that was a little later, that was after he was working for Booked
Washington Center, and we took Mama that time. Mama and Bob and I went to Yosemite and we camped. Because he was connected with an organization, we could go to the organizational area where the tents weren^t jammed up side by side. We camped on a little kind of a point that went out into the Merced River and flowed along on either side. We called it Pine Cone Camp, BTWCC Pine Cone Camp, and we gathered pine cones. I still have some of them in the basement, that were all of fifteen inches long, magnificent things. We strung them all the way around our camp and we made a sign and put it up.. And in our little area we had the living room and we had the bedroom and we had the kitchen. In the kitchen we had two big packing boxes on top of each other where we put all our cooking utensils
and things, and the camp stove was on one side. We had been warned about the bears and sugar, so we put our sugar in a canvas bag and strung it up in a tree. And milk, canned milk was another thing the bears could pick out of canned goods, even though unopened. So the rangers told us, "Don't leave your canned milk or your sugar within reach." Well, one night, we had our cots in a triangle in our bedroom area, and one night in the middle of the night, it was dark, there was the greatest clatter you have ever heard. Bob jumped up and grabbed the flashlight and was looking all around to see what was happening.. And there, out in the middle of the road, alongside BTWCC Pine Cone Camp, sat a great big brown bear. He sat on his haunches and he had something in his hands. We were all so startled, but Mama hadnlt said a word, and I looked, and Mama's cot was flat. "Boh, the bear's got Mama!" I started to scream and yell, and Mama said, "You little goose, the bear doesn't have me, I'm right here." Mama was underneath her cot. [laughter] What the bear had in his hands was the sugar,
DL: He got up in that tree?
KF: He had gotten up there, and in doing so heM knocked over the packing boxes with the utensils and everything.﻿77
DL: At least that's all he wanted.
KF: That's all he wanted—the sugar. We did have a bear take some of the
canned milk, but we weren't there. We had the canned milk, you see, we hadn't put it away. We had it lined up on the shelf of one of these packing boxes, and the bear came and took out cans, didn't take anything else. There were stringbeans and all kinds of canned stuff.
DL: Did you find the cans on the ground or did he... Took 'em away?
KF: No, he took them, I guess. They were gone. But the ranger said that this is what they have the ability to do. I guess their sense of smell is so keen, they smell through tin.
DL:
DL KF
Going back to the depression, how were your friends affected, like Freda Phillips, or any of your other closest friends?
KF: Yes. Let me see, they were affected, certainly.. Usually it was the men who lost their jobs. The women didn't s-eem to lose their jobs.. Now, Freda Phillips's brother Tony, he worked in an auto mechanic repair shop, and he lost his job. Now her mother didn't, she was working for the Emporium. My mother didn't, she was working for Viavi Company, and t didn't, but Bob did, you see.
DL: Did Waldo Bethel lose his?
KF: Waldo was always self-employed. Waldo was apprenticing to his uncle who
was a contractor and builder. And though there wasn't as much work, Freda s job carried them along. Freda was working for Interocean Casualty Company, that's an insurance company, and she was passing too. I was the only one who wasn't. I couldn't. [laughter]
DL: So that was really the only way to get a good job, was to pass?
KF: Oh yes. There were no jobs for Negroes in San Francisco. The only jobs there for Negroes were in terms of household help or janitors, waiters...
DL: Service things.
KF: Yes, that kind of thing. You couldn't even get a job as a street sweeper here. That was limited, all white.
'Cause it was government, I guess, city government jobs.. I suppose. Garbage men were all white.. Most of them are now.
DL: Were you aware of the impact of the depression on the black community in general?
Yes, I was because I was in contact with these large families in the Booker Washington Center.
KF﻿78
DL: I think when we were discussing your mother, you had told me how the Booker T. Washington Center and the churches did help the community.. Now, we'll just go on and talk about your experiences at the store, Davis Schonwasser. Were you the only black person working for the store in a sales capacity?
KF: No, no. I didn't go there as- a salesperson. Oh no, no. Charlotte Straughter worked there as an elevator operator, and she's the one who got promoted to the shipping department. She's the one who told me to come and apply. Charlotte Straughter and I were real close because she lived with Vivian and Myra Simmons at the same time Mama and I lived there.. So we were kind of like sisters. We're the ones who took our very first jobs we ever had, either one of us, in the cannery. Anyway, when Charlotte came home and said this job was available, I asked Mama if I could go and Mama said yes.
DL: This was as a shipping...
KF: Well, no. This was as elevator operator.
DL: Oh, since Charlotte moved...
KF: Charlotte got moved to the shipping department.,
DL: Did they know that Charlotte was a Negro?
KF: Yes, they did. They were Jewish.
DL: Who?
KF: The Davises and the Schonwassers.. There was Alvin Davis, and Jerome
Neubauer, the nephew, and Sylvia Davis, the senior member of the family. Sylvia and Alvin were brother [and sister] and the nephew they brought in. This was all one family, and they were Jewish. They had had some of the same people working for them from their early teens on up into adulthood.
It was a very closely knit organization.
DL: Your progress through the store was as, what? You started as an elevator..,.
KF: Yes, I started as an elevator operator. Then I moved to the shipping
department. Then I was moved to the second floor where I did stock work. The stock work included marking and hanging the stock in the stock rooms, keeping the racks,on the floor where the merchandise was shown, free of merchandise, hanging it back in the stock room. From that point, as I learned this part of the business, I began to order and reorder, and screen lines that would come in for showing from various companies.,
DL: Sort of like an assistant buyer without the title?
KF- Exactly, I became an assistant buyer without the title, and was doing all the buyer's work. She'd take off, and I learned it thoroughly and enjoyed doing it. I got to the point where I knew not only the buyer's job, but I knew also the shipping end of the business. So, when the time came for me to take her place and go to New York as buyer, I was ready, but I found﻿79
KF: (cont.) out I was the wrong color. And somebody from upstairs in the children's department was sent.. So I Began to think this over, and I thought, I guess, just like Bob did, I'd better get back to school and do something, prepare myself for something that can make the rest of my life meaningful.
By that time, the war had come, and it was my mother who clipped a little notice out of the San Francisco Daily News... It told about Lynette Messer having an eighteen-week training course at San Francisco State College to prepare child care staff for the centers that were being organized for the children of war workers up and down the coast. And that was from Washington straight on down to San Diego. There were many of them being opened, because by that time there were hundreds of thousandsof people,from various communities throughout the United States, here on the coast with their families.. Because they were working almost around—well, they were working around the clock. There were three different shifts in war industry in these shipyards, and something had to be provided for the children of these families so they wouldn't have to lose time from work when children were ill, or if they had young ones that weren't school age. So these child care centers were being opened, and they had to have trained personnel for them, Lynette Messer had one of the major training centers on this coast. There was another one in Seattle, and another one in Los Angeles. It was from these three "training centers that the child care centers were staffed, and I went to see about it. I also was looking then for something to do to contribute to the war effort in a nonviolent way. I was working on War Camp Community Service--not War Camp Community Service... Liberty bonds? No. that was First World War. What was Second World War's drive? What was the bond, the name of the...
DL: I don't remember—it was just war bonds.
KF: I don't remember either. Anyway, we were all involved in selling war bonds, that's another activity, too, I'd forgotten about. I did engage m that through various organizations. And then each store had its own drive too.
Well, anyway, where was I?
DL: Specifically, what was your reaction to losing the promotion, did you make any attempts to contest the decision?
KF- Oh no, you didn't do that then. There was no point, there would have been no point in protesting. What would you gain by protesting?
DL: So even though it was a discriminating act, the NAACP couldn't have gotten involved back in those days? They didn't do that?
KF: The NAACP back in those days was not strong enough. You see, we had not-I love that word, clout—we had no clout, because our numbers, our organized group, was so small. Now, all these war workers who had just come they hadn't come to the point where they were interested m anything but making money. They weren't interested in NAACP or organization or what the political climate was here. They weren't interested m that at all There was money to be made here like they had never seen. There were freedoms here that they had never enjoyed. They were here to make﻿80
KF: (cont.) the money first, and give expression to some of the freedoms that they had never been able to enjoy. So, there would have been no point in protesting. What would you protest about?
DL: It didn't even come to mind, then?
KF: To protest? No, you would make yourself look ridiculous.
DL: I guess my generation is so used to protesting.
KF: Yes, you'd think, "Well, what's the matter with them?" But you see, there were so few. Protesting would have made you look ridiculous. There was no way to do anything about it, so why protest?
DL: Your mother obviously went along in terms of helping you to find some other direction. What was your husband's position when you lost the promotion?
KF: When I lost that position?
DL: Mm hmm. His advice, or...
KF: I think he was still... Let's see, what was happening?	.
DL: I don't mean his job position—his advice to you or his supporting kind of position to you.
KF: Oh. Well, he reinforced what I knew I had to do, and encouraged me.
DL: Had you been thinking about going to school before losing the promotion?
KF: Oh no, I was all set. I liked merchandising, I enjoyed the whole
thing, and I could see myself in the position of buyer, you see, and making these trips to New York every year...oh boy. No, I was headed in that direction.
DL: After high school, though, did all of your other friends, or a lot of them, did they go to college?
KF: Some, some did.
DL: In the area, the Bay Area?
KF: Yes. Not many on this side of the Bay. Most of those who went were on the other side of the Bay. I'm thinking now about the High School Girls' Club. Not many, Emily Roberson was one. What's her name who lived out there in the sand hills? I can't think of her name. Oh yes, there were many across the Bay who went.
DL: How did you feel when they went off to college and you weren't able to?
KF: Well, I wasn't ready, you see. I just wasn't ready. I was in﻿81
KF: (cont.) Schonwasser's and I was having a good time. I had money for the first time in my life, and I loved working with those exquisite garments. I'd copy them, and I made all Mama's clothes, and all mine. Oh, I learned how to tell the content of a fabric by the feel of it. This used to amuse my husband, because I'd be going through a yardage shop, feeling not looking, just feeling, and he'd laugh because I could tell him what kind of material it was and what content it had. This just seemed to amuse him so. But anyway, I was perfectly satisfied in Davis Schonwasser Company, and I liked everybody there. It was just a very pleasant working environment, until I found out that they didn't like me as much as I liked them.
DL: What about Charlotte? Had she gone through a series of promotions and reached a peak?
KF:
DL
KF
DL:
Charlotte? Charlotte by that time had left Davis Schonwasser Company. They hired other Negro girls, they hired Greta Mae Claridy. Well, wait—first, before Greta came Marguerite Round tree, then came Greta Claridy, then came Fredonia Magruder, she was there too, then came Althea Robinson. These are all high school girls, the AOB's. Then came...there were so many came after...and then there were a lot who came after I left.
And what kinds of positions T,?ere they getting? KF: They were getting the same kinds of things.
DL: Elevator, shipping, stock...
Yes. See, everybody had to do everything, really. When Schonwasser unionized...finally, the department stores unionized. When Schonwasser unionized, they employed a white elevator operator because the elevator operators were included in this department store clerks' union. I don't know why they did that, it may have been because of the great increase in salary. There was a tremendous increase in salary.
DL: With the unionization.. KF:
Yes But the stock clerks and the wrapping departments, you know, they had gift wrapping on each floor. And then down in the basement was the shipping department. Those salaries were not increased.
DL: So that was why.. KF:
So that must have been why they got this white girl for an elevator operator. I hadn't thought about that before, but that must have
been the reason.
When did the store unionize, was this during the thirties or the forties?
KF: Must have been the thirties.
* Alameda, Oakland, Berkeley High School Girls' Club﻿82
DL: Okay now, the whole thing with you losing the promotion and going to college, that would have been about when, forty what?
KF: That would have been '41 or '42, because I remember just before I went back to school in September, that summer Freda Bethel and Waldo Bethel had a new car, it was a Nash touring car. Oh, was it ever elegant! And they decided to take a trip, a vacation, and go to Grand Rapids, Michigan. Freda Bethel, Freda Phillips's home. That's where she grew up as a little girl before they came here. And then, incidentally, after they'd been here a few years, before Freda was married, her mother decided she was going back to Grand Rapids. So they packed up all their furniture and went back to Grand Rapids. But the charm and the beauty and the climate of San Francisco kept calling to them, and so within two years they were right back here in San Francisco again. Anyway, that seems to be what happens to people who come here and live for any length of time...
DL: It just calls you back.
KF: They go back but they're right back here again. There's something
about this San Francisco Bay Area that just takes hold of you. Well anyway, Freda and Waldo Bethel had this beautiful new Nash touring, car and invited Bob and me to go with them on this trip. Well, of course, we took all our camping equipment, and away we went headed for Grand Rapids, Michigan. And on that trip we had the most wonderful time. We camped just anywhere we felt like it, because four of us, we felt secure, we weren't afraid to camp off the beaten path. We went from here, on up into Yellowstone National Park, and oh, it was really a magnificent summer, but I won't take the tape's time to tell about that.
DL: This was the summer prior to...
KF:
to school in the fall.
KF: DL: KF:
DL:
This is the summer prior to my going back to school. I had left Davis Schonwasser, you see, and then came this trip and then I went
DL: Now to get the dates right, had the war started here, had Pearl Harbor taken place?
'41, December... No, it hadn't.
Okay, so this was '41 that you started school. September.
Yes..it must have.been.. Well, that I could very easily check by some of my records.
Let's go back a little in time and tell me what you did after you lost your promotion. Did you quit right away.﻿83
KF: No, I didn't quit right away. I thought about it for some time, and I talked it over, of course, with my mother and my husband. No, I didn't quit right away. I think I must have stayed there a year more.
KF: It was fall of 1943 that I went back to high school and finished up that semester, and then I went to San Francisco State College, spring of 1944.
DL: So spring of '44 you went to State, that's when you were enrolled in﻿84
DL: (cont.) both Lynette Messer's program and the regular academic program at State.
KF: It was called the Pre-professional, Directed Child-Care, Teacher-Training Nursery School. Yes, that was spring of '44. So, I started to State, spring of '44, and continued fall '44, '45 and '46, '47, '48, '49, 50, '51 and '52, and I got my B.A. in '53. And that's as far as it goes on there. Then the M.A. came in...
DL: That's a little ahead of us.
KF: Is it? All right. Okay.
DL: So the name of the Lynette Messer program is down here. Is this it? "Pre-professional..." No, these are education courses I see here.
KF: No, the name of the school where Lynette Messer set up this program for the training of child care center teachers was at San Francisco State College Nursery School. It had been a nursery school. Lynette Messer is the one who instituted nursery school in connection with kindergarten-primary curriculum, because she felt that more preparation was needed for some children for kindergarten than they were getting, and that nursery school should become a part of the total education program.
DL: Was this before the war that she instituted all of this?
KF: Oh, yes. Frederic Burke Nursery School was going on on old campus for years and years. That was the teacher-training institution for San Francisco,and Lynette Messer was supervisor of the kindergarten-primary teacher-training block. It was she who was successful in putting in a teacher-training program at the nursery school level.
DL: Did this become part of the child care training program?
KF: The nursery school program was always maintained, it was combined in
various aspects of the larger educational program. You see, the child care program was geared differently because the child care children spent more hours at school than did the nursery school children. The nursery school children might come—depending upon their readiness—for two hours or three hours. They might come for that length of time a whole week or, depending upon each one's readiness for group activities, those children might come two or three hours twice a week. So the nursery school program, which was a readiness program for kindergarten, which was part of the teacher-training program for the public schools, was always
maintained.
DL: I'll go back to this again. You have said twice already that you wanted to do something for the war effort in a nonviolent way. Does this mean that you were a pacifist at that time?
KF: No, I wasn't a pacifist. But I just didn't want to contribute to anything like warships or bomb buildings or anything that was a negative kind of effort, anything that would hurt people. I felt that people should sit down and talk out their differences, rather than... I wasn't a pacifist, no. I could have the ability to get very angry, but I also had the﻿85
KF: (cont.) ability to get hurt. Well anyway, I wanted to do something because I was patriotic. We all were patriotic! This is our country and we must do something. And I bought war bonds, I saved for them and I sold them. That was contributing to the war effort, certainly, and everything went into the building of ships and the building of bombs and the building of planes. I thought, well, when it came to this effort on State College campus, I felt the need, all up and down the coast, for this kind of provision for children, so it attracted me, because it wasn't destructive in any sense of the word. It was taking positive action towards securing a good future, and our future always lies in the youth. That's why I went into it, and by golly, when I—I thought I was going for eight weeks, I think I stayed there eight years or longer. [laughter]
DL: Now, did your husband share your philosophy about the war?
KF: Yes, he did.
DL: What did he do during the war? Was he drafted or did he enlist?
KF
KF:
DL:
KF:
Fortunately, he was not drafted. I don't know how this thing happened, but with each draft, either age-wise... He was perfectly able, but he was either in school, or he just missed it according to his age, sometiow or other, each one of those drafts he missed.
DL: Was he glad?
KF: Oh, well I'm sure he must have been.[laughter] DL:
What did he do during the war, then? Was he working for the Booker T. Washington Center at this time?
Yes, he was working for the center. Let's see when did he go back to He went back to Northwestern Institute of Medical Technology, fall of 1935 He completed his work there and interned as a medical technician at Illinois Eye and Ear Hospital, Chicago. He returned to San Francisco Bay Area hospitals but was refused employment because of race. He was employed as executive director of BTWCC to 1946, as correctional counselor, San Quentin Prison, 1947 to 63, and was sponsor of Alcoholics Anonymous at San Quentin Prison.
Yes. But you see him in your mind's eye here in San Francisco during the war?
I know I was on campus during the war. Maybe it was that period...
DL: Living on campus? KF:
No, no. I was living right here, 2762 Golden Gate Avenue I was going to school. We started in the morning—when I got hired, after I completed this course, I got hired by the demonstration school and became a demonstration teacher. At the same time, I started taking those courses so I could achieve the B.A. degree. Because I had decided then, by that time, that that was going to be my field, early childhood
education.﻿86
DL:
KF:
When you returned to school, had you decided on a field?
KF:	Not until I'd completed this eighteen-week course, and then I knew
where I belonged. And I said to Mama, and I said to everybody else who was interested, "I tried to escape it, I tried my best, but here I am and it looks like I'm caught, because I'm enjoying it and I see the need for it." So that's the story of that, and that's why I went on through San Francisco State College. I received several scholarships, too, while I was working in the demonstration school and taking courses at State to achieve the B.A. I had three scholarships that permitted me to take an active part in Vassar Summer Institute in Poughkeepsie.
DL:	I want to back up a bit, and ask you some things about the war before
we continue talking about your school career and your professional career. When the war began, what was the thinking of the people that you knew in the Negro community? Were they concerned about it, were they not concerned about it, were they for the war or against it?
KF:	Oh, they were concerned, certainly. They were concerned in terms of
family members. They were concerned about discrimination in the armed services also. Are you talking about the period from Pearl Harbor, on?
DL:	Yes. Well, when did people begin getting concerned about the war,
during the early forties when the war in Europe had broken out, when England was being bombarded, I assume?
KF:	Yes, we were certainly concerned out here. We were concerned
about attack from the air. Our concern for departing family, both men and women, was heightened by enforced blackouts in the Bay Area as well as all up and down the Pacific Coast.
DL:	I guess that was really after Pearl Harbor, the concern about being
attacked.
Yes. And then too, we were threatened several times with strange objects out here in the Pacific Ocean. We thought we might be attacked by submarine, and many expressed concern about poisonous gas attacks.
DL:	Where did they hear that one? I didn't know about that one.
KF:	Well, they were using, in a limited way in the European theater, some
of the poisonous gases. The word got out that sulfur gas and mustard gas had been used in one of the European theaters and what a horrible effect it had on the people.
DL:	Now, did Negro men go and sign up, to enlist or did they...
KF:	Oh, lots of Negro men signed up, lots of them did. There were great,
strong feelings of patriotism out here in this area, and they volunteered for all branches of the service. Young boys, some as young as thirteen or fourteen years old, lied about their ages.﻿87
DL:	Negro people were just as caught up as the whites.
KF:	Oh yes, yes. They were as loyal as the palefaced brethren were.
DL:	Did you know any Japanese people during that time?
KF:	Oh, yes. Yes, indeed I did. Yes, there was one person working in
Booker Washington Center when the evacuation occurred. Yes, her name was Toshi Koba, and she and her whole family were lifted up overnight and transferred to one of those concentration camps in the Middle West, where there wasn't a tree, there wasn't anything, just dust and dirt and those horrible, horrible barracks.
DL:	Were the Japanese able to write to their friends in the city from
the evacuation camps, or concentration camps?
KF:	In a limited way. Everything was censored.
DL:	Did you ever get anything from Toshi Koba?
KF:	No, you see, she wasn't a personal friend of mine. She was doing
girls' work in the center. But since I've grown up, I've come to know Toshi Koba.
That was a horrible thing that happened. Because people like her family had lived in the Japanese area for years and years and years. Some of them were born there, and they had spent their lives, they and their families before them, accumulating and developing these properties. It was a beautiful area. And the Japanese Language School on Bush Street between Webster and Buchanan was a beautiful new school, and they had to go and leave that. One of the things that happened to intensify the Japanese peoples' anger was the way they found that Japanese Language School when they came home. Because in the interim, it had been used by the United Crusade to house Booker T. Washington Community Center. United Crusade funded the activities, or partially funded them, and they gave that center to the Booker T. for their activities because it had a big gymnasium, it had meeting rooms, it had the space they needed because the program had grown so. And they moved from Divisadero over to that new language school. It was a beautiful place and beautifully kept. Of course, when you put in a youth program and a building is used for as long as that was used, it's going to show the effects of being used. And when those of the Japanese who came back to San Francisco found what the war workers had done to their neighborhood, and what had happened to their center, I'm sure the indignity of what had happened originally was increased 'a hundredfold. People both black and white who had been recruited by the shipbuilding industry from the Deep South are the ones who occupied that area while the Japanese were gone. They came back to complete destruction. It was a sad thing, because it had been very beautiful.
DL:	What was the Negro community's position on this evacuation during the
early forties when the Japanese were being evacuated?﻿88
KF:	Negroes were very angry about it, and they knew that it could very
well have been them, had the situation been a different one. Even way back then, we knew that there, but for the grace of God, go I.
DL:	Do you recall if the Negro press carried stories protesting this?
KF:	No, you didn't, you didn't. If you had, you'd probably have found
yourself in jail. Or there would have been some kind of retaliation. No, behind closed doors was where this was talked about and feelings were aired.
DL:	During the war, did you belong to any volunteer organizations that
were specifically concerned with wartime activities?
KF:	Yes. We had blackouts during that time, and we had to have
everything blacked out, couldn't have any lights showing anywhere. We were in such fear of attack from the air that the populace was recruited for first aid, storage facilities for food, ambulance driving, motor mechanics, all kinds of things that would have to do with the survival of San Francisco and its people. And so, yes, I took the first aid courses with Red Cross, and I attempted to sign up—I did sign up for motor mechanics. It was a very, very popular class. You had to wait to take your turn to get into motor mechanics. So I waited and waited and waited. I never did get called, though I had signed up properly and everything. So one day I went downtown to the central office where this motor mechanics division was, and asked them to look up my application and see if it was in order. Oh yes, it was in order. And I asked the lady to get it, I'd like to see what date was on it—I had forgotten what date I'd put. So she got it and she was holding it, and somehow or other I had a funny feeling, and I said, "Well, let me see it." She drew her hand back and she said, "Well, the date is such," and I snatched it out of her hand. There in the corner of this card was "colored," so I turned and dashed out of there and dashed straight home again to my mother. "Look what they did." Well, when Bob came home that night, he looked at it and, as he usually did, he would never say anything right away. He'd say, "Hmmm." And he might not say anything but "Hmmm" for a long time. Well, anyway he had contacts by then in the community, and there was much more going on in concerted effort to prevent this kind of thing from happening than there ever had been before. From the period of the war when we had this great influx of people come, the effort to protect ourselves in terms of civil rights increased year by year. It was slow getting started because the people had other things they wanted to do, like make money.
DL:	Mm hmm. Survival first.
KF:	Yes. But gradually when war was over and the shipyards began to
close, then you see, here they were, no jobs. Then came the great pulling together, then came the awareness of what we needed to do to protect ourselves.
DL:	And how tenuous the positions are.﻿89
KF:	Yes.
DL:	Did you get involved with the Buchanan Street Y during the war as
a hostess?
KF:	Oh, yes. Yes, Mama was working very hard with Buchanan Street Y's
Women. The Y's Women, a group of twenty-five, assisted paid USO staff in planning programs of activities for servicemen. I would go down and be hostess, and they had some very, very wonderful programs for the servicemen.
DL:	Were there any other organizations that you got involved with?
KF:	Let's see, what else? Buchanan Street Y, the BTWCC, YWCA, I was
doing something for them. I was working full time at Davis Schonwasser Company, an exclusive ready-to-wear store for infants and women.
DL:	Were you still working with the Girl Reserves with the Y?
KF:	No, I think that was over by then.
DL:	And going to school?
KF:	Was I doing that? What was the year? I've forgotten. No. Girl
Reserves came between the time I left Schonwasser's and enrolled in the eighteen-week child care training course at San Francisco State College. When I started back to school, after the eighteen-week course, I started seriously. I think I dropped just about everything because I was working in the nursery school program as well as the child care program. Our child care program started at six. We had to be there at six o'clock in the morning. Some of the children of war-working parents had to be on duty at seven, for that morning shift. That ran from six in the morning until sometimes seven and eight at night. Then when the war was over, of course, things relaxed a little bit.
DL:	It was up until you went back to high school in '41, that's when I
guess you were involved in all these volunteer...
KF:	In these other activities, yes.
DL:	Now during World War II, were you aware of the discrimination
experienced by blacks in the armed forces and in the defense industry?
KF:	Discrimination? Before the war?
DL:	During.
KF:	During the war. No, I wasn't really aware of it.
DL:	So you weren't aware that the black press out here carried those
kinds of stories?
KF:	The black press carried them, I suppose, but I didn't read them. I﻿90
KF:	(cont.) was too concerned with what I was doing.
DL:	So you didn't know any people who applied for jobs with defense
plants and didn't get them?
KF:	There were very few who applied who didn't get jobs. The need out
here was so acute, and that's why they had to recruit people by the trainloads from the South. There was plenty of work.
DL:	What about friends, men who went into the armed services, any stories
that they might have told you and your husband about the discrimination that they experienced?
KF:	Well yes, I've heard stories of discrimination concerning positions
in whatever branch of the service they might have enlisted in, in terms of their particular involvement. It seems as though discrimination in the armed services for black youth had to do with menial positions, such as kitchen jobs and maintenance work and serving officers. This was one of the main things that I heard talked about then, the menial kinds of work they were assigned to in the armed services, like keeping the officers' shoes polished and being responsible for their laundry and all that kind of thing, like a servant.	L
DL:	Was there any concerted effort on the parts of these men to go to
NAACP to fight their cause—that you were aware of?
KF:	No, no. There weren't enough of us, then, organized to take action.
DL:	These were friends, I assume you heard these stories from friends when
they were stationed out here in California?
KF:	Yes, I'd hear my husband talking over the telephone a lot, and
people might come who would talk to him about these things. I often wish I had kept a guest book, because to our house came people from upper echelons, blacks from all over the United States, and my husband...
DL:	How did your husband come to know all these people who passed through
your house, who came to visit?
KF:	He was very active in community affairs here, and he made the newspapers
many, many times. People who were coming out to San Francisco would be referred to him. When they'd come to the community center and meet him, of course, he'd invite them to the house because they wouldn't know anybody in San Francisco. He'd invite them, depending upon who they were, to come home with him.
DL:	These were political people, community affairs people...
KF:	They were people engaged in education, in social services, in interests
that had to do with the development of the Negro community and the relationship of the Negro community in San Francisco and the national scene.﻿91
DL:	Since your husband was concerned about the civil rights of black
people, do you recall any discussions or reading in the paper about the CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] sit-ins of 1943?
KF:	No, I don't.
DL:	I brought up the CORE sit-ins because in general the mid-forties were
a time of stepped-up protest activity on the part of black people. Perhaps it was primarily an East Coast activity.
KF:	It must have been the East Coast. I can't remember any sit-ins, but
I can remember the stepped-up activity in the Negro community during the war years. I can remember how, under [my husband's] leadership, Westside Courts, the first low-cost, integrated, public housing project in San Francisco, came into being.
DL:	Was that during the war years that this happened?
KF:	Yes, because housing was needed, you see, for all people, because
of the war industries' recruitment, on a large scale, of both southern whites and southern Negroes.
DL:	Was this housing government-sponsored?
KF:	Yes. Westside Courts was the first in San Francisco. Then there
followed others. Another thing that put him in contact with people in the East, he was a member of a speakers' bureau, and he was also on several radio programs. We didn't have TV then, but there were these radio programs that were scheduled by various radio commentators who had weekly programs. He would be invited to participate on those, so his name became known. There were many controversial issues on these talk programs, and he would be the only Negro on the panel.
DL:	Did you discuss with him these concerns that were obviously of interest
to him?
KF:	Oh yes, we'd talk about them. And I listened, but that's as far as
my participation in it went. My interest in it was in what he was saying. I had my hands full...
DL:	Did he try to educate you in terms of what was happening nationwide
with the black community or black people in general?
KF:	No, he didn't, and I'm sorry I didn't take time to ask questions, because
he would have. He'd like nothing more than to lean up in the corner of the kitchen and talk half the night.
DL:	I was going to ask you, had you read in the paper or had he discussed
with you A. Philip Randolph's march on Washington in 1941? Were you aware of that?
KF:	I was aware of it, but I wasn't emotionally involved in it.
DL:	Do you know if that was a concern of the community here, the march?﻿92
KF:	Oh yes. Yes indeed. Yes, I can remember, what did we have, the
Spokesman then—or it was the Oakland Advocate? Well, anyway, I can remember there were several meetings where the issues were discussed, but I wasn't there. I just knew that Bob was participating. A lot of this, you see, was via telephone conversations. I'd hear it and absorb that way. But I can't give you any accurate information about the reaction of the Negro community to these political issues. Not political necessarily, but controversial things that affected Negroes on this coast, or nationwide. One thing, it wasn't due to lack of interest, it was due to emotional involvement that I couldn't handle too well, and the same thing held true with my activities with the NAACP.
DL:	At that time in the forties?
KF:	Well, yes, in the forties. I tried to get myself involved, but
emotionally it was too much, it was more than I could handle, I was too uncomfortable. I got too angry, and I was frustrated, too, because I could see there was nothing much to do except accept it and take it from there. I think a lot of this lay in the extreme agony I suffered when a registrar at State College said to me, "You can never teach in the San Francisco Unified School District." I said, "Why?" And she said, "Because you're a Negro." I think a lot of £he anger, a lot of the hurt prevented my participating in NAACP. It was too painful. I think that's why I turned to State College and that program [child care program], because there, you see, I was contributing to the war effort but in a positive way, rather than fighting against something that was so big I didn't feel I could do anything about it. Besides that, it made me very uncomfortable because the anger was there and I didn't know how well I could control it. It was just too frustrating to be always confronted with, "You're a Negro, you can't do this, you can't do it." But there were things I could do and I set about doing them, and I did them effectively in my way.
DL:	The war years were a time of change and growth of the San Francisco
black population. We had discussed your mother's reaction to these changes in the forties. What was your personal reaction to this large migration, especially in terms of the black population?
KF:	Well, I, like all the other old-timers, resented the intrusion. Because
here was a group of people who spoke a different language, their behavior was different. They were unlike what I had grown up with, so I resented them. It was through my mother's counsel and my mother's attitudes that I found that my attitude was entirely wrong, and that I needed to change it. So I went about doing that as well.
DL:	What kinds of changes did you see in San Francisco itself?
KF:	A change in relationships between blacks and whites. The 1940 census
shows under five thousand of us living in San Francisco. I saw the development of Hunter's Point, and I saw here in San Francisco efforts to absorb these newcomers on the parts of the churches, the YWCA, the YMCA. I saw tremendous activity in the Fillmore district. That was where most had settled because the Japanese had been evacuated.﻿93
DL:	Besides the black areas which were growing and developing, did the
city spread out beyond its boundaries, let's say..,
KF:	Because of...
DL:	Whites also, because the increase in population also included them.
KF:	Yes, it did. Yes, they did spread out and the growth began south of
Market out toward the Bay, out that way. What's the name of that area? I can't remember the name. Out Third Street.
DL:	Isn't that South of Market District?
KF:	That is South of Market. South of Market. But it has a name, or it
had a name then [South Park]. But anyway, they spread that way, and of course the Hunter's Point area is out in that section, so they spread in all directions. Then another area that developed, at least that absorbed the influx, is the area out Ocean Avenue, all around in the hills out there, out by City College. That was another area that grew rapidly.
DL:	What about the Richmond and the Sunset districts, did they...
KF:	No, the Richmond and the Sunset did not absorb the war workers.
Richmond and Sunset... then, Sunset was largely sand dunes, and the Richmond was thought to be way out, nobody wanted to live way out there.
DL:	What about in terms of people's behavior, the way they socialized,
how did that change with the war? Were they wilder? That's the impression you get from movies.
KF:	Wilder?
DL:	Mm hmm. The mores changed.
KF:	Well, the mores certainly changed. They brought their own mores with
them.
DL:	Was it just southern folks who came in great numbers? What about
easterners and northerners and midwesterners...
KF:
Oh yes, other people came. Yes, certainly they came, but the dramatic influx during the war years, when the shipbuilding industry was at its peak, from Washington on down to the end of California, and the airplane industry also... This was when there was the dramatic increase of the southern laborers. It was because they were recruited down there and brought out by trainloads that the population increased dramatically in a very short period of time. The whole character of the San Francisco Negro community changed when they came, because where there had been less than five thousand in 1940, all of a sudden the population exploded and the four thousand-and-something were lost in this great population explosion. So the old-timers retreated into their own little groups and stood on the sidelines and were appalled by the people whose mores were different than their own.﻿94
DL:	Did you have any feelings about the possible changes that would take
place in terms of race relations in San Francisco?
KF:	At that point, I don't think I gave it a thought. But I'm sure my
husband was thinking about it, and probably engaged in activities that had to do with the amelioration of many of the problems that presented themselves in terms of the Fillmore-Divisadero area.
DL:	Having come up against the situation with the registrar at San
Francisco State College, did you think that with increased numbers of blacks that kind of situation would no longer take place, or there would be less of it? Let's put it that way. Did you think there would be more opportunities for blacks as their numbers increased?
KF:	Well, right then, during those years, I saw opportunities open, and
I saw the school population change. Yes, certainly there were increased opportunities. For the first time we had Negro motormen—wait a minute, Negro conductors—we had no motormen in the beginning. Then we had...after the conductors took over, we had Negro motormen. I don't know whether I've told you this funny story or not, but I was on Mission Street one day...
DL:	Yes, you did, the guy yelling out,"This is my car."
KF:	"This is mah car! I runs mah car," and he's on top of the car
telling all and sundry as he rode down Mission Street, he'd give the signal, stomping his foot. Twice to go and once to stop. So you see, yes, I saw many opportunities...
DL:	Did they hire salespeople downtown during the war?
KF:	During the war? No, not to my knowledge. Salespeople were not
hired in any of the department stores, but there was a great... Now, this I remember, during the war years there was a great expression of displeasure on the part of the department stores when the war workers would come from work in their overalls and greasy clothes to try on fur coats and one thing and another, and to try on hats and stuff, and some of the department stores refused to allow them in. Well, of course there was a big to-do about that.
DL:	This was black and white war workers?
KF:	Black and white. But mostly, you see, it was directed toward the
blacks, and the blacks were the ones who made the big noise about it. They're the ones, because of high visibility, who stood out. They came in such numbers, you see, they came in greater numbers than did the whites. They're the ones who were deprived of positions that paid the salaries they were getting here. They were deprived of those high salaries in the South, besides the fact that there wasn't the work there for them. So they were the ones from the back woods who were coming, and they were making big money and they were spending it. They were going to have all of the things that they had never had an opportunity to buy. And here were the shops, and here were the clothes. A lot of them didn't save as much as they should have out of these﻿95
KF:	(cont.) fabulous checks they'd get. The shipbuilding industry-
was hiring them for twenty-four-hour shifts, and whole families would be working right around the clock, so their income would be sizable. And they were spending, and the stores resented the way they would come in to try on their nice clothes. So there were problems. Fillmore Street became known as "Cadillac Alley"!
DL:	Did San Francisco attempt to accommodate these newcomers in any
way?
KF:	There were all kinds of classes and church groups set up to help
them orient themselves to this new environment. We tried.
DL:	There seemed to be resentment on the part of all the old-timers, not
just the blacks, to these new migrants.
KF:	Well, the old-timers were appalled by the differences in behavior,
in speech and attitudes. There were those who knew that we had to take the positive approach, like Mama. "We've got to help them adjust." So the Y and the Center [BTWCC] and the churches, and all community organizations attempted to get them enrolled in some of the activities of the community, and to help them understand how we lived here, and what San Francisco was all about. And out of this group, a leadership emerged from the newcomers. The Urban League opened a San Francisco office, the USO brought James and Helen Stratten, the YM and YWCAs brought black staff from New York. Professionals in every area came in great numbers. Prior to 1940, San Francisco's Negro population was small—less than five thousand. Ministers, there were only three: Reverend Dennis, Reverend Byers, and Reverend E.J. Magruder (who replaced Reverend Byers). John Fisher, Thomas M. Jackson, Jake Peyton, Judson Whitfield, J. Minor Thompson, Miss Alice Reese, Myra and Vivian Simmons, Mrs. Anna S. Magruder, Dr. H.E. Davis are names that come to mind as being heard in the twenties and thirties. They were the black leadership then. What I'm saying is that with the population explosion in San Francisco, the leadership changed. We, the old-timers, were now in the minority, and we withdrew. This new leadership helped orient the newcomers to this new environment. Emerging from the newcomer group was the second wave of people who organized social clubs and that kind of thing. And churches sprung up like mushrooms, in the store fronts and houses and just all over, because this was what the people responded to. This is what they had known, in terms of their social lives. Theatre, opera, formal dress affairs were foreign to the war workers. The old-timers, now in the minority, withdrew.
DL:	Were your husband's activities in the community as a result of the
influx of people during the war, or had he already been involved in the community?
KF:	He had already begun, with the newspaper that he and John Pittman
and Mason Roberson started. They recognized a need for a newspaper here. We didn't have one. The only Negro newspaper we had was across the bay in Oakland, and we needed a San Francisco newspaper.﻿96
DL: And what was this one called, the one that your husband helped found?
KF: The Spokesman, and that had a little office on the corner of Broderick and Sutter,
DL:	What was your husband's position, was he editor or publisher?
KF:	John Pittman was editor, Mason Roberson was publisher.
DL:	Did he write for it?
KF:	Oh yes, yes. They all did, it was a cooperative kind of a venture.
DL:	Was he involved with The Spokesman throughout its life?
KF: No, he wasn't. I'll tell you who ought to have copies of that paper, one of the Wysinger girls. She has copies., that Oakland newspaper. In her basement they say she's got stack upon stack of those issues of that old, old newspaper.
DL: I'd like to turn now to your college years, though. I'm curious to know, when you went back to enroll at San Francisco State College, was Florence Vance the registrar, and did she recognize you?
KF: Florence Vance was still the registrar. I doubt that she recognized me, but I'm sure that over the years she heard the story. But you see, it wouldn't have been polite to have mentioned it, so I didn't. I think it was because of Florence Vance that I really went back to school. At the same time, you see, here came this opportunity to participate, in a positive way, in the war effort, rather than in a negative way by going to shipyards and building warships.
DL: When you enrolled in the teacher-training program in the 1940s,
apparently there must have been some kind of change as to acceptance of black teachers at that time. Was this after Josephine Cole had been hired by the San Francisco Unified School District, and perhaps other people had also been hired, by the time that you enrolled at State College?
KF: Josephine Cole, yes, had she been... Yes, I guess she had been hired.
DL: Do you remember?
KF: I don't remember the incident of Josephine's being hired as the first Negro teacher. No, I don't really...
DL: Was the leadership in the black community	involved in getting
Josephine Cole the teaching position with	the San Francisco public schools?
KF: No. When did she get it? Now, that must	have been—what year was that?﻿97
DL: I'm not sure.
KF: Let me see. I don't think so. I think one of the reasons was
because her father was so prominent and well known by influential whites. I think that was largely why. I don't remember the Negro community doing anything in her behalf.
DL: Going back to your own career, you said before that you began training child care teachers after you had completed your own training course in the child care center program. Were you training people within that eighteen-week course?
KF: Yes.
DL: How did you get that position?
KF: Through Lynette Messer's recommendation.
DL: KF:
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
DL:
KF:
Had you sought the job, or she just came to you...
You see, my interest by that time had increased to the point where I wanted to pursue this field as a career, and teachers were needed, badly needed. She suggested to me that I was a natural and that I should get enrolled and work toward a degree, so I did.
And the position, she also suggested that you go for that?
Oh yes, yes. She could make the recommendations and J. Paul Leonard, the president of San Francisco State College, was the one who had to confirm... The program was going full swing all up and down the coast and Lynette Messer was participating with colleges and universities in Washington, in Oregon, and in California, to help develop the training program for child care center and nursery school
teachers.
How did the training program come about? Was this something that the federal government or the War Department presented to the universities?
The need for child care was so apparent with the influx on this coast of .war workers that something had to be provided and who suggested it, I don't know. Lynette Messer developed the program at San Francisco State College,and I know that she was very active in the organization of the teacher-training program, and the establishment of these nursery schools that ran from six-thirty in the morning until six, and later, at night.
As a trainer, did you have an opportunity to work with the children directly?
Oh yes, yes. The thing was structured so that a certain number of student teachers would be assigned to each master teacher. Schedules were made for each one of those students, and the student would work intensively with the master teacher, depending upon where she was in her eighteen-week course.﻿98
DL: They were called teachers and not child care workers?
KF: Well, let's see. They were called nursery school teachers at that time.
DL: Was your position a paid position?
KF: Yes.
DL: You also said previously that you administered the isolation unit of the child care center.
KF: Yes, we did some things at State College that weren't done anywhere else in the nation. Lynette Hesser was a person who liked to work out ideas that would be beneficial to both parents and children. She noticed that these war working mothers and fathers were losing a lot of time because of childhood illnesses, like measles, mumps, chicken pox, colds, and that kind of thing. She felt that we could contribute to the war effort by setting up a twenty-four-hour care unit. So she went about making plans, and she found a little building just about two blocks from the school. That building was remodeled to include what we called an Isolation Unit for the Communicable Diseases. Into that unit was put a twenty-four-hour staff of nurses,and a doctor on call twenty-four hours, and he made daily visits also, and also a teaching staff. Included in the building was a miniature nursery school room with everything that the rooms had on campus, everything the nursery school was equipped with was right there, but, of course, in a smaller area. So we started this and it was a success, it was a great success. Parents would come in to visit their children in the evenings if they could, or whenever they were free to come. But they'd have to be robed, and little caps put on their hair so they wouldn't be spreading the measles, the mumps and the chicken pox, these communicable diseases, around. And the children enjoyed it, and the parents enjoyed it, and the teachers enjoyed it. It was such a unique kind of an experience.
DL: What were your duties as an administrator of the unit?
KF: Well, I had to see about schedules, mainly, counseling, working out any problems that occurred. We also had a little kitchen there, we had one cook that took care of all the meals. Her menus had to be worked up with her...that kind of thing, just general supervision and adjusting the daily program to meet individual needs.
DL: Aside from,that, did you also continue to train the teachers?
KF: No, we had a limited number of master teachers come in to observe,
but we couldn't take... No, couldn't do that. The place, number one, was too small, and it was too risky a thing because we could have started an epidemic in the teachers' group, you see. So we didn't encourage visitors or observers, but a limited number who were working toward their degrees were allowed to observe, and in the area where the communicable diseases were, they had to observe through a glass window, they weren't allowed inside.﻿99
DL: How long did this unit last? Did it exist beyond the war?
KF: No, just during the height of that intensive effort on the part of the shipbuilding industry in this area.
DL: How did you get that job as administrator of the unit?
KF: Well, Lynette Messer, again, said, "Do you want to tackle this? It'll be difficult." She felt I could do it, so she recommended me for it.
DL: Besides being a training teacher or a master teacher and then the administrator of the unit, where there any other responsibilities that you had during the war years with the child care program?
KF: Yes, we started an extended day care program for the siblings of those children in the nursery school who needed care after school and were attending Frederic Burke Elementary School. That, of course, was an entirely different program because of the wide age range. It also had to be a more relaxed program than the morning program for full day enrollees. So extended day care program was a challenge, and that was fun to work out, because we had to cover the interests of that wide age range group, and also meet the need, that all children have, of time to themselves. Usually in these programs things are so intensified and move so fast, children don't have time to just sit and purr. Children and kittens need time to sit and purr.
DL: So that was incorporated in the program, a little purring time?
KF: A little purring time. We had quiet corners with big pillows and
things where a child could go by himself with a book or whatever he wanted. Or just go and lie and stare at the ceiling. Then we had little corners outdoors in the yard where they could be by themselves.
DL: They could pull away from whatever the group activity was.
KF: Yes. And some children had greater need for this kind of solitude than others.
DL: Now in that situation, were you, again, a training teacher, a demonstration or master teacher?
KF: Master teacher. [1945 to 1948]
DL: Were there any eligibility requirements for the children in the child care program, economic or otherwise?
KF: Yes, there were. Not during this intensive effort on the part of shipbuilding industry, but later on after the war, enrollees were limited in terms of income, family income, and also whether or not there were two, mother and father, or single-parent family.
DL: Children of single parent families weren't eligible?
KF: Oh yes, they were eligible. Yes, indeed. But I don't think they had to meet as high an income schedule as the two-parent family.﻿100
DL: What happened to this child care program after the war?
KF: After the war, it continued as a child care center and the hours were reduced. The teacher-training, the eighteen-week teacher-training program was discontinued. But you see, by that time there were child care centers established all throughout the city, and all up and down the peninsula. They even had a few in Marin, yes, they did have some in Marin County. We had to continue to train teachers but now, you see, the emphasis changed. It changed toward a work-study program.
DL: So the students were all enrolled in college programs?
KF: That's right. They had to enroll in a certain number of courses in order to be eligible for child care center curriculum. The nursery school had become a lab experience for them.
DL: Did you maintain a position with the program?
KF: By then I was supervising.
DL: You were a supervising teacher and you were an undergraduate student yourself, is that right?
KF: Yes. Supervising teacher in terms of giving guidance to that group of students who were assigned to the lab school in my particular division, which was extended day care, special services, and I think we had a special five-year-old age group.
Oh, there's another thing we instituted I forgot to tell you about. And maybe I've got this out of context. During the war years, to make things easier for parents and children, we started a pick-up hot dinner program. The menus would be posted a week in advance and the parents would sign up for dinners to take home, so parents and children would have more time to spend together, and the mothers and fathers wouldn't have to rush out of the school and go home, shop, and cook dinner. And then there'd be a hassle to get baths and get to bed. There was time for parents and children to spend a relaxed, nice, uncluttered time together. So we started this hot meal program. And, of course, that took a lot of planning for.
DL: How was that paid for, do you remember?
KF; The parents paid, and the meals were low cost.
DL: The college hired a cook?
KF: Well, the same cook and her assistants who cooked for the nursery
school groups—we had the two-year-old group, twos, threes, fours, fives, and the extended day care group—the kitchen staff would cook hot meals for the parents.
DL: I should think that was a very successful program.﻿101
KF: Oh, it was a very...and some of those meals were really very delicious.
DL: And after the war, was that phased out?
KF: Yes, parents were not working such long hours, and there wasn't
as great a need. Just as the isolation unit after the war was over, that was discontinued. That was State College's contribution to the war effort. Lynette Messer was full of ideas and J. Paul Leonard, the president of the college, approved them.
DL: Directly after the war was over, you were a supervising teacher as well as an undergraduate. Were you being paid to be supervising teacher?
KF: Oh yes, there was a scale. Let's see, by that time... No, that didn't come till later, I guess. At one point the whole nursery school staff had to either be working toward a degree or had to have achieved it. If you were enrolled and working toward it, then you retained your position. If you weren't, you had to get enrolled to retain your position, and as I remember, a pay scale was developed. At this time I was a master teacher; later I became a supervising teacher, from 1948 to 1952.
DL: Were there other people in your situation, or was this an innovative thing that State was doing, having people working towards their degrees and work on staff?
KF: Well, no. You see, when this great need for teachers existed all up and down the Pacific Coast, teachers had to be trained. They had to take people who were capable and could absorb the material in this eighteen-week course, and utilize effectively the tools and techniques they had acquired in the course with a group of children. Might be the twos, the threes, the four-year-olds—teachers performed differently with different age groups. Some of them were good with the twos, some with the threes, some with the fours. Some were good only with fives. If they had interest and they wanted to retain their jobs, they had to enroll and work toward a degree. Later, those that had the least number of units were on the bottom rung of the ladder, with regard to the pay scale.
DL: Do you recall that this was something innovative that State was doing at this time, or do you know if other universities were incorporating similar programs?
KF: I don't know. I don't know. In this area, I know that's what was done. I don't know what was done in other areas.
DL: At this time, right after the war, did you have faculty status, or were you a supervising teacher only?
KF: When was that, right after the war?﻿102
DL: In 1945, '46, '47.
KF: I was a master teacher. Then, I moved up to become a supervising teacher and was put on the nursery school faculty . And, in '49 I was working toward the B.A., and I had a scholarship. Then I had another scholarship in '53, and I remember I was working on the M.A. I achieved that in '54, and I had college faculty status in '54. But I had it before then.
DL: When did you become supervising teacher of the nursery school?
KF: Not the whole school—only extended day care and five-year-olds. That must have been in 1948, or shortly after that, to '52.
DL: You had said before, early on in the interview, that Lynette Messer went on sabbatical and at that time you assumed certain of her responsibilities.
KF: Yes, I took over two of her classes and became supervising teacher
for the extended day care group and the five-year-olds. By that time we had a group of atypical children we were integrating into the normal group. One of those children was the first open-heart-surgery case in San Francisco, a little girl six years old, and she had to have a special program.
DL: Could you define what you mean by the atypical child?
KF: Well, the child that deviates from the norm in any area. The child who requires a special program, an individualized program.
DL: You were appointed to the college faculty after Lynette Messer left, is that right?
KF: No, this was before she left, because I was on faculty, and took over two of her classes while she was gone for the year.
DL: How was that worked out? How did you get on faculty?
KF: Well, let me see. I guess again, it was due to the kind of participation, the length of time, and on her recommendation, and the discussion she had with the whore education division. And by that time, I had earned my B.A. and was enrolled in the master's degree program.
DL: Was there much reaction to the appointment?
KF: Yes, there was a lot of reaction to it, and Fred Wilhelms was one of
the ones who objected. Mary Hyatt was also proposed for this position. Yes, there was a lot of discussion, both in meetings and out of meetings because Mary Hyatt was white and I was black. The compromise was that she supervised the nursery school and two-,three-, and four-year-olds; I taught Lynette Messer's classes and worked with Frederic Burke teachers on a curriculum study. At this point, Frederic Burke School was closed for one semseter.﻿103
DL: Was she also a student?
KF: She was a student. She was not employed as a teacher at all in the nursery school at that time. She had been a teacher during the war years with Lynette Messer's child care program. She followed Theresa Mailer's San Francisco child care program for working parents, while she worked toward her degree. She was working on her M.A. the same year I was.
DL: So she didn't have the background that you had?
KF; No, she didn't have the background, but she was associating herself with the child care centers in the San Francisco Unified School District and assisting the director of those child care centers, Theresa Mailer. She wasn't as active on campus. She was known because she was taking courses there, but she wasn't as active nor had she been there the same number of years I had been there, actively engaged in Frederic Burke Elementary School program as well as the child care center and the nursery school program.
DL: Did it take a long time for this to be resolved, for you to get the appointment?
KF: Well, I don't know how long they'd been talking about it. I really don't know.
DL: Lynette Messer didn't tell you that she was proposing this?
KF: Not until it was all settled. Then she said to me, "Would you consider
taking my classes while I go?" She was very diplomatic about everything, And when I heard that, I thought, "My land, would I consider? Indeed I would!" I was tickled to death and very flattered. I didn't ever expect anything like that to happen to me. And shame on me, the first thing I thought about was the registrar. I thought, "Aha, I can never teach in San Francisco Public Schools. Ha, ha. I'll nod to her with my cap and gown on at the graduation." [laughter]
DL: Did you take over any of Lynette Messer's responsibilities with the nursery school?
KF: Yes. That summer, 1952, I was in charge of extended day care and also the five-year-old group and developing individualized programs for the atypical child.
DL: Did you continue your supervising duties of the student teachers?
KF: Just those that were concerned with my particular area.
DL: How were you able to get appointed to the faculty as an undergraduate?
KF: In 1949, there was a reorganization of the nursery school staff, and we had to have our credentials reevaluated by the education division. Those of us who had achieved the B.A. became part of the faculty of the﻿104
KF: (cont.) nursery school. Those of us who were consistently working toward advanced degrees, which I was, received positions on the nursery school staff comparable to our background of experience, and time spent on campus in the nursery school. All of this was part of the reorganization.
DL: So in essence, you got nursery school faculty status even though
you were working towards your B.A. as a result of this reorganization?
KF: Yes. And the evaluation of our credentials by the education division.
DL: The faculty position with the nursery school enabled you to continue supervising student teachers. Was having faculty status the primary change in your situation?
KF: Oh, yes. Well, that wasn't the primary change. I had been supervising all along, even during the war years.
DL: What did faculty status do? I mean, what did it change for you?
KF: Well, it didn't change anything for me. You see, my background of
experience in the teacher-training program was extensive. It didn't change anything for me except permit me to become a member of the faculty on their reevaluation of my background of experience and training, and reevaluation of my work.
DL: Were you teaching any courses, or were you given any courses to teach at that time?
KF: At the college level? Not at that time, but when Lynette Messer went on leave in 1952, then I took two of her classes. By that time I had achieved the B.A. degree, and I was made a permanent member of the college faculty, so I could teach two of her college courses, and did so.
DL: Did you also keep a position at the nursery school?
KF: Yes, I was supervising teacher of the five-year-old group, the
extended day care group, and the program we had instituted—integrating the atypical child into a normal group.
DL: I'd like to just change the subject somewhat. During all of this time, what was your relationship with Lynette Messer? Were you friends or were you just professional associates?
KF: During this time I was a professional associate, but there was a warm relationship existing between Lynette Messer and me, as existed between Lynette Messer and all of her staff. She had the ability to establish rapport and to encourage confidence. At the same time, she made each one of us feel competent in areas where a lot of us were really weak, so we exerted a lot of effort to really improve and perform well.
DL:
Did she give the same kinds of opportunities to other students as she gave you, or was this something special that she had...﻿105
KF: No, this was nothing special. Lynette Messer had the ability to assess each one of her faculty, and also each one of the student teachers who came into the training program. She had an unusual ability in this area to evaluate the capabilities and the special areas of interest that these students, as well as staff, had. And to encourage them to develop those areas where they seemed to be most proficient. It was under her guidance that I developed, and my interest in preschool education increased. And I guess it's due to Lynette Messer that I stayed right there at State College and went on in preschool education, parent-child relationships and early childhood development.
DL: Did anyone else besides you take over any of her classes when she went on this sabbatical in 1952?
KF: Yes. Mary Hyatt took over the supervision of the two-year olds, the threes, the fours, in the nursery school building, and also taught nursery school procedures as well as early childhood education at the two-, three-, and four-year-old level.
DL: What were your courses? What courses did you teach?
KF: Well, let me see. I've forgotten... It was a seminar for student teachers.
DL: But it was just you and Mary Hyatt who split Lynette Messer's course load?
KF: The supervisory position, the directorship of the nursery school and the child care center was split between Mary Hyatt and me. You see, the total program was housed in two buildings. The nursery school group—the twos, the threes, and the fours—were housed in one building. The fives, the extended day care and the special program was housed in Frederic Burke School. At the same time, or at least during this period, I was also working with Irv Futter's elementary school staff on a curriculum study in preparation for opening the new school on State College campus. If you want to hear a funny little story, we were the last division on old campus before the school moved. Have I told you this?
DL: No. ~
KF: We had nothing to do then except... This is after I'd taught—this is the following semester..
DL: This is about 1953?
KF: Oh, this would have been '54. Yes, it was fall of '53 that all the departments had moved out to new campus, except the education division. The Frederic Burke School staff was given six months to do a curriculum study. Didn't have any classes in Frederic Burke from the kindergarten level through sixth grade. But the extended day care, the special project for atypical, and the five-year-old group was continued. Well, during this semester when we were working on the curriculum study, four of Irv Futter's master teachers﻿106
KF: (cont.) became pregnant, and here he had to open this new school in the fall. He was frantic, and he said, "Nobody I will hire, but nobody, without the rabbit test." So those of us who knew each other so well and had worked together for years and years and years in that wing of Frederic Burke School all absented ourselves at the end of that summer, and Irv Futter had to open with an almost all new staff in the fall on new campus. [laughter]
DL: While you were earning your B.A., you were working all this time in the nursery school, getting paid?
KF: After completing the eighteen-week training course, yes. Yes, I was on salary. Salaries were established during the war years. There was a scale, and I guess the assistance came from the federal government for costs connected with the program, and part of it from San Francisco State College, because this was a teacher-training institution. So we were not fully federally funded. And then part of it... Well, of course the state funds would come through the State College.
DL: Did you have to work, or was this something you did because of the professional experience...
KF: No, I didn't have to work. By that time Bob was working. But I did it because I had interest and had been asked to join the staff, and I did. I considered it quite an honor to be asked.
DL: You also received scholarships?
KF: Yes, this after a few years of participation. I was recommended for a scholarship to Vassar Summer Institute in 1949, where I was a part of the summer institute staff. Then in '50 I was invited to come back again on staff, and also in '53. During those three summers, I worked... I also took courses there and worked on my B.A. and also my master's.
DL: What is the Vassar Summer Institute?
KF: Vassar Summer Institute was developed by Mary Fisher Langmuir and
was a summer school for parents and children. There were two schools, one for parents and one for children. These two schools were housed in different buildings. The children's school was a twenty-four-hour school where the children lived—it was their world. They had their own teachers, and the age groups were divided. The parents lived by themselves in the adult school building, so they had a chance to pursue their interests for one whole summer, spending scheduled time with their children in guided activity. And they learned how to be relaxed parents, how to enjoy their children for the first time, some of them. So Vassar Summer Institute was a school designed for parents and children so they could spend the summer together, following their own interests separately.
DL: What was your position at the school?﻿107
KF: My position was in the children's school, and I was assigned to...
Let's see. I had three experiences, twos one summer, the threes and the fours. This was a wide age-range group, this summer school for children. It ranged in age from the two-year level through nine years.
DL: And were you being supervised?
KF: Oh, yes. Oh, indeed so. I was like a student teacher at Vassar Summer Institute, and there were supervising teachers who were responsible to the director, Mary Fisher Langmuir.
DL: How did you get chosen to participate in the Summer Institute?
KF: Any college or university in the country could recommend applicants for the program. Or, people who were involved in the field of early childhood education could write and apply. And since I was recommended through our nursery school, I applied, and asked for a scholarship, and received it.
DL: Oh, but first Lynette Messer or someone else at the nursery school...
KF: Lynette Messer said, "Why don't you apply for Vassar Summer Institute?" "Well," I said, "I don't think they'd take me, number one."
DL: Why did you think that?
KF: Well, Vassar Summer Institute had never had one of us, and having had this experience at State College, I knew very well they weren't going to take me. It was a surprise when they did. And they may have been surprised as I was too, when they saw me. [laughter]
DL: There were no other black teachers there?
KF: There were no other black teachers, but there were enrollees. That was where I met Barbara Rowan. Her parents were enrolled in the adult school, and she was enrolled in the children's school.
DL: She became one of your favorite children?
KF: I should say so. We're just close, close friends as of today.
DL: After you received your B.A. in '52, did you immediately go after your M.A., or did you take some time off?
KF: No, I didn't. I went right after the M.A., tooth and nail, because I had the feeling I'd be displaced if I didn't.
DL: From the nursery school?
KF: Well, not from the nursery school, but from San Francisco State College faculty. By that time I'd had a taste of it, I had my finger in the pie, and I wanted to be sure that the registrar wouldn't have the
last laugh. -﻿108
DL: You had gotten a B.A. in early childhood...
KF: Early childhood education.
DL: And this was where you were going to get your M.A., in the same area?
KF: Oh, yes. Following right along. The major field was early childhood education. Minor field, psychology, with special interests in counseling and guidance.
DL: Was anyone involved in helping you make that decision to go after your M.A., or was this something that you...
KF: I couldn't get it fast enough. I needed that little piece of paper to sit on, that was my security.
DL: Besides Lynette Messer, were there other people in the education department who took an interest in your education or your career?
KF: Oh, yes. George Cheviokov gave me lots of help, and Boyd R. McCandless, who became a lifelong friend also. And, what was that other man's name—Adler... He was in the psychology department. They were the ones who gave me encouragement and helped me work through on some of the many, many problems that came up. For example, one of those professors, when I had to take statistics, said to me the second session of class, "You'll never pass this course." Of course, statistics, you know, is a requirement, you have to take it. So I went to George Cheviocof and told him, and he said, "Well, go to the dean and tell him what happened, then come back and tell me and I'll tell you what to do." So you see, if it hadn't been for the interest and the guidance of people like Rob Stewart, George Cheviocof, Celia Anderson, I couldn't have gotten through. I probably wouldn't have run home crying to my mother, but I probably would have been crushed and thought, "Well, it's too much to fight. I can't do it." But because people supported me, and said, "Now do this, do this, do this," I did it and I got through.
DL: Do you feel that some of the hostility that came at you was because you were a Negro, or some other reason?
KF:	In this instance it was.
DL:	The statistics course?
KF:	Yes. In that instance, it certainly was.
DL:	In other instances it was, what, a personality issue?
KF: Oh, it could be a personality thing or a combination of... You see, there weren't very many Negroes in San Francisco State College, and they didn't encourage Negroes to come. But during the war years we began to make our presence felt because there were many, many Negro students who enrolled in this eighteen-week course in order to qualify for child care centers all up and down the Pacific Coast. There were three training programs—Seattle, San Francisco, and San Diego.﻿109
DL: Oh, there were many Negro students?
KF: Yes, oh, many.
DL: Do you remember some of the people, their names?
KF: Yes, I can't pull them out of my hat, but I certainly must have a list around here somewhere.
DL: But at the master's level, were there other Negroes working towards a masters in education at the same time that you were, or before you even got there?
KF: I don't remember any, I don't remember any. Not in the education division.
DL: So you might have been the only one in your department at that time.
KF: I know I was the only one in... Well, wait a minute, Sylvia Mallett was a supervising teacher in the four-year-old group when I enrolled in that eighteen-week course.
DL: So she was ahead of you. She was there already.
KF: Yes, she was there. But she did not have and was not working on her B.A.
DL: She was just in the eighteen-week, the child care program?
KF: She was in the child care program and had worked with Lynette Messer for several years. This is before the reorganization, as a head teacher. But she was doing...
DL: This is before the war, even?
KF: This is before the war.
DL: She didn't have a B.A.?
KF: You see, the reorganization had not taken place in the nursery school, and the head teachers did not have to have B.A.'s. The nursery school at that time served as a laboratory for the home economics department and P.E. The psychology department didn't use the lab then.
DL:	P.E. being physical education?
KF:	Yes.
DL:	How long was Sylvia Mallett able to keep her position?
KF:	Let's see, she was there about two years after I came.
DL:	Did she leave on her own or was she asked to leave?﻿110
KF: Well, she and Lynette Messer unfortunately had some kind of a disagreement and she was asked to go.
DL: While you were working on your master's degree in education, you
continued your position in the nursery school, as well as teaching Lynette Messer's courses. What was your thesis subject for your master's, do you recall?
KF: It was on the education of the atypical child.
DL: Did you have to have a placement while you were working on your master's degree, or were these other responsibilities the major things you had to deal with?
KF: They were the major things I had to do with. I had to do this other work, of course.
DL: Class work.
KF: Oh, yes. You see, my job as a faculty member... You're talking about after the reorganization...
DL: How did you manage that? Were you working a thirty-five or forty-hour week as well as studying?
KF: No, this is where they readjusted, you see, my time. I worked as a faculty member part time, and devoted the other half to classes.
DL: And when you say faculty member, you're talking about teaching your courses as well as your responsibilities in the nursery school.
KF: Yes.. I worked part time.
DL: While on campus, did you belong to any professional associations or organizations ?
KF: Oh, yes. Celia Anderson, Irv Futter's assistant in the Frederic Burke School, recommended me for membership in a national society in education, the National Honorary Society in Education, Kappa Delta Pi. That was a big surprise to me, because they didn't have any either. [laughter] So I joined Kappa Delta Pi, took an active part in it, spread my blackness around, became the first one. Oh, yes, and I wound up as president of the group, even had my picture taken with them.
DL: Was this during your undergraduate years?
KF: Yes, because they sent me as their representative to a national convention at Purdue University.
DL: This was after you became president?
KF: Yes. Yes, they did, they sent me. I had to get permission from﻿Ill
KF (cont.) J. Paul Leonard, and he looked at me as though I didn't have good sense, and he said, "Well, if you want to pay your own fare, I'll give you the time off, but be back on..." such-and-such a date. So I went and I had a very interesting time, because they didn't have any either.
DL: How did you get the presidency? I mean, were you surprised, did you campaign?
KF: No, I didn't campaign. The group just, when the nominating committee came back, my name was on the slate, and when the vote was taken, it was for me, it was me, it was me, oh Lord! I was scared to death.
DL: How long were you president?
KF: No longer than I had to be. I guess that was a year.
DL: Do you recall any of the things you might have done when you were president?
KF: Oh, yes. I turned to and worked hard and developed all kinds of special activities. I made everybody know I could perform well.
DL: Were there other organizations that you joined on campus?
KF: No, no. No, I thought that was sufficient. Because in this
organization, number one, you had to be recommended by a faculty member. Number two, you had to have displayed certain qualities during your enrollment as a student at San Francisco State College. And beside that, you had to get faculty members to sponsor you. So I thought, well, gee whiz, if I can pass the test, this is enough, that's it.
DL: Had you been interested in joining this organization?
KF: No. No, I'm not a joiner. I've joined only three things in my life, and Kappa Delta Pi is one of them; NAACP and the Smart Set are the others.
DL: Now you were associated with Dr. Hulda Thelander of the Children's Hospital. How did this come about?
KF: At Frederic Burke School, the teachers in the elementary school became aware of the number of children who were giving them trouble in the classrooms. Even though these children tested out to be normal, they seemed to be in motion all the time. They were always adjusting shades or sharpening pencils, or going to the library or doing something for somebody else but not for themselves. We also found that in the public schools, these children who were a little different and always in motion were turning up at third and fourth grade not reading, not doing number work, not writing. They weren't doing anything for themselves. Well, of course, they'd be put into the special classes for the mentally retarded and, as we looked at this group of children, we found there their problems seemed to increase,﻿112
KF: (cont.) rather than decrease, and they still weren't learning. So about that time, Dr. Hulda Thelander, who was chief of pediatrics at Children's Hospital, had established a preschool for the medically diagnosed cerebral palsy child. And she found that these children who were different could not be diagnosed as cerebral palsied, so she couldn't enter them in her nursery school for evaluation. About this time also, Lynette Messer became interested in the atypical group that were filling up the mentally retarded classes in the public schools and becoming such emotional problems that they were sloughed off into mental institutions throughout the state. Jane Ratundi, who was child psychologist at San Francisco State College, and was working with the teachers in Frederic Burke School also, became interested in this group, and Dr. Hulda Thelander asked to have a meeting... Oh, wait a minute, Dr. Hulda Thelander had referred, at that time, some one of her patients to Lynette Messer's nursery school. They talked it over and they decided that this group of children should be studied because they were different. They weren't reached through the special education groups, and they were filling up the institutions. Somebody needed to do something about them to find out just what the disability was. They decided that this group of children needed to be screened medically first, then educationally and psychologically at the same time. And in order to do this, an experimental unit was needed.
My association with Dr. Thelander came as the result of my interest in the atypical child and my having had the opportunity to work with the program on campus, integrating the atypical child into the normal group. By that time, I had been associated with the Northern California School for Cerebral Palsied and Others, where I had been doing the education evaluations of the children in a twenty-four-hour school.
DL: Was this before or after you had earned your master's?
KF; This was after.
DL: So you were maintaining some sort of ties with State as well as
working at the Northern California School for Cerebral Palsied and Others, a residence school.
KF: Yes, you see it all tied in together because the Northern California School for Cerebral Palsied and Others—now it's the School for the Neurologically Handicapped, but then it had another title—was associated and working closely with the special education division at San Francisco State College. And by that time, I think I had my California State credential for the orthopedically handicapped, and the mentally retarded. I was much interested in special education at that point.
DL: Was this with the elementary school child or with all children?
KF: With all children. It was my feeling that if you could identify﻿113
KF: (cont). these children and work with them early enough, you could help them compensate for some of their deviations from the norm. And at State College, Lynette Messer had given me enough elbowroom in developing programs for the atypical child, so I had the feeling of what the needs were in terms of developing a program of activity for these children who were different, and how their individual needs had to be met through these programs. My exposure to the orthopedically handicapped, at the Northern California School for the Cerebral Palsied, had also been a valuable experience. So when Dr. Hulda Thelander said to Lynette Messer, "Let's get somebody to do the educational evaluations, and somebody to do the psychologicals, and let's set up an experimental unit, if we can find a proper place and find some funding," Lynette Messer called me in on that meeting, along with Jane Ratundi. Dr. Hulda Thelander, Jane Ratundi, Lynette Messer, and I discussed the possibility of establishing such a unit. Well, at that time there was an empty apartment on the first floor of the building where I lived, and they all came and looked at it and said it would make a perfect little unit. It was decided that Dr. Hulda Thelander would screen and select the children, because the medical diagnosis was necessary. And while she was doing that, we were all talking about ways and means to get this funded. There was so little in San Francisco for these children who were different and seemed unable to adjust to normal groups, and parents were eager and anxious to get them enrolled in anything at the preschool level that was available. So when this became known, it was easy to fill a group. I think we started with six children and we charged tuition. The parents were also called upon to help make, out of apple boxes and orange crates, activity shelves, and furnish the school. Well, these parents went to work and they not only made cabinets and furniture, they made a set of the most beautiful blocks, finely finished, in any classroom setting. They turned to and helped with the organization of this little unit, and finally we developed our program and we began our evaluation of the children. Now, how much do you want me to go onto it?
DL: Well, did Dr. Thelander do the medical workups of some of the children?
KF: Yes. Dr. Thelander did the medical workups, Jane Ratundi did the psychological evaluations, I did the educational evaluations, and Lynette Messer supervised. Dr. Ernest Wolf, a very well-known pediatrician in this area, took interest and came and spent one whole morning observing the group, as did Boyd R. McCandless. Dr. Hulda Thelander took charge of any medical problems and followed the children medically. . We had also George Cheviokov come and observe, and Jerry Rothstein, head of special education at San Francisco State College, took a great interest in our little unit. And as it developed, Leo Caine, who was then director of special services at San Francisco State College, and Helen Herrick, who had to do with the Department of Social Services at the state level—she was a psychiatric social worker at the state level, then—took an interest in this little unit and what we were doing. And they met as a group at San Francisco State College and discussed this and the work we were doing, and as a result, we applied to the San Francisco Foundation for support.﻿114
DL: Did you get it?
KF: Well, everything was all arranged, and Mr. May of the San Francisco Foundation was very much impressed with the reports he had received from this panel of professionals. He gave us all encouragement and said we were being considered very favorably, and that we were to receive funding through the San Francisco Foundation for one year.
DL: This is after the program had been running for some time?
KF: This was after the program had been in operation for, I guess, a year and a few months.
DL: Were you the only teacher?
KF: Oh, no. Jane Ratundi, yes, she taught too. You see, because we were evaluating, we needed two people as a team to do it. That's why our group couldn't be too large, because we really needed to have time to observe and to react—children to teachers and teachers to children.
DL: Was it the same six children that you started out with—did you carry them over from year to year?
KF: Yes, we did. We were fortunate in being able to do that. There were also two neighborhood preschool age children who attached themselves to the program.
DL: How long did the program last?
KF: The program...well, let's see. I've forgotten, I'd have to look it up. Let's say it lasted two years, three years. Yes, from 1955 to 1958.
DL: How did the parents learn about the program?
KF: The parents were a part of the program because until you know parents, you don't know children.
DL: But how did they hear about the —
KF: How did they hear about it? They'd hear about it by word of mouth
or through Dr. Hulda Thelander's clinic at Children's Hospital. This is how most of them came to us. She would have to screen them medically, and she had a great long list of people who were waiting. But we could take so few.
DL: What was the outcome of the experimental unit?
KF: Well, during the first year, we had decided in our screening of these children that we'd use some of the Strauss and Lehtinen methods. Strauss and Lehtinen did a twenty-year study on the nonmotor-handicapped, brain-injured child. And we decided that this group of children that Dr. Hulda Thelander was screening medically were nonmotor-handicapped, brain-injured children. Some of them were mildly motor﻿115
KF: (cont.) handicapped, others didn't look any different than a normal child, but they were different. So we decided to use these methods in our assessment of them and in our evaluation. In using these methods over a period of a year, we came to find out that these children deviated in visual and auditory areas. And we found out that the deviation was not a constant, fixed one, it was fluctuating in nature. On some days the child might not see letter and number symbols as normal children see them. Parts of the letter and number symbols would be missing. So those children, because parts of these symbols were missing and they didn't see them the same way every day, they couldn't learn. They didn't have a visual, mental picture of the symbol. Another thing we found out, their inattentiveness and their movement was due to inability to take direction, because they deviated from the norm in auditory areas, they didn't always hear a complete sentence. On one day they might hear the first part of the sentence, on another day, they might hear the last part of the sentence, or vice versa. Anyway, they couldn't take the teacher's direction because they didn't hear everything that was said.
DL: What did you do with the findings of studying these children?
KF: All right. In using the Strauss and Lehtinen methods, we found the results were this, and they were dramatic. We found that we could help these children compensate for their deviations visually, for instance, by using two colors to draw symbols. We didn't use, at the preschool level, letter or number symbols. We used circles, squares, triangle, oblong—the fundamental shapes. We found that in using two colors, these children, over the period of a year, learned the symbols, and had memorized them, and had compensated for that deviation, because they consistently, each day, could see these symbols with the two colors on them. In the auditory area, we would repeat sentences, both the whole sentence; then we'd repeat parts of the sentence; then we'd put the whole sentence together. We'd have the child verbalize it. And gradually these children began to pick up on what was said, faster, and by the end of the year, several of them had improved to the point where they could take simple directions.
DL: Did any of them move into the normal school system?
KF: Oh, yes. But that was later on. You see, these were young children, and this is what we wanted to see—if you get them young enough, after you find out what the problem is, can you do something about it? Now all of the children didn't deviate in these auditory and visual areas. Some of them had slight motor handicaps, some of them might have a visual area, some might have an auditory deficiency. But they all didn't have everything wrong with them. So we had to determine what these areas were that were keeping them in motion all the time. Short attention span was another thing we had to work on, and the Strauss and Lehtinen methods were effective there. So by the end of the year, we knew we had kids who fit the Strauss and Lehtinen syndrome, and we so labeled them. Well, you see, then was when these other people began to focus on us and see that we were doing more than appeasing parents of atypical children by creating a place for them.﻿116
DL: What other people?
KF: Well, these are the professionals. This is when we decided that we
needed more money than the parents could afford. We had been scraping along, using our own funds as well. And some of us were going without salary because of our interest and because of the dramatic things that were happening with these kids.
DL: Did you maintain your job with the Northern California School for the Cerebral Palsied and Others? Is that how you were able to get by?
KF: Oh, yes, I maintained my job there, and then too, we had a lot of help from people like Jerry Rothstein, and Helen Herrick supported us.
DL: Financially?
KF: Not financially, but in terms of screening the work we were doing and
approving it. And because they were at the professional level. Here's Helen Herrick from the State Department of Mental Hygiene; Jerry Rothstein, head of the division of Special Education at San Francisco State College; Hulda Thelander, chief of pediatrics at Children's Hospital; Lynette Messer, San Francisco State College faculty; Ernst Wolf, M.D., nationally famous pediatrician. We had people who were interested. We wanted to get this thing off the ground and get it properly funded, so we could expand and probably get an experimental unit set up on San Francisco State College campus to include in the teacher-training program. Because you see, if teachers are not aware of how to identify these children—who are the nonmotor-handicapped group, nonmotor, brain-injured, handicapped group—at the kindergarten level, or the preschool level preferably, then how are they going to know what to do with them in the classroom?
DL: You had said before that the experimental unit lasted from two to three years. On what funding did the project last for that long?
KF: The children were charged tuition, and the tuition served to buy
supplies and pay small salaries, but most of us were giving of our time because we were interested in determining the problems that existed in this particular group of children, who were screened by Dr. Hu-lda Thelander medically, Jane Ratundi psychologically. And I did the educational workups on them.
DL: Did you and Jane Ratundi make most of the basic decisions, and the consultants came in with suggestions? How did it work?
KF: We talked over every part of the program with the consultants. That was Dr. Thelander, Helen Herrick, Lynette Messer, George Cheviokov, and Ernst Wolf.
DL: So you'd talk over the decisions with them?﻿117
KF: Yes, we did. And any changes, any basic changes in our daily program were made with their help.
DL: Well, what happened finally to the experimental unit? You said before, you were seeking San Francisco Foundation funding.
KF: Yes, Mr. May at the San Francisco Foundation read our proposal for assistance and had approved it. We were to receive full funding through the San Francisco Foundation when someone informed the San Francisco Foundation that there was a unit with a program comparable to the one we were offering, and that it would be a duplication of effort. So we didn't get the grant. We found out that there was a school, and that it had been established by Tommy Greenburg's grandfather (a student who was one of the original enrollees in the experimental unit). We also found out that the person I had been using as a consultant every step of the way, using as a sounding board, Chairman of the Special Education Division, had worked with Tommy Greenburg's father and grandfather to set up this unit. And when that happened, I was astounded; we all were!
So I called Judge Raymond J. O'Connor, (father of other enrollees— Kathy and Roger O'Connor) and I asked him what to do. So he set up a conversation between himself and Tommy Greenburg's father to discuss the future of the school. Raymond J. O'Connor taped that conversation and that is how we came to know exactly what had happened.
I talked it over with my husband who was a very wise person when it came to taking positive action in negative situations. He said (and I agree) that those were powerful people and they were well entrenched financially and politically. They had money and power, and I didn't have anything except the creation of this little unit and the goodwill of the parents and those who had worked with me as advisors...helped with the development of the school from the beginning. What chance would I have of taking this program farther against all this power and money? So I decided we'd made our point and we have identified one segment of "The Others."
DL: Once you didn't get the grant, did the unit fold right then and there, or did you go on?
KF: We went on for one summer and at the end of the summer we closed.
DL: You were still maintaining your job at the Northern California Cerebral Palsied School, is that correct?
KF: Yes, I did, and I continued to teach there for a number of years. The supervisor at the Northern California School was a Mr. Errol Lown. That school, then, was a center for the cerebral palsied child. It was a twenty-four-hour situation and children came from throughout California for diagnosis and evaluation in all areas. Mr. Errol Lown was in sympathy with what we were attempting to effect﻿117A
(cont.) and instituted parts of our program at the Northern California School for Cerebral Palsied. (And Others) was added to that title.
DL: Did you handle that, were you supervising?
KF: Yes, I became a part of the team. You see, they had staff
psychologists, they had people who did the complete medical screening, and also some of the hospitals were participating with the Northern California School in medical diagnosis. I had the educational workups, working with the team. It was a very satisfactory experience, so I don't think I felt as frustrated as I would have, had I not been in a situation that permitted me to further test and develop the educational tools and techniques developed in "Aid for Brain-Injured Children."
DL: So the Northern California School instituted some of your programs after the experimental unit folded, or did they do so at the same time that you were working with the unit?
KF: Yes, I was utilizing some of the tools and techniques I had acquired in working with the experimental unit utilizing the Strauss and Lehtinen techniques. And I just took these newly acquired skills into the Northern California School, into my own group where I had the authority to develop and plan the programs to meet individual needs.
DL: Did you just do the diagnoses, or did you work with the children?
KF: I worked with the children. You have to work with them every day for a period of time to make an accurate diagnosis.
DL: Were you with the Northern California School for several years?﻿118
KF: Yes. Then one spring Pat Kennison called from the Laguna Salada School District in Pacifica. Pat Kennison was supervisor of the Kindergarten-Primary Division in the Laguna Salada School District. She said, "You know, we're going to get funding this coming year for the Head Start program. Wouldn't you like to coordinate the Head Start program down here for the district?" And I said, "Well, I don't know, I'll think about it." So I thought about it, and I was sort of interested because preschool was my first love. As of today, I'd rather work with the preschool group than at the college level. So I thought about it, and I decided after a period of weeks that I needed a change, and I'd go down. I thought also that I would take some skills to that Laguna Salada School District that they had no knowledge of. Here is where we need to find these kids who deviate in visual and auditory areas; here's where we need to find them, and start working with them—at the preschool level— rather than waiting until they go through the frustration of three grades before they get any attention. And when they do, it's the wrong kind of attention, because by being placed in the slow learner classes, their problems increase to the point where they become severe behavior problems and are institutionalized. This is how we became interested in them in the first place. Our institutions were filling up with these children and nobody knew what to do with them. And Dr. Hulda Thelander was getting a number of them that she couldn't diagnose medically, because the disability this particular group had was so minimal, so fluctuating in nature, that it couldn't be diagnosed medically. Now this group is labeled neurologically handicapped...
DL: I wanted to ask, when you went down to the Laguna Salada District, did you in effect bring the whole Head Start program together? Were there guidelines to follow?
KF: Oh yes, yes I did. I got off the track, didn't I? The Laguna Salada School District was coordinating a Head Start program for the district at Westview School in Pacifica. Yes, I had that summer to coordinate the program and, fortunately, that summer Lydia Cooper decided to work. Now, Lydia Cooper had been working for Laguna Salada School District for seventeen years as supervisor of food services. And it was Lydia Cooper's feeling that food services should be a part of the curriculum and should have been correlated with the curriculum because it offers such a rich opportunity for teaching in many areas. So, since Lydia Cooper and I were in agreement, we decided we d include her department in coordinating this program. So we did, and as a result food services are now a part of the Laguna Salada School District curriculum.
DL: Head Start as well as the regular program?
KF: Oh, yes. You see, after we had such a successful summer, our program was looked at in terms of the kindergarten department and the elementary school grades also, because there was much that we incorporated that could be used. It was a new idea, and they rather liked it. Anyway, we had a wonderful summer at Westview.﻿119
KF: (cont.) You want to hear a funny story? When I work at something like this, it isn't an eight-hour-a-day job. It becomes a twenty-four-hour-a-day job. Toward the end of the summer, we were going to be reviewed by the VIP's from Sacramento. Well of course, whenever company is coming into a school district, and especially the people from Sacramento, you tidy up, just like you would at home. You clean up everything, you display your very best. So we worked hard, and we had everything ready, and we were exhausted because we really wanted the district to get the amount of money they needed. We knew it depended on us, in a sense, to sell this program to the people in Sacramento, so we wanted it to be especially good. Well, finally the day before these people were coming to visit arrived, and exhausted, I went home and fell into bed. I had to be at school at seven o'clock the next morning. Well, all of a sudden, I woke up and looked at the clock, and it was seven o'clock. I jumped up and threw on my clothes, and I drove like crazy to the school. And when I got there, there wasn't any life around, nobody on the street, no cars in the parking lot. There was a peculiar quiet and a funny kind of a light in the sky, as though there was an eclipse or something. I thought, well, this is strange, there must be some physical phenomenon happening. I'd better get to the first parents' house and see what this is. There must be something terrible going on that I don't know about. And it kept getting darker and darker, and all of a sudden when I was on the way to the closest parents' house, I thought, oh, it must be quarter of eight at night and not quarter of eight in the morning. I had been to school twice in one day! [laughter] You have no idea how many deaths I died on that ride down there to Pacifica.
DL: It's a good thing you didn't go to the parents' house because they would have thought,"Oh my, what's wrong here!"
KF: Wasn't that fortunate. Indeed they would have.
DL: "And she's running this thing!"
KF: Wasn't that fortunate!
DL: The summer you went down to coordinate and put the Head Start program together, were the children in the school going through whatever programs you were setting up?
KF: These were the children who were signed up for summer school. They
had already been screened by the psychologists, the school psychologist, and accepted for the Head Start program in the fall. In order to coordinate the program, I utilized this group that had been accepted. And I had a staff that really wanted to work in the program, and they were very cooperative.
DL: Did you institute any of the programs that you had developed, both at the Northern California School and at your experimental unit? Were you able to put any of those into effect?
KF: Yes. In our orientation program, I made the teachers aware of some of the guidelines that we had developed in the experimental unit, in terms of identifying these children who deviated from the norm in﻿120
KF: (cont.) visual and auditory areas.
DL: As the program really began rolling, once these children were identified, what did you do then?
KF: Well, that's where it stopped. Because generally the teachers in that school district had not had any kind of preparation. Our teacher-training institutions didn't include that material at all. Special education departments didn't include it because they weren't aware. They were aware of the mentally retarded, and these children all got sloughed into mentally retarded groups because they weren't learning. So there was nothing to be done there. I talked with people at State College, as did Hulda Thelander, Lynette Messer, Helen Herrick, Ernst Wolf.
DL: This was when you were at the Head Start that you talked to these people?
KF: I talked with them, yes, after I had the Head Start experience, to see how effective they could be with the people at State College in the special education department, to include some of the knowledge we had gained about this particular group of children in the teacher-training program. So that as they sent teachers out, they'd be prepared to identify these kids at the preschool level, since Head Start was being instituted throughout the state of California. That's where we needed to find them. The earlier you can identify them, the more likely it is that you can help them compensate for their deviations.
DL: Now besides those special skills, and the food services program, were there any other innovative programs that you instituted as a coordinator?
KF: Any other special programs? No, we had guidelines that were in
printed form from the federal government, that we had to follow. We enriched all of those programs with many activities, in every area.
DL: Did people from other Head Start programs come and use your programs as a model for their districts?
KF: Yes, we had visitors all summer long from other school districts. Ours was a kind of a model program.
DL: Why was that?
KF: Well, it was because, I think, Laguna Salada School District was the only school district who was coordinating their programs that summer. The others were all waiting until the fall. But Laguna Salada wanted to be ready and so they took the summer to do this.
DL: When the VIP's from Sacramento finally came and observed your program— and you were there at the right time—did they give the program a particular rating? Were they pleased?﻿121
KF: They were very pleased and they funded the school district well for Head Start. Later on, Cooper's Corner, which it was my pleasure to develop from the ground up, received some state funding and state support. It wasn't part of the Laguna Salada School District, but the state people cooperated with Cooper's Corner.
DL: We'll get to Cooper's Corner in a second. I wanted to ask you—Head Start has come into a lot of criticism because some people are saying it is ineffective in doing what it was set up to do, and that is to give those children a head start.
KF: Yes.
DL: While you were with the program in the early 1960s, did you perceive any problems of that nature?
KF: No, I didn't. Because I had people who had a background of preschool education. I had a staff of people who had had experience in preschool groups, and they were professionally prepared to come into the program. Now, the program got its bad name because some school districts were not funded well enough to employ professionally trained people. They had people who were interested in the program, but some of those programs were little more than child care, because the staff was not equipped to plan and develop Head Start programs, they didn't have the skills. It was unfortunate.
DL:
KF:
KF:
Do you recall how many years you coordinated the Head Start program for Laguna Salada?
I coordinated the program that summer, and then it was instituted in the other schools in the district in the fall.
DL: So you were not the director of the Head Start program?
I was director for that one summer, and then they were ready to go.
DL: So after the summer you did not remain...
KF: No, after the summer I did not remain with—except in an advisory capacity. When Pat Kennison felt she needed help, then I'd go on down and we'd talk about whatever the problem was together.
DL: So what did you do after that summer?
KF: After that summer... Let me see, what did I do? After that summer was over, word of the kind of work we had been doing in the experimental unit had been circulated through preschool groups, and people wanted to hear about it. So there were many, many, and more invitations than I could really handle, to come and talk about the program and about some of the techniques we used. I started speaking to various groups, and enjoyed doing it, and that's what I did, until one day Lydia Cooper called me and said, "I think we've found the place for our nursery school." Her lifelong dream and her husband's lifelong dream﻿122
KF: (cont.) had been to build their own nursery school and institute their own program in terms of the way they felt preschool should be run. Having been in Laguna Salada School District, as well as the San Franc isco Unified School District--her husband had taught in San Francisco from elementary school through the high school level, and then had become a counselor—he had a very well defined idea as to what preschool and kindergarten education should be. Their lifelong dream was that they have their own school. So when they found a parcel of property with a building on it, all on one level, on a good, big section of land right across the street from Linda-Mar Elementary School in Pacifica, they decided that was the place. So they called me up to come down and look at it and see if it would be appropriate for a preschool, for a nursery school. So I went down, and that little building, which had been a Catholic church, was ideal, it could be remodeled satisfactorily. So the Coopers sold their home in Pacifica. Mr. Cooper put his retirement money into this project, they got an architect, and we started planning their nursery school.
DL: They asked you to come in with them on this project?
KF: Oh, yes. I had the pleasure of working with the architect and planning the school.
DL: How did the Coopers and you decide that you would help them with this project?
KF: Well, they asked me if I would be willing. They said, "We haven't enough money to pay you, but would you be willing to help us?" And at that point I thought, "My goodness, here's an opportunity to practice every skill I've acquired throughout my professional life in preschool education." There would be an opportunity to plan the building, to buy the materials, to select the staff, to institute an in-service training program, to interview parents and children, and to open the school and do the supervision. Why, it's more than any person could ask for in a lifetime, all under one cover. And to have full freedom and elbowroom in which to do this! I was thrilled. So here was another twenty-four-hour-a-day job. We got the school planned and built, and I was flown by Creative Playthings to Los Angeles, to their big showrooms, to select the furnishings and the materials for the school. The most fun of all was screening and selecting staff, and then developing the in-service training program prior to opening, so we were all speaking the same language. And of course, Mrs. Cooper took over the food services program, we incorporated that into the curriculum, and oh my, we had a good time doing it. Then came the grand opening. But before we had the grand opening—of course the children were accepted—but we took children in groups of five, with the parents, to let them get acquainted and move around comfortably in the new school. We had them come in groups of five for three days. Then we combined them, a group at a time, and in this way we didn't have a lot of chaos and a lot of movement that would have been hard to handle.
DL: Was the group limited to fifteen children?﻿123
KF: No, we were licensed for forty-five, but we started with thirty.
But we took them in groups of five for a kind of an indoctrination. So when one group of five could move around comfortably, then we'd introduce another group, and there were... Well, it would take a two- to three-day period between each group coming to school. Finally we were ready. The program was moving well, and the teachers were comfortable. They had become acquainted with the children. I guess it took us about a month and a half to really settle down. Then came the grand opening, and the mayor of Pacifica came, and the newspaper reporters came and took pictures, and oh my, what a great day. One thing I didn't tell you, though, was that during this preparatory period, while the building was being remodeled, Jim Cooper—who had never had an illness in his life, and had given up his job, as had Lydia Cooper, to work on getting this school opened in September—became ill, and had to be hospitalized, and he didn't improve. He willed himself to live to see that grand opening and he died five days afterward. So this was a great tragedy. Also, the income that he was going to put into the school by that time was gone. Mrs. Cooper had given up her job at Laguna Salada School District, and she no longer had any income. So for a while this school was on shaky ground.
DL: You didn't have any federal monies or foundation grants?
KF: You see, this was a private school. Had we made it a nonprofit
organization,we would have been restricted by the federal program, and there were things we wanted to do in this program that weren't provided for federally. One was to include curriculum for the nonmotor-handicapped brain-injured child, which we did successfully.
DL: Your baby.
KF: Yes. Strange thing, though, at every point where we couldn't see which way we were going to go and we were threatened with closure—we had to meet the payments on the building, the mortgage, pay staff, buy supplies—and when it would come to the point where we were using up the money for next month, and we didn't know what to do, something would happen, somehow, some money would come through. An example of this is when the state education department decided that they would give us funding. Some of the students whose parents were going to school—and I've forgotten the name of that program—but single parents attending school would receive so much money per month for child care. The state people, knowing that I was director of Cooper's Corner, and that I had coordinated the Head Start program successfully, worked with us so that we could enroll this group of children who needed child care while their parents attended school and thereby receive this funding. That program is still in existence down at Cooper's Corner, and we're cooperating with Linda-Mar Elementary School which is right across the street.
DL: Were you prepared to receive these children?
KF: Oh yes. You see, we didn't take as many as we were licensed for. We were licensed for forty. I don't think we ever had forty. We had as many as thirty, thirty-five. But anyway, every time we were faced with failure, something happened.﻿124
DL: So with this state money, was this able to keep you going?
KF: Well, partially. We had several programs. We had a nursery school program accommodating three age groups—threes, fours, and fives. Within this framework, we developed half-day and full-day programs.
DL: When the Coopers contacted you about their idea for a nursery school, did they propose that you come on as the director and literally pull that school together?
KF: No, when they contacted me the first time, they wanted me to come
down and see whether or not this little building was an appropriate place for a nursery school. That was the first step. Then as we worked together on the planning of this building, they told me that they would like me to just take it over and develop it, and we worked together doing that.
DL: Were you given title of director?
KF: Yes, I was director. We got so much support from the newspaper, from the school district—especially from Pat Kennison of the Laguna Salada School District. Cooper's Corner had many, many friends. I remember now I also became involved in parent education groups in that district, and also parent cooperative groups.
DL: What are both of those?
KF: All right. Parent education groups are parents who want to know more about early childhood development. Parent cooperative groups are those groups who have their own little nursery schools and are learning through participation, and they usually employ one teacher and the parents serve as staff. Both groups requested lectures, program-planning assistance, observations of activities. I'd go and do it. I was having a ball!
DL: And then you'd make recommendations...
KF: Yes, yes.
This was at the same time that you were planning Cooper's Corner?
DL KF
This was the same time that we were planning Cooper's Corner. Because it took quite a period of time to acquire the property. The Catholic church was most cooperative in making the loan. They liked the idea, and they especially liked it because it was across the street from the elementary school, and we made it very clear that we were eager and anxious to cooperate with the school district and the kindergarten. We attempted to get the children who were going into kindergarten a year before they entered so they'd really be ready, and so the school district could see how important preschool education is to effective participation in kindergarten. We also felt that the child's introduction to kindergarten is the most Important educational step in his life. Because if children do not go into kindergarten with a positive attitude, this negative orientation to learning is going to﻿125
KF: (cont.) follow them all their lives. For instance, if they're
dragged to kindergarten screaming and crying, and the mother puts them in the door and walks away, they are petrified and they decide right then and there school is no good. This is what we didn't want to happen. We wanted to see children ready for the kindergarten experience, and we knew that by letting each child take his time, his own time in getting himself ready for preschool group experiences, his participation in kindergarten would be a positive one rather than a negative one. And we wanted to sell this idea to the Laguna Salada School District.
DL: Were you successful?
KF: Well, they had the Head Start program by that time, but we wanted to reinforce the meaning of what Head Start should be.
DL: Did you institute similar things at Cooper's Corner that you had
instituted in the Head Start Program, or were you even given freer rein?
KF: Oh, yes. I had freedom to develop programs, and what I did was to individualize the program for each child.
DL: How many teachers did you have per, what, forty kids at the maximum?
KF: No, we never had forty,I don't believe. I think the most we had was thirty-five.
DL: Even when the state...
KF: ...allowed for, yes. We liked space and we found that with thirty-five, it was just an ideal number.
DL: So you had how many teachers per student?
KF: Let's see. We divided these children into groups and, depending upon where the child was in his own development, determined what group he was in. And for each group there were two teachers. So let's see, I must have had a staff of...we had a morning staff and an afternoon staff.. You see, the children weren't there all at once at the same time.
DL: Was it a twenty-four-hour program?
KF: No, no. No, we were open at seven—or was it seven-thirty?—seven-
thirty. Open at seven-thirty, to accommodate those children who were all-day students, to six o'clock at night. These were the ones who needed child care; their parents were attending school, and they were being funded by the state. We needed two teachers for that group. Then we had a half-day, a morning group, just three hours, nine to twelve, and we needed two teachers for that group. Then we had an afternoon group from one to four, I guess it was, and we needed two﻿126
KF: (cont.) for that. So these teachers' times were staggered, their schedules were staggered. And that's the way we operated.
DL: So they were introducing a lot of individual attention, because it was not a large group.
KF: No, it wasn't a large group. Another thing we did, too, we had a little table by the door with a sign-in sheet for each group. There'd be a teacher sitting at the table, and as the parent and child came in, we had a little routine. The parent would go to the child's locker, help him off with his coat, or put the things away—usually they'd bring things to school to show—then parent and child would come to the little table and there were little chairs there, and they'd sit down and have some juice together. At that time the teacher would talk to the child and let the child decide what he wanted to do.
DL: This was every day?
KF: Every day when his parent left. So he wouldn't just aimlessly be wandering around for something to do. Because when young children wander aimlessly, they get into trouble.
DL: And this was the three-, four-, five-year-olds?
KF: Yes. As they come in, they're greeted, they have juice with the
parents, they decide where they want to go, what they want to do first. And the room is set up in interest corners. There's the music corner, the library, the doll corner, the science materials...
DL: Did you have a purring corner?
KF: A purring corner? Oh, yes, where they could go and sprawl out on the cushions and do whatever they wanted to do. But you see, they had to go somewhere, they couldn't just wander around. This is how we managed to keep down the difficulties that come with having a large group of children. And the teachers were always alert to see when a child's interest was waning. Then they'd be right there to help direct him to something else.
DL: Were there any children that were identified as being the nonmotor-handicapped child?
KF: Yes. That child took, of course, special attention.
DL: So you kept those children in your school?
KF: Yes, we would screen very carefully, and when we found a child who was disabled, then of course I'd plan a program for him and the teachers would see that it was carried out. I worked with those children also.
DL: You did? On a daily basis?﻿127
KF: Yes. Usually those children came three times a week, Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, because we couldn't have too many of them at once. Or Tuesday and Thursday, depending upon individual readiness.
DL: Did you work with them on the days that they came?
KF: Yes. Also, on Tuesday and Thursday we had those who were younger, and I'd work with them and their teachers.
DL: Younger, like two?
KF: Oh, no. No, we did have threes, fours, fives, but I mean younger in terms of their development, and they weren't really ready to leave their parents. In fact, we did have the parents stay until the child was ready to have them go. This is something kindergartens don't do. They send them away. That's wrong. If a young child is fearful, unwilling to be separated from his parents, we required the parent or a family member to help in the child's adjustment, helped children develop positive feelings about school.
DL: Now how long were you, or are you still, with Cooper's Corner?
KF: I'm still acting as a consultant, but they're on their own now. They're operating very well, they don't need me anymore.
DL: Is Lydia Cooper still associated...
KF: Lydia Cooper is there, the program has grown. I think they now have sixty children, but of course, they have more room now. She has acquired the property next door. It came up for sale, and she s using part of that. And the garage is being converted to accommodate afterschool-care children who have siblings in the all-day-care program, from the school right across the street. Parents can pick up their children at the end of the day at Cooper's Corner.
DL:
KF:
DL: KF:
We
As long as you were with the program, did you remain as the director?
Yes. I stayed as director, and while I was there, we developed for Skyline College a laboratory situation for the physical education department, the psychology department, and the home economics department. We had students from those three groups from Skyline. That was lots of fun. I supervised and relived my earlier experiences on campus at San Francisco State Collge in the teacher-tramxng program.
Did you teach at Skyline, or did they come down to Cooper's Corner?
No, their entire lab experience was at Cooper's Corner. I directed the laboratory experience and met with them three times a week. They were assigned certain tasks having to do with the developmental program. They had observations to write, and also, after their initial laboratory semester, they selected one child for intensive study in all areas of development. And that I supervised, and that was fun.﻿128
DL: Why did you leave as director?
KF: Let's see. Why did I leave? Oh, this is when I got involved with the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center in Washington, D.C., and Dorothy Porter came out here. That's when I left.
DL: So you have stayed on only as a consultant or advisor?
KF: Yes, as a consultant, yes. One of the teachers I had initially
selected when we opened the school became my protegee, and when I decided to leave, she was then ready to take over. Her name was Naomi I'zumizaki and she was a graduate of San Francisco State College. She went to State while she was working at Cooper's Corner, and used that as part of the requirements for some of her courses, as her laboratory experience. She and I saw eye to eye on every issue that ever came up, and so, of course, when somebody agrees with you, you know, you feel pretty good about them.
DL: To go back a bit, when Cooper's Corner was being planned and you were spending a lot of time there, were you going back and forth between San Francisco and Pacifica?
KF: Yes. Yes, I'd go down several times a week during the planning
stages. After the building was remodeled, included in the remodeling was a little suite for me, and I lived right there. It was built like a motel room would be, one great big room with a bath. I stayed there seven days a week in the beginning and worked twenty-four hours a day, I guess. I was involved, and happy in my involvement, because this gave me an opportunity to develop a school that was really mine. I had to make it a success because it was my total responsibility, and so I put everything ...I put all my skills to work.
DL: You say it was your total responsibility—did not the Coopers share in this with you, or did you have the major expertise?
KF: Well, I had the expertise to develop programs for teachers, children, and parents, for integrating the community, home, and school into the curriculum, yes. Certainly they shared, but they gave me elbowroom in which to work. If there was something they didn't agree with, then we'd sit down and talk it over and adjust whatever it was. But I had free rein to plan the building. Of course, Mrs. Cooper planned everything that had to do with the kitchen because that was her area of expertise. I get so thrilled when I think about this wonderful opportunity to practice every knowledge I had acquired, it just kind of overwhelms me, and I'm deeply grateful for it, too. Because I don't think very many people can say that in their lifetimes they have had an opportunity to utilize all of their knowledge, and I did have, and I'm just very grateful. It was a most satisfying experience.
DL; This Cooper's Corner experience kind of capped your professional experience.﻿129
KF: Yes, it certainly did. That was another reason when Naomi Izumizaki was ready to step into my shoes, I thought, "Now, this is enough now, there's no point in putting another maraschino cherry on top of the whipped cream sundae. Nothing could climax this." It was such a fully rewarding, total experience. "Now's the time to stop."
DL: While you were director, did you parcel out any of the responsibilities, or did you always carry both the supervision of the staff, the supervision of the student teachers, working with parents and teachers, et cetera?
KF: I parceled out the teacher-parent conferences because I thought the teachers working directly with the children all day long had much better knowledge of that child's participation in group situations than had I. So the teacher-parent conferences, except on rare occasions, were always handled by the teacher in charge of that particular child.
DL: Were there any experimental programs instituted at Cooper's Corner?
KF: Yes, we had several atypical children. One was a nonmotor-handicapped brain-injured child who was also a patient at Langley Porter Psychiatric Clinic. We met with his psychiatrist, and with the students under the psychiatrist who were observing this child at Langley Porter, and some of them came to Cooper's Corner to observe him also. We had staff conferences at Langley Porter on those children who were patients of theirs and students with us.
DL: So there was more than just this one child?
KF: Yes, we had several of their patients over a period of time. Langley Porter psychiatrists and Cooper's Corner staff cooperated in sharing observations on children who were both patients at Langley Porter and enrollees at Cooper's Corner.
DL: How many years were you associated with Cooper's Corner?
KF: Well, I was there, I guess, four years. About four years. It might have been a little longer. That was on full-time basis.
DL: But since then...
KF: Since then I'm a consultant, and I go down when there's something ^
they want to talk to me about. But they're on their way now. They're well established and they don't need help. But it's good to have a sounding board, and Lydia Cooper calls at least once a week and just talks things over.
DL: Do you have any input in terms of new programs now?
KF- No. Well, she discusses program with me, but the staff has changed, and I'm not familiar with the new staff. The current director is a^ San Francisco State College graduate, and most competent. They don t need me.﻿130
DL: Are you currently involved in any professional activities—that is, in terms of being an educator?
KF: No, not now. No, I'm giving all of my time and attention to
gathering together the treasures that lie in our basements and attics all up and down the Pacific coast. I'm doing this for Bancroft Library and also for Moorland-Spingarn Research Center. I think that's what I'm going to do the rest of my life,because I recognize the importance of saving these old evidences of our history on this coast. So much of it is going to be lost if we don't get it together and get it now.
DL: We'll get to that later, but before we discuss that, I'd like to
finish discussing this. In looking back at your career, one sees that you had an opportunity at a very early stage of that career to get involved in both the administrative end and in designing and planning programs. Did you prefer that kind of experience to teaching the children directly?
KF: Oh, yes, it was broader, it gives you much greater opportunity to put into effect the growth-promoting aspects of preschool education. This is why I found such great satisfaction in developing, supervising, and training students in effective ways of dealing with preschool children in a classroom situation.
DL: You reach more children that way.
KF: You reach not only more children, but more teachers when you get students who need lab experience from the colleges.
DL: So you enjoyed training the student teachers?
KF: Oh yes, working with student teachers was lots of fun. At Cooper's
Corner, the students are assigned for one year in their first semester to observe the group, and they have many observations to write and discuss. The second semester, they select one child and make an intensive study of that one child during the semester.
DL: You were training student teachers all the way through. Even at
State College when you were working there, you were doing that. Did you consider that a particular challenge?
KF: I enjoyed it. A challenge? No, I always felt very comfortable with teachers.
DL: Even as an undergraduate yourself?
KF: As an undergraduate, because of my background of experience and study with top professionals in the field of early childhood education, coupled with daily supervised teaching at San Francisco State College nursery school and student teaching in San Francisco Unified School District, I was prepared.﻿131
DL: Did the student teachers challenge you in terms of your knowledge?
KF: No, because they didn't have as much knowledge as I had. I'd been there longer. [laughter] And I was, as Lynette Messer said, "a natural."
DL: Yes, I guess "challenge" has a kind of adversary meaning; but I don't mean it in terms of adversary, I also mean it in terms of something that is growth-producing for yourself.
KF: Oh, indeed it was. Oh my, yes. I think that's why I enjoyed it so much.
DL: Would you prefer teaching the teachers to teaching the children?
KF: Oh, yes. But I'd like a combination of both. It offers fertile field when you have the very young child and the young adult.
DL: And this you were able to do at Cooper's Corner?
KF: Oh, yes. Well, that I was able to do at State too, because we had the laboratory school at every level, two-, three-, four-year-olds and extended day care. This is the kind of physical environment I was educated in, so naturally my preferences tend toward a preschool laboratory situation with students and teachers participating.
DL: In that situation, do you work with the children directly?
KF: You can, yes, you can. You aren't limited, you aren't restricted.
DL: Do you think that having an M.A. in the 1950s—which is when you got yours, in the mid-fifties—do you think that having an M.A. at that time made it easier for a black person or a black woman to progress in the education field?
KF: Oh, yes. Oh my, yes. Because somebody was always climbing toward
the position you had achieved and was breathing down your neck trying to get it. You had to be two steps ahead of them all the time.
DL: Had-you considered getting a Ph.D. and teaching, staying at State College and becoming a professor?
KF: No, I'll tell you, by the time I finished with the M.A., I was so involved with the parents, teachers, children in this laboratory situation, I was having a ball, and enjoying it so much. I had heard some of those faculty members say what they'd gone through to achieve the Ph.D., and I could see how a lot of their success was based on personalities, and frankly, I was tired of kissing behinds. I had to kiss a lot of them to get that M.A. at San Francisco State College. That's no kidding. I really had to. One of those, the one who taught statistics said, "I don't know why you want to take this class. You'll never pass it." And I said, "Why?" And he said, "You'll never pass this course." I got the message and I went to the dean﻿132
KF: (cont.) and I made a big noise. So, they changed me to somebody else who was giving the course. They didn't do anything to him. So you see it's that kind of thing that you have to battle, and I was having too good a time. The Ph.D. didn't mean that much to me. I wish many times that I did, especially when I used to go to these national conferences, and some of those that hold a Ph.D. didn't know any more about young children than some of our parents. They had the book learning, but actual experience in the classroom, they didn't have it. They did the laboratory work that was required in order to achieve the degree.
DL: Do you think being black affected your career at all, the positions either that you were offered or the positions that you weren't offered?
KF: The positions I was not offered, yes. Right there at State when I became a member of faculty, there was much controversy, and it filtered through to me. There were faculty members who definitely didn't want me on the faculty because I was the first black, I guess. They just didn't want me there. Especially the supervisor of the education division, the chairman, they called him, of the education division, Fred Wilhelms. He and Mary Hyatt, who shared. Lynette Messer's classes with me when Lynette Messer went to Europe. Mary Hyatt was not a member of faculty, she wanted to be, and did everything she could with Fred Wilhelms's help, to help get me dismissed. Yes, there was a bad battle, and this was based on, I think it was, on race. And then, I could do a better job than Mary Hyatt could, and I was a member of faculty, which she resented. And another thing, Mary Hyatt had always coveted Lynette Messer's position, and had done everything she could do on the side to get that position while Lynette was gone, and Fred Wilhelms worked with her. Yes, race played a big part in what I didn't get assigned to.
DL: Did this in any way affect your decisions about leaving State at some point and becoming associated with the Northern California School for the Cerebral Palsied?
KF: No, it didn't. You see, I didn't leave State until San Francisco
State College moved to new campus. When they moved to new campus, they did not have facilities for a nursery school. They had Frederic Burke School out there which started with the kindergarten group. I could have gone to work under Principal Irv Futter in the elementary school, but the chairman of the education department did not okay my application that Irv Futter asked me to place with him. So there's another instance of where race came into it. They had never had a black teacher on the faculty at Frederic Burke. Irv Futter wanted me because I had worked with his staff successfully, during that last semester we were on old campus, in a curriculum study. Irv Futter lost three of his master teachers that semester—they all got pregnant. See, they had too much time on their hands. [laughter] There were no classes, we were doing this intensive curriculum study, and he had to replace in a hurry for fall opening three teachers.﻿133
KF: (cont.) And he had worked closely with me on this study, he knew what I could do, so he gave me the application, but it was not accepted. Or I might have been out there yet. But I'm so glad it worked out that way now, because look at the ball I've had. Cooper's Corner was the culmination of my education. Like giving birth—painfully pleasurable!
DL: Were there any other instances when you were with the Laguna Salada District-I assume Pacifica is basically white—were they any problems?
KF: Oh, yes. Something similar. Something very similar, except this time the supervising person, she was director of personnel, and supervisor of the elementary schools'teaching staff. No, she didn't want me down there. But there I was.
DL: Did the fact that Pat Kennison___
KF: Pat Kennison was the one who was responsible for getting me that opportunity She asked me to come. Apparently Pat needed the job done quickly and efficiently. She knew I could do it. We had taught together at San Francisco State College in the same wing of Frederic Burke School, and she was one of Irv Futter's staff.
DL: So her clout pulled you in?
KF: Yes, and in my interviews with other faculty down there, I made a good
impression and they liked me. So this person who didn't want me there was sort of overridden.
DL: In the fifties and sixties more and more black people were going into education. In fact, education has been one of the fields that blacks have always been in. Were there any tensions there in terms of their participation in the national education conferences?
KF: Oh, yes. Yes, indeed, there were. I felt them on the parts of people whom I had been associated with at Vassar Summer Institute three different summers. I'd see all these people at these national conferences. Oh, yes. In Los Angeles at the National Association for the Education of Young Children, there was a get-together for breakfast, or for lunch, or something like that. There was a little group that somehow seemed to meet without letting me know about it. Things they would do socially, I didn't get included. So yes, indeed there was a difference.
DL: But these are social things that they would leave you out of, but Negroes as a whole... Was there a feeling of tenseness about the participation of Negroes in the conferences or was there more acceptance?
KF: Oh, you mean at the conference level. No, no, I can't say that. In the fifties in San Francisco, the child care centers were heavily staffed by blacks who had held positions during the war years. At the time of reorgani zation of San Francisco State College Child Care Center, those who had been employed as teachers were hired as "head teachers" by Theresa Mailer, director of San Francisco Child Care Centers.
DL: Were there quite a number of Negroes who would attend the conferences, being that so many black people were teachers?
KF: No, there weren't. Now, there were when the national conference was held at﻿134
KF: (coat.) Asilomar in the late fifties, there were. It was on a weekend, and within driving distance.
DL: This national conference you referred to, what was it?
YIF: National Association for the Education of Young Children. Wherever the
conference was held, in whichever state, the Negroes involved in the program would attend in numbers. But that stands to reason, because we then did no<". have the funds to go off to conferences. If we had the funds, we're usually involved in a job and we can't leave it to go to a conference. Unless we're sent by our school district or something like that. So no, you didn't see numbers, you'd see a few, a scattering, but not in comparison to the numbers that were being employed in elementary school education.
DL: During your career as an educator, were you involved in any
activities, outside of your paid positions or your professional memberships, that were involved with the welfare or the education of children, such as the Y?
KF: Oh, yes, yes. YWCA and Girl Reserves. But that was prior to my getting involved with San Francisco State College.
DL: But after you got your B.A. in —
KF: After I got my B.A. , yes. The development of an experimental unit for the nonmotor-handicapped, brain-injured child, with the cooperation of Dr. Huldai Thelander, who was chief of pediatrics then at Children's Hospital on California Street. Yes, I got involved with her because she found that in diagnosing children for her cerebral palsy nursery school, an alarming number, deviating from the norm, were going through her clinic.
DL: But aside from the experimental unit, were there any other activities that you've had, beyond paid positions?
KF: I can't recall any right now. No, when I went into something like this, I seem to have the unique ability of making it a twenty-four-hour job. One-track mind. [laughs] I didn't have time for anything else except the job at hand, and I was like a bulldog.
DL: Now you received your M.A. in 1954, which was a very important
year for blacks and education because of the [United States] Supreme Court decision. Do you recall what you thought at the time when that decision was announced?
KF: No, I can't recall any strong reaction. I should have reacted,
certainly, with what had happened to me at State College when I went to enroll the first time. But I can't remember having any strong reaction except for, "It's about time."
DL: Yes. Were you or your husband involved in supporting, or were you members of the NAACP at that time?
KF: My husband was very active, always, in the NAACP, as was my mother.
But I, well, I guess I was intolerant of how some of the older members in the community took action on what, to me, were important issues. They moved too slowly. They ignored the opinions of the younger members.﻿135
DL: And that's how you perceived some of the people involved in the NAACP?
KF: I was impatient with the way they dragged their feet. I was
impatient because they didn't take direct action. And emotionally, I couldn't stand it. And I didn't have enough inner control to work well with the group, so I just withdrew. I spent my energies working to improve black and white parent-teacher-child relationships at the preschool level.
DL: That leads me to, then, when the 1960s civil rights movement began, since this was direct action that was being taken, did you in any way become involved in providing financial support or moral support, or membership, in any of the organizations during this period of time?
KF: Membership, yes. We both had membership in the Booker T. Washington Center. I took an active part in their programs when my husband was director.
DL: No, I'm talking about the sixties, when there...
KF: Oh no. He wasn't there in the sixties. No, I can't remember taking an active part in anything beyond the war years. I was active then.
DL: All right. You had said before that you weren't too aware of all of the things that your husband was involved in, all of his activities and commitments. But did you discuss with him your career, your goals, your problems, successes, failures, as you were progressing with your career?
KF: Oh my, yes. I depended upon him for decisions. When I had problems, I'd come home and talk them over with him, and always get the right answer. And if he didn't have the answer he'd say, "Well, let me think about it. We'll talk tomorrow morning before you leave." And he'd usually come up with a good suggestion. Yes, he was very much, very much involved in what I was doing. But he didn't let me know it. He made me feel so self-sufficient, just like I could do anything. He bolstered my ego to the extreme, and I guess that's why I performed well. And when he died, and that support was no longer there, I fell flat on my face.
DL: Let me ask you this. Did you depend on his advice more than someone who was in the field with you, one of your peers?
KF: Oh, yes. Oh, my yes. Bob Flippin was a great thinker. And he took a long-range view. And he could put all the little inconsequential factors together and see the whole picture. And he had an analytical mind. And yes, I most always took his advice, and he was never wrong.
DL: Then he didn't mind your having a career that took up so much of your time. He didn't mind your getting an M.A. degree?
KF: No, no, indeed. He encouraged me.﻿136
DL: Did you and your husband plan to retire together?
KF: Oh, yes. We intended to retire in Hawaii, on the island of Kauai, on Anahola Bay, the most beautiful bay in the whole wide world.
DL: And this would have been when you reached your sixties or later?
KF: Yes, when he reached retirement age. He died at fifty-nine years of age. We were planning ahead.
DL: So did you retire at that time? What happened?
KF: Well, you see, he died September, 1963, and I had begged him to
stop, the year before he died. We were over there on Kauai then, and I said, "Bob, why don't you stop now? Let's take the trip we've always wanted to take." We had planned to go around the world on a freighter. "Let's do that now." And Bob Flippin said, "No, I've got to work one more year. I owe it to them." And I said to him, "Bob, with what you've done at that prison, for those men, you don't owe anybody anything." And he said, "Oh, yes. Yes, I do. I need to work one more year for this program, and I'll be ready to turn it over." And the program he was talking about was Alcoholics Anonymous.
Alcoholics Anonymous at San Quentin Prison was the first prison chapter to be established in the whole wide world, and it was established by Warden Clinton Duffy, who was born and raised on what they called "the reservation"—that's San Quentin. And after Clinton Duffy grew up and became an outstanding criminologist, he was appointed warden of San Quentin Prison. He and Bob were personal friends. And when Warden Duffy was assigned to the Adult Authority, State of California, he had to leave his job at San Quentin, and he asked Bob to sponsor his AA prison group, and Bob did. And he became interested, so interested in the program, that he built that group up from a handful of men to a weekly average of between 450 and 500. So some of the psychologists began to be interested in the regular attendance and the enthusiasm about the AA program and its effect on the group in the prison. And they did a study having to do with the number of' men who violated parole after,they were released, against those who had and had not benefit of AA programs, and the support of AA on the outside when they were released. And the figures were so astounding that they began to give serious attention to the establishment of other AA groups throughout the state of California. And other states as well.
DL: Do you know if it was carried through?
KF: Oh, I'm sure so, because Bob was traveling around, lecturing, and then he had a scholarship to attend the Yale School for Alcohol﻿137
KF: (cont.) Studies in '52, I think it was. And also, another year
he went to the Utah School of Alcohol Studies. Those were the two major ones in the country. Yes, he worked hard with the Hospital and Institutions Committee of Alcoholics Anonymous, and established an outsiders' program to work with the men on a weekly basis. Lecturers, counselors, paroled inmates who had "made good on the outside," all contributed to the rehabilitation of men in trouble.
DL: Now when did you retire, then, after he passed away?
KF: Well, I just stopped working. I did not expect his death. I
stayed in a state of shock for months. I wanted to die, too. And for a very long time I saw no one except Freda Bethel.
DL: During the period that he was...
KF: During the period he was ill, I just didn't continue to work, because I was too worried. I didn't think he was going to die. He had reached low points before and bounced back. And the thing that happened was, his doctor at Kaiser, Dr. Charles Herbert, his friend... They had close communication. And Bob Flippin made that doctor promise not to tell me what the condition was, and that he was dying. He knew he was. The doctor knew he was. But I didn't know. And I should have been told, because I thought, well, he's getting thin, he looks so terrible, but he'll bounce back. But you see, had I known, I would have been ready for this permanent separation.
DL: How did you recover? What did you do?
KF: One day Pat Kennison who was curriculum advisor for the Laguna
Salada School District telephoned to say that they had received funds for Head Start. She wanted to submit my name as coordinator. I had worked x^ith her in Frederic Burke School, on old campus. And it was a real good relationship. And then when I was developing the experimental unit with all those people, she came by and observed on various occasions and made good suggestions, and sort of worked along with me, and kept her ear to the ground when [someone] sabotaged the whole thing—when I had been funded through the San Francisco Foundation. I think I told you that. Well, anyway... I don't think I ever formally retired, but I had reached the point where, when I finished that Head Start program, I said, "Pat, I am retiring. I feel fulfilled." Then, in a year or so, Lydia Cooper, with whom I had worked on the Laguna Salada Head Start project, called up and said, "My husband and I think we've found a parcel of property that's suitable for a nursery school. Will you come down and look at it? This has been our lifelong dream, we want to do it, we're going to put everything we have into it. Will you help?" So I got involved in that. I went down there and, talk about a twenty-four-hour day, I think I squeezed a few more hours in! And that project bloomed and grew and is now secure. I had had an opportunity to utilize every skill I had acquired during my total educational experience, and I felt fulfilled. And I thought, now's the time to retire. And so I did.﻿138
DL: But have you really retired? Since I've known you, you've been doing a number of things.
KF: Oh, yes. Then I got involved with Dorothy Porter when I was
searching for a proper repository for the McCants, Stewart, and Flippin family papers.
DL: Sort of semiretirement.
KF: I'm busier now, I guess, than... Not as busy as I was in Pacifica, though.
DL: Before we get into that, I'd like to ask you a little more about
the recovery from your husband's death, or at least the readjustment. You said at first that the job and the work were a lot of help to you. Were there friends who provided support?
KF: Freda Bethel came and stayed with me for a period of time, but
she couldn't stay forever, she had her own family to look after. But she stayed for a few days. Emily Williams gave me support. Not then, she didn't. But later on, she did. No, there were no... I shut everybody out, you see. I closed the door. And I was just in shock. I really didn't begin to even talk to people until, I guess, until Pat began interesting me in coordinating the Head Start program.
DL: Were you managing the apartment building at this point? Was that something you and your husband had done?
KF: Yes, yes, I did. I did that. But as far as people whom I knew, and had associated with socially... Now it begins to come back to me. This is what happened. They dropped away. They did not contact me. It was as though they didn't want to be reminded of who's next. And that, I can understand. But the ones who had been closest, like Anne Browning and her husband, they're the ones who could have given me real support. They were the first just to fade away. And though I understand it now, I didn't understand it then, and it hurt. It hurt very much, just as with, well, many of the others in the little group. They all did the same thing. But I know now that I was a threat to them. Because every time they saw me, they remembered, "Bob's gone. Who'll be next?"
DL: So that maybe prolonged, also, your recovery. Do you think it did?
KF: I think, yes, yes. Because I missed them. But you see, now I've
put all of that, that agony out of my mind. I still feel this deep sense of loss. Sometimes it comes back. And I don't think it'll ever go away. People said to me, "As time goes on, you'll forget. Time will take care of it." But time, for me, has not taken care of it. Because I now enjoy reliving the experiences, both good and bad, that were part of our lives. And they're meaningful, they're more meaningful to me now than they were earlier in my life, or when they were hurting. Of course, because I'm older and in﻿139
KF: (cont.) retrospect, I can see where I was at fault a lot of the times. [laughter] Bob let me get away with murder!
DL: He pampered you.
KF: He did. He really did. That poor man, sometimes I think about situations, and I thought, IIow did he ever stand me? "Bob, have you done this? Bob, have you done that? Well, did you write such-and-such a letter? You didn't? Well, why didn't you? They're supposed to be in such-and-such a time. Well, why don't you go and do it now?" [laughs] My mother often said, "For heaven's sake! Let the poor man alone! He's tired!"
DL: All right, now. In terms of your semiretirement, as you were saying before, what are some of the things that you're doing now? For instance, I know that you travel, I know that you're interested in history, black history projects and family projects. Could you expand on some of these different things that are taking up your time now?
KF: Now? Well, after Bob's death, and... Well, I knew I had to find a place for these scrapbooks, and... He would have taken care of all that. And his father...we had a wealth of materials from his family. And, in traveling around the country searching for a place, I ran across Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, and met Dorothy Porter. She was interested in what I had and came out here to look at it, and shipped it back. And that's how I got involved with Moorland-Spingarn Research Center and have been working closely with them ever since. Not doing what I'm supposed to be doing for them, and I feel very guilty and very burdened, and very ill-at-ease. Just like I need to look over my shoulder every once in a while to be sure Moorland-Spingarn Research Center hasn't sent someone to remind me.
DL: But you are also involved in other projects, aren't you?
KF: Oh, yes. Oh, yes. The Oregon Historical Society is eager and
anxious to have information about the Stewart family and any other family up there, because they have little or no material on blacks in Oregon. And they want it. And so I've worked a little bit to help them. But when I went up there to find the [Oregon] State Bar certificates that I had given them...
DL: These were your father's?
KF: My father's State Bar—what do they call that? It isn't a certificate, what is it?
DL: License?
KF: License. They couldn't find it. So I thought, well, that's the
end of that. So now the Bogle family is working with them. But I still keep my finger in the pot up there. Then I've been working with several families in Los Angeles who have rich backgrounds. And﻿140
KF: (cont.) when I heard that Bancroft Library was interested in black filmworkers, I took the Grayson scrapbooks to them. And consequently...
DL: Grayson who? Grayson...
KF: Jessie Coles Grayson, who was a film star of the thirties—oh, wait a minute,- of the forties and the fifties. And those scrapbooks I'm still working on, and some of them have been given to Bancroft Library, University of California at Berkeley. That's quite a nice collection, will be when it's completed. And I'm also involved with the NAACP AACTSO Program. The AACTSO Program is the Afro Academic Cultural Technological Scientific Olympics, AACTSO.
DL: Quite a mouthful.
KF: It certainly is. And that AACTSO program was developed by Benjamin Hooks. He has selected key cities throughout the United States for a pilot program. And we got our notice of being selected as a pilot city late, so we got started late. But we certainly worked out some of the bugs in every, well, every pilot program has to be tested and tried. Well, anyway, this AACTSO program is a scholarship incentive program, and it was established to encourage black youth to achieve academic excellence through a national competition. And they participate in this academic competition for prizes and scholarships in selected areas of disciplines.
DL: This is high school or college students?
KF: Now, this is ninth and tenth grade, eleventh and twelfth grade
students. And the areas of participation can be in, generally, the arts and humanities which would include painting, drawing, sculpture, original compositions, poetry, playwriting, essays, performing arts, acting, dancing, music, all of those various areas come under arts and humanities. And the student can select any one of those or several of them and be judged on his presentation.
DL: Will they get scholarships to colleges, is that the end result?
KF: Well, the end result, yes. Certainly at the national convention, the national winners will be awarded scholarships as well as other prizes. At the local level, the participants were judged and the winners awarded gold, silver, and bronze medals, and honorable mention, of course. And the winners in the competition locally will go to the nationals to compete against other nationally selected winners.
DL: You were on this committee to choose the winners?
KF: No, no, no. My job was that of publicity. I had to contact the news and the TV and radio media, and get publicity out. That was the only job I had. But it was a challenging one, it's an area in which I have never worked, and I enjoyed it. And I'm glad it's over, almost. Now there are two other general categories here, you want to know about those?﻿141
DL:
Well, just the broad category, you don't need to break it down.
KF: Just broad. Don't break it down. All right. Then there are the
sciences. And we had one presentation in electronics that was just magnificent. A young man bought a kit for an electronic clock. And he put it together and made it work. And he also drew a chart demonstrating each step of the process, and where he had had difficulties, and how he solved them.
DL: Did he make this kit?
KF: No, he sent for the kit. But the kit was not all it should have been, because it didn't work. But he solved the problems, and he charted his solutions, and his presentation was just great. But unfortunately, he graduated—he was a twelfth grader—he graduated, and he has already gone to a school in the South somewhere. And so he won't be going to Portland. He would have been one of the winners. But he won't be going to the national in Portland. And then, also, there's the area of the social sciences. And some of the youngsters who chose debate as their area of competition performed creditably. And it was a delight to hear them speak the King's English. I didn't know many of our youngsters could.
DL: Before, you had said that you hadn't joined the NAACP for quite a
while. When did you become so active that you're joining committees and participating in programs? Is this something recent?
KF: Well, this is very recent. This is the most recent thing I got
involved in. And I got involved...I didn't intend to get involved. I went to a meeting at Jule Johnson's, just to hear about the AACTSO program. Jule said, "Well, if you're interested in it, I'm having some people come to my house on Monday night, and the program is going to be explained. Why don't you come over and listen?" So I went over and listened. Jule Johnson knew what she was doing! And not knowing how to say no, and there wasn't anybody to take publicity, I said, "Well, I'll try." So that's how I got involved.
DL: Are you a judge, though?
KF: Oh no, no. The judges are drawn from people throughout the
community. Oh, there are lots of committees. The structure of the AACTSO program is very well worked out at a national level.
DL: Did you want to be a judge, since it's in the education field which is your real love? Did you want to be involved in some other aspect rather than the publicity which is kind of new to you?
KF: I got involved because Jule Johnson needed somebody to chair the publicity committee, and I felt that I could handle this with her help. She appointed Ilsa Sternburger, who has many skills in that field, and with Ilsa's help I managed to carry through. In terms of the education committee, with Jule Johnson at the helm, I would have liked very much to work in that area. But she didn't need me for that. She needed me to take over publicity, and so that's what I did. That's how I got involved.﻿142
DL: Another thing that has occupied your time, some of your time, has
been travel. Could you tell us some of the places that you've gone to?
KF: Yes, I've been to Europe. And, do you want me to tell you what I did there, or just...
DL: Yes.
KF: All righty. My first trip to Europe was with the Oakland Youth Symphony Orchestra. And that orchestra had been invited to the Herbert Von Karajan International Orchestra Festival competitions. They were held in Berlin that year. And the orchestra, under the baton of Denis de Coteau, has participated three times in those competitions. And on this particular trip, I went because his wife was going as one of the chaperons. It was a magnificent experience because we, all the chaperons, had unexpectedly three days' freedom. And we gained those three days' freedom from our duties because we had difficulty getting away from these United States on a chartered plane that left from Oakland Airport. The plane left three times, believe it or not.
DL: And came down?
KF: That's right. We were about ten minutes out, on our way to Los Angeles, to pick up a group who was going with us from the Los Angeles area, when the pilot announced, "We're returning to Oakland Airport because of mechanical difficulties." So we returned, everybody disembarked, and we walked around for about an hour, then we boarded again and took off. About fifteen minutes out, the pilot announced, "We are returning to Oakland Airport due to mechanical difficulties." We returned again, and there we stayed for about four or five hours. And finally, the plane had been taken up and it had circled around overhead, and finally it came down and we boarded, and this time we took the northern route to Frankfurt, Germany and had the most beautiful flight, seeing the Northern Lights and that beautiful ice cap, and we landed in Frankfurt nine hours later. Well, by that time, the kids were keyed to high G! They were just, you can imagine, high school kids. They had reached, well, just that, high G. So, Denis said, "There will be a three-day interim between now and rehearsals," to let the kids calm down and get ready to work intensively on the program. So the chaperons, some of the chaperons, were allowed to have three days to do whatever they wanted to. Three of us, we didn't know where we were going, but we just started out. And I think that was one of the most fascinating trips I've ever had. And I saw a part of Europe then, such as I would not have seen on any kind of planned tour. And I'm deeply grateful for that experience, because I really got in touch with the people. And even though there was a language barrier, we communicated. Sign language, body language, it was fun! Then I had another opportunity to go to Europe, to go to the southern part of Europe with lifelong friends, two of the Allen children with whom I grew up in Portland, Oregon. Connie Beaty is one of those, I call her Nellie. Nellie Constance Allen﻿143
KF: (cont.) Beaty, and her little brother Bobby, who used to be the bane of my existence, when he was a tiny, pink'n white-rompered toddler in Portland. Well, anyway, we traveled together, and we had a delightful time. Bob Beaty took care of us like a mother hen, from Amsterdam down the Rhine River, through the Alps, Spain,
Italy, up the Mediterranean Coast, England and home. DL: Where else...
KF: Let's see. Well, I've been to, I did the Circle South Pacific tour, and oh, that took me from Hawaii, all the little islands down in the South Pacific, as well as being able to go into China, and to look across that great row of barbed wire into Red China.
DL: Where'd you go, to Hong Kong?
KF: I went to Hong Kong, and then to the mainland. There was one spot in the mainland—if I had my map, I could show you. But that was fascinating. And I've been to Australia—that was included in the South Pacific tour—Australia and New Zealand. I'll tell you a funny thing that happened in Australia, that makes me not want to go there again, because I know none of us are welcome. It was cold there, and I went into a department store in Sydney, and I stood around, stood around, and stood around. I wanted to buy a sweater, and I saw the sweater department, but nobody came to wait on me. Most of the salespeople, in fact all of them, were men. So I thought, isn't that strange. So I walked over to one of them, and I said, "I'd like to look at some sweaters, some coat sweaters." And the salesman looked at me, and looked me up and down, and he said, "The only thing we have for you is nigger brown." That's what he said. So I marched myself right upstairs to the administrative offices and asked to see the manager. Well, the manager wasn't in. And I said, "I'll wait." So I sat down, and the manager couldn't get out of his office, because there was only one door. And apparently he was in there. So I sat and I sat and I sat. And I thought to myself, "If I have to sit here for days, I'm gonna sit until he comes out." So pretty soon, his secretary said, "Mr. So-and-so is in now, won't you go in?" They had my name and my whole history. And they also knew what I wanted to see him about. So I went in, and when I got through telling him about how the world was shrinking, and how tourism was one of their major products [laughs], he began to look at me through different eyes. And we had a nice conversation about how in employees' training courses, there needed to be introduced material that would help some of these people, who would be bringing their prejudices, respond differently to the guests that were coming through their portals from all over the world. Well you know, after a while, he began to agree.
DL: Did you buy the sweater?
KF: Oh, no. I froze to death! [laughter] But apparently that's the
attitude among people over there. "Nigger brown." Now New Zealand was a little different. The people over there were friendly. And New Zealand is one of the cleanest places I've ever seen.﻿144
DL:	What other places did you go to?
KF:	Well, let's see.
DL:	How did you choose the places you wanted to go?
KF:	Bora Bora was a fascinating little island, and Papeete was a lovely
little jewel. And, oh my, it was the funniest thing. On Bora Bora, in their little hotel—beautiful outdoors with an open-air patio dining room, overlooking an aquamarine frosted, emerald sea, it was beautiful—who did I see but my godchild's favorite person— his name is right here, and I can't get it. He's a TV and concert star and... Well, I can't remember. Anyway, he was sitting there at the bar. And he's in films also. So anyway, that was a nice little sidelight on Bora Bora. But that, the whole South Pacific area is a fascinating area, and in terms of scenic beauty, it's lovely, though it's not as lovely as the San Francisco Bay area.
DL:	How did you choose the places that you wanted to visit?
KF:	I went with, on a tour, and it was called the Circle South Pacific
Tour.
DL:	No, I meant in general. Not just on this tour, but...
KF:	How did I choose? Each trip was chosen because something captured
my attention and I wanted to go and see for myself.
DL:	Was there any particular region that you always wanted to go?
KF:	No, I'll tell you. No, I had never had any particular interest in
Europe. I went because I was interested in the orchestra, and I wanted to see how they would perform in this worldwide competition of youth orchestras, what 1 thought was going to be youth orchestras. They, the Oakland Symphony Youth Orchestra, under the baton of Maestro Denis de Coteau, were the youngest group there, and performed magnificently, and were awarded the silver medal, second place in the worldwide competitions. They have been invited back since, and they were invited to Japan also, to perform. But they couldn't raise enough money to go to Japan. But this year they're going back to Europe.
DL:	Have you traveled every year?
KF:	No, I don't go anywhere every year. There has to be a reason. I
went to the South Pacific because I wanted to see it. That I did want to see, so I thought I might as well see everything there was to see while I was there. Haven't been to Alaska, I'd like to go to Alaska. I'm going to South America, that's where I want to go. And I'm going to Brazil this year, to a cultural festival, with participants from all those countries affected by the African Diaspora.
DL:	All of your travels have been since your husband's death. Did you
and he travel together outside of the country?﻿145
KF: No, not outside of the country. We were too poor and too busy,
you see. I was getting an education, plus all these experimental projects. He was working over at the prison and working very hard, and lecturing all around everywhere.
DL: Now, are you a member of any other organizations right now, besides the NAACP?
KF: Yes, I'm a member of a group of old ladies, and they call themselves the Smart Set. And they have a meeting every month, and they bought a life membership in the NAACP a few months ago.
DL: Is there any other organization? What about political activity?
KF: No political activities, no. There are no other organizations. I participate in anything that is of community benefit, but I'm not a joiner. Most recently, I became a charter member in the "Rainbow Auxiliary" of the Children's Home Society. This is the first San Francisco Negro auxiliary. Also, the San Francisco Consumer Action. I have been chairman of the Monday night grievance committee for two years, participating in all activities.
DL: Had you become involved with the women's movement in any way, in any of the activities?
KF: No, no.
DL: You also mentioned before, when we were talking about Cooper's
Corner, that you on occasion serve as a consultant for them. Are you still doing that?
KF: I'm still standing by, because that, Cooper's Corner, I gave birth to, and the pain was exquisitely delightful. That will always be my child, and I'll always, I think, keep my finger and eye on it.
DL: Do they call you often for consulting purposes?
KF: No, it's going ahead by itself now. It's on its own legs. But
Mrs. Cooper calls me every once in a while, and she did a nice thing this past birthday I had. She had a surprise luncheon for me, and all my favorite people were there. And it was just very heartwarming and nice. She calls me and talks over programs and the various problems, and also the joys that come to them. And they are now completely funded, and the teachers are going to get salaries comparable to public school salaries.
DL: Is Cooper's Corner the only contact you have with your former profession?
KF: Yes.
DL: Do you keep up with readings in the education field, or anything like that?
* Also, charter member Bay Area Service League, Black Women of Marin.﻿146
KF: No. No. No, you see, this was the culminating experience. Here I
started from the ground, and built this thing up. Looking at the site, first of all, to see whether or not it was appropriate. It lay right across the street from the elementary school, making it superb for a preschool. Then I had an opportunity of working with the architect on remodeling the building. Then I had a chance to go to Los Angeles to Creative Playthings to select all the equipment and material. Then I had the opportunity of choosing staff, developing an in-service training program, prior to opening the school. So we were all speaking the same educational language. We were all in agreement at every point, and we knew where we were going. So there was complete communication. Then came the opening, and prior to that, I had an opportunity to interview parents and enroll children. And I had an opportunity to do it the way it should be done in public schools, and that is, take groups, small groups at a time each day. Say, take five the first day, five the second day, five the third day. Build up gradually so these children aren't all thrown together at once, and chaos results. Then came the development of programs designed to meet the needs of each individual child, plus, we took some atypical children, which, is my field. And we worked with Langley Porter Institute [of the University of California at San Francisco Medical School]. See, everything I've ever...every skill I've acquired, I had a chance to utilize and practice successfully in Cooper's Corner program, right straight on through with the student program involving Skyline College and using Cooper's Corner as a lab. So, I've had it. I have had it! And every time I think about it and review it, it excites me. Because there are very few people who, in their own lifetime, have a chance to use everything they've learned.
DL: Do you then consider Cooper's Corner your most important achievement and satisfying...
KF: Oh, yes. Oh, I do. Of course, the experimental unit, had that effort not been sabotaged, I wouldn't have known Cooper's Corner, because it [the experimental unit] was ready to be funded and would have become a state school in time. And that's where my interest lay, in these nonmotor-handicapped, brain-injured kids. They're the ones who are filling up our institutions, because in the public schools we didn't know how to identify them, and we didn't know what their problems were, because they weren't visual problems, some.
DL: Well, why did you leave Cooper's Corner? Being so involved with it, did you think that you would want to stay with it longer?
KF- It had reached a point where it needed to function on its own. Oh, I'll tell you why I left. Now I remember. I felt that elementary school teachers do not have the background and knowledge in early childhood education to really administer a preschool program. There's a great difference between the psychology of the elementary school child and the psychology of the preschool child. And elementary school teachers, I have found in my experience, are not equipped to adjust the preschool program to meet the needs of each individual child, and this is most important at the preschool level. Lydia Cooper wanted to hire the daughter of a good friend of hers, who was an elementary school﻿147
KF: (cont.) teacher for the summer program. And against my recommendation and in my absence, the teacher was hired and expected to stay on for the new school year. And so I thought at that point that I had better step away, step out of the picture, and that's what I did. But it was well on its way then. And fortunately, I had been grooming Naomi Izumizaki, bless her heart, to step into my shoes because I knew I couldn't go on forever down at Cooper's Corner. And she was ready. It was just about graduation time, so she just eased in, you see, and I eased out. Always hanging around, though, always being there, and that is when I became a consultant.
DL: But in those days your consultancy must have been more active than now, when you just receive reports.
KF: Oh, yes, yes. No, I am not participating now.
DL: Do you consider your activities of promoting black history projects as a continuation or extension of your educational interests?
KF: No, my interest in black history had not been born until I met Dorothy Porter. I knew the importance of it, but after I met Dorothy, and met Liz [Elizabeth Parker], and worked there in the archives at Howard [University] with Dorothy Porter's archivists, Charlotte Price and Patricia McClure... They are the ones who really motivated me toward whatever I have done in that area.
DL: Are there any other activities that you're involved in at this point that we have not covered? We have covered the travel, we covered the black history projects, we covered the NAACP and the Smart Set.
KF: Yes, let's see. What else? Well, I'm acting as manager of these two buildings, as plumber, as maintenance person, as gardener, as buffer, keeping everyone happy.
DL: Chief cook and bottle washer?
KF: That's right. [laughter]
DL: Well, these houses have a kind of interesting history because the main house is the house that your mother first bought...
KF: And my grandmother.
DL: Your grandmother, right. This house that we're in, you, your mother, and your husband built—is that correct?
KF: Well, no. My mother had a dream... You see, this all used to be
cemetery out here. And when the cemeteries were removed—Turk Street went through—and Mama bought this vacant lot next door, and this part of the vacant lot was our back yard. That old house is where I grew up, and that gave a fifty-foot frontage on Turk Street. So Mama said to Waldo Bethel, "I want you to plan to build something on this. Build it, build on as much as you can of it. And make it unique." So Waldo, taking his own good time, you know, thought about it for years, and Mama talked about it and talked about it. Well, dear Mom died in '53,﻿148
KF: (cont.) and Waldo...or at least Bob and I thought, "We'll try to
carry through." So we talked it over with Waldo and he then said, "Yes, I think it's a good idea. I'll do it." So we all worked on the plans, and Bob and I built this apartment for ourselves, but did not live up here until November, 1962.
DL: The upper unit.
KF: Yes, this one. We couldn't live in it right away, because the amount
of the note was so large we had to rent everything. We lived downstairs in the old building. But anyway, we planned this, and we planned it so we could still have company. We loved to have people come, and people... I wish I had kept a guest book, because people have come through our doors down there from all over the world, and all over the United States, and big names. Like we had at one table, dinner table down there, [A.C.] Kinsey, and his whole staff. Did I ever tell you?
DL: Yes, you did.
KF: Oh, boy, that was a thrill. And we had the director of the [California] State Department of Public Health, and his wife. His wife taught at San Francisco State College, and I was there too, then. And they were there. And they, since that time, have made names for themselves. Oh, we had Dr. Mordecai [Johnson] andhis daughter. I wishl'd kept a guest book.
DL: That would have been nice.
KF: Yes, wouldn't it? So, anyway---
DL: We were talking about any other activities...
KF: Oh, any other activities.
DL: ...and the building of the house.
KF: Oh, the building of the house, yes. So, finally the house was built.
And I know Mom's pleased, if she is where she knows about it, because it was what she wanted. And I think she'd love that little patio. And I think she would like also the purposes to which the foundation, established in her name, has been used. I mean the Mary McCants Stewart Foundation Trust, which has been established in my mother's name, and the funds that go into that trust are the rents from these two buildings, and that's how the fund is built.
DL: And what do you do with the...
KF: The purposes of the foundation? The purposes of this foundation are
ones I'm sure she'd approve of, too. The purpose of the foundation is to assist in the education of black youth for whom everything isn't available. These funds are to give educational assistance to those young people who are not straight-A students. To those young people who have potential, but because of grade-point averages, can't always get loans, can't always get whatever is available to these brilliant ones, who are often flashes in the sky. They're so brilliant, and they go at such a great pace, they burn themselves out and they're gone.﻿149
KF: (cont.) The others, who show potential, are the plodders, and they
work consistently toward their goals. And when you take a long-range view, and research shows us that some of the plodders, who really have to struggle to get there, make far greater contributions over longer periods of time than these brilliant flashes in the sky for whom everything is available. How do you feel about it?
DL: So your foundation gives small grants to these students?
KF: Yes. Now this assistance is given in the form of long-term loans at very low interest, and they are not payable in part. The payments are not required until the young person has completed whatever it is he's working toward and is employed, so this can extend over many, many years. And in some cases we are successful in recovering the loan, and in some cases we aren't.
DL: Have you any idea of the number of students that the trust has helped with its loan program?
KF: Possibly ten to twelve. The trust gives gifts to educational institutions, organizations, for scholarship purposes.
DL: Did you and your husband set the trust up, or did you do this after he died?
KF: No, we discussed it, because we have no children. And we discussed it and started working on it some years before his death, with the help of an attorney who was the father of two of the children in the experimental unit, Judge Raymond J. O'Connor.
DL: So are you still in contact with him, or was he just your lawyer?
KF: No, we selected him because we had had contact with him and had confidence in his integrity.
DL: Now what role do you play in the trust at this time? Are you the chairman or...
KF: Just a trustee. I'm just one of the trustees.
DL: Well,-1 think we've covered everything, just about everything, so I'd like to "thank you very much for participating in the oral history project. It's been a very pleasant experience for me.
KF: Well, it's been an education for me, and I have enjoyed reliving the past with you.
DL: Thank you.﻿KATHERINE FLIPPIN
