
Margaret Cardozo Holmes﻿﻿Ms. Marcia Greenlee:
Mrs. Margaret Cardozo Holmes:
This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Margaret Cardozo Holmes. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Holmes's residence at 12 Keel Way, West Hyannisport, Massachusetts. The date is the 9th of November, 1977. Marcia Greenlee is the interviewer.
Mrs. Holmes, could you tell us how you became interested in cosmetology and how and why you decided to pursue it as a career?
Well, I needed the job and the job needed me. In 1928 my sister had started a small beauty shop in order to be at home with her two children. You could have a beauty shop in your home in those days. I was living in Philadelphia, working as a milliner, a trade that was beginning to fade. So my sister said, "Why not come with me, and we'll build up the business, the beauty business." It seemed like the thing I could do best, having spent my summers as a child in my grandmother's very large and prosperous beauty shop in Atlantic City. I had become hair conscious, I guess. Because at age ten, I was drying customers' hair and setting it (there were no electric dryers at that time) and helping my grandmother to weave hair for wigs. Her shop was a shop for whites, the wealthy Quakers of Philadelphia. So I knew little about Negro hair, but I set about in 1933, learning as much as I could.
I wanted to know all about all kinds of hair, so my sister and I decided it would be best to learn from the master hairdresser at that time, who was Emile, of Connecticut Avenue. Also I went to every possible demonstration, both black and white, and to trade shows and seminars. My grandmother, of course, was my earliest influence, but also my aunt, who was a sculptor. She had wanted to adopt me and train me as an artist, but this, I﻿2
MCH: (cont.) felt, was not for me. Yet I knew I had artistic ability. I even selected Armstrong High School over Dunbar, which was the high school of choice in those days, because of their art department. I learned there at Armstrong that I liked best working creatively with my hands. So in later years I found I could be creative with hair, cutting, shaping and arranging, which was why I became a hair stylist.
In 1937, after I had been with my sister's shop for a few years, even though it was in the middle of the Great Depression, we began to prosper and needed larger quarters. So we moved to a large store and set up a real beauty shop, and named it Cardozo Sisters. This is in 1937. My sister was the one with the business ability. She had learned bookkeeping and stenography and typing at convent school, and it was her ability that put the shop on a sound foundation and kept it there through the years. I was considered the artistic and talented one, and I also had a very inquiring mind. Besides liking to beautify hair, I also wanted to know about hair chemistry and hair in general, and especially Negro hair. The knowledge about hair was limited in the 1930s, but it took a sudden upturn in 1935. Some leading manufacturers started research and educational programs because those in the trade could see the potential for growth in the beauty industry. Certainly the methods of treating hair improved for both white and black. White permanent waving became softer and more natural. The early improved chemical relaxants for blacks hit the black trade, and the Cardozo Sisters shop was well in the lead with the improvements. In view of the fact that historically humans have never been satisfied with their hair, forever changing color and styling, it is not surprising that the hair business prospered, along with related cosmetology.
So as Cardozo Sisters grew and grew, it became necessary to develop and train new operators. This became my department. So we took young women out of trade school and trained them for working in a first-class shop, Cardozo Sisters shop. My sister was excellent in her selection of personnel and in maintaining good relations with employees through the years. And I was fortunate to be able to discover and direct the talents in the shop. It turned out to be a business for women who somehow managed to do the best possible job at work and in their homes. Through the years, with my sister's understanding of their problems, they had their children, were successful, bought homes; most owned cars, and many of the older operators are still in good health and productively with the shop. Our public has remained faithful through the years, fortunately, and progressive enough to applaud and appreciate whatever innovations we brought to the shop, even willing to model for us whenever we had demonstration classes, which were in the spring and fall, to present new trends. Even after the racial disturbances of the sixties, which made our area one to be avoided, our operators and most of our customers stayed with us. Later when it became fashionable to go downtown, customers would go, but most returned to us because we never failed to give them our very best attention.
In the sixties, when black racial awareness became a new rage, there also came a radical change in hair styling. Suddenly the "bouffant" gave way to the "natural," not only among blacks, but whites as well. Tremors went through the beauty shops for fear all the conventional techniques would﻿3
MCH: (cont.) be abandoned in favor of no styling at all! But Cardozo Sisters was quick to adapt and modify the natural style. In fact, we welcomed it as a healthy change from over-teased hair, which was beginning to show damage from excessive teasing. A musical became very popular in those days, Hair, which glorified hair, all hair. All hair was beautiful, gorgeous, wonderful, and the more the better. Hence the huge Afros and the long flowing unstyled white mane tossed about.
By the time this phase was beginning to wane, a stylist (I forget his name) came into favor with his "precision cuts." This was hair very carefully cut blunt instead of tapered as hair naturally grows. Then the '76 Olympics made popular the "wedge," as worn by Dorothy Hamill. Instead of curling and styling in the conventional way, the hair was first cut by a process which took the same amount of time as the conventional, and then it was blown dry with a hand dryer and brushed into place. The price of this type of cut and styling is usually double the price of the conventional styling. But there are at least half the women patrons who prefer updated conventional styling, which makes for greater variety in the trade and therefore very good for the industry, and good especially for Cardozo Sisters, where operators are trained in all styles. The new wave of natural hair brought many male customers to the barber shop, which was opened in 1968.
When my sister and I reached retirement age, we were very fortunate to be able to turn the shop over to a young person who had grown up with the shop, employed in the clerical department. She, in turn, has been able to assemble an excellent clerical staff to help run the shop; also the operators are of first quality. ^This young lady, Mrs. Fauntroy, was always one of my most interested and involved pupils in the area of research. She had good background for innovative training, and now uses the most advanced hair styling, methods and products. She was also well trained by my sister, Elizabeth Barker, in the clerical department. She and her husband are carefully investigating moving the shop to a more modern location. Though they own the shop, they still intend to keep the name, Cardozo Sisters.
MG: Mrs. Holmes, could you give us your grandmother's name, who you mentioned with the beauty shop, so we can include that in the record.
MCH: Mrs. Emma Warrick.
MG: And you say she had a shop in Atlantic City. Where did she live and did she have other shops?
MCH: She and her husband had had shops in Philadelphia. They served the very wealthy Quakers of Philadelphia. The Quakers decided to make Atlantic City their playground; they wanted their hairdresser and their barber to come to Atlantic City, so my grandmother told them, "Negroes in Atlantic City live on the other side of the tracks; we're sure you don t want to come to the other side of the tracks." And they said, Oh, we 11 find you a place." So they found her a place on Atlantic Avenue, which was the main avenue of Atlantic City, and there she and her husband established﻿4
MCH: (cont.) their shop and also lived above it.
MG: Do you know how she came to be...she and her husband. You say he was a barber; what was his first name?
MCH: William.
MG: William...how they came to be associated with the Quakers?
MCH: Well, in Philadelphia, most Negroes were associated with the Quakers by working for them. Because the Quakers were the monied people, and more or less the liberals too, the liberals of that day. They were very fond of my grandmother and grandfather, and those days those people probably didn't pay you too much, but they saw to it that you got all the tips on the stock market. That's how most of the Negroes got their money, on tips that they got from white people on the stock market, and how and when to invest and buy property.
MG: Is that right? Now about what length of time did their business cover, do you know? When did your grandparents retire?
MCH: Well, my grandfather died. And my grandmother retired in about 1917 or 1918.
MG: And then did the business close or was it sold or what?
MCH: Yes, it closed and was sold. And the property which she owned, and that business and another property was part of her parents' estate, the Jones estate. It came to a tidy sum such as $90,000, which shows that she ran a very prosperous business.
MG: Yes. You mentioned your aunt, could we put her name in the record as well?
MCH: Meta Warrick Fuller.
MG: And we'll be discussing her a little more later. Could you just say now where it was that she lived at the time you were connected with her and she wanted to adopt you?
MCH: In Framingham, Massachusetts. She was married to Dr. Solomon Carter Fuller, a psychiatrist, and they lived in Framingham. I used to visit there from
time to time.
MG: Now I wanted to go back and ask you a little more about the detailed
aspects of your business. I know that you were interested in research, as you said, and that you were responsible for introducing a lot of the then new hairdressing techniques. Could you describe a little of that? What types of research you were engaged in? And what kind of styling?
MCH: I'll say my husband was very interested in whatever scientific research
I got involved in, and he used to get me books, wherever he could find them, on hair. Actually the first book I remember was a treatise from the New﻿5
MCH: (cont.) York Department of Science, a treatise on hair in general and
that included black hair, Negroes, as they were called in those days. I read that very faithfully and made many notes. Then as I said in this interview here, all of a sudden the trades people began to be interested in hair from a scientific standpoint. I think you'd have to say from a semi-scientific standpoint, because they were adapting whatever knowledge they had for the benefit of selling products and the benefit of the trade. Nevertheless, they did uncover quite a few scientific facts and details about hair, the construction, the chemical and physical construction of hair, which people didn't know about before. And it helped in the trade and it helped in the products. It helped in the knowledge. They found out what hair could do and what it couldn't do. What you could expect of it and what you couldn't expect of it. That was really the beginning of any scientific knowledge which...Scientific knowlege then became fairly popular. A lot of monographs on hair came out after that; I can't remember all of them.
MG: So the period we're talking about is the 1930s?
MCH: No, I would say forties. The forties and fifties and sixties began to bring out a lot of new knowledge about hair.
MG: And how did you use this in your business?
MCH: Well, in the first place, we were bothered so much about Negro hair being rather fragile. Kinky hair. If it's coarse you think, oh, it'll never break, it's not fragile, but it is, it's brittle. Well, even that scientific treatise mentioned the possibility that they inherited that from African hair which was exposed to the sun and dryness of the atmosphere. Plus the fact that they didn't have any nutrition to speak of. So poor nutrition and drying hot sun, maybe that was what produced... On the other hand, you could even say that nature helped out in that, because it made that thick thatch of hair to protect them from the sun, rather than a thin fine hair that the Nordics have. So I began to wonder why it was that there was so much brittleness and what to do. New trade_journals began to apply themselves to that; they became interested in it And then I started working with a laboratory in the Washington suburbs that was doing a study on hair. The Gillette company instituted this research on Negro hair, and I was asked by a man who was running this research to supply him with hair clippings and cuttings which I cut from customers. And he would send in a messenger and he would pay me by the pound for this, and I even went to the laboratory with him and worked with him.
What they were trying to do was to discover the perfect relaxer for Negro hair, to make hair more pliable. They were not successful, by the way. It was a complete failure. There were other people who went into it at the same time, who were more successful, but Gillette never was able to. In fact they had several disasters because they used products that had a tendency to have a depilatory effect on hair. So after a couple of losses
they dropped it and went on to something else. In the meantime, other_
products came out, Johnson products-Ultra Sheen came out and has remained﻿6
MCH: (cont.) on the market ever since, successfully. But it has a stiff
competitor in the way of Revlon. Although Johnson's Ultra Sheen product is on the American Stock Exchange, they don't have the advertising name that Revlon has, so Revlon did provide them a lot of competition. But they have remained, and they continue to improve, and we like their product, and we feel that it's an excellent product. This is all, of course, the relaxation department of Negro hair. We do not use products as strong as we used to; we use much milder products. Of course, in the cruder days — straighteners, they used to call them—there used to be terrible sores and loss of hair and that sort of thing in the early experimental days. But today relaxers are milder and used quite successfully to relax Negro hair and make it more pliable. Even the natural hair is more pliable and more successful and not as brittle, if it's relaxed slightly or somewhat carefully with a new relaxer.
MG: What were some of the styling innovations that you introduced to your clientele?
MCH: Well, in the forties, all of a sudden there were "stylists," we used to
go to styling shows, and the bouffant came in. That made it very necessary to go to all the styling classes and find out how this thing was done, how the hair was cut and shaped for the bouffant. And how it was manipulated by the way of this teasing, in order to make the hair stand away from the head and have more volume than it had, in the days before, when the hair was flat, waved flat to the head. The result was very pleasing because it was a style which framed the face, perhaps more pleasingly than flat hair. So it became very popular, with all people—black, white or anybody— everybody liked the bouffant hair because it made it look like more hair. And so you had to learn how to do it, and it took some doing. So that was the main innovation at that particular time, I think you could say that was around 1950. I think for the whole fifties we went for the bouffant...ad nauseam, because the hair began to look like a bird s nest underneath and could become very fragile as a result of over-teasing.
Just about that time, people were beginning to get a little fed up with the bouffant; then the trades people were right on the ball and began thinking about something else. So suddenly the wind went out of the bouffant and the natural came in. Well, you could achieve almost a frame, or outline the face with a natural because it stood out from the face too. It wasn't flat. So the natural became very popular, not only with blacks but with whites because they grew more hair and they liked the effect of the hair.
MG: now when you entered this business, the trade, and I suppose today as well, was dominated by whites and you entered it in a city that was segregated. How were you able to progress and to find out what went on at the trade shows and to really be current with what was being introduced
in the field?
MCH: Well, we were affiliated with beauty shop suppliers. We were perhaps, at tires criticized by some of the black beauty shop suppliers for buying products from them, but in buying products from the white suppliers we got﻿7
MCH: (cont.) to be pretty knowledgeable about whatever demonstrations and trade shows and things were taking place. That kept us more or less au courant♦
MG: And were you able to introduce that back into the black community?
MCH: Yes.
MG: What were your experiences like, accommodating both a public and a private life? You were a professional woman, but you were also a wife. Did that create difficulties working in two spheres, domestic and public?
MCH: No, none whatever. My husband was very modern when it came to women. He also was very encouraging as far as my work was concerned, and he took an interest in whatever scientific work I was able to do. He, being an intellectual, surprisingly, would have patience with me. Sometimes I'd make him sit down and read some of the things that I was doing. That required patience on his part, but he had it, and he was very encouraging.
MG: Could you give us your husband's name and a little bit about his background?
MCH: Eugene Clay Holmes. He's been in philosophy at Howard University for...
forty years. He was at Howard for forty years, and head of the philosophy department for twenty-five. He got his Ph.D. from Columbia University.
MG: To what extent would you say that	your being a woman has affected your
choices and options in pursuing a professional career? Are there things
you think you might have done had	you not been female, or that might have been easier to do, or not?
MCH: No, I don't think so. In the work that we were in...We had options several times to have men operators, but we chose to remain a women's organization, because we felt the need for women to have something that they could do... well, thinking along the same lines that my sister thought when she opened the beauty shop. She had to have some job that would make it possible for her to have a job and take care of her children at the same time. ^So I don't think that that had anything to do with it at all. I wouldn't have done any different had I been a man, or had I been in men's work.
MG: And you don't think that being female in this work was any hindrance at all?
MCH: In fact, I think it was an advantage, because it did become a women's
business and we served women in the trade entirely. Actually, we had much more of a sympathetic following from the women in Washington, in public and at Howard University, all that sort of thing.
MG: How do you perceive the women's movement? What do you think it is and how do you feel about it?
MCH: What I've said to my husband a couple of times is that I did have some reservations, but certainly I'm all for ERA. Solidly, 100 percent. In﻿8
MCH: (cont.) general, I would say I'm for the women's movement. I worry a
little bit about the economic and social impact of the women's movement, and its effect on children, and the home and family. Because while women are taking to the economic field, what's becoming of the children? They're suffering from the fact that there's no one home to keep them in line, there's no one home to help in their studies at school. The mother used to be at home to see if they got their lessons done, and they're not at home anymore, and if they are at home, they're too tired, they've gone to bed. So I just think that they have to think about the economic and the social impact of the women's movement. But on the whole I'm for it.
MG: In your work with operators in your shop who had children, did you perceive that their work interfered in any way with their domestic responsibilities?
MCH: No, that's why I couldn't say that it's not possible for women to combine home and work, I couldn't say that. I wouldn't be consistent if I said that. I think it's entirely possible, as has been demonstrated in our shop and in our personal life. But at the same time, women are suffering the same ills now that men have suffered and they are going to die a little bit earlier than they have been dying, which is just as well, because then there won't be so many widows around.
MG: Do you have any preference among the terms Negro, colored, black, and if so, why?
MCH: No. I have become entirely acclimated to black. I protested for quite
a while, because I felt it was a term that was imposed rather than selected by most people. I lived through the period when colored was superseded by Negro. In Washington, there was quite a commotion going on between Mrs. Bethune and Mary Church Terrell about the subject of whether we were Negro or whether we were colored. And so we had a National Council of Negro Women and a National Council of Colored Women...and now we have to have another one to change that, the National Council of Black Women or what they're going to do. Sometimes I hedge about black because it does seem to me to be not very accurate; since Negroes are all sorts of colors and shapes and sizes, I was wondering why it has to be. It sometimes appears to be a little divisive to me too, dividing black and white. But nevertheless, I have accepted it, because I feel absolutely old-fashioned and quaint if I say Negro, and colored is absolutely even further back...
HG: well, how do you think being a black has affected your choices and options? Have you ever felt limitations imposed by race or not?
MCH: No. I haven't. I guess because of being light enough in skin to go anywhere I please and not be limited. I could go in white groups and not be noticed, and in a black group, and so it's never been too much of a problem. As far as work is concerned, I guess we limited ourselves to our own little sphere of influence and stayed within it, more or less, only to go forth when we wanted to gain some knowledge or something that would help us.﻿9
MG: Can you tell us something about the organizations and memberships to which you've belonged, and perhaps in which you've held office?
MCH: I've been a member of the Business and Professional Women's Club in
Washington. I didn't hold office there, but...and of course, the NAACP, the Cardozo Sisters were life members of NAACP...and Howard Wives... that's all so far as I can remember.
MG: What did Howard Wives do? What do they do?
MCH: Have monthly meetings and raise funds for scholarships, mainly for scholarships.
MG: Were these wives of faculty?
MCH: Yes.
MG: Are there any of these memberships, participation in organizations that you feel have been particularly rewarding?
MCH: Howard Faculty Wives at the time, yes.
MG: Could you say something briefly about any awards or honors that you've received?
MCH: No, I'm afraid not. I had several awards, and I have some pictures
when the operators and the black beauty industry, about fifteen years ago, awarded a prize for the leading beauty shop in Washington. That's about all I can think of.
MG: Well now, as you look back over these years, what would you say have been your most outstanding achievements, what gives you the most satisfaction?
MCH: Well, I think it gives me the most satisfaction that I think I've been a successful wife to an intellectual, and a Ph.D. from Columbia University! Also, it's been rewarding to me that I've been able to train enough women, well at least, I won't put any numbers on it, but quite a few women who have made a good living in the shop and have been able to rear their children and live a good life.
MG: Do you have any hobbies?
MCH: Well yes, I guess I do. There they are.
MG: Your plants?
MCH: Yes. I'm a homemaker. I'm not one of those women's libbers who think
that taking care of the home is a bad thing. I think it's a good thing.
MG: You enjoy it.
MCH: Yes.﻿10
MG: How about travel? Have you traveled much?
MCH: Well, in 1927 my sister, another sister and I went to Paris. That's Emmeta C. Hurley, she's married to Granville Hurley, who's also a Howard University professor...
MG: You went to Paris in 1927.
MCH: Yes. We had inherited a few thousand dollars. We thought we wanted Meta to learn a trade that would keep her occupied and would have a little glamour to it, so we decided that she should go to Paris and learn the beauty trade. I took her there and we enrolled in a beauty school in Paris, where she took a course. I stayed there six weeks, left her there, and at that time it was a very nice time to be in Paris, because it was the time of Josephine Baker, and all the very beautiful entertainers were in Paris at that time. Not much other traveling. I've been to Montreal and to Quebec and, I don't know, I think this winter we're going somewhere...we traveled from here to Washington back and forth...
MG: This travel, besides the presumed pleasure of the experience, do you think it has changed you in any way in your outlooks or attitudes?
MCH: How can you travel without broadening your outlook and broadening your whole life? Yes. Naturally. I don't think I'll ever forget my trip to Paris and six weeks in Paris.
MG: You say you reached Paris on the 6th of July.
MCH: Yes, two young women without any preparation whatsoever, we just decided, almost on the spur of the moment... catch her before her money's gone and get her to Paris and get her enrolled in a school. We knew that it wouldn't do any good to just have her take up any ordinary beauty trade here in Washington, because the beauty industry at that time was a very depressed industry. But if she got a little glamour, she would probably stick with it, which it worked out that she did. And so we hit Paris cold, you might say, without even a place to stay. We had to depend on a taxi driver to take us...We got the paper, and we looked up the places to rent, and we had to depend on a taxi driver to take us around, and soak us each time we went to each place. So we ended up on the Rue de Clichy, which was right behind Place de Gaulle, [laughter] Oh boy, we found out we were in a very, very, shall I say, bawdy area. So we stayed there for about a week and the next place we went, we went to a very large, expensive hotel so we could only stay there a week. So we decided what we would do next was go to an English pension where we could at least be understood...
MG: i Was going to ask you how you handled the language.
MCH: That's where we finished up, we spent four weeks there in the English pension. So I would go back and forth to my sister's school which was located over near the French Market. Every day I would go back and forth, so I got to see a lot of Paris just walking around. I was a good walker﻿11
MCH: (cont.) in those days.
MG: You and your sister were orphaned really at a fairly early age, weren't you? How old were you when your father died?
MCH: No, we were not orphaned. My mother died when I was ten or eleven, and the youngest was a year old. There were six of us, one boy and five girls. My father died when—he's been dead now about twenty years— we were grown.
MG: Oh, you were grown. I had an idea that he had died when you were young. What was your early education like? You seem to have been a close-knit group so far as the siblings were concerned.
MCH: Elizabeth and I went to a convent school, St. Francis DeSales Academy in Virginia. And we got our training there, which was a little bit beyond high school. I think it went two years into normal school in Washington; we could have enrolled. But by that time we were married and my sister had children, so she had to drop any further education to look after her children. Beyond that Elizabeth and I didn't go. But Catherine and Frances went to college for a while. Catherine went to Hunter College for a while in New York and Frances, the other sister, went to the University of Michigan...
MG: All your siblings were female, is that right?
MCH: One brother. He became a pediatrician, but he died several years ago.
MG: That was Warrick, I see. You were saying there were two organizations you belonged to here in West Hyannis.
MCH: Yes. The Godmothers and the NAACP. The Godmothers was formed by a
group of women about five years ago. And this group of black women got together and decided we were just not going to be do-gooders around here or bridge players, and just waste our time doing nothing. We had to do something of some good around here, so we decided that we would form an organization to work with children. And then I was the one who suggested a good name would be Godmothers. The group accepted the name. So it's been very popular ever since. And we work for the Children's Protective Society. We work for the Hubbard Fund which is an arm of the Children's Protective. We didn't want our money to go into the general budget of the Children's Protective, so we insisted that we wanted to be part of the Hubbard Fund, which is an emergency fund for children. So over the years we started, I think the first contribution we made...to give three things a year. We have a cocktail party in May to open the season on the Cape. And we have a flea market in front of the Children's Protective, and we do very well with that, because people come from far^and near. Then we have a dance and people come from everywhere, because it's the end of the social season, more or less, on the Cape, and we do very well with that. So this year we handed over $3000 to the Children's Protective Society for the Hubbard Fund, which is the emergency fund. Each year they give us a report of what they have done with the funds for the emergency children around here.﻿12
MG: And you remain active in the NAACP here?
MCH: Yes.
MG: This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Margaret Cardozo Holmes. The interview is taking place in her sister's home, Mrs. Elizabeth Cardozo Barker.
Mrs. Holmes, you were going to say a bit more today about important relatives in your family.
HCH: Well, there was my Aunt Meta, Meta Warrick Fuller. She is one of
America's most original sculptors. She studied in France under the great Rodin, and in 1903 and 1904 won high recognition in Paris. In 1907 she executed a series of fourteen groups for the Jamestown Exhibition portrayal of the progress of the Negro. One of her most remarkable works, in the Harlem Public Library, shows the rebirth of Negro greatness. A mummy unfolding from its wrappings to beauty again."
She lived in Framingham, Massachusetts, and since I visited there frequently, I'd like to speak about her home life. In visiting Framingham, I was sort of like a sister to her three boys. What I remember most was the studio which she built from money she inherited from her grandparents. It was beautifully designed for her purposes with lots of space and light, overlooking a lake. I always remember her walking rapidly back and forth from her home to the studio. She was always in a hurry to get back home around five in the evening, after she had worked all day in the studio, either working on a piece of sculpture or teaching the fundamentals of modeling to her students. Her husband, Dr. Solomon Fuller, was generally appreciative of her work, but at times impatient at the time she took away from their home. So she was usually anxious to reconcile her career with her home life, and the demands of her husband's career as a psychiatrist.
Dr. Fuller was the first black psychiatrist in this country. He trained in Europe, contemporary with Freud. His work was consultant work as a psychiatrist in private practice, and also as a neuropsychiatrist. He also trained and developed young black psychiatrists. His work took up so much time that it was often in conflict with the career of an artist. Dr. Fuller, a Liberian, was somewhat conventional in his belief that a wife's place was in the home. Nevertheless, Aunt Meta managed to pursue her work and her sons grew up with a healthy, if sometimes ruthless, respect for their mother's work. Two sons went on to Colby College, another became a free-lance artist.
When Aunt Meta had reached her 80th birthday, the art department at Howard University decided to give her an award of merit and distinction. This was a most happy occasion for all of our family. Her very youngest niece presented a huge bouquet of flowers. During the last ten years of her life, Aunt Meta set herself the task of sculpturing a Christ on the cross to present to the Episcopal church where she had been a member so many years. The crucifix was of singular beauty because of the great compassion for the human race on the face of Christ, which Aunt Meta had turned toward the thief on the cross. All of Aunt Meta's children and grandchildren
*This piece is currently owned by the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York Public Library, and is on loan to the Countee Cullen Library. (January 1979)﻿13
MCH: (cont.) were present when the crucifix was presented to the church, and we always remember the words of appreciation from the pastor. I visited Aunt Meta as often as possible during her last years. She was confined in a hospital, physically disabled, but mentally alert, and able to recite poems in the voice of her young days, which was always beautiful and musical to the end of her life.
MG: When did she die, what year?
MCH: I can't remember.
MG: Are there other relatives that you could say something about?
MCH: Well, there was Essie, Essie GoodeRobeson. Essie's mother, our aunt,
lived with us while Essie was in college at Northwestern University. I never saw much of Essie, until I visited her in New York at Presbyterian Hospital where she was a pathologist, and about to be married to Paul Robeson. Essie was a very handsome woman, though short in stature, barely reaching Paul's chest. Her attitude toward him always seemed to be "this great handsome hulk of man needs me to refine him," so she worked very hard, after they were married, at furthering his career, which included chasing away the women who pursued him. Essie had tremendous enthusiasm, and after Paul received the Stalin Prize, she became an ardent advocate of the Soviet Union, making speeches and lecturing all who would listen. Unfortunately her ardor tended to turn people off instead of on. When Paul lost his health, he lived with his sister in Philadelphia, and soon after, Essie became ill and died in New York, of cancer. Her son and grandson live in New York. The life story of Paul was done by James Earl Jones, but his son does not approve of it.
MG: Did either of you ever meet with Paul Robeson? Do you have any impressions or memories of him?
MCH: A very striking, handsome man with a very musical speaking voice, not only his singing voice but his speaking voice was very beautiful. He used to come to Washington from time to time. He was in our house, on several occasions, on Jackson Street. I remember my nephews were amazed at his height then; their own father was about 6' 4", and it seems to me that Paul Robeson must have been a little taller than that, because I remember John, the oldest son, said, "Oh Daddy, there's one man who's bigger than you are." Paul Robeson was big. Not just physically big, he was big in every way. There was a modesty about him that you wouldn't think he had done anything. There wasn't a touch of arrogance anywhere in the whole man. He was just wonderful. I could tell you a whole lot more about him if I sat down and got it together.
MG: Maybe you could add it on then, if you would like to later.
ECB? And as my sister says about Essie, he was so modest, and probably was a man who would never have pushed himself as far as he got; he just never thought. I guess he really wasn't all that interested. However, he was very definitely interested in the race problems. And it was because he was so hurt that his country, America, would treat blacks the way they did,
Elizabeth Cardozo Barker﻿14
ECB: (cont.) that I think he was inclined to see if he couldn't find better treatment for blacks in other countries, such as England and Russia and Europe. Right at the time when they needed him most in America, he and Essie left for England and Russia where they spent a good many years. I can't say this positively, I couldn't document this, except to say that they evidently didn't find all that they hoped to find in Russia because they did want to come back before they both died. That seems to be the way most people who leave America, in spite of all the things that are wrong with it, they want to come home. So far as Essie was concerned... She used to always visit us in Washington when she came down, that is on Jackson Street. I didn't know her earlier. I remember on one occasion, she had a bout with Senator McCarthy on communism. She was very independent in her talk with him, and her arrogance, she got this from her mother, which was Grandpa Cardozo's only daughter, a certain arrogance, and she was very happy to take on Senator McCarthy. Well, she came out all right. Evidently she must have given him the right answers. I remember telling her that she must not speak as though she represented the Negro people, because the black people didn't quite understand their affinity for Russia. Apparently black people were really essentially very loyal. I don't think it's ever been recorded that they went all out for Russia and everything that Russia stood for. Apparently Essie and Paul were so advanced and so cultivated, and so whatever-we-weren't, that they did. They had the money to go to those places...So I had to say to her that you must not think that you speak for blacks of America, because they don't quite understand you, and I don't think they think you speak for them. So I think after that she calmed down a little bit. Anyhow, they left the country just about that time. She was a very forceful, powerful woman. She was probably the power behind the throne with Paul.
MG: Is there anything else that either of you would like to add to the tape now? Anything that we haven't touched on?
ECB: I'd like to add to my sister's comments about Aunt Meta...Pictures don't mean anything, do they?
MG: Surely, if you want to mention something about them.
MCH: With Essie we have this very lovely picture of her family, Essie and Paul and the daughter-in-law and son and her grandchildren.
MG: About what time was this?
MCH: '57, and any number of lovely pictures of Pauly, from the time he was a child on up, which you can look at later if you want.
MG: I'd love to, yes.
ECB: I would like to add to my sister's comments about Meta Warrick Fuller, my mother's sister, my aunt. Mrs. Holmes has made a recording of the life of Meta Warrick Fuller, but I would like to add a few memories of Aunt Meta. She was a very wonderful person. Mrs. Holmes, my son Nick and his wife Faith, and I went to see Aunt Meta when she was in the hospital, very﻿15
ECB: (cont.) near the end of her days. Although she was wasted from long
illnesses, her spirit burned brightly, like a flame. She was over 90, but her young heart was ageless. My daughter-in-law, Faith, herself a poet, captured the mood for us all in this poem:
Meta Warrick Fuller
Bone and birdlike fragile form,
Perched on large pillows and linen veiled
Remarkable and long fingers
An ageless and upright human head
The face alight to know and think
The voice aglow with poetry
A magic of youth immortal spirit
Housed in its remnant of 90-year flesh and brittle structure Proclaims musically, soft and clear, I am ready to depart. Oh my heart's child, goodbye.
By Faith Nicholas, 1968, so that's it.
MG: Thank you. Thank you both very much.
MCH: Thank you.﻿