
Beulah Hester:
Felicia Bowens: Beulah Hester:
Felicia Bowens: Beulah Hester:
We're here at Mrs. Hester's house in Oxford, North Carolina; it's a beautiful day outside. It's been raining on and off here, but the sun is out now. What kind of weather do you all have here usually, Mrs. Hester?
This winter we had it pretty bad. You see my new fence out there? Tried to get it up before you came. The tree fell over, broke my fence. The man promised to come; I was so afraid you would come before I could get my fence up. So what time did you come yesterday?
Oh, I guess I got here around five o'clock.
And my fence was finished at twelve-thirty. He said, "Has your company come?" I said, "No, not yet." He said, "We're gonna have it finished before she gets here." I said, "I couldn't have this young lady come and see a broken fence like that; she wouldn't want to come and see me anymore." He said, "Well, Mrs. Hester, don't worry. You'll have your fence fixed and painted." I said, "Look, if you have any paint left, would you put some on the garage door?" I said, "I'll give you a little tip. She's never been here before, and I don't want her to see it all broken down. Maybe she won't worry about the broken-down fence. Just put some paint on the garage door." It's supposed to be a garage, but it's too small for a garage. So I use it. We call it the little house. So we got it done before you came. That was the damage that the storm did for us and my house wasn't the only one. I think I worry more because I wanted to have it done before the guest came.
Mrs. Hester, why don't you tell me something about your mother and father?
Well, my father was a minister, Baptist minister, and my uncle was chairman of the committee. He used to travel around and he became interested in orphan children.
Felicia Bowens:
Chairman of the committee? What committee?
Beulah Hester:
Shiloh Baptist Association. And he was very﻿2
BH: (cont.) much impressed with the condition of the orphan children in the state. So he got his committee to see what they could do for the orphan children. My uncle was Reverend Augustus Shepard. And he was pastor of the First Baptist Church in Raleigh. He didn't have time to do it, so • my uncle Augustus sold the idea to my father, Robert Shepard, and asked him to take over after the present superintendent gave it up. And my father had lost his first wife. And then he met my mother. He asked my grandmother could he marry my mother. My grandmother didn't give him any answer at all. She said, "I don't make any matches and I don't break any." He walked out the door. So my father... they decided that they would go on and get married. Then my mother and my father worked at the orphanage. They accepted without pay. And he was superintendent of what is the now Central Orphanage in Oxford, North Carolina, for years. And three of us children were born there, my two brothers and me—Robert Shepard, the late Robert Shepard, and Marshall Shepard. My mother was very interested in music. And my grandmother was asked by the people that "he worked for, if they would le t her take my mother in their home, and see if they could teach her music. So, she did. She became interested in music. Then as time went on, they sent me to Hartshorn, which is now affiliated with Union University in Richmond, Virginia.
I'll never forget the day that I graduated. Dr. Teft was the president. Someone told him that my mother was in the audience and to call on her to speak. My heart was in my mouth when my mother leaned over to get up. I heard her whisper, "Lord, help me." And then she raised up. She said, "Dr. Teft, faculty, trustees, members of the graduating class..." There was a tall building in New York City, many, many stories high. After years and years, they found that it was beginning to sink on one side. They had the architects to investigate and they found that the foundation was not secure. And my mother drew an analogy from that. "You students have been here three or four years. You're going out in life. And I want you to be sure that your foundation is secure. If you want to make a success in life, don't feel because you have been to college that you know it all. There are certain things that you ought to live by, certain things that you want to be impressed upon you. If you've been going to Sunday school, don't think because you are in college, finished college, that you don't need Sunday school. There are certain fundamental principles that will stand by you for all your life. Hold on to those. Sometimes in life you see young men and young women, they don't make a success in life, and you wonder what is the trouble. It is because their foundation is not secure. And I want to appeal to each one of you to be sure that your foundation is secure. If you have been going to work in your church, continue to do that. Don't say because you've been to college, now you don't need that. Your church needs you. Your family needs you. Your community needs you. Sometime you may say, well, wonder why they didn't make a success of life? It's because their foundation was faulty. Now I want to appeal to you students. As you go out in life, be sure that you're on the right road, the right foundation. And success will be yours." At the end of the speech, the whole audience, the graduating class, the trustees, gave her a rousing applause. She stood and bowed twice. Dr. Teft said (I didn't know, someone told me), "Thank you, Mrs. Shepard. Thank you is all I can say."﻿3
FB: How did you feel?
BH: Just cried like a fool. Couldn't keep the tears back to save my life.
I was so proud of my Momma, I didn't know what to do. Oh, I couldn't tell ' her, I couldn't explain, you know, what effect it had on me. But one thing I remember, one of the teachers said, "Don't you mean to tell me^that Dr. Teft had tipped Mrs. Shepard off that he was going to call on her?" I said, "No. She didn't know." "You mean she made an extemporaneous speech like that?" I couldn't say a word. I was speechless. I was so proud of my Momma 'cause all those graduates, all those teachers, all those professors—and my little mother from North Carolina making a speech at a graduation like that? Oh, I couldn't stand it. I had to get myself together. I leaned over and kissed her. That's all I could do.
FB: Now you say your father was a minister?
BH: Yes.
FB: And your mother worked with him at the orphanage.
BH: She was president of Missionary Society, Women's Missionary Society, for thirty-five years.
FB: Inhere was this, at your father's church?
BH: No, no, that was for the state, the state of North Carolina. And part of the time she was at the office, but they elected her the president of the Women's Baptist Missionary Society of North Carolina.
FB: What else did your mother do?
BH: Well, she helped my father. She was the general matron at the orphanage. As a girl she went to Boydton Institute. And when my father asked her to marry him, she said that she had planned to go to Africa. And my father said, "You marry me, and it's Africa right here in North Carolina with these orphan children, and I'll be glad to have you with me." And that's what she did. And they elected her president of the Women's Baptist Convention in North Carolina. She only missed one year. The year after I was born was the year that she missed, and she had six children. Three lived. Three of us. Three passed away.
FB: When they were really young?
BH: Yes, when they were young. And she only missed one year, the year I was born. Somehow they arranged it so that the children would come in every October the convention met. And my brothers were born in July. Both of them were born in the same month. She only missed one convention, and that was the year I was born. She was elected like this October and she served this October. The next October, she couldn't go. That was the only one she missed. People used to laugh and wonder how she arranged it. So she continued with the missionary work until she passed away.﻿4
FB: You mentioned earlier that your mother also went to Hartshorn, is that correct?
BH: No, she went to Boydton, Boydton Institute. And she was supported by ' the Missionary Alliance and said she was going to Africa. You know what I told you my father said, "There's Africa right here. Help me with these orphan children." And she did.
FB: Haw many children in her family?
BH: In our own?
FB: In your mother1s. How many brothers and sisters did your mother have?
BH: Oh, about five or six. But somehow she was the favorite. My grandmother worked for some very nice people, some of the leaders. And they asked my grandmother could they take my mother and let them give her music lessons, just to see if a Negro girl could learn music. And they told her yes. So she stayed, what they call "in the house" with these people who my grandmother worked for. And they sent her to school, Missionary Alliance School. They were a delightful family. The niece of the family played for the Episcopal church. She taught my mother music. It was kind of a roundabout way. Then my mother just felt that if she could learn, and I was the older girl, I just had to learn to play. So as soon as she could, everybody that came to Oxford that knew one note from another, my mother would get in touch with them. Don't ask me how many music teachers I had 'cause I couldn't tell you. Everybody who came to Oxford to teach school that knew music, my mother would get. I guess I had about ten or fifteen teachers. They'd stay so many months at the school down there and then they'd go somewhere else. Then another would come and my mother said, "I want you to teach Beulah music."
FB: Did your mother ever teach you?
BH: Yes, she used to teach me. My mother learned to play. Her favorite was the "Under the Double Eagle." That was a piece of music. My mother had rheumatism in her hands and her wrists were stiff. But somehow, I don't know how she managed, she used to play for the First Baptist Church. And she just said I had to play. So when I was in Hartshorn, I decided that I wouldn't take the music lessons. I would start to specialize, I would specialize in music. I wouldn't take the other stuff. And my mother said, "How do you know you're going to be that good? People may not want to hear you. You get up there with "we'ses" and "wases^*3™3 talk about, well, I don't know so-and-so and so-and-so and so-and-so, but I can play the piano. They might not want to hear the piano. They might not have a piano in the house. If you are a guest in someone's house, you can't open your mouth and say anything 'cause you play the piano. How ridiculous it is. I don't want to hear it." And she said, "Young lady, if your father and me can work and send you to school and give you music lessons, seems like to me, that you could stay there and take them. Now I don't want to hear any more about stopping and specializing in music. I don't want to hear it. You're going to take your music as long as we can afford to give
it to you, and you're going to take your other studies too. How do you
*
refers to colloquialisms﻿5
BH: (cont.) know what kind of job you are going to get? You might not be good enough to teach music. How do you know? You want to be able to open your mouth and converse on most any subject? You're a guest at somebody's house." My mother made me do it.
FB: What did you go into at Hartshorn?
BH: Well, I took the regular course. Then I finished Hartshorn and I taught school.
FB: What was the regular course? What does that mean?
BH: That was a normal, normal course.
FB: What did that involve?
BH: That was more, like the high school now. Or maybe two years above the
high school, at Hartshorn. That qualified you to teach. It was just like what they called the normal course. I imagine it would be a high school now. Because you go from a high school now to college, don't you? Well, that's what that was. So if you passed the examination, you could teach. If, say, I'd been taking music all that time... When I taught, my first school was in Gloucester, Virginia. I played for the church there, and taught the first and second grades. I taught at Faison Institute, Faison, North Carolina, and Mayesville Institute in Mayesville, South Carolina. Then after my father passed away, I wanted to go to Fisk and take a college course there in music. But my younger brothers were home. I felt that I should help my mother. So I sacrificed. I could have worked my way through Fisk, but I couldn't leave that responsibility on my mother. So I sacrificed furthering my education to help.
Then I decided that I would accept my husband's offer of getting married— William Hunter Hester. But on $25 a month, I didn't see how I could do it. I picked out a trunk—nothing in it—and I decided that each month, I would get one piece of a trousseau. And it was so hard... I made up my mind, told my mother, I had to get a better job. About that time the war program was going on, and I liked to cook anyway. I took some courses, and worked for the government. I went to Raleigh and took the examination, passed, and got this new job January first. And 1 was supervisor in Person County. My salary doubled from $25 to $50. That was a lot of money. And I was able to get my trousseau and help my mother. And I married the twenty-fifth of September, 1918.
FB: Ydu say you were a supervisor. What kind of was this?
BH: That was like the government, you go down and have these classes to teach
the people how to conserve food. And I remember once, we had a demonstration class. You had peas. We met in this woman's kitchen, about twenty-five people. I was going to show them how to use black-eyed peas. So we boiled the peas. And the dish was called "pea souffle." I thought I would die laughing. A man raised his hand and said, "Miss Shepard, may I have a word to say?" I said, "Yes, sir." He said, "You can call this dish anything you want, but they're black-eyed peas right off." I was so amused. The﻿6
(cont.) man was so right, because I didn't like them myself, I was trying to get the other people to, and when he said that, it was all I could do to keep from laughing. The audience looked like they would fall out. The man said, "Call them whatever you want, but they're black-eyed peas right off." It was amusing, though. Then we'd have sewing classes, make pillow tops, conserve food, substitute one food for another. They had books. I'd learned in lessons two, three nights ahead. I kept two or three nights ahead. We didn't go every day. And the people would take me from one community to another. You'd meet at this woman's house, and then we'd get the neighborhood, let them know where you would meet. Then we taught them how to can food. Oh, we did so many things. And I was always two or three lessons ahead, you see. You didn't go to the same place, you know, you teach this place, in one community you'd teach one thing, and then you'd go to another. You could teach the same thing you taught over there, didn't make any difference. A new set of people. I got along fine. They were so pleased I got a ten-dollar raise, sixty dollars. And when I gave them my resignation, on the first of September, they didn't want me to leave. I had promised.
I got married on the twenty-fifth, and how in the world I made it in twenty-five days, I don't know, but I did. People wanted to know what to give me. "If you don't know what to give me, give me the price of it." And my poor husband, I was so amused. He said... We didn't have the money to pay the minister, but he was someone that we knew. So my husband said, "We'll send you the money." So we sent him five dollars back. I had so much money. I was just giving him money.
Then we went to Greensboro. My husband was pastor down there, Mount Sinai Baptist Church. I played for the church. We used to have emancipation celebrations at that time. Mrs. Faulkner came to me. She said, "Oh, Mrs. Hester, I'm so glad to know you." She said, "We need a teacher out in one of the rural communities, and I would like so much to have you." It was miles from the Terra-Cotta community. I told her yes. And I didn't know where we were going to live. We were rooming at that time. We started to buying a house. My husband had $50, and they asked him, how much money did he have. He said $50. The man said, "Well, you got nerve enough to come down here to buy a house with $50, I have nerve enough to give it to you." [laughs] That was amusing, that was amusing. We went down. This Professor Johnson was going to Howard University; he had been teaching at A&T* and his house was for sale. I wanted it so bad. I'd go down every day. They had newspapers on the floor. And I'd get on the floor and pray. And that was the day my husband decided to go down to see Mr. Warton, was his name. And Mr. Warton said, "How much money you got, Reverend?" He said, "Fifty." "Fifty dollars? All right. Now you get some of your trustees to sign. I'm going to try." And he gave him the down payment. Then Mrs. Faulkner asked me to take the school. That's how we got started.
And my sister-in-law decided she wanted to go to Bennett. And we were in walking distance of Bennett. We let her stay with us, and she would help with the meals and the work. Then, one of the secretaries over at the school wanted to room with us, so we let her room with my sister-in-law. My sister-
in-law would come home at lunch and give her her lunch because I was too
*
North Carolina Agricultural and Technical College﻿7
BH: (cont.) far away. Then I prepared the dinner when I came, or if she came first, whichever one came first would start the dinner. That's how we made it. Then we bought the house next door to President Bluford's, 1009 Lindsay Street, Greensboro.
In the meantime, there was a vacant church, Twelfth Baptist Church in Boston, Massachusetts. My brother, Reverend Marshall Shepard, was assistant pastor at Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York City. He was asked to come and fill the vacancy at Twelfth Baptist Church. He couldn't come, but he told them he thought his brother-in-law would be interested. He got an appointment for him to go up and preach. He was to stay one Sunday. The trustees asked him if he would stay two. He told them that they would hear from him later. All that time I was home praying, hoping, asking the Lord to open the way so we could get better field of service.
In the meantime, I had been promoted three times, my final assignment for the city schools of Greensboro, North Carolina. My supervisor said when I left, "If you get to Boston, and find anything there that you think you can do, let me know. I'm not going to give you anything in your hand to take. But you write to the superintendent of schools or me if you see anything that you think you can do." So I decided to go to school. I went to Boston University to take up religious education. Trying to do too much, I had a breakdown. The doctor advised that it was too much. So I stayed out of school for two years, worked with the church, went to parties. Finally I transferred over to Simmons College School of Social Work to take this course of social work. There I had a money problem. I explained it all to my director, Miss Katherine Hardwick. She said, "The only thing I can recommend, Mrs. Hester, is you go over to the college, talk with the bursar, Mr. Bachelor." I told Mr. Bachelor that I was in a financial bind, but I wanted to take those courses in social work. Mr. Bachelor just said, "The only thing we have is on a cash basis. I don't know what I could do." I said, "But Mr. Bachelor, couldn't you arrange so I could pay you so much a month?" He laughed and said, "No, Mrs. Hester. We don't do that here." I said, "I could give you $25 a month." He said, "Mrs. Hester, we pay our tuition by the semester—first semester, second semester. And the second semester begins in February and we have to have a down payment. We've never done anything like that." I said, "Mr. Bachelor, you've never done it before, why couldn't you begin with me?" He said, "Mrs. Hester, you win. I'll do that. How much can you pay a month?" I said, "Twenty-five dollars." He said, "If you pay $25 until you finish school, then you don't have to pay any more until you get a job. When you get a job, then you can resume the payments."
I finished in May, got a job in September, payments began in January, ended in October. I got it all paid. Got a job and worked on that job for almost thirty years. The time came for me to retire and the board sent me a letter and said that I had reached the retirement age, but they were sending this letter to ask me if I would stay on a year longer. I accepted. The job had been with the YMCA, in charge of the senior citizens program. I organized the group two years earlier and stayed there until Mr. Wright, Colonel Wright, Thomas Wright, was the director. After he was taken ill, I didn't know what to do. Finally, I decided to take my group to the Freedom House. We were known then as the Goldenaires. And I worked there﻿8
BH: (cont.) until my retirement.
My brother passed away. It was his request that I move back to North Carolina. In the meantime, I lost my husband, '64. I tried to make it ' back to North Carolina before my brother passed in November '69. But he told his sons, "You can't do anything for me. Please, take care of my sister. See that she gets back to North Carolina. I don't want her in Boston alone." He had been upset because some boys knocked me down, near Dudley Street. And I was hurt quite badly. I stayed out a few weeks, then went back to work. So my nephews did as their father had asked them; they helped me to get back to North Carolina. That's a short history of my life in Boston.
FB: To go back to the beginning, about your mother and father, you said
your father had been married and his first wife had died. Were there any brothers and sisters that you had?
BH: They had one son, but he died.
FB: Tell me something more about your father.
BH: Well, my father was a minister and he gave up his church work. He just felt that he wanted to work with the orphan children. And he made many sacrifices. It's most interesting to know how he fed those children. I mean, the state gave them a little money, but he would travel around and take the children. He organized a band...a very competent band director. They would sing and give concerts at various churches throughout the state. Then he had a staff.
The thing that impressed me so much as a child, my father depended upon his Heavenly Father for food for those children. I remember quite vividly. I heard the matron came to him one day and said, "Mr. Shepard, I don't know what we're going to have for dinner today for those children." And he said, "I don't know. We'll have something." That was about eleven o'clock. The children were accustomed to having dinner about one, between twelve and one. And he was sitting out on the front porch, reading his Bible, and the telephone rang. He answered. And it said, "Is this the orphanage?" He said, "Yes." "Who's speaking?" He said, "Robert Shepard." "Now Mr. Shepard, you're the very one I want to see, I want to talk to. The Junior League had a big banquet here last night. And we have more food(i than we used. Would you accept donations from us?" He said, "Would I? And he went on to explain. And I, that's right, I guess I'm a crybaby like my father. And he said, "The matron just called me and told me they don't know what we're going to give the children for dinner." He said, "I'll try..." "Now, Mr. Shepard, we'll bring it out." And then in about thirty minutes, those ladies came up there with sandwiches, cakes, everything. He couldn't thank the woman for shedding tears.
There are so many instances like that. I remember hearing him say, he went to the post office and it was time for the band to go off on their trip, and he'd already made reservations. But the Taylor Tobacco Company used to give him so much money, and he was depending on that check, and it hadn't come. So he said, "Well, I'll go to the post office and maybe﻿9
(cont.) I'll pick it up." And they were going the next afternoon. He had made the arrangements and everything, didn't have the money. My father went to the post office. And he said, he looked in the box. There wasn't a thing in the box. But he couldn't move. Just stood there •leaning on the counter, thinking. And all at once, Mr. Taylor, who was the president of the Taylor Tobacco Company, came in and said, "Hi, Shepard, how are you doing?" He said, "Well, I, uh..." "Did you get your check?" My father said, "No." "I signed the check before I went out...just been out of town. I just came back. You going to be here for a while? Drop by the office and pick it up. Your check is right there. You should have had it long ago." My father said he didn't know what to do. So he said, "Mr. Taylor..." "No, no, don't need to thank me, just go by there and pick up the check. How you getting on?" "Getting on very well. Trying to get the children away to give some concerts." "All right, if you need anything, let me know. See you. Take care." And my father said he couldn't walk. For a while he got himself together. He went on by the office and there was the check. I think it was $50 or $60 they gave him every month and this was past the time.
There's so many instances like that. I could just go on and on. Some of the children wanted to go off to school after they finished the grades there. And he wrote to the different schools around, and asked, Would they take some of the orphan children, some of those that had finished the grades? The schools said yes. And many of them went to school.
After my father passed, my brother Robert, his namesake, organized a scholarship fund, and they do that now for the Central Orphanage. So many of the children have finished their college through scholarship aid. Some have been teachers, some artists and are doing well. Architects, dressmakers, most every profession, they've done it. And you know, sometimes I feel like I1m alone. Then when I think about those orphan children, and they're so dear to me. In different cities that I go in, they call me up, "Beulah, you remember me?" "Yes." "Listen, I'll be around to see you. Come to my house and have dinner." "Don't you remember me?" "Oh sure." They just fill me up. My mother and father adopted two children. Both of them married doctors. And they can't do enough for me. The girls have gone on, but they had, each one of them had one or two daughters. One has completed her education, has a Ph.D. from Boston University, have beautiful homes, doing well. Every Mother's Day they remember me. And I said, "I ought to do something." "Don't you, your mother and father did so much for me. We can't do enough for you. We feel like, what would my mother have done if it hadn't been for your parents? We'll never forget you." When I feel low in spirit, I think about those two girls. When my mother was sick, their mother came and helped. She used to come every year—she lived in Augusta, Georgia—get my-mother's wardrobe fixed up. When she was sick, they were there. When my father passed, they were there. When I married, she made my trousseau. I came down to see her before she passed. It was almost too much fox me. She said, "Girl, you've been so good to me." And her daughters falling right in line... She was one of their professors in college. Anything that they have, I want my Aunt Beulah to have... Nothing is too good for you." And I told them, I said, "Remember I'd like to be able to do something for you all." "You've done enough; your mother and father did so much for us." Any trouble in this family, they are here. I﻿10
BH: (cont.) don't know. Pay it back in some way. That's the seed that they have sowed. Don't let me get off on that now.
FB: Tell me something about your grandparents.
BH: I couldn't tell much about my grandparents. Only my grandmother was a very important person in my life. When my mother was with the orphan children, my grandmother lived with us. They say that I have some of her sayings.
FB: Which side was this?
BH: This was on my, I didn't know anything about my father's parents. This was my mother. Rebecca Pemberton. She lived with us for a while. She was always going to reprimand us or whip us for something we did wrong. Or she was going to tell my father and mother when they came. And we would be scared to death to see our parents come, because we knew we were going to get punished. And we'd walk around there, waiting for my grandmother to report our wrongdoings. And you know, it never happened. She didn't tell. I remember my brother Robert did something, and my father said that he was going to whip him, so he took him in the barn. And he got him a switch. And they knew Grandma would be hurt. And they screamed and screamed and my grandma knocked on the door, "Mr. Shepard, Mr. Shepard. That's enough, that's enough. Don't whip him any more." And they just loved her. They loved her. She's going to do all this big tattling. "I'm going to tell your mother, I'm going to tell your father." Then they come in. She was just quiet. No one would say a thing. And as I say, well, I don't know to save my life what we're going to do. But she wouldn't tell. She would not talk. My grandmother said, "You know one thing. Your mother doesn't raise you like I raised her. You never would do so-and-so-and-so if you were my child. I'd take this hand, it's nothing but a bone, I could dip it in some cold water and put it beside of your face." "What you going to do that for?" "That's right, because your mother doesn't raise you right." Then my mother would come, and we'd be scared to death, know she was gonna tell on us. She said, "Well, Mother, how'd the children get along?" She'd look at us. "Oh, they did pretty good." And we knew we were in for a scolding or a whipping or something. But we didn't get it. She was a lovely, lovely person.
Before I came to Boston... She lived with us for years. And then, when I married, lived in Greensboro, and I was getting ready to go to Boston, and I came by Oxford, to leave from Oxford. We were sitting out on the porch that afternoon, in the swing. And she said, "Beulah, you're going away. I don't ever expect to see you any more in this world." I said, Grandma, don't talk like that." We said, "Grandma, now don't talk like that." "No. Got to go some time. Certain things that I taught you, I want you to remember." And I said, "All right, Grandma." And I kissed her good-bye. It was a sad day. My grandmother was so good to us. I never will forget her.
My step-grandfather, I didn't know him very well, because he didn't live very long. When he passed away, then my grandmother came and my mother﻿11
BH: (cont.) had full responsibility.
My mother and her sister Harriet used to go north to work in the summer. In fact, they stayed up there. They decided they wanted to buy my grandmother a house. And the two sisters worked together. When I pass that house sometimes now, I think about it. Then my mother took my grandmother to live with her after her sister passed. And they sold the house and gave half of the money to my cousins Marjorie and Roy. My mother had the other half. Marjorie's living in Chicago now, and Roy has passed on. So I mean, they're pleasant memories, but they're sad memories when you think about it.
We were a loving family. My aunt came to New Rochelle to live there for years. She never came back to North Carolina. When she heard I was in Boston, she started to write to me. She had lost her husband too. She said, "Beulah, may I come and live with you?" Well, I had never lived with her. I didn't know her. But my husband went down and we brought her up to Boston. And she lived with me. Then she decided that she's feeling so good she thought she'd get a job. She got a job for some very wealthy people in Wellesley Hills, Massachusetts. She did her work there until her health failed and got her into a project. She lived there for a while. The doctor said it was best to put her in a nursing home, which we did. And they all fell in love with her, the attendants and everything. They just loved her. She liked ice cream. And the superintendent, I heard him when he said, "Listen, Hester Norman"—that was her name—"I want you to see that she gets a dish of ice cream every day." And those nurses, white and colored, they were as nice to her as they could be. She'd have her favorite dish. The head chef would see that she had it. Not only when I was there, but she'd have it every time. And they said that was on her diet, so that she'd get it.
I went there one day and the attendants were trying to get her to eat, but she didn't want to eat. They called her Bonnie, that was her nickname. "Bonnie, now you gonna eat this for her." "Well, all right." They got her to eat. They said, "Where were you last night?" She says, "You went by here; you didn't tell me goodnight." They said, "You were asleep." "Who told you I was asleep?" And she'd carry on a conversation with them till they apologized, "I'm sorry. I rushed out last night and I forgot to say goodnight." "It's all right, just so you admit it that you did it." She was just in love with the people. And they just lovedher. I went out to see her in September '73. I knew she wasn't very well. When I talked with her, she said, "I'm getting on pretty good." We planned it so that she was to never know that I was out of the state. As long as she thought that I was in Boston or suburban Boston, she was all right. But they didn't want her to know that I had moved to North Carolina. And I would write letters and my sister-in-law would read them to her, you know, just like I was in town. I arranged for my sister-in-law to take her little goodies and things like that and say, "Beulah sent this to you." She said, "That gal goes all the time, taking these things, trips, you know. Where is she now?" Say, "She'll be back, but she sent this to you." But she never knew that I had moved from Boston down here. And I was here about— I came in '70—and she died in '73.﻿12
FB: That was your mother's sister?
BH: Mm hmm. My mother's half sister. We had a wonderful life. She was
working, you know. One thing, I never forgot her. On Mother's Day, I would have Mother's Day dinner for the people at the church. And I didn't go to church on Mother's Day, for the eleven o'clock service. I would go out to her house, and take her a cake, and spend time with her. Then, I'd get back by two o'clock or two-thirty, for the dinner at the church, with the older people at the church. That's the way we worked it. But I never went to church on Mother's Day; as long as she was there I'd go out and spend the time with her. And we'd laugh and talk. Some times she'd go to church, some time she would, some time she wouldn't. She'd come in the kitchen and talk with us. And that's the thing that impressed her and impressed them, and I never forgot her, never got too hard to go out.
T remember driving one day. She would come in on Thursday and I'd take her home. And a cop stopped me, and she said, "Sir, she wasn't driving fast." I said, Now how was I going to get out of this? So when I heard that whistle I knew what it meant. I stopped the car. So he said, "May I see your license?" And then I got to trembling. I just trembled and shook and shook and shook and shook and shook. So my aunt said, "Sir, she's just nervous like that. She didn't mean any harm, she was trying to get me home in time, so she could get back before dark. She didn't mean any harm." And she said, "She's so nervous. She gets like that." I was about to die laughing, but I couldn't laugh. She was so earnest that the cop said, "All right, be careful going home." I went on. And her madam was there before we got home, when we got to her house. And she said, "What did Beulah say? I know she had a word." She said, "You know, she got to trembling and shaking and going on," said, "I had to help her out." We laughed. We had Mrs. Bell, that was her name, Mrs. Bell, laughing. "Tell me about Beulah, how did she get out of that?" My aunt answers, "She got out." And she said, "I told him, I told the cop she didn't mean any harm. So he told her to go on. 'Be careful, next time. Don't drive too fast.'" I said, "I told him I was trying to get here so she could get back to Boston before night." That was a Thursday, her day off.
And the thing that impressed—I never forgot her manners. She'd come to a program, I'd always take time to introduce my aunt to so-and-so and so-and-so, my Aunt Hester. And I never had any company I couldn't introduce her to. And you would have thought that she was, I don't know, my aunt could put on more airs, if I had company. Sometimes I wouldn't hardly know her myself. She'd talk about the flowers, "Well, I think... I always I'd be cracking up inside, Aunt Hester's putting on airs. Sometimes I'd have some people or someone come to Boston to visit, you know, and I'd say, "Well, I want you to meet my aunt." And I'd go out and get her, you know, tell her beforehand we'd take her out to dinner. And on the way my aunt could tell about flowers, "Well, have you ever tried Spanish so-and-so..." "Well, sometimes I prepare this dish, and...we are very fond of it You wouldn't know...I'm telling you. Itwould crack you up to hear my aunt put on those airs in the cars. "Well, Beulah, would we have time to stop﻿13
BH: (cont.) at such-and-such a place?" You know, she'd talk just like the
madam. I didn't want to laugh because I didn't want the guests to know that it wasn't real, you know. But I'm telling you, my aunt could put on more airs. "Yes...yes...yes. Well, I have been in Boston about... Beulah, how long have I been here?" I said, "About five years." "I guess about five years. I stayed in New Rochelle for a while. And then I came to Boston to live with my niece. You know Mrs. Hester is my niece. And I felt like I wanted to do something, so I got me a job in Wellesley with Mrs. Bell, there, some very outstanding people in Wellesley Hills." And I'm just cracking up, cracking up. If I could just get somewhere to give out a cornfield yell, it would do me more good than anything else. "Mrs. Norman, very glad to... "Thank you, very glad to have met you too. If you come to Boston again, be sure to come to see me, get in touch with me. Tell Mrs. Hester to get in touch with me..." "I'm sure she will. Thank you." And we'd get there and put the guests out and I'm telling you, you talk about some screaming and carrying on, my aunt would kill me, put on more airs than anybody else. You'd think she was a university graduate. And I think she'd been through the fourth or fifth grade, maybe. But she always associated with the cream. And she knew just how to serve and what to put on.
My aunt knew everything. All the recipes. "Now if you get you some so and so and so and so, corn meal and..," When we were alone she'd say, "corn meal." "Corn meal [with refined accent] and, uh, so and so and so, and you just rub it on." [all with accent] She had more recipes for this, for that and the other. It would kill me, putting on airs. We call it putting on airs. "I like so and so and so and so... The thing of it is, my madam thinks that I should do that, but I haven't decided just yet. We went out the other day, driving around. Have you ever had any..." some kind of dish, and the person would say, "No, no, I never have..." "Well, sometime if you're going to be in Boston, you let Miss Hester know, and I'll be glad to make you some. I used to cook at my home in New Rochelle and there are certain dishes that I used to have for the children. They enjoyed them so much." And I said, "If I could just get somewhere and give a cornfield yell, I'd be all right." I just don't see how I can be penned up like this and my aunt and these airs much longer." And she'd look at me and smile and keep right on talking. She was a scream. She was a scream, I'm telling you. But I loved her. I loved her.
And she said, she'd call up, "Beulah, what you got for dinner?" And I said, "I don't know." "You and Hunter want to come over and have dinner with me? I have some spare ribs, Beulah." I said, "Aunt Hester, you know how I love spare ribs." "You coming?" I said, "Yes, we'll be there." "What time?" "Well," I said, "I get off at five, maybe about as soon as Hunter comes back. Five-thirty, something." "All right, I'll be ready." And she'd have the table all set just right. Miss Vanderbilt or somebody. Just so, just so. Excellent cook. That's her way. And, it was so. It wasn't anything to laugh at, but I couldn't help it.
I came to the hospital and the doctor said, "You know, Mrs. Hester, I think it would be good if you would put your aunt in a nursing home where there may be some of her own people." I winked at him. He said, "I think she would enjoy it better." I said, "Well, doctor, my aunt doesn't work﻿14
BH: (cont.) well with people. And I think she'd be happier if she were in a home where there were people that she didn't know." I didn't want to say colored people, but I said, "People that she didn't know. I think it would be better." He said, "Well, just as you say, just as you say. We can get her into a home like that." I said, "Because she doesn't work well with people." She worked in the colored home in New Rochelle. There were only a few. And with a smaller number it helped. My aunt had certain duties she had to perform for the children. She would cook the desserts and things like that. And make the breads. That was her responsibility. She'd know just how many squares she had to have and keep the extras. And she knew how many cookies she needed to bake. She'd go on, if she had to depend on this one doing this, it wouldn't work.
I said, "Doctor, 1 hope you understand. I appreciate what you're doing, what you're trying to do for my aunt, but I think it would be better if you would get her in a home where the occupants are more mixed." I hated to say it, you know, but I knew she wouldn't work well because... She'd never done that. I mean if she was in the colored home, there wouldn't be but about two or three. And if she was a maid in the person's house, she had to have charge of everything. She had the keys, she'd do this and she'd do that. She worked beautifully. She didn't work well with other people. I don't know why. You put her alone. Perfect.
I remember my sister-in-law came there to visit her, and we carried her out to see my aunt, and she had a line of clothes, two lines of clothes and three-fourths of the clothes were my aunt's. And the madam, the madam had about four or five pieces. And my aunt had four and five of everything. She said, "Well, there were seven days in the week." She'd have six aprons, underwear, five dresses, change dresses every day, or apron. Or sometimes, she might wear a dress two days, with a fresh apron. That's the way she went all the time, neat as a pin—fresh apron, fresh dress. Had a hair comb; she'd wear her hair rolled over. Very predictable. "Is Mrs. Bell in?" "No, Mrs. Bell isn't in. May I help you?" [laughter] I said, "You gonna kill me putting on these airs." She said, "Well, Mrs. Bell wants me to do that, she likes it." I said, "Don't start that stuff with me."
They couldn't get her to eat. So once, she was sick when I was there, they sent for me. And I said, "Aunt Hester, now you don't want to do that. These people are very nice to you. And one woman there, you know, she said, "Well, I don't think so." She said, "Now listen, that is my niece. That's Mrs. Hester. Don't forget it." She said, "All right." And then when I'd go, I'd take them both something, the lady was in the room with her, and we'd be sitting there laughing, talking. But Aunt Hester was a scream. She'd talk like that: "I want you to know, in case, don't forget. That is Mrs. Beulah Hester. That is my niece. Don't forget it. And she has a right to come in here. She has permission to come in to see me. I just don't want you to forget it, please."
FB: You mentioned something about your grandmother knowing something about slavery. Did she ever tell you all about it?
BH: Oh... She told me about slavery. Their master was a judge of this town,﻿15
BH: (cont.) Oxford. And In some way he taught them...they felt that they
were a little better than the other colored people. I don't know where they got that idea from. And they knew that they were going to be freed long before the others. He called them, Judge Gilliam called them and told them, "You all are going to be free, but don't tell anybody. And after a certain day when that emancipation is signed, I'm going to put you all on salary. Now you can go if you want to. And if you stay here, I'll pay you a salary." She said some of them went, but most of them stayed right there with the family, just as good to them as he could be. And they never were whipped or beaten, or anything like the other slaves. They always had the best. They had their company, in their quarters. Anything in the big house that they wanted, they could get it. Now who ever heard of a girl like my mother, with slave parents, going into the parlor of their madam, practicing on the piano. Who ever heard of such a thing as that? How could she learn to play if she didn't practice on the piano? And they were invited in. They would see that they looked as nice or better. In fact, they just felt that they were a little better than the other people, servants around.
My grandmother...one favorite saying of hers, "Well, you know one thing, I joined the Declaration of Independence a way back in the dark days of slavery. I don't have to ask, I don't have to borrow, I can be independent. So I don't give a kick what you do or say." That was her saying. And when she'd say "what you do or say" she tried to talk like the madam, you know. I'd die [laughs]. Oh, she used to...my aunt was just like her in that way. They say that Judge Gilliam taught them that, that they were better. They thought that they were just a little better than the rest of the servants around. They had more privileges. They could go to the white church, of course, most of them sat in the balcony. But they could go. Get through that door. Go to the Episcopal church in the morning, and go to the Baptist church in the afternoon.
And she said, many times she wouldn't wear the same clothes in the afternoon that she would wear in the morning. That's right. She said she used to get on her knees and ask the Lord to help her not to be so proud, because she knew it was wrong. She changed.
Lady Pat, I met her one day, and she said—they called her Aunt Becky— "Oh, Aunt Becky, your dress is so white." She used to wear white linen skirts, and a long blouse, white long blouse and a black belt, and a black ribbon at her neck. And a black hat. She'd go down the street. She'd say, "Aunt Becky, your dress is so white." And she'd say, "Well listen, what I wear on Sunday—I don't wear this pressed-over stuff—what I wear on Sunday," and she'd make this voice, "goes in the tub on Monday. I don't wear any pressed-over things, no pressed-over things." And she said, "You know, one thing that I made up my mind that you white people could wear finer things than I, but you shall not wear any whiter ones. I made up my mind. You don't see me wearing any warmed-over, pressed-over stuff. Mm, mm. It's washed, clean. I use bluing. A lot of time^ I'd stand up 'cause I didn't want to sit down and get my dress wrinkled, [laughs] She was a proud woman.
And my husband used to tell me, he said, "Beulah, you got so much of﻿16
BH: (cont.) Aunt Becky in you." I don't know. Most of us, and my mother... whatever they had was the best they could get. They always liked to dress well. I don't know, it's just us. I think sometimes... I mean, it helped us. My brothers, they did the same way. My brother liked nice clothes. My mother used to say, "You get it from Mother. Get everything from Mother." And from my father too. They liked to wear nice clothes.
They [the master] allowed them to go to church. And other people, the other folks who were the servants, they didn't have the privileges. Sometimes they would dress up and go. Anytime that they went to church, they had on the best that they had. They didn't wear worn, pressed-over stuff, either. Just like she told us. And I'd go to church on Sunday. All right, now if I had to go out anywhere during the week, I'd wear the same dress that I wore on Sunday. But my grandmother wouldn't do it. "Beulah, didn't you wear that dress Sunday? What you puttin' it on today for?" I said, "Grandma, I just wore this dress once." "Sure thing I wouldn't do it. I don't wear no pressed-over stuff." Just her way. She was that way as long as she lived and my aunt was the same way. I told you she'd have more clothes than the madam. And who was she washing for? Two long lines of clothes. And four or five pieces are madam's, the rest of them...two and three of everything. I said, "Not but seven days in the week, Aunt Hester." Every morning when she come down in that kitchen she'd have on a clean dress, or a clean apron. Her hair was always combed.
FB: Mrs. Hester, you spoke about your mother and your grandmother, and how
she was a slave. Did she ever tell you about the family, whether or not the family was kept together, whether or not she was allowed to stay with her husband, that kind of thing we often hear about in terms of slaves?
BH: She was taken away from her mother. She and her twin sister Beattie. And she was sold. She was sold into North Carolina and she doesn't know where her twin sister went. She never saw her own people any more. She came to North Carolina with Judge Gilliam.
FB: What about her husband? Do you know anything about him?
BH: Very little. I didn't know anything about him. I heard her speak of her mother and twin sister Beattie. That's all I know.
FB: You said that you and your brother, your two brothers, were born in the orphanage where you mother and father worked.
BH:	Yes.
FB:	And you said your mother had six children?
BH:	Yes.
FB:	Were you the oldest of those six?
BH:	Yes. My sister was next to me, she was two years younger than me. My﻿17
BH: (cont.) sister Bessie. And then, there was a brother, Wendell. And
Robert, Marshall the youngest, Marshall the youngest, and a baby sister. She [the baby sister] was an infant. She died in childbirth. Now who died in childbirth? My sister died in childbirth. I mean my youngest sister was stillborn; that's what I should have said.
FB: What about Bessie and Wendell?
BH: Wendell lived to be about ten months. Bessie was two years when she
passed. Three children lived, and three of them died. I guess we wouldn't count Rebecca, because she was stillborn.
FB: So that was seven children.
BH: Let's see, Robert, and Marshall; Beulah, Bessie, Wendell, Rebecca makes six. She had some trouble, and the doctors didn't get there in time or
something. I don't know how they explained it. They named her Rebecca, they said she was more like my mother than any of the children.
FB:	fow, the Central Orphanage was in Oxford?
BH:	Yes.
FB:	So you were born in Oxford?
BH:	Yes.
FB:	When were you born?
BH:	October the seventh, 1893.
FB:	You said that you went to school at Hartshorn.
BH:	Hartshorn? It's Union now. It's Union University now.
FB:	What about your brothers? Did they go to school also?
BH:	They went to the...after they left the orphange. They went to the grade school, Oxford Graded School.
FB:	Oxford Graded School. What was that?
BH:	That's just the, you know, city school. The grade school.
FB:	Did they go to college like you?
BH:	Yes. Then Robert went to High Foint Normal School.
FB:	That's in North Carolina?
BH:	Yes. High Point, North Carolina. And then he went to a school called Bricks, in Enfield, North Carolina. I think they called it Bricks.﻿18
FB: This is still Robert?
BH: Yes. Robert. Bricks Industrial School. And Marshall went to, at that time they called it Slater. My mother said she didn't want to send her two boys to the same school.
FB: Why . was that?
BH: Marshall went to Slater. At that time it was Winston-Salem; it is Teachers College now. But he went there.
FB: Why didn't she want them both to go to the same school?
BH: She didn't think it was good policy. Because one might seem to be more aggressive than the other and she thought that one would get discouraged because of always being compared. My mother said that wasn't good. Put
them in different schools, because they had different temperaments, dispositions. She studied it very carefully.
FB: Was it normal for a whole family to be able to go to school? Your parents paid for all of you to go to school?
BH: Well, yes. And then as soon as the boys were old enough to work, they
worked. They had little jobs around. Of course, schooling here in Oxford didn't cost anything. But when they started to go to Bricks and Slater, they would work every summer. They'd work for the Pullman Company.
FB: So they sort of helped themselves?
BH: Oh yes, they helped themselves.
FB: What about you? How did you get your education paid for?
BH: Well, I sold perfumes. I forgot the name of the company. Then, in school, they had what they called work classes. And I was in the bread class, being paid $4.50 or $5.00 a month, and that would go toward my expenses.
FB: What was the bread class?
BH: Bread class, you know, instead of buying bread from bakeries and everything, they had a domestic science teacher there. She would teach. You'd go down. You'd make bread twice a week, about 50 or 100 loaves of bread. They had a bread class and a pie class, and we'd make pies on Saturday and we'd save them. And as school passed on, I joined the pie class and the bread class. That's the way I made my extra money.
FB: Did the school use these breads?
BH: Oh, yes. They used the breads, you know, for desserts. We all had duties assigned, and I would help in the dining room sometimes, serving. They'd give us something for that.
FB: How many years did you go to Hartshorn?﻿19
Hartshorn? I went there three years. I went to Lincoln Academy first. What was Lincoln Academy?
That's a Congregational school in Kings Mountain, North Carolina, near Charlotte.
FB: Was that like a high school?
BH: Yes. My mother said I wasn't doing anything there. I kept up and all, but she said I didn't study hard enough. I got my lesson, never missed. But she said it wasn't doing for me what she wanted it to do. So she persuaded my father to send -me away to Lincoln Academy. She was afraid they were favoring me too much, or something, that I got my lessons too easy.
FB: Where? Here in Oxford?
BH: In Oxford. And I went to Mary Potter about a year and a half and my mother wasn't satisfied.
FB: Another high school in Oxford? How was high school education for blacks then? Did black people have their own schools...
BH: Oh yes.
FB: ...or did the state pay it, or what?
BH: I don't know. Mary Potter was private...I couldn't tell you. I went to Mary Potter, that was sort of a private school under the Presbyterian board. Then I think later Oxford took it over after the death of Dr. Davis. I don't know just how that operates- Now it's a city school, one of the city schools. MaryPotter. I went there a year and a half. I don't think my brothers went there. I told you where tbhey went to school.
I went there a year and a half and my mother wasn't satisfied. She always looked ahead, you know, and she could see things.. "Beulah isn't doing anything." Because it was understood that I wasn't coming home every holiday or anything like that. And she got my clothes together. I got a winter dress. And I carried it with me. My sister, my adopted sister, mended my clothes. I got a winter dress, a Sunday dress. And some other things to wear to school, put them in my trunk. Then I left there [home] in August. I didn't come back any more until summer. I think once I did come home Christmas. She sent a box up there at (Christmas. Didn't get a dress—that dress was in the trunk—I could put it on the next Sunday after I reached school, if I wanted to. But that's all I was gonna get. I let it stay in my trunk until everybody else was taking out their Christmas dresses, and I could go down to the trunk and take mine out. I got a pair of shoes at Easter. That's all. These things sat in the box in there for two, three weeks—new dress. I knew that everything I was going to get-except shoes, got the shoes at Easter, carried the Christmas dress with me, I could put it on in September if I wanted to—I ihad it in the trunk.﻿20
BH: (cont.) My adopted sister was a very good dressmaker. And along about July or August, she would get the material, and my sister would make up my dresses for school. What you call Sunday dresses, and one very nice winter dress, brown, it was made very pretty. My sister would see dresses uptown, and one that a white girl used to wear, and she'd say, "Momma, I saw Mrs. Landis's daughter uptown yesterday and she had on a very pretty dress. I want to make one for Beulah." She'd say, "All right. What do you need?" "Just the material." And my sister and I would divide the work and each one of us would cook breakfast maybe one morning, or do the washing, and any extras. If it was my sister's week to wash, maybe I would wash for her, and she sewed for me. It was a regular arrangement. She could sew and I could wash and iron and cook. And I'd do her work and she sewed for me. My mother would buy the material. But the time it was ready for me to go to school, I had my clothes all made from the cloth. She'd look over and see what I needed, figure out what she had to do, how many dresses she had to cut, how many skirts and blouses. But that best Sunday dress was in the trunk. With so many of the children, you know what happened, the parents would send them a box. "Send me a dress, we got to go to a party." And the summer dresses that I had the previous summer, I'd take them along. If we had any parties at school, I'd wear them. But this thing of sending home for a dress for such and such a party, my mother wouldn't even listen to me. And other girls used to wear beautiful dresses, silks or anything. My mother would say, "Well now, listen, you're eleven years old, twelve years old. Now if you're going to wear silks, satins and all that now, what are you going to do when you get grown? Won't be a thing for you to wear."
FB: You mean you left home at eleven or twelve years old?
BH: Yes, and I stayed there, I stayed in Lincoln Academy four years, stayed in Hartshorn three. I did the four-year course in Hartshorn in three years, passed the examination. I was only thirteen, I was a baby. I was at Lincoln Academy for four. Six, seven, eight, nine, maybe in the ninth grade. Then in the transfer, I took the examination and skipped a grade. Instead of being at Hartshorn four years, I was there three. My mother was so proud of me too. My mother said, if she had just understood me better... She said I was a child that, if I know that I was pleasing you, I'd work myself to death. But I was easily discouraged. I used to get on the steps and say, "I'm going to tell God how you treat me." "Are you really, are you going to tell it to Jesus?" I was afraid to tell my mother, sitting on the steps... "Can't say it." Then after, she said, "You know, if I had understood Beulah better, I think I would have made her life much happier. I'm sorry. If I understood her when she was younger, like I do now," she used to say, "Beulah, honey..."
And when she was in the hospital, and Robert told me that she was sick, I went there to the hospital bed and stood there almost at the door and she was barely sitting up. I remember so vividly. She used to call me Beulah, sometimes she'd call me Boots. "Boots, that you? I knew all you needed, was to know that your mother was sick, that you would be here some way." She was in bed, and I was in and out of the room. Robert and his wife, his children, they got ready to go. She said, "Beulah, aren't you going?" I said, "Going where?" "Going home. You're leaving, aren't you, aren't you﻿21
(cont.) going to say with Robert tonight?" And I said, "No, Miss Pattie, I'm going to stay right here." "What?" I had already been to the administration office and made arrangements so that my mother had a private room. And I asked them to put another bed in the room, so that my face would be facing hers. And she said, "Girl, what you gonna do?" I said, "I'm going to stay here with you." "What! You're not gonna stay here." I said, "Yes, I am." "You been right here all day. When did you do that?" "While you all were talking, running your mouth." "And what were you doing?" "I was in the office, making arrangements to stay here. I cane down here from Boston to be with my mother. And I made arrangements for me to stay right here, in this hospital room with you. Who else is gonna stay here? You know Robert can't stay, Elizabeth can't stay. They have children. Nobody can stay but me. You don't want me?" "Oh, don't talk like that. You know I want you, you know I want you." "Here I am, Miss Pattie'.' And she started to cry. I said, "Mom, don't start no stuff like that. I'm here." "But what did Hunter say?" "Hunter said it's all right. Stay with your momma as long as you need to. Here I am." I could see her failing so fast. I had to go in the bathroom to cry, washed my face, powdered, wiped my face, freshened up, and come back. "What's wrong? You don't talk right." I said, "I got a cold or something." I had been in the bathroom. I cried so hard. Because I could see she was feeling so bad.
Benjie would come and take me out sometimes for a ride if I could get somebody to stay with her. He said, "Beulah, you stay too close." My cousin would take me out and show me some of Durham and Chapel Hill. I'd be gone for an hour and a half, and then come back and stayed right there with her. She said, "Tell the doctor I want to go home. I don't know how long I'm gonna be here. If anything happens, I want to be home."
I asked the doctor about it... "Yes, you may take her home." I sent for Robert. His wife was a nurse. They came and took her. I think we stopped about three times on the way. She would have those coughing spells. I don't see how I stood it. And I was sitting on the front seat with Robert, and my mother and my sister-in-law would be on the back seat, so she could partly recline on pillows. We'd have to stop, let her sit up, get out of the car. Had a little stool so she could sit on the side of the road. Then we'd go a little farther. We stopped three times. We got home.
They moved her bedroom downstairs, so that she didn't have to... Her room was the library on the hall, back parlor. Robert and Elizabeth had put a bed down there for her. Said, "Beulah, where you gonna..." "Stay right in here with you." And I stayed there with her. She came on Saturday afternoon. She lived till Wednesday... I could tell she was sinking. Tuesday night, she said, "Beulah, repeat the Twenty-third Psalm with me." And I went on through it. Got to the last, "Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow..." I couldn't say any more. I choked, [coughs] was coughing, she knew what I was doing. Couldn't fool her. "I know Thou art with me..." And I got up when she said, "Thank God." I couldn't stand it. I was coughing, oh, I felt like I'd never get through that psalm. And she said, "Just help, help Beulah." And by then, the boys couldn't stand it. Nobody there could. So we held her hands. She took her ring off, her wedding ring, and gave it to me. And she said, "Beulah, this﻿22
(cont.) ring probably will be too small for you. But you have it made over." (And I had the ring enlarged; it just fits my finger.) She took it off, put it on my hand. Well, the thing was killing me. You know, I couldn't afford to break down. What are you gonna break down for? Now's the time that she needed me. Nobody except me. My sister-in-law was back and forth, but she had a little baby. And I didn't. And I stayed there with her.
Then we told her Robert's father-in-law was very, very sick. And I was sorry I told her. I spent the whole morning nursing my momma. And we sat there, trying to talk to her. And of course, she wasn't looking at us. She didn't say anything. She was real quiet. I had to get out. I went out of the house. I couldn't stand it, went out of my mind, one day. I said, "Now, Beulah, now you gonna help the boys? You: mother told you to stick together. You: mother's gone, grandmother, father's gone, husband's gone, two brother's gone. Now who do I have? Just put your trust in the Lord."
In my heart I like old people...I know if I live long, I would get old some day. And I want somebody to look after me when I am old. We know we have some friends and some enemies. Used to say when the bitter comes before the sweet, the sweet is much sweeter. That's so true. Go back home, go back to Boston and I have a mother, to get those weekly letters from your mother. The brothers are so busy. They did what they could. Sad. My people were so nice to me. Very nice. The church people stood right by me. One girl there, Frances, Frances Ross. And she was the one that first started to call me Sister Beulah; and that name went right through the church system. She stood by me. The director, Mr. March, said, "Now, Mrs. Hester, we know you lost your husband. Take as much time as you want. And all during his sickness, my club members would say, "Mrs. Hester, who's speaking today?" "Oh, Mr. So-and-so-and-so." "You stay here and introduce the speaker. Tell us what the program's going to be. Then you go on home to Reverend Hester." Mr. March said, "Take as much time as you need. As much time as you need to get things straightened out. Take it. Don't worry about anything. It'll go just the same. We'll fill in." That was how it happened at my mother's death and at my husband's death.
People I work with are very nice. Anything they felt... And I thought the nicest thing when my husband was in the hospital, sick, people went over there Christmas because he couldn't come home for Christmas. My class from the church came over, and had a Christmas party in the hospital. Somebody made a cake, and brought some ice cream, and they put a little colored doll on top of it, and they called that Sister Beulah. And, you saw that in my room, didn't you see it? I'll show it to you, my little doll. She had on a pink dress, and one of these fluted skirts around. I take it down in the morning, wash it every night. She had a little pink bow on her head. And they call her Sister Beulah, and she was sitting on top of the cake. My husband couldn't come up, of course, He was in bed. The nurses and some of the doctors came up on the fourth floor. I pretended to eat some cake. I don't know how I got a slice of it, but I did. And we had the nicest party, as nice as we could have, under the circumstances.﻿23
(cont.) They came back and wished him a Merry Christmas. He said, "It was so nice of you to come, and spend Christmas with me, and with Beulah. You all have to look after Beulah." That's the way it went. And they say, my people down here in Oxford say, "Why, you love the folks in Boston better than you do us." I say, "Well, I've been with them longer." They don't ever forget. Every birthday, every Christmas. If they hear that I'm sick, here comes the cards, here comes a present. Reverend Haynes, who is the pastor now, "Don't forget the twentieth of April, the anniversary of the pastor's passing. This is 'Remember Beulah' week." Then I get cards. They sent for me to come up there. "We'll be responsible for your expenses." Some people. They usually give me the check after I've been there. "Don't worry about money." And so many of them, I can't write, sometimes I write a general letter, to thank them. I don't want to thank them, there's such a thing as running a thing in the ground, but I do want them to know that I appreciate it. And they just won't let me retire.
I was with the orphans. Children are just as priceless as they can be. Of course, they were mischievous. They weren't perfect. But they were nice. I don't know how I got down here. The third Sunday in October, 1977, I let myself get into something. One of the churches here, the choir director went to college, left them high and dry. And I let two of the ladies talk me into coming and taking the choir, two of their choirs sing once a month, or once every other month, every first Sunday, every other Thursday. They come for me, and bring me home. The pastor there, Reverend Davis, P.G. Davis, is very nice, encouraging. He tells me how much it adds to the service. So far I'm getting on very nicely. I like it. I don't have to go every Sunday, since every once in a while. They say, "We can't sing it." I say, "You gonna sing it Sunday." They'll work hard to sing. I say, "If you gonna sing the same song every Sunday, you don't need me. How can't you learn something? Take you a year to learn one song? Oh, come on." It takes someone older to see what they're doing.
Just like I told my mother, I didn't see how in the world I was going to graduate from school. She said, "Beulah, has anybody ever graduated from this school?" I say, "Momma, what you talking about, you know they have." "They have? Well, how did they get through?" "Oh, Momma, don't ask me that. I don't know how they got through. They graduated. They've had graduates." "Well, if anybody else graduated, why can't you graduate too? If I got any any dumb children, I don't know it. Anybody else got through this school, you can get through too. Don't bring me that, that you don't know whether you gonna graduate. I just want to know if anybody ever been through the school. Anybody ever made it?" "Sure." "Don't start talking crazy now. Anybody else can do it, you can do it too. As I said before, if I have any dumb children, I don't know it. Now you better get it. That's all, that's all I have to say about that." And she put that into all three of us. "Anybody else ever done it? You can do it too. I'm gonna help all I can. I want to be proud of Beulah one of these days. You can do it." She did, too. I'm telling you, sometimes it's... mighty painful. I said, well, other people did it. Parents should live to see, I mean they didn't even live to see... My father, my grandmother, all my immediate family. Me, I'm the last one.﻿24
(cont.) I go to Marshall's church and he said, "I think I see my sister in the church. If Mrs. Beulah Shepard Hester is in the church, in the audience, will she please stand? Stand up!" I stand up and start to sit down again. No, I want you all to see, want you all to see, my forty-year-old sister. I said, "Beulah, how old are you?" She said, "I'm forty." "Beulah, how could that be? My baby is thirty-eight." And when we were in Oxford, you were our oldest sister." "Well, I'm the baby now." "How could that be?" "I don't, I can't keep up with anybody's age but mine. I'm forty years old. That's my story and I'm sticking to it." And the people just laughed. "So I want you all to see my forty-year-old sister. She was born first, but she's the baby now." And the people just laughed. I started to sit down. "Uh-uh-uh-uh, I want the folks to see. This is a miracle. I want you people in Philadelphia to see it." And he laughed and laughed.
What was it like coming up being the only girl?
Oh, it was pretty rough sometimes. I had to pay for so many things. I had little boyfriends, you know. And they slipped me candy, and slipped me notes, and I put them in my book bag. Sometimes I used to just strew the candy up and down the road, trying to get rid of it before I could get home. Momma wanted to know where the candy came from. Marshall and Robert, they were gonna tell on me. And instead of them helping me, my father said, "Help your sister wash the dishes." And they wouldn't help me. "You do them all by yourself. We won't tell on you." So I couldn't say anything. I'd say, "That's all right, Papa, I'll do it." I'd have to wash the dishes, empty the trash, share in the household duties. We were supposed to do them together. Or every other day. They'd make me do it other than my time, just because, so they wouldn't tell on me about these notes that I received from my little friends. Oh, being an only girl, I'm telling you. You had to bring in the wood when it was their turn. And they would make up things and they'd tell them so straight, you know. And I couldn't talk as much as they could. Marshall was the biggest tongue of them all. "I'm gonna tell Momma, so and so and so and so. You know that boy brought you that candy." I said, "Marshall, please don't tell." "If you wash dishes later on, I won't tell on you." That's the way they'd buy me on and on.
We owned a horse, one time, and they wanted me to get off the horse. And I said, "I want to ride." And so they said, "Get up, you." And the horse galloped. I fell right on my back. And oh, they were so scared, they didn't know what in the world to do. "Oh, dear Lord, please help." And I just lay there for a little while. They didn't know whether I was dead or not. And when my parents came out and got me, then I was sick for a little while. Sometimes I think maybe that may even have something to do with my back trouble now. But other than that, I'm all right, can't lift much. That gave me trouble for some time. And then Marshall said, "Oh, Lord, just let my sister live. Oh, I'll never do it. Oh, please." Robert said, "You had no business to do it. What you want to tell that horse to get up?" "Momma, I didn't know, I didn't mean it, I didn't mean it. I'm so sorry."
I was sick off and on, for some time, got over some of it. Maybe that's,﻿25
BH:
FB: BH:
FB:
BH:
FB: BH:
(cont.) I don't know whether that had anything to do with the arthritis or what, inching along like a poor inchworm. We used to have some good times. And when Momma was sick, Marshall and Robert would be on the floor and I'd be on the bed. And we'd go over and tell some of the things that happened in our childhood. And my mother would laugh until she cried. She said, "I do know I have the craziest children I have ever seen, or heard tell of. When did y'all do all those things?" "Oh, you
know that time, so and so and so and so___" We'd go off, and come back
singing. I'm in the bed with her, across the bed; Robert, Marshall on the floor. Maybe I was on the side of the bed by my mother and Robert was on the foot of the bed and Marshall was on the floor, or vice versa.
Tell me something else about what your brothers did.
Well, they worked as Pullman porters, in the summer, you know, to get their money to go to school. My mother worked, and I taught school here
in Oxford. With my grandmother, we kept house. We had a friend of my brother's who used to work, and boarded at our house. Robert was in the insurance business, and we helped my grandmother run the house, while my mother was teaching up in Morganton, North Carolina. All of us hustled. But we did it cheerfully.
Did you feel like you were better off than a lot of people you knew, in terms of money? Did you have more money?
I don't think so. I don't think so. It's the way that we pooled our money, because we weren't getting much money. We couldn't have done it now, but we had God. And, everybody, our grandmother had her work. My mother used to say, "Mother, we don't want you to work." She'd say, "I do my work. I like to help my own family, make it like I want, spend it as I choose." And at the same time, "Mr. Henry, will you please bring me, next Saturday, two pounds of butter (it's twenty-five cents a pound), two dozen eggs, and bring me about two chickens. Now the money doesn't have to be made. The money is upstairs in the trunk. I wouldn't have ordered if I didn't, if I hadn't had the money. I pay for what I get." That's the reason Momma said, "Well, Mother, you don't need..." "That's the very reason I work; that's the reason, the very reason. So I can have my own money." She'd repeat that two, three times.
This was after your father had died?
Yes. So I could do as I choose. Everybody had a part to do. That's when I was making twenty-five dollars [a month]. How in the world could I get married? I wanted to get married, and I hated to leave my mother. I was trying to...didn't know hardly how to do it. She said, "Now Beulah, you have stood by me, all along. You're still going to be here. You're going to be in Oxford." And the morning I left for Boston, look like my heart... Ooh! I never cried so, all the days of my life, woke up about four o'clock in the morning. And I looked in my mother, she was sleeping so peacefully. "How can I leave?" "Beulah," she said, "Boots, are you there?" I said, "Sure I'm here, right here looking at you. Why aren't you asleep?" She said, "Oh, I just woke up. Now what time is it?" I said, "It's about half-past five or six." She said, "What time the train leave?" "About eight-thirty." "Then I guess we better get up." Then I﻿26
(cont.) went out from the room there, I couldn't hide. Every time she'd come in there, I'd go someplace else. She'd come to this room, I'd go to this one. "Beulah, what's wrong with you?" "Nothing, I'm just looking for so and so and so and so..." And she'd come in there, be looking forward to talking. I'd go back and go in the other room. And it was just like we were playing hide and seek, you know. I was crying. She didn't want me to see her cry. That was a terrible... Then my grandmother said, "Never, I never seen you cry so much." We went through a sad parting.
Tell me how you met your husband and got married.
Well, I had been knowing the family. His sister and I were very dear friends, his sister Mattie, his older sister, the one next to him. We were friends. And the year I graduated from Lincoln Academy, I was in the ninth grade and my mother wanted me to go to Hartshorn. And I came home that summer. We didn't have a pastor every Sunday. It was every first and third. But the second Sunday that was young people's day. My husband was going to school in Durham. It was the religious, National Religious Training School, at that time, which later became North Carolina Central University. And during the summer, while they were having young people to lead the service, all of us young people who were home that summer wanted to attend the service. My husband spoke. They were very interested in the young people. Annie Brandon invited about eight or ten of us out to her house to dinner. And we were sitting around the veranda, porches, everything. There was a vacant seat by Hunter Hester. I knew him before, but I never talked to him. I went to sit down. "Miss...Shepard, when did you come home?" "I came Friday night." Then he asked me about my schoolwork, and if I liked it. Then I asked him about Central, and then from one thing to another. He asked me where was I planning to go to school out here. I hadn't decided, but my mother liked Hartshorn in Richmond. So he asked me, could he come and see me sometime. I told him I couldn't tell. I'd have to ask my mother. My mother said a lot. Later I told him, I would have had him to come. My mother said, "He can come sometime," but she wanted me to keep my mind on my books. She didn't want me to get too involved, that is, neglect my schoolwork. So he said, "Well, that's all right. I'll see you Sunday." We found out they were going to have a party at men's Bible class, a party Tuesday night. He said he would like to take me to the party. So just from one thing to another.
Time came for me to go to Hartshorn. He wanted to see me before I went to Hartshorn. I gave him my address in Richmond, so he could write me every once in a while. I came home on holidays, and I'd see him, and during the summer time, just friendship like that. My mother said she didn't want anything to distract my attention away from my books. She didn't want a regular thing, like Beulah and Hunter, Beulah and Hunter. Didn't want to get my name associated too much. She was afraid I might be influenced to neglect my books. We went on like that. We corresponded in school, once in a while. Then whenever we came home, Hunter would come to see me; she let him come. When we graduated, he came out to see me. We were living in Winston-Salem then. (My father had the orphanage in Winston-Salem. I told you about that.) My father had passed, he came﻿27
BH: (cont.) out to see me. He took me to the station. We were on the train. He asked me, would I, did I think I could be, would marry him. I said, "I don't know how to be a minister's wife." He said, "Well, you'd know how to be my wife, wouldn't you?" I said, "Well, I'll let you know." We were on the train. And I got off the train. He kissed me. He said, "I'd like you to be my wife." I got off that train. I don't know which way I was walking. And I was half laughing, half crying. My mother knew there was something. And I told her. She started crying.
He was ordained as a minister the same Sunday that my father was buried. That was a trying ordeal, the same Sunday. He couldn't come to my father's funeral because of the ordination for himself. He saw me as often as he could. My mother said, during my father's...sickness, she said, "Daddy, Beulah going with anyone now?" He say, "Yes. I think she's almost engaged to Hunter Hester." "Who's Hunter Hester?" "Well, you know who he is." "Oh. He's grandson of Henry Hester. Nice, nice people." I'm so glad. So, it wasn't too long aiter that before he was ordained. The same Sunday. First Sunday in March. And we had to move from Winston-Salem to Oxford. I didn't give these things in order because, something dovetails into something else, you know. So you start on that.
: How long was it? You met him how many years before? You'd known him a good while, right?
Well, I had been knowing the family a long...
FB: That time when you met him over...when you talked to him over at the lady's house.
Oh. That was in, that was about four years. Because I went to the lady's house after I finished Lincoln Academy. And I had three years of Hartshorn. Then I taught three years. Plus I couldn't leave my mother. I had to help her with the boys, so they could help themselves. So, I couldn't leave. I had such a short time to get myself together. I gave up my job in October, teaching in the grade school. January first, taught through September. And I saved every penny I could, except what I needed. We made it, we just made it. By the time the boys were old enough, to get their jobs in the summer... They used to work for an electric plant out in Pittsburgh. Robert sold insurance. Marshall worked as a valet for a rich man in New York. Got a chance to see Reverend Adam Clayton Powell at Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York. I guess we've done a little of everything.
FB:
It was about four years then since your husband first asked you to get married, before you got married.
BH: Yes. Yes. Because that was...when he asked me to get married, that was after my father died, you see. Then I taught school two years. Then I made twenty-five dollars a month, the smallest that I had ever made. And I didn't see how I could help my mother and get married too, on twenty-five dollars a month. So that's why I made the decision. If I was going to marry, I'd have to get another job. I had to still help my mother. And, because it was too much. She wasn't a well woman, and I couldn't leave﻿28
(cont.) everything on her, and Robert and Marshall weren't in a position to, not even to get married then. So I made the first move. I married first. Then Marshall.
FB:
FB:
FB: BH:
FB: BH: FB:
How did your husband feel about waiting four years'
BH: Well, he was ready. How he felt? How could he feel? He hadn't finished school himself. And it all came. Then he finished school, and they asked him to come to Mount Sinai on a trial basis. They liked him. They called him. Then he actually got the church. He took the church before he married. And when I went there, he was already pastor of the church. Some people were very hurt. Some had eyes on him. Some of the mothers had him picked out for their daughters. And he told some of them that he wished that they would let him make his own decision as to his wife. They had Marilyn Louisa all picked out for him. And I got there, that was the situation that I ran into. But he assured me that I didn't have anything to worry about. I believed him. I knew I had to work, had some music pupils, played with the church, played for the Sunday school, ten dollars a month.
Were you still teaching?
BH:	I hadn't started teaching. Then I was sick. I don't know whether it was
caused by a back injury. I married in September. I had to have surgery by the next June. The following January I started teaching. Then I worked from then on until '61.
Did your husband ever object to you working or want you to stop?
Well, he didn't have much choice, because his salary was small, and the thing that I wanted to get, I had always, you know, been able to take care of myself and my mother. Things were just hard. I always like to have my own money, always. It was funny. It started out, you know, he was going to do the groceries, doing the marketing. And he did it about three weeks, and he gave it back to me. I said, "Well, why don't you just settle on an allowance? Give me so much to run the house." Then we'd put so much in savings, sort of budget what we had. So we did. Ran so much better. He'd give me my money, or he'd give me his check. I cashed the check, gave him his allowance, put so much in the bank, every week. Then I had so much to run the house.
Was he paid on a salary by the church?
Yes. Every week.
Was that unusual for that time? Or could you be paid a salary?
Yes. No, they always paid a salary. It was small, but they paid it. When we started out, I think it was twenty-five dollars a week. You had to pay ten, eight dollars a week for room rent and the use of a kitchen in this woman's house. You see that didn't leave us much. Trying to buy a house. I couldn't, I couldn't stand, I just couldn't stand it, just living in somebody's house. I'd never done it. We'd always had our home. So I told﻿29
BH: (cont.) you we had this Professor Johnson, went to Howard University. His house was for sale and we bought it.
FB: How long had you been married before you moved to Boston?
BH: Six years. We married in 1918. And we went to Boston July the first, 1924.
FB: When you went to Boston, was that your first time in the Northeast?
BH: No, I had been to New York and Baltimore, and I was all right when I
got on the train, going from New York to Boston. It seemed like it was out of this world. I mean, I couldn't control myself. I was all right, just happy and jolly, my husband. And when we started for Boston from New York, going to Boston, and there were some people who got on in Providence, Rhode Island. And I remember distinctly. I think my husband was reading the Saturday Fye.^rsg Post, and I had the Ladies Home Journal, and we were sitting next to, almost to the rear compartment of the club car. And there were some people behind us, and the conversation went like this, "I wonder what they're doing in here. Thing about it, I just can't stand it. In the South, they have their own churches and their own schools and their own everything to themselves. Here they are, in the car with us. I can't stand it. I don't see what they're doing here." We weren't speaking. Oh, and my heart was hurting anyway. And those people rode on down to Providence. I don't know just the distance, but we heard them. He didn't speak, neither did I. But we were, you know, ridiculed to the point where.. It looked like my heart was breaking anyway, leaving my home, my mother, for the first time. And then to be subjected to something like that, I can't describe it. Neither one of us spoke. Sometimes I'd raise my eyes from the Ladies Home Journal and look at him; and he'd look at me. I know he wasn't reading much, but he had the Saturday Evening Post. And I had the Ladies Home Journal. And they were talking back and forth. These people sitting directly behind us. There was a comment, "Massachusetts, cradle of liberty." Dear Lord, you don't know how it hurt. And it seemed like to me after they got off, somewhere at the beginning of Massachusetts, and then the fact my heart hurt so, I said, "Beulah, don't cry like that, don't cry." I said, "I'm trying, I'm trying." I didn't cry till they got off. But did it hurt. Then when I got to Boston, I went to the ladies' room and got myself refreshed. But he had been to Boston before, and I'd never been there. I didn't know how they were going to receive me.
Before I left Oxford, my mother got the missionary sisters. And she said, "What I want you to do, my child is going to Boston. She does have some cousins up there." Raised up a frenzy. Oh, that old lady prayed and prayed And then on the train after this episode, with this prejudiced family, it just came down on me. "Now, how am I going to be received? What will they do to me?" And he answered, "We have to be followed by that old Negro spiritual. 'They hung him to the cross crucified, never said a mumbling word, not any word.'" And it made my heart break. But I got myself all together, and they met me at the station. They had met him before. He had been there to preach to them. But they asked him to come back, then they extended their call. I went with him. My heart was heavy. But my﻿30
BH: (cont.) grandmother, I told you, had already said she never expected to
see me any more. And my father was already gone. My brothers were away. This whole load was on my mother. What would it have meant to receive, to have a reception like that on the train? I felt like going back. But I didn't.
Then people were very nice, very nice. We lived with a family that worked during the summer, out at a summer home, or something, of rich people. And so their home was vacant, practically vacant. So we sublet their house until they came back. That was around the first of July; we were there July, August, September, I think they came back the last of September. Then we found a house. We stayed there for a year or two. Then we moved on Columbus Avenue; everything was nice. Mr. Monroe had a house for sale. We couldn't buy a house at that time, so we rented it. I had students, lodging and boarding, that's when I broke down, trying to prepare meals for them, go to church, go to school. It was too much. Doctor said it was too much. T gave up the course in religious education, and transferred into social work, because I could get me a job with less training. And I had one girl to come up and help me do the dinner, and wash the dishes. Right back again, those are some of the hardships that I had to go through. I don't know, made it some way.
When you first went to Boston, did you go to school, or did you do some kind of work?
BH = No, no. When I first went to Boston, you know, I don't know whether I told you, I didn't go to school immediately. I had some music pupils. And I worked through the church, and as soon as I could get on, I had some lodgers. And I made a little extra money that way, until I could get myself together to go to school, because there was a shortage of rooms there. I rented, sublet some of the rooms in the house. Some of them I gave meals. I just had to do something to make money. I needed it. That's how I did it.
FB = What interested you in religious education? You said you had taught school..
BH= Well, I taught. I taught for many regular schools. But Boston University, I thought, would be a nice place to go and take religious education. I had in mind that maybe I could get some work in the church, you know. Then I decided that maybe that wouldn't be the best thing for me to work anyway, in my husband's church. And then there were so many churches that couldn't afford to pay a pastor and then pay a religious education person too. I began to look the field over, and I didn't know there weren't very many other students in that class that were from Massachusetts, none that I knew from Boston. So the chances looked very slim. I said even if I graduated, it may be a long time before I get a job and I needed something immediately. Then I was sick too. And I decided that I would transfer to the school of social work [at Simmons]. Whereas the course in religious education would take me four years, that was to be a degree course, and Simmons offered a two-year course in social work. And I thought that if I could make that... After the doctor told me that I wouldn't go on, even if I'd had the money, even if I had the degree. She [Katherine Hardwick] said that my health wouldn't allow me to carry that schedule. So I talked﻿31
(cont.) it over with my doctor. And he put some sense into me. He said, "Well, I think you ought to tell him." I said, "Well, you tell him, Doctor." Because I was crying so my husband didn't know what to do. He said, "Beulah, it's too much for you. You can't do it. I know you want to do it. There'll be a way, some way, somehow."
What were the opportunities for black people to work in social work?
There weren't very many that I knew about. There weren't very many black students in the school of social work. But I was there. And most of them were from out of town. This girl, as I told you, was from New York. She didn't want to be a big social worker. She wanted to be a little social worker. She just went over and took one or two courses.
Why did you think you could get a job?
I just felt like I was going to get one, just had that feeling. Why did you choose that field over teaching?
Well, they didn't allow married teachers a position in the school, at that time. They do now. Probably I would have gone on and qualified as a teacher, but they didn't allow it at that time. But they did have these schools of social work. And I thought I would take my chances. When I asked for this job and this man explained it, he said they wanted to know why he'd take her, a married woman. He said, "Well, how many young girls have applied? Do you know?" They said, "No, how are we going to know how many." "How many have I turned down?" He said, "We had a vacancy when Mrs. Dorothy Faucette left. And we didn't have anyone. Mrs. Hester was a student. She came in and volunteered, to learn to get the feel of social work; before she was in her second month of school, she worked here as a volunteer. Then when Mrs. Faucette left, we didn't have anyone, didn't have anyone prepared. Mrs. Hester went out to Foxboro, then the camp at Crystal Bush. We rented the Foxboro Camp from the Christian church. Had the camp a month, and Mrs. Hester ran it for a month or two, July and August. She did such a good job that we asked her if she would come on our staff in the place of Mrs. Faucette, who had resigned. She had the whole girls, work program, adults, young people, everything."
This is at the Shaw House?
Yes.
Tell me something about the Shaw House.
Well, that was a settlement house we organized under the auspices of the Episcopal city mission. They bought the Shaw House. It started as a little mission in the South End. It grew to incorporate itself. It's operated by the Episcopal church, so most of the board members were Episcopalian; it started in a little house. Children could come in the afternoon, from school. They'd teach them arts and crafts, games. Then when they'd put on a new worker, something new, fathers would come, mothers would come. Kindergarten, nursery school. Six Hammond Street. Later on﻿32
BH:
FB: BH:
FB:
FB: BH:
FB: BH:
(cont.) they built a new building, gymnasium and everything. [Mrs. Faucette worked there about a year or two. Then she left. Mrs. Hester took her place.] You asked me about the Shaw House.
Tell me something about your work there over the years.
Well, when I was going to Simmons, I had to have a field placement. And they secured the Shaw House. I put so many hours there, training. I went to the settlement house, Lincoln House. They had to get in so many hours. And then one of the assignments was at the probation office with the court. But your main assignment was at the Shaw House. You put in so many hours at these houses. That was a requirement of the course. And at the Shaw House, my work was with the senior citizens. Then on the Board of the Public Welfare I had a chance to go visit the National Conference of Social Workers. Then I got the idea about the work with the senior citizens. And every time I'd go to a conference, I'd always be fT""'nd at the table with the information about senior citizens. I just liked that kind of work. So when I went back to the Shaw House to make my report that I had worked on, they wanted to ask me, what did I get out of the conference. And I told them. I had an idea I wanted to organize a group of senior citizens. They seemed to be neglected in the social work program. And he said, "Mrs. Hester, I like your report. And anything that I can do to help, don't fail to call Mr. Morris Taylor."
So what I did, I got a commission to organize, through Mr. Taylor. I talked with many of the ministers in the area, and asked them to give me the names of some of the older people in their churches. And then from one to another they would tell me what person they think would be interested in the program. I would get a card and invite, them to come to an organizational meeting at Shaw House, a special meeting for senior citizens. They came and we organized. Our first name was Golden Leaf. We already had the Mother's Club. It was the older women, and the Friendship Club, War Parents.
These were older women too, the Friendship Club?
BH: Friendship Club was the young women. And the Mother's Club, those were
older clubs that had been organized for a long time. But they were under my supervision. Then I organized the senior citizens into a club called the Golden Leaf Club.
What did you say about the War Mothers?
Well, that was War Mothers, those who had boys who went into the service. I had about five or six clubs.
What year was the Golden Leaf formed?
Well, I think that was about---let's see...soon after I went to the hospital,
about '33 or '34. I inherited the others, but I organized the Golden Leaf Club. Then they had its counterpart for the men. The men wanted one, and Mr. Taylor and Mr. Steele organized one for the men. Sometimes we used to have joint meetings. Then, later on, we started as the Goldenaires.﻿33
BH: (cont.) And, as I say, I got commissioned From the ministers. They
gave me the names of some of the older people in their churches they thought might be interested. And we invited them over and explained the program to them. We called i"t the Golden Leaf Club. After we took in some men, we had the Goldenaires, and it changed. And it just kept growing, got larger. Finally, when we reorganized a program for senior citizens, and Mr. Taylor said, "Mrs. Hester, you're doing a good job. Anything I can do to help?" And so, within the board, based on the response of men, Mrs. Wilson asked the board if they would take my project on. To help me they would give me money to promote my project, the Goldenaires. See, I didn't interfere with the Friendship Club or the Mother's Club, but for the Goldenaires they gave me money to send them away on vacations. For a week or two or three days, they would help pay for it.
FB: This is the Shaw House?
BH: Yes. The bo^rd became interested through Mrs. Esther Hawkins Wilson, who remembered me from our girlhood days in North Carolina. And she was the one that submitted my name to the girl as a prospective member. And that's how I got into that.
FB: What board are you talking about?
BH: The board that would run the Shaw House.
FB: Were you the only black person on it at first? BH: Where?
FB: On the board of Shaw House.
BH: Oh yes. First. See, that was the Public Welfare Board. 1 was on the
Public Welfare Board. That was a nonsalaried position. See, they never had me as appointed under the late John B. Hynes, mayor of the city of Boston. I was the first to be appointed. First black to be appointed on that board.
pB: When I think of a social worker, I think of somebody going into somebody's house, checking on what they're doing, or seeing if everything's right, in terms of who's living there and all those kinds of things. Did you ever do that kind of field work?
BH: Yes. You worked with an agency. And the agency would have so many people that they were interested in. They would give you an assignment, so many people that you had to see monthly or weekly. They were called your "caseload." And you had to see everyone and make reports, see whatever they needed. They'd bring their problems to you, and you'd solve them, if you could, alone, or if you needed, you'd take it to your supervisor and say, "Well, I ran into some problems, very interesting." They had a storeroom and they had beautiful dresses, and to some of your younger women, you'd want them to go to parties. They would[say], "Mrs. Hester, I'd like to go to a party, I haven't got anything to wear." And then I'd go﻿34
(cont.) to the supervisor. "You know what I ran into yesterday? Mrs. Gary Jones is going to a party, and I was looking in the storeroom, and I saw a dress there, beautiful, and I think it would look so good on her. May I have it for her?" "Mrs. Hester, you don't miss a trick, do you?" I said, "Mrs. Jones wants to go to this party, and no one is using it, couldn't she have it?" "Yes, go on and get it. Take it to her." And I'd do it. And she'd look' good, all beautiful. And then she'd wear this dress. Next day I'd go up, hearing about the party. "Oh, we had a gracious time." And she'd tell me, "I couldn't have gone without you."
They have their problems, sometimes, getting their children in school, children that didn't graduate. We'd get the Friendship Club, "So many of our girls are graduating this year, let's give them a little lift." And we'd have a little social or something like that. Give the mother ten dollars if we could, to pay for it, depending on how many we had graduating that year. There's so many things, you know, like getting shoes for Faster, They'd frnne with all kinds of problems, sickness.
Sometimes I helped some, one of the saddest things, you know, death. I didn't know hardly how to cope with that. But it was so near me. So like the problems that I had to face personally. But I said, "We'll bear it along together. I lost my mother." Then, during the war... I'd like for you to hear the poem that I wrote: "Covered their whole garment about, worked there at the Friendship Club. Maybe we can get there together." They used to serve breakfast to the boys before they went overseas, at the Waldorf restaurant. We'd purchase coffeefrom them and they'd send it up. And we'd serve coffee and doughnuts to the boys, before they left to go to training camp. And in this poem, it tells some of the things that we did. Hope I can get it for you. We can put it right here so that it gives you insight into some of the things that we did.
Going back to the senior citizens—the work with them was so interesting. I remember, we carried them to New York, and we saw Pearl Bailey. It was amusing. They said, "Mrs. Hester, now, don't leave us, because we've never been in a big theater like this." And I said, "All right, but don't you leave me." When we came out, I asked the usher, "Did you see some ladies come out of here?" And he said, "Yeah." "I told them to wait for me." He said, "I saw some ladies down there at the Beer Garden." I said, "What!" And when I went down there, they said, "Mrs. Hester, you were so long coming, that we thought we'd get a glass of beer. You didn't mind, did you." I said, "No, no. I want you to enjoy yourself." They had such a good time. Things like that always encouraged me. It didn't hurt. I didn't drink. I'd never heard of a Bloody Mary before. Different things like that, they would call for in the restaurant. They had a good time. And I like to make them happy. It's such a little, to make them happy. They enjoyed Pearl Bailey. Anything interesting that would come along, I'd get an opportunity to take them. Sometimes, I would find that it was necessary to just have a quiet evening. We used to have these conferences out at some of the house. They have programs. I think I have the name of that. Maybe I'll tell you that another time. But I enjoyed my work. I feel that I benefited as well as they.
You were a pastor's wife?﻿35
BH: Yes.
FB: Tell me about some of what that meant, to be a pastor's wife.
BH: I hardly know. I don't know. As I told you, the day that I was engaged, my husband said to me, "Will you be my wife?" I said, "I don't know how to be a pastor's wife." He said, "Well, you know how to be my wife, don't you?" I said, "Yes. I guess so." Well, I went in the first Sunday in July, 1924. He introduced me, and I said then, "I want to live in a house by the side of a road, be a friend of man..." and I recited the whole poem. When I left Twelfth Baptist Church in 1970, I said, "I have tried to build a house by the side of the road." You didn't know what problems you ran into. I wanted to be a friend to men. That's what it meant, all kinds of problems. As a pastor's wife, as a social worker, the two went hand in hand. Sometimes I would go to the pastors themselves. I had rapport with the pastors. I'd say, "Reverend so-and-so, may I see you for a minute? May I come bv and see you?" He'd say, "Yes, Beulah Hester." And I told him about this old lady that hadn't been to church in a long while. I said, "Reverend, I know you're busy, but sometimes if you could drop by and see her, she would appreciate it." "Sister Hester, I really thank you. I will do it." And I checked up. He did go. I said, "How you getting on now, Mrs. so-and-so?" "I'm getting on pretty good. The pastor came." "Seriously, did he come?" "Yes, he came." "How you getting on now?" "I'm getting on fine. I read my Bible, say my prayers, take a swig of liquor, and get into bed, doing fine." And she stayed there years and years. Eight-seven years old. And she'd be just as cheerful. She always wanted to give me something. She knew I liked j ewelry.
My director said to me one day, he said, "Sister Beulah, you've been coming here for seven or eight years. This is the first time I've ever seen you without your beads." I don't know how that happened unless it was flowers in my hair, or something. "You always have your jewelry." Most of that jewelry was some of these old pins that these ladies wanted to give me, some earrings. I couldn't wear the earrings because my ears weren't pierced. My brothers used to tease me, "Old woman like you don't want to have your ears pierced." And I came down to North Carolina to see my brother, and my sister-in-law's a nurse, Mrs. Elizabeth Shepard. She pierced my ears. I was so tickled. Then everybody in the church—not everybody, but so many people—gave me earrings. They knew I liked them, and that made me more akin to them because they were older. They had had their ears pierced, but I was always afraid to have my ears pierced. And my sister-in-law said, "If you want your ears pierced, I'll do it." Somebody asked me out to dinner and I told them I couldn't come that day because I was having an operation on my ears. I was waiting for it to bleed, but it didn't bleed. And she put ammonia and something else on. It didn't have any ill effects at all. I had earrings to give away. No way in the world was I going to wear them all—earrings, necklaces. One pin, I know it, it was dated 1876. My husband used to say, "If anything should happen to you first, what will I do with all this mess?" I said, "I don't know; just raise me up, put me under, because I don't know anybody that loves it like I do."
But that's...a social worker and a minister's wife, you got to be all things.﻿36
BH: ( cont.) They come to me with problems. A man said he wanted to see me. He and his wife were having some marital difficulties. 1 sa\v him, he had a studio, doing some beautiful painting. He said, "Mrs. Hester, I just made up my mind that we would separate. And you've been so interested in us that it would hardly be fair without telling you." "So you decided that you were going to break up. When?" He said, "We don't know exactly." "When?" "I said, we don't know exactly." "I see. What you going to do with the children? What are you going to do when you get sick? Who's going to help to look after you?" I said, "You're going to be like those children in the family, and the momma was always sick." About five children in the family, all of them waiting on momma. "Momma's sick." And Pa wasn't getting any attention at all, so they came in one day. Ma was around, Pa was in the bed. Said, "What's the matter with you, Pa?" Say, "You know Pa's a sick man today." And told him that story. And I said, "Now what's Pa going to do, when he gets a sick man. Who's going to be there?" "But I just made up my own [mind]." "Have you decided when? What you going to do? When you see those children on the street, and they ask you about Ma, you not going to say about it?" I said, "Man, don't start no foolishness like that, don't start it. You and your wife can get together some day. All that work we'd done with those children, sending those children on to school, and trying to make something out of it, then, at this stage of the game, Pa going to walk off. Oh, you can't do that. No way in the world. I tell you, think about it. I'm not going to say anything to her, and don't you say anything to her, just wait a while and see. See if it will cool off. Huh, promise me? Sure enough, will you?" "Well, I guess." I said, "That's all right, you've already promised me you're going to do it. Just try. It'll work."
That was about fifteen or twenty years ago. I left there in '70; that must have been in, somewhere about the year '40. His children have grown, married, have children themselves; Moimiaand Poppa stayed together. And he said, "Mrs. Hester, I want to tell you; I really had made up my mind that I was through. But I promised you, I tried really hard." Next day he had a reception. I don't know what it was, they invited me. I didn't go. I said, "Let them work it out themselves."
And they come, "I don't know. Mrs. Hester, I just want to let you know, I didn't think it would not be fair not to tell you." "Tell me what?" "My husband and I are separated." "For what?" "Well, we never, we..." "When did you decide that? There's something you been holding back on me? You planning on going tonight?" And they'd get to laughing. "Oh, Mrs. Hester, no." "I just wanted to know if it was tonight, I'd know just what suggestions I could make. I tell you, why don't you give it another try? Now you know as well as I do that you're not going to be satisfied far away from the children. Do you have someone else in mind?" "No, Mrs. Hester." "I was just asking, just asking, do you have anyone else in mind?" "No, I ain't got nobody else in mind." "Well, if you haven't got anybody else in mind, well, what are you going to do? Where you going? You going back to your mother? Or are you going to spring it on her and not let her know you're coming? How you going to do that?" "Mrs. Hester, I never said that..." "Well, you're the one that brought it up. You told me that you all, you just were going to separate, you﻿37
BH: (cont.) could not stay together any longer. And I thought that I had a right to ask you some questions. Anything wrong with that?" "No." "Just think it over for a while." Next day or two, I'd see her. She'd had a boy taking a course, or something like that. She'd come by the house. "Mrs. Hester, how are you?" "All right, how're you doing? Come on in." Maybe she'd bring one of the children with her. I would give her some candy, anything I had around the house, talking to the little girl, I said, "What's your name?" She'd tell me, "Adelle." "Are you being a good girl?" I'd say, "Momma, how is she doing? Is she a good girl?" "Yes." I'd say, "Well, that's nice. That's nice." I'd give her some lemonade or whatever. I say, "How's Daddy?" "He's fine, he's fine." I said, "Well, I knew things were going to be all right." Next thing I knew little Susie was there. I didn't even think about Susie, [laughs]
Oh, people do have problems that way. And it's just the way you handle it. I guess I talked some, until everybody got to laughing. "Mrs. Hester, how in the world do you think of all the..." "I don't know. Didn't you tell me?" "Yes, I told you." "Well, all right then. No one else... You know I don't talk your business before anyone else. You know that. You told me. Just go on from there. Let's get this straight. I got this from your mouth. You came to my house and told me." Just from one couple after another. But I think that by having an attitude like that, in the open and free and all, they couldn't think that I had anything. No way of knowing that the other one had talked with me. I said, "Have you told her? When are you going to tell her? Or are you just going off and not saying? You less than a man? What reason are you going to give? Have you always walked the straight and narrow path?" "Now Mrs. Hester, now don't..." "That's all right, I just asked you, just asked you if you were the one to find fault, if your skirts were clean. That's all I asked. I didn't ask you did you, I just asked, have you always walked a straight and narrow path?" "No, I..." "All right then, let him that is without fault, let him cast the first stone." I said, "You can find that in the Bible. It's in there." "All right, Mrs. Hester." That's the way it ends. Not word. Come by, tell me any trouble. And they said, "One thing, Mrs. Hester, when we talk to you, we never hear it again. You're one social worker who I can tell in^this town. I never yet heard of you talking from one person to another."
[break]
FB: We're here again on May twenty-eighth, 1978, at Mrs. Beulah Hester's home in Oxford, North Carolina. Mrs. Hester, tell me something about your cousin who founded a school.
Dr. James E. Shepard was my cousin, son of my uncle Augustus Shepard. At first it was called the National Training School It was so funny. My cousin wanted to get some money, and he said, "Momma, I need twenty-five thousand dollars to get this school started." And she said, "Twenty-five thousand! Son, I didn't know there was that much money in the world." Oh, we laughed about that so many times. But, he was president there for, I don't know the number of years, and then the state took it over later. The name was changed to North Carolina Central.﻿38
FB: And what was it first? A school for ministers? This is where your husband went to school, right?
BH: Yes. It was a training school. Religious training school, National Religious Training School.
FB: Under the auspices of the Baptist church?
BH: No. It was just...yes, I guess it was... I'm not sure about that.
But it was just a private school, and for the purpose of religious training. Then it developed into a college, and the state took it over, like most of those private schools started, supported by associations, donations, contributions here and there, to get on its feet. When my father passed away, he was the superintendent of the orphanage in Winston-Salem. And after his death, my mother came back to our home in Oxford. She worked as a demonstration agent for the Rosenwall Foundation up in the western part of North Carolina, around Hickory, North Carolina. It was she who gave me the idea of becoming a demonstration agent for the government during the war. So I told you that I gave up my lucrative position at Oxford at twenty-five dollars a month, to become a demonstration agent. I was going to get married in September, and I took this job in January. And my salary was doubled, because I couldn't get my trousseau there being my mother with her mother, and the boys to support—without extra help. So I gave up the job in January, worked about, not quite nine months, eight months.
FB: How young were the boys, were they in school? In high school?
They were in college. Marshall went to Union University, and Robert went to North Carolina Central. Everybody had a contribution to make, and we all worked together. My grandmother and Robert and I kept house, and my mother was working in the western part of the state. Marshall was in New York. They would work in the summer, go to school in the winter. I don't know how we made it. I really don't know. But when the time came, the bills were paid.
FB: You said something about your home in Oxford. Did your father build a house?
Yes. My father built a house. When he was at the orphanage in Oxford, he decided he didn't want to live and die at the orphanage. So he bought some property, a home place, in Oxford on Anderson Street, and he told the carpenter to just take it as a slow job. And build the house when he wasn't rushed. Because he decided that when he left the orphanage, he wanted to have a home of his own. That's how we had it. When he gave up the job at the orphanage, then he moved to his home in Oxford. And he resigned with the idea that he would still work at the orphanage as an advance agent. Go ahead, you know, and prepare for concerts. And he would get a chance to preach and, like that, work with the orphanage that way. But it didn't turn out that way, so that they asked him to go to Winston-Salem, take charge of an orphanage there. That was out of his plans, but he accepted it because he needed some work. So we rented out our house in Oxford. Stayed in Winston-Salem, about three years. He﻿39
BH: (cont.) passed away there. My mother carried on the work at the orphanage for about seven or eight months, then she gave it up and we moved back to our home. We had to give the tenants time to get out of the house, so we had to rent a home in Oxford until our house was available.
FB: Is the house still standing?
BH: Yes, Robert took it over, my brother Robert took it over. And he went into the undertaking business. So, he had an undertaking parlor up in the heart of Oxford, the city of Oxford, and then he moved it to our home, turned the home into a funeral home. They lived on the second floor and the first floor was the funeral home. That was customary for that time, for funeral homes to be residences upstairs. You see, it was more convenient at that time. So that the house is still standing there, as a funeral parlor. Later on, my brother built a house for himself, just a few feet away. So that this whole thing would be the funeral home; he had his private home very near.
^B: Your nephew lives in the funeral home now?
BH: My nephew lives in the funeral home, because my brother built his house, and his widow lives in the house that he built. My nephew has a funeral home in the original house that my father bought, and also a funeral home in Henderson. He has two funeral homes, one in Oxford and one in Henderson, which my nephew operates after the death of my brother.
FB: All right, you went to Boston in 1924...
BH: In '24.
FB: You had said that you were looking for a better place, and then this
opportunity for you and your husband came to go to Boston. Did you feel like you were leaving because of conditions in the South? Or was it just a better job?
BH: it was a better job. My husband had a better church. I was teaching in the city schools in Greensboro. And when the call came through [from the Twelfth Baptist Church], my brother Marshall, who was assistant pastor at Abyssinian Baptist Church in New York City, and they wanted him there, but he also had a call to Philadelphia, Mount Olivet Calvary Baptist Church. So he said he would go to Philadelphia, and he recommended [that] his brother-in-law would be extended the call to Twelfth Baptist in Boston, Massachusetts. That's how we happened to get there.
FB: Tell me something about relationships between blacks and whites when you were coming up in Oxford.
BH: I didn't feel the tension that, like, we were all only friendly for
innocence. When I came back this time, I went to one of the drugstores in Oxford, and I met the man, the proprietor there. I knew him, he lived just about four or five doors from us in Oxford. He lived on the corner, and we were about five or six houses in on the same street, and I knew him very well, Mr. Powell. And I said, "Mr. Powell, do you remember me?"﻿40
BH: (cont.) He said, "I don't know." I said, "This is Beulah Shepard.
Beulah Shepard Hester now." He said, "Oh yes." I said, "Don't you remember we lived just down below you on Henderson Street?" He said, "Yes." I said, "Well, when I married, Mr. Powell, I had one of the prettiest weddings in Oxford. We had breakfast. My mother gave me a breakfast. And we had a veranda that would go all around the house. We had little tables out there. Do you know whose dishes we used? Your mother's." He said, "What?" I said, "Yes, your mother said, 'Come up to my house, send up there and get anything you want.' And the most beautiful dishes, we had them all around; it was about seven or eight tables all around the porch. And we had a breakfast at twelve o'clock, eleven or twelve. And I'll never forget Mrs. Powell." He said, "Why, I'm glad you told me." I said, "Well, Mr. Powell, your mother was one of the sweetest women that I have known. She said, 'Anything in my house that you want.'" Now, that was the relationship. The neighbors, the Capeharts, lived just across the street.
They were white?
BH: They were white. And evejry morning, Mr. Capehart would go over to his garden and send vegetables just across the street to my grandmother, who was keeping house. So we didn't have to... I mean, the relationship, so far as we were concerned, was perfect. When Mrs. Capehart had a fall, I was teaching school. Every afternoon when I came from school, my grandmother would have dinner all ready for me. I would eat my dinner and go right across the street to Mrs. Capehart, get her fixed up. Her daughter was working and they didn't want her to be alone. She wasn't so serious that she had to have a nurse all the time, but they didn't like for her to be alone all day. As soon as I came from school I would go over, have my dinner and go over, spending time, fix her supper, and get the fire started. Or if it were cold enough, you know, make her a fire, get her comfortable. She said, "Why are you doing all this?" I said, "Well, Mrs. Capehart, we're neighbors." She said, "Well, you teach school." I said, "What difference does that make, Mrs. Capehart? We're friends, we're neighbors." She said, "Oh, Beulah, it's so nice of you to do that for me." And later on, when I was in this demonstration work, she was too.
I remember one day, we were in Roxboro, she was giving a demonstration. And she said, "Oh, I need something from Oxford." She said, "Beulah, would you like to go?" "You know I would, Mrs. Capehart," I said. "Come on, let's go to Oxford. It'll just be two or three hours." We got in the car, and she was going to have the demonstration about three o'clock. We came to Oxford, scared my mother to death. She looked at me, "Beulah, what are you doing here? What's wrong?" "Oh, nothing, Mrs. Capehart had to come over and get some things and... Don't you want to see me?" She said, "Don't you start no foolishness like that, you know we are always glad to have you." And we sat down there and had tea, laughed and talked until it was time for Mrs. Capehart to go home, ready to go back—just a relationship like that. She was driving and I was sitting there on the seat with her. We laughed and talked and so forth. She said, "Talk some more, Beulah. Tell me so and so, tell me so and so." And I talked; she was driving and I was doing all the talking. Crazy jokes and things like﻿41
(cont.) that. We had a good time. She introduced me, "This is Mrs. Hester, uh, Miss Shepard, who is my assistant." So that, I mean, it was like that.
And the Lassiters. They were all people that my grandmother knew. They accepted me. I mean, I don't know, socially, just friendly. I remember once I was sick, and Mrs. Lassiter was the organist at Saint Stephen's Episcopal Church. I'll never forget. Sunday morning before going to church, I heard her strains of this beautiful song, "Oh Master, let me walk with Thee." The window was open and my bedroom was on the front. And her parlor was on the front. I was on the second floor, they were on the first floor. And the strains of those chords were so beautiful, I'll never forget it. I will always love that hymn. "Oh Master, let me walk with Thee." And there was something in there that made me, I want to, I want to, I want to be a pianist. If I could just play like Mrs. Lassiter. I never told her just what impression her Sunday morning devotions, I guess it was their devotion, meant to me. And every time, that's been over forty years ago, every time I hear that, I think about Mrs. Lassiter. Those are some of the early impressions.
My grandmother used to make cakes, pound cakes, layer cakes. We'd do anything honest to make a living. We'd call up and ask would they like to... "Sure." Sometimes they'd buy half a pound cake. Sometimes they'd give an order for a chocolate cake, or pie, and my grandmother and I would get in the buggy and we would have those cakes all wrapped in tin foil or waxed paper, had them in the basket. We'd take the orders the first of the week. And on Friday and Saturday, we would deliver. I wasn't too proud to do it. Anyway, they'd say, "Beulah, you brought the cake?" I'd say, "Yes, ma'am. How many you want? I have your order for so and so and so and so." "Do you have any extra?" "Yes, we do." Just honest little things like that. That was our country. All, as I told you, all of us helped to make this thing go—my brothers, my mother, my grandmother. This is what my grandmother and I would do.
And some of the white people, some of them would have their laundry done at home. Sometimes they'd send it to the laundry. But my grandmother did the special... She would do the men's, the man of the family, his silk shirts, and special things like that. She didn't do just ordinary wash. Special. I remember, the Lassiter's little girl. She washed her clothes, just this little girl's clothes, and the men's shirts. That's all. The other heavy things she didn't do that. Just the special things. And one of the white ladies said, "Well, if you want it to come out of the store, you get Aunt Becky to do it. Looks just like it came out of the store when she finishes it. But you just as well to go on to the store and buy a new one by the time you get through paying her for it." Someone told my grandmother that. And my grandmother had a polishing iron, she used to polish the men's shirts, those that were silk, and tablecloths, just to bring out the print beautifully. She did this tablecloth, said it was about five yards. I think she charged her five dollars. Someone told my grandmother that this lady said that when she did work for you, it looked like it came out of the store but you just as well to have gone in the store and bought it. So when my grandmother carried the work to her, she asked her, how much did she charge. And she said, "Nothing." Mrs.﻿42
BH: (cont.) Johnson would say, "Well, I expected to pay you." She said, "Yes, I expected to be paid. But I understand that you said that the laundry looked like it came out of the store when I finished, but you just as well to have gone to the store and bought it. So, I'll give you that to find you out. But don't ever ask me to do any more laundry work for you. Is that clear?" And she said, "Oh, oh, no, no, I didn't mean that." "Oh yes, it's perfectly all right. You see, I joined the Declaration," never heard of such a thing, she said, "I joined the Declaration of Independence way back in the dark days of slavery. And I still keep it. So, I'll give you that. Don't ask me to do any more." Oh, she felt so bad, she apologized. She said, "All right, it's all right, no hard feelings. We just understand each other." And she worked for the other members of the family and all that. And this lady was so sorry. She said, "She did deny me," she said, but she thought, I imagine, that maybe my grandmother was, I don't know, so hard up, she'd take anything, and say anything. It didn't work that time.
1 remember one Sunday, she was going to church. My grandmother mostly wore black and white. She'd wear a white dress, a skirt and a blouse, a black belt, a little black bow ribbon tie, and a small black hat. And she rolled her hair, in back. It looked very nice. She passed by this, say Mrs. X's house, and she said, "Oh, Aunt Becky, you look so nice. Come over." She had her newspaper, she didn't sit, she stood in the yard and talked. She said, "Oh, you look so nice." She said, "You know, madam, I made up my mind." And she said, "Your dress is so white." She said, "I made up my mind that you white people can wear finer clothes than I, but you shall not wear any whiter ones. Because what I wear on Sunday, goes in the tub on Monday. I don't wear any pressed-over white dresses."
FB: Mrs. Hester, you said you all lived with whites and blacks, lived together, and they were neighbors.
BH: Yes.
FB: What about schools, did you go to different schools? Did white people have their schools and black people have their schools?
BH: Yes, yes. We had, here we had Mary Potter, that was mostly for blacks.
The grade school for blacks. But later on, they integrated the schools. When we came up, we had separate schools.
FB: Did you feel bad about being a black person, in terms of, that white
people might have had things better, or they might have said some things to you about being black?
BH: No, no. I never had that. I never had that. Because my mother and
father taught me, it's within you. You can be what you want to be. I don't know, they just inspired me. And I didn't stop to worry about what the white people had. I wanted to go to school. I remember, when I was in Hartshorn, I said to my mother, "I don't believe I can graduate. I don't believe I can get this done. Too hard for me." I never shall forget, my mother said, "Has anyone ever graduated from that school?" "Yes." "Did you have any graduation last year?" "Yes." "Gonna have﻿43
BH: (cont.) any this year?" "Yes." "Well, if any of the other children graduated, I want you to graduate too. Anybody else can make it, you can make it. If I have any dumb children I don't know it. So you just put your mind on your books if you want to get through school." And she taught that to us. We were in the grades. Anybody else could get it. Of course there were no whites with us. But I mean in college, anyway, we'd read in the paper about the whites, "Well, if she can do it, you can do it too. I don't have any dumb children." And we were just brought up that way. So that what the white people had didn't disturb me. If a white girl could learn to play the piano, I could too. The Lassiters, the Gilliams, they taught my mother, and my mother taught me, carried me as far as she could. Then when I went off to school, I took piano lessons. I told you about the time I wanted to stop, you know. My mother said, "No. You don't know whether you'll be able to get a job as a pianist. You might not be that good. So, if your father and I can sacrifice to keep you in school, I think you ought to agree to stay there, get all that you can get, for the amount of money that we can spend."
FB: So, now when you went to Boston, I'm sure things were a lot different.
How did you find relationships between blacks and whites in Boston, as compared to how they had been in North Carolina?
BH: Well, the thing I remember... When I went to Boston the first time, we took the train in New York and some white people got on in Providence, near Providence, Rhode Island. Did I tell you that?
FB: Well, what about once you got in Boston?
BH: In Boston? Didn't have any trouble.
FB: How did you see things as different, were they any different from here in North Carolina?
BH: No, I didn't notice anything. It may have been there, but you see, they had a policy that no married teachers could teach in the city of Boston. So that let me out. So I decided that I would do something else, that's when I told you I went to Boston University. I didn't have any problem. Of course, money-wise, I needed money because my husband was a young minister, wasn't getting very much, and I had to supplement his salary.
*"B: Did you feel different about going, I mean now, in Boston you could go to school, you went to school with whites at Boston University, whereas here you had always gone to school with blacks? How did you think about that situation?
BH: it didn't bother me. I met some of the nicest white people. They were my friends. They just liked me somehow. I don't know. One girl had a car. I didn't have a car. And she said, "Beulah, be ready, I'll be by for you at quarter past eight." And we'd go to school together and come back together. Any picnic, she'd say, "Be ready; we'll come by and pick you up." She was white. When I went there, she was single. Later on she married a very prominent man. I knew he wasn't too particular about blacks. I mentioned it to her. She said, "Oh no, he likes you." I said,﻿44
BH: (cont.) "No, no, he said he likes one or two." I said, "Well, I'm not but one." And she laughed. He worked for a very prominent company. They lived out in Quincy. And by that time I had a car and had learned to drive. And I'd get there, go out to see her, maybe every two weeks. She'd have lunch for me, or late breakfast. We'd laugh and talk and have a great time. I left there about two thirty, always left around two thirty, and I'm home enjoying myself. Her husband didn't ever see me at his house. I didn't know, she said it would be all right, but I didn't want to take a chance, because I knew he wasn't too particular about blacks.
FB: Did she ever come visit you?
BH: All the time.
FB: How did your husband feel about that?
BH: Very nice to her. Very nice to her. And that relationship lasted as
long as she lived. Then her husband passed away, and I had a chance to do for her some of the things that she had done for me. I mean, through organizations, we had an organization that would give clothing. She married a man that had five children. Two of them were small. She had a problem of getting clothing for them. Well, I had a fund which said "clothes," didn't say "for black people," said, "clothes for needy children." I could send them to the store, and she could get the clothes that she needed. Or she'd give me a list of things she needed. That's the way we worked together. She called me up and said—that was before she married—she said, "Beulah, would you get someone to help out one of my families?" She was a social worker also. And she said, "Their mother has passed. I'd rather get a black person because it wouldn't be a question of marriage. So I'd like to get someone to go over there and help take care of these children." I said, "All right, I'll look around and see if I can find someone." Two weeks later she said, "Beulah, don't bother." I said, "What happened?" She said, "I decided to take the job myself." "You?" And I said, "Margarita, you don't mean that." She said, "Yes, I am. Take a chance." She married this man, with all these children. He didn't live too long. And after he passed away, she had the younger children on her hands. That's the time that I was able to help her.
Later on when she moved with her mother to California, the National Conference of Social Workers met there. By that time I was on the Board of Public Welfare in Boston, and they sent me as a delegate. When she heard I was coming, I was so shocked, she said, "Beulah, you're coming to this and I want you to stop with me. Let me know when you are coming." Got in there, and the train was late, got there about twelve o'clock at night. She was right there. Met me at the station, and took me to her home. I had a room right next to hers. I have never been treated any better by anybody, white or black. In the morning she said, "Now, don't get up." I said, "Why?" I'd get up, put on my housecoat, have breakfast with her before she left. Then I'd go out to the car with her. I couldn't stay in the bed. I'd get up, and talk with her, always had plenty to talk to her about. I talked with her and laughed, went out to the car, and see that she got off all right. Then I'd go back in the house, go﻿45
BH: (cont.) back to bed, do whatever I wanted to do. Every day at twelve o'clock when she'd get off to lunch, she'd call me and ask me how I'm getting on. She said, "Now, you be ready when I come home, and we'll go out and eat." I said, "Eat?" She'd say, "Yes, you know we'll go out to dinner." I said, "With all the dinner we have here. You know we had lamb yesterday." She said, "I know." I said, "Well, would you object, couldn't I make a lamb stew?" "You?" I said, "Sure, what's wrong with me?" And she said, "Oh Beulah, that's the nicest thing." I said, "Now listen, when you come home, I'm gonna have dinner waiting. And we'll eat dinner. Then we can go out and see some of Los Angeles." She said, "That's what you want to do?" I said, "Yes, just bring yourself on here just as quickly as you can and I'll have dinner ready." "What you gonna do?" I said, "Well, I'm gonna make a lamb stew and I don't know. I'll look around and see what else we'll have." "Oh," she said, "Beulah, that's the nicest thing. All right, I'll be there just as quickly as I can." And when she came I had the table set and I made a lamb stew, and I think some gingerbread, and I don't remember the other menu, but anyway, she said it was a good dinner. And we sat down and ate, washed the dishes. I was already dressed, and we went out sightseeing. That was the most pleasant time I've had. When I was going from Los Angeles to San Francisco, that's where the conference was, and I stopped with my cousin in San Francisco, Dr. and Mrs. McCurdy, she got up and fixed me a lunch. It was a long way from Los Angeles to San Francisco. They lived out in Berkeley, not far from San Francisco. And we had a beautiful time.
So that I've never had, I've never had the problems. I know they exist, but I never had the problems that some of the blacks had. When I was in North Carolina, I told you the job that I had as supervisor. The superintendent didn't have a special office for me, so he said, "I have an extra desk." They'd never heard of such a thing. And I had a desk in his office. I would get there before, sometimes, before he would get there. Sometimes the night before they'd had a meeting, and the custodian hadn't cleaned up the building or cleaned up the office. And so I would go in, dust off his desk, take the broom, sweep up the room, and straighten everything out, empty the wastebasket, just go out in the hall, and the office was tidy. When he came in, he said, "What happened?" I said, "Oh, don't bother about that." I said, "If I share the office with you, it wasn't going to hurt me to tidy it up." He said, "Well, you..." I said, "Oh, don't start that." I didn't sit there all day. I mean, around ten o'clock it was time for me to go out. But those two or three hours, I didn't hurt him, and he didn't hurt me. We had the nicest relationship.
But the funniest thing, you know, he didn't want to call me Miss Shepard, and he didn't want to say Beulah. So that, he had the committee, mostly blacks, to meet me. "I've got a wonderful supervisor for you. I think you're going to like her." And he said, "Her name is...uh... You tell them your name." Well, sir, I thought I would pop my sides laughing. He was nice up to that, but he didn't want to say Miss Shepard, and he wanted them to feel that he respected me. And he didn't want to say Beulah because he didn't want them to say Beulah. So he was telling me, telling them my qualifications and recommendations, and he knew I could do the work, and he knew they would like me. Then he came to the part, "And her﻿(cont.) name is Miss...uh... You tell them your name." Well, we all... I laughed. I didn't want him to ask me, you know, and I said, "Beulah Shepard." But I mean, it's the way you handle it. I could get all puffed up and everything, but I didn't. I just laughed and told them. And when the government took over and asked him, he gave me a wonderful recommendation, because the work was going to close in May, and they gave me extra work until September, the first of September. I married on the twenty-fifth, only had twenty-five days to get ready. But I don't know, it's just my personality, I don't know.
I think you mentioned to me once about the attitude. Tell me something about the attitude that black people in the North have toward black people in the South, black people coming from the South to a northeastern city like Boston. There were a lot of blacks coming to the North during this time, right?
Yes, yes. But now, wy experience, T wanted to be a social worker, and I told you, 1 was waiting to get a report from Boston University, or Simmons, a certification of whether I would be accepted or not. And Mr. Allen, who used to be at the Urban League, suggested that I do some volunteer work to get the feel of social work. So he referred me to the Family Service, and I made an appointment with this lady to come in and talk with her. When I got there, there was a black woman in charge. My heart sank, and she was from the North, educated in the North, and I told her that I had an appointment with Miss Fletcher, and she said, "Miss Fletcher isn't in now. May I help you?" So I thought if she was Miss Fletcher's assistant, it would be all right to tell her what I wanted. I told her that Mr. Allen at the Urban League had referred me to the office, and he thought that it would be very beneficial to me to come in and do some volunteer work at the Family Service Association, Family Service Society. She said, "Well, the thing of it is, you people from the South come up here and expect to get jobs. Those of us who were born here can't get them." And I said, "Well, I think you're mistaken. I'm not looking for a job." I said, "I talked my plans over with Mr. Allen at the Urban League, and he thought it would be a good idea for me to come in. I haven't been accepted yet. I'm waiting to hear from Simmons. He thought if there was room for a volunteer, it would be a good way for me to get initiated into this kind of work." "Well, as I said, I don't know... You see, we would have difficulty going down South and getting a job, and because the first thing you'd get, we'd get down there, they say, 'Where are you from? You're from the North. Our girls who are trained here, we give them first preference."1 So I saw there was no need of talking any further, because she didn't want to give an opportunity to do some volunteer work. And Miss Fletcher and Mr. Allen had talked it over, and they thought that was a good place for me, and Mr. Allen recommended me very highly. So I thanked her very much and that was it.
But you know, a strange thing happened. I went to Simmons, I graduated from the two-year course, and I got the job at Shaw House. Our supervisor, the director of Shaw House, went to Europe for two or three months during the summer and left me in charge, and what happened? This girl's sister came to me. We were getting the staff ready for the fall work, and Mr. Steele had confidence in me, and from the time that I had been there,﻿(cont.) and my work at the camp, and he felt that I was in a position to take over for the month. So he gave me the privilege of hiring. Of course, if I wanted to consult some members of the board, I could do so. But this girl's sister came to me, said she wanted a job as assistant sewing teacher. I looked at her. I thought about it. I thought how embarrassed her sister made me feel, and I didn't know what to say. I said, "Well, I can't do evil for evil. Now what can I tell her?" I know it would be all right, because she's a good seamstress, and Miss Robinson, who was in charge, needed someone. Now what should I do? Shall I tell her that there are no vacancies? Or shall I take her in? And I said to her, "Mr. Steele is out, and we want to get the staff together. I'll take your application and I will think it over, and you will hear from me in the next day or two." And all those things came to me. I said, "Well, you can't do evil for evil. That's awful." A black woman. And even if she'd been white, the same thing. So I wrote her and told her that her application had been accepted, and she could report for work at such-and-such a time. And you know. It did something for me. T just had the spirit, you can't do evil for evil. All through my social work, I had chances to vindicate myself, to do something to help somebody although they had hurt me. But on the other hand, I had friends.
When I was on the board, one of the board members, I was the only black on the board, the Board of Public Welfare. I was appointed by Mayor John Hynes, stayed there eleven and a half years. One of the members was going to Europe. We had a party, and they said, "We'll go from the board meeting to the party, get there at four o'clock- Now you bring Beulah Hester, 'cause if you just tell her to come, she's not coming, so you bring her." They told the doctor's wife who was a member of the board, "You be responsible to bring Beulah Hester." Because they would invite me... See, I didn't think it was necessary for me to go all the time, but on this occasion she said, "Now, Beulah, don't tell me no, because we're going right after the board meeting. We got to be there at four o'clock, going to have a short meeting." I went in, and they were all glad to see me. We had toasts, things that they had done. They had their drinks, I had ginger ale, and I said, "Now when you get over there, if you run short, need any money, you let me know and I'll tell the president." And, oh, everybody just laughed. That was my contribution to the trip. I got there exactly one minute past four. I looked at the clock, and by the time I went around and shook hands and did some orders, and ginger ale and greetings and things like that, and eleven minutes past four, I left. They said, "What's your hurry for?" I said, "Well, you know, I have a husband at home, and he eats about such-and-such a time. Regardless of my meetings, you know, I have to have dinner for him. That all right?" "Sure." "And don't forget, let me know, I'll pass the word on, if you need money or get short." And they all laughed, and that's the way I left.
But you know, the thing of it was, I'd had something instilled in me. I knew I wasn't white. I didn't try to be white. That was a little place there for Beulah. And when I went on the board, they said, "Now listen, you're not here just for the black people. You*re representing the people of Boston." Now when they began talking about this expenditure, and the money in the budget in the millions, three million a month, I kept quiet, didn't know a thing about it. But when there was a fire in this house﻿(cont.) because of poor heating, and I said, "Gentlemen, ladies, I think we ought to do something about it." And they passed a rule that each social worker would see that her client was supplied with sufficient heat so they couldn't have any oil stoves exploding and things like that. But three children burned. Two of them were black, one white, and she told me, "You're not here for the blacks, you're not here for the whites, you represent this city of Boston," and I kept that in my mind. So that that's what social work meant to me—the city of Boston.
There was a girl there had worked, a white girl, had worked in the department as a secretary. She took sick. I don't know what happened, but she lost her sight, she lost her job. She went to the school for the blind, and she learned how to type beautifully. She wanted to get her job back, and she applied, they told her, "No, I'm sorry, we don't have any place here for you. There are no openings for you." Somebody, I don't know who it was, told her... I think it was one of the clerks, said, "I'll tell yen what yen io. Why don't you see if you can get in touch with Mrs. Hester, Beulah Hester, on the board." I've never seen the girl in my life. So she called me up, and she said, "Mrs. Hester, I've finished school for the blind, and I passed the examination, and I would like to get my job back. My husband isn't very well, and I have two children, and I need the job. I wonder if you could help me." I said, "I don't know, but I'll try." I went in the next morning to the director's office, and I said, "Good morning, sir." He knew me. I said, "Do I have to be introduced or, shall I say, what's the procedure in meeting such a distinguished..." He said, "Cut that stuff out and come on in here and tell me what you want." But then I told him about this girl that needs this job, she's very competent, and he said, "She's blind." I said, "What difference does it make?" "How's she going to get around?" I said, "Mister, now you know yourself, if any person loses one of his senses, the other senses become more acute. You know that." I said, "Now, if she's lost her sight, why, there are some other senses that will come into prominence." So he said, "What can she do?" I said, "In the first place, she dresses beautifully. Her daughter sees to that, just as neat as she can be. Her hair looks beautiful. That's what they tell me. I've never seen her. They say she looks beautiful. And you mean to tell me if she comes to the subway there, just one block down here, that no one would just touch her on the elbow and guide her a block? That would be no problem. She gets right off the subway. All right. What else?" He said, "All you got to... How's she going to..." "Get her out. Just show her. Show her this room, the ladies' room, right here, and there's two or three doors from her office, and if she wants, she can pace it off. That's it." "Well, all right. What're you going to give her to do?" "I'll tell you what to do, put her on intake. She'll put on dark glasses, person comes in, they don't know that she's blind. All right, 'Name? Address? Occupation?' All the other information, and so and so and so... And she'll look up with a sweet smile. How are they going to see through those dark glasses?" He said, "Beulah Hester, I don't know what I'm going to do with you." "They won't know whether the girl's blind or not. She'is taking the information." He said, "You win. Tell her to come in Thursday, and see Miss Jackson, report to Miss Jackson."
The girl got the job. And every year, up till a few years ago, she just﻿(cont.) stepped up, stepped up. She took the supervisors' examination, and she passed it, and she got the position of supervisor when there was a vacancy, and she just stepped up until she retired. How proud I was about two years ago to receive an invitation to this dinner that they gave her at one of the big restaurants. She never forgets me. Her daughter married a very prominent man. He's a traveling salesman, something like that. But anyway, they go abroad nearly every other year. She always writes me a card, sends me a gift every Christmas, every Mother's Day. I've never laid eyes on her, and she knows I'm black. When she passed this exam, she let me know she'd been promoted. "I thought you'd be interested to know I passed the exam, and I'm now a supervisor." I said—talked over the phone—"Why, isn't that nice, isn't that nice? I'm so proud of you." She said, "I though you'd want to know." And every advancement that she'd have, or her daughter or her son-in-law, she'd tell me. Every time I go to Boston, I call her up. "How are you doing?" "Fine, fine, fine, fine." She sent me a gift, "Some way ^o let you know that I'll never forget your kindness to me." I haven't laid eyes on her. Somebody told her, I guess. I know she'd know I'm black,, and I knew she was white. But that doesn't make any difference. Just as nice and sweet to me...
Now, why should I go around all puffed up about the white folks? They treated me all right. I can't bear the whole Negro race on my shoulder. I have enough to bear. When I go to them and ask them for something, they always respond. If they tell me no, it's in such a nice way I think it's yes. They've never turned me down yet. Now, I mean, I'm just one. I mean, I love my race and I think they ought to do the right, but at this age, I'm so thankful that the Lord has opened the way for me to get along. Since I've been a widow, yes, some of my folks have turned me down. I know it, I told them, you know what they call you when you lick them. I don't lick them. But they're very nice to me.
Just like I think I told you, when I had a group of senior citizens, want to take them away on a vacation, and they'd stop in the hotels, and some of these people had been working for white people for years and years and years. One of my black sisters told my president of the board she thought it was a shame that I was spending their money to take these people on vacations, stopping in these big hotels. And this white friend told me, she said, "Beulah, you'd better watch it. I don't know. I don't know, but I don't like the feel of it." She told me what this girl said. I said, "Well, listen, I'll tell you what to do. When I give my report, you just give me an extra five minutes." She said, "Beulah, I know you can take care of the situation. That's the reason I'm telling you, because I don't want to bring it up against you. Just give you a few minutes, and you can take care of yourself." I said, "Thank you." I always called her Madam President. "Thank you, Madam President." So that day, we had the board meeting. Someone asked me. I said, "We had a wonderful trip. I took them to the New York World's Fair, and then we went to Montreal." One of the board members asked me, "Well, did you have any trouble?" "No," I said, "in New York we stopped at the Piccadilly Hotel, and everything was nice." She said, "Did you go very heavily on your budget?" I said, "No, we planned it." I said, "We made our plans around February for our vacation in August." I think it was about seven﻿50
BH: (cont.) months. I called up the public welfare department and asked
them how much did they allow for recreation. They told me it was four dollars. I asked how much for transportation. It was five, something like that. Anyway, the whole thing was around seventy, eighty dollars, maybe, more or less. I asked those ladies did they think that they could put away four dollars a month, and they said they could. I said, "If you start in February, and, until September, then you'll have about thirty-five dollars. Now, ladies and gentlemen," I said, "have you ever heard of anybody going to Montreal, Canada, staying in the Laurentian Hotel for thirty-five dollars? Have you every heard of it? That's what we did. All right, where did the other money... Some of the money came from what you gave me. We sold cakes and pies and things. Part of it came from that. I paid the Michaud Bus Company, they gave me a little discount. All of that together made the expenses. Now, how did I do it? It didn't come all from you, it didn't come all from me, but all of us together gave those ladies a trip to Montreal, Canada. We left on Thursday night, and we came back Monday."
I'm telling you, you could hear a pin fall in that room. The president looked at me and winked her eye as if she said, "Girl, you all right." And she said, in the meeting, "Are there any more questions of Mrs. Hester?" Not a word. One of the board members said, "Mrs. Hester, if you had more money, what would you do?" I said, "If I had more money, I'd take more women to camp. I'd let them stay longer. Where some of them stay a week, I'd let them stay two weeks. I would pay their membership in the organization. Those are some of the things that I would do if I had more money." The treasurer got up and said, "We have some extra money, and if someone will entertain a motion, I move that we give Mrs. Hester additional funds to carry on her work." Now some of them said, "Beulah, how'd you..." "I don't know how I did it." And those ladies could go in there and sit in the lobby. They said, "Where did you get such a dignified, refined group?" They dressed well, they looked well, they were refined, no boisterous laughing, or nothing like that. I don't know. But I was so grateful. They said, "We're so proud of you." White people, black people. I want you to know, it seems to me that if you try to do right and ask the Lord to help you, He'll open the way for you. Old people say, "Crown your efforts with success."
And this very man who was head of the department retired from the public welfare; he was head of the department. He went to another organization, and I was surprised when he sent me an invitation to his retirement. I started not to go, and then some of the other girls said they were going, and we went. I shook hands. Oh, he gave me the most cordial greeting. "Mrs. Hester, I am so glad you came. I was afraid you weren't coming." And introduced me to his wife, "This is Mrs. Hester, Beulah Hester, I've been telling you so much about." Everyone said, the woman that's got so much mouth. She said, "Yes, I'm so glad to meet you, Mrs. Hester. I've heard my husband speak about you. You're one woman it's hard for him to tell no to requests, to your requests." Then when I left, after the party, he shook hands with me, "Thank you, thank you, more than I can tell you about." That's the same man that I talked into giving the blind girl a position. "Any time that...I'm at such-and-such an organization.﻿51
(cont.) Get in touch with me if you need me." That's the way we were. Now somebody else would have a different... I'm not condemning them. That's their way. Everybody has their own way. But my grandmother said, "I praise the bridge that carries me over." I didn't have any trouble. I don't know how it is now, but I never had any trouble. Those things that would come up, why, I'd open my mouth and speak. The former director of the Simmons College School of Social Work told me, as I said before, "Don't think you are here representing the black people. You are here representing the people of Boston."
A case came up where some children were burned. I didn't stop to ask whether they were black or whether they were white. They were human beings and I think as a board member. My brother said to me, "Beulah, when you go to those board meetings and they vote out millions of dollars, what do you say?" So I say, "Second the motion." "How much have you got in your pocket?" "Twenty cents to get home." And he laughed. He said, Beulah, you got more nerve than anybody I have ever seen. He says, "Sitting up there with those millionaires, people who have money..." I said, "Well, I can second the motion, can't I? It doesn't cost anything to second the motion." And I have twenty cents, the carfare then was ten cents, and I had ten cents to get down there and ten cents back, that's all I needed that day. Why worry about what somebody else had? I had food, I had clothes, and I think I had the perspective of people. Anybody asked for anything, they'd give it to me, so why should I worry?
So you asked about my relationship with the white people, and the same... Since I've been back here in Oxford I have more friends. I had a white mailman. I was sick one day. I've had arthritis since I've been home, can't get around very well. I had a mailbox, difficulty with the mailbox, always somebody would knock it over. Bad days, somebody would ring the bell. There's the mailman. Once he told my neighbor, "Tell Miss Beulah don't come out every day for her mail." Come up, get out of the car, come up on the porch, and leave my mail in the door. And tell me as long as the weather's bad like that, don't come out, keep bringing my mail. A white man. All right. When I got better, I talked around, and I wanted to do something for him. I found out when his birthday was and made him a birthday cake to thank him for his kindness to me. That didn't hurt me. I had eggs, butter, and sugar. And in no time could make a one-two-three-four cake, plain cake, this kind of thing. Now, one good turn deserves another. I didn't have money to give him, but I could make him a cake for his birthday. My way of saying thank you. Now, some people say, "Well, the government is paying him." But that wasn't the point. He was nice to me. Otherwise, I'd have had to go out in the rain, sleet,and snow, go out to my mailbox. It was his duty to put it in the box. I resent them telling him to come up on my porch, but that's what he did, and I appreciated it. That was my way of compensating him for his kindness to me. I mean___that's the way I've been
taught to live, and it's worked so far. As the old song says, "Grace has broughtme safe thus far, and I believe it's going to carry me home."
Same way when I have work done on my house. I call this one and call the other one. And I call the electrician. I said, "You know, I had some guests come down from Boston." And I said, "My bell didn't ring,﻿52.
BH: (cont.) and I sent for you, didn't have any response. So then you came, and said you'd be there the next week. So this lady went somewhere else to visit a friend." So I called this electrician. He didn't come. Next time I called him, and he had some excuse. I said, "You know the thing that hurt me so bad, this lady was visiting me and another friend in a suburb of Oxford." She was here one Wednesday and she heard me ask the electrician when he would come. He said, "I'll be back next Wednesday." So she came back the next Wednesday and he wasn't here, hadn't been here. And the thing of it is, she knocked on the door. So I just happened to look out and I saw the car. "You know, I just imagine," I'm telling him, "I just imagine, when she went back to Boston, she said, 'You know, the people in the South, they get along very nicely, but I haven't figured out how they communicate. They don't have doorbells. I went to Mrs. Hester's house one Wednesday, and I knocked on the door. But she came and she apologized and she said she was so sorry that her bell didn't ring. I went to visit someone else, and I came back the next Wednesday, and the same story, the bell didn't ring. So I began to figure out, how do they, people in the South, how do they communicate with one another? I mean, there are no doorbells."' And he hesitated. I'm on the phone, now, talking to him. I said, "So I didn't know what to say. And I could just hear her saying, 'I know what she's going through. What does she do? How does she communicate with her friends? No doorbells, got to go in, knock on the door. Suppose you can't get to the door?'" And do you know, the next morning, 8:25, the man was here and fixed my door. And I had occasion to have some more electrical work done, and I heard him tell the carpenter, "Mrs. Hester is a wonderful woman to work for, but if you promise her anything, just be prepared to carry out your promise." He said, "I like to work for her." Now that's the way I got that... I didn't lay about, I didn't say, "Your company..." I didn't say any woman said it. I said, I could hear her when she returned to Boston, and speaking about her trip in the South, one of the problems, how do the people communicate without any bell? I said, you know you didn't want that. Just little things like that, little instances like that.
So I don't have any trouble. I mean, you just tell them. All right. He said, "Miss Hester, you mean this year of our Lord, or were you speaking about the present or the future?" "I'm not talking about what has been." He says, "Mrs. Hester, I'll be there tomorrow morning." And he told this contractor, he says, "She's a wonderful person to work for, makes suggestions and things like that."
I don't know what it is, but they're always willing to do it if they can help out in any way, same way with the banks. I remember I went to the bank one day. The cashier said, "Mrs. Hester, you know we have a new system now, if you have your social security check, you don't have to bring them. You can have them sent directly to us. We can deposit them for you." A number of places that wanted to do that right then, and I didn't understand it. So I said, "That's very nice of you, but as it happens, I have all the little checks that I want to send. I'll just bring them all together. How would I see you all? I have to see you at least once a month. Won't you miss me?" "Mrs. Hester, you know we miss you." I said, "If I'm going to put it through the mail, how am I going﻿53
BH: (cont.) to see you?" He said, "Go away," and laughed, and that was that. "You haven't been to see us..." "How am I going to come? You want me to send the checks up here, and you want to see me, too? That's a long time for one month that I haven't seen you. You give me inspiration." And they laughed, say, "We surely miss you. It's been a long time since you been in." But I don't know, it's something, something but I can't explain it. But it helps me in forming friendships. I mean, I don't get out of my place, just friendly and try to be cheerful, try to do something fine. One of the ladies, her mother's sick, tell me, "I heard your mother's sick. How is she feeling today? Oh, I see, I see." "She's feeling better." "Can she eat anything?" "Oh, she eats a little." Now I just made a little bunch of cookies, put them up in a little box, and say, "Now these are for your mother, now. Don't want you to go eat them up." They say, "Mrs. Hester, Mother just enjoyed those cookies." Now that didn't cost me anything. I don't mind doing it. I'm living alone. I need to lose weight anyway. So it just occurred to me that would be nice.
FB: Now, you were married for almost fifty years...
BH: Forty-six.
FB: Forty-six. Tell me some more about your husband, about being married for that long a time.
BH: Well, it seemed a long time, and yet it seemed a short time. We had our ups and downs, difficulties. Sometimes he would get discouraged with the church, and I was there to help him. I think about what one of the trustees said to me one day, "Mrs. Hester, we need a dryer, we need some money." And I said, "We don't want to worry the minister too much." The man said, "Can't you think of something?" And he was a doctor, and he said, "I'm just so busy, I am so busy, I'd like to meet... Every other patient I have is sick, and I want this to go on. We want you to help us. Anything that you suggest, we'll go along with." I put on a project and raised around four thousand dollars in a very short time, little things like that to help him and make his work lighter. We had our little difficulties. The church was condemned. We had to move two or three times. I mean, the building was old, we were in. And the architecture wasn't safe. Finally the city condemned it. We had to move. That was a terrible blow to my husband, and I got in and helped him, put on affairs and things like that to raise money, organization, helped him, along with my social work. That's why I told you, the doctor said that I have to slow down. I slow down for a while, and start up again. So that the last week of his life, he said, "Beulah, you are working too hard. You're doing too much. I know you are tired, I can see it." He said, "I know I'm a burden to you." I said, "If I ever hear you say a thing like that, I'm going to give you a quick pattycake job. I don't want to hear it." Sometimes I felt like I was going to crumble. I remember one night during his illness, I went to bed at 3 a.m., got up at 3:15 a.m., just to put the cover on him, give him a drink of water, rubbing him with alcohol, doing something. My director was so nice to me. He said, "Mrs. Hester, take as much time as you need." My club members, "Who's speaking today?" I would say, "It's Mr. So-and-so."﻿(cont.) "Well, you come and introduce the speaker. We have the collation all ready. We're going to have so-and-so and so-and-so, and you go back to Reverend Hester."
I mean, he wasn't sick very long, but even in other things that I could help him... I never criticized him in public. I never made suggestions in a meeting. I never have been to a church meeting, so that he would be free to do what he felt should be done, and we would talk over things at home. I never made suggestions at church, so that they would think that I was taking the initiative in anyway. I'd never embarrass him, never. Any suggestions, sometime he'd say, "Beulah, what you think about doing so and so and so?" and we'd talk it over at home. How when he'd get to the church, he would present it. In fact, I didn't go to church with him. I didn't think that was the thing to do. My suggestions were given to him at home. Anything that I thought that he did wrong, made a mistake, I would tell him behind closed doors. And I think that was partly responsible fur the success that wo had In marriage. No criticism. We'd criticize each other at home. But you know, sometimes women get so involved, and so interested, and make suggestions. And the parishioners misunderstand, your husband misunderstands, so that we always thought it was best to criticize each other, or make suggestions in our home, and I think that's the success of our marriage.
What about, did you work with the choir at this church?
Yes, I had one of the choirs, the chapel choir- We were organized in '55, and the thing about it, we enjoyed ourselves. We'd sing songs that he'd like. We always, usually sang on the first Sunday, and we'd have one or two gospel numbers, and then they'd have revival. I would play for the revival.
Did I tell you about his hospitalization? Well, he was in the [New England] Baptist Hospital on Christmas, and my choir, they wanted to do something, and so they had a party. We got in touch with the head nurse at the Baptist hospital, and told them that we wanted to come over and have a little party, just a few of us. He was not able, of course, to get up out of bed. So they arranged for us to go up on the fourth floor. We had the party. They went in and just talked to him a few minutes in his room, and then they went out on the fourth floor and had the party. I went up and some of the nurses and doctors came. I'll show you the little Beulah, old doll with a pink dress on, crocheted dress, and it's on a little pedestal. They put that on top of the cake, and they went by and put it up in the room where we had the party. They enjoyed it so much. Then after it was all over, they carried the Beulah [doll} down so he could see it, and it tickled him so to see it. They all had a very nice time at that party we had.
And he was so thoughtful. There were two white men, one of them was a minister, in the room with him, and his wife would come over, and I remember one night, one afternoon, and she said, ''I know I must go." So he said, "How far do you live?" He said, "My wif-e will take you home." I gave him some eyes, you know, because I didn't know where the woman lived. He said, "She'll take you home." And I'm telling you, snow was﻿55
BH: (cont.) on the ground. I couldn't say, "I can't go." I was scared to death. I didn't want him to know it. I didn't want to embarrass him after he said, "Oh, Mrs. Hester will take you. She'll be over in a few minutes." Then I came in, and we talked a while, and he said, "Beulah, you don't want to stay too late tonight. Mrs. So-and-so, she's going out there. Why don't you take her on home?" Because her husband was sick, so she didn't have anybody to drive. So I carried her home, scared to death, but I made it. So I said, "Listen, let me tell you something..." Oh, my Lord. He said, "What time did you get home?" I said, "What are you asking me? What time did I get home? I was scared to death, got lost." He said, "You did?" I said, "Oh, shh." He laughed. He said, "Beulah, you're the same Beulah." I said, "Sure." And I imitated, "My wife will take you home, don't you worry. Yes, she'll be here in a few minutes." I said, "lean hear you. She'll be here in a few minutes. After she stays awhile, I'll tell her, she'll take you home." And I'm sitting up there, scared to death, didn't know...in the snow. Stuck :,ze i , but I just kept on working till I got out. So I said, "Next time, don't be planning to tell somebody that I'm going to take them, because you don't know." Well, he certainly got a lot of fun out of that, you know. I used to say things like that to make him laugh. And I'd imitate. [She imitates someone.] "Your wife didn't know how she was going to get there herself." All throughout our married life, we used to have fun like that.
I went to the ministers' wives one day, and I went home. I said, "You know, I went to the ministers' wives, and I was the only one had to go home and cook hot bread for dinner. These people up here in Massachusetts, they don't eat bread for dinner, like we do in the South." I said, "I'm just going to stop..." "When are you going to stop?" I said, "I don't know, but I'm going to stop. We eat too much bread anyway." Went to the ministers' wives, they used to serve each time. So the time they came to my house, I said I had some rolls. And they said, "Oh, Mrs. Hester, rolls, and cake.11 They said, "What kind of cake flour do you use?" The thing of it was, that was during the war, you know, and some of the members had given us some not-to-be-sold flour, and you knew I wasn't going to say that. I hadn't noticed. So some of the ladies said, "What kind of flour do you use?" "Well, I use Pillsbury." And another one said, "I use Swansdown." And the other said, "I use all-purpose flour." And everyone had a different flour to use. So I was going back and forth, and they said, "Mrs. Hester, what kind of flour do you use?" And, you know, I'd been using not-to-be-sold. So I was in the kitchen before I could answer. So I never did tell them. He [my husband] said, "What did you say?" I said, "They can have the Pillsbury, some can have Swansdown, some could have all-purpose, but you are eating not-to-be-sold today." Well, my husband laughed. He said, "Beulah, how'd you think of that?" I said, "I don't know, because you know Mrs. So-and-so gave us some flour, and I made some cakes out of it, made my cakes from that." So he said, "What did you tell them?" I said, "You can have your Pillsbury and your Swansdown, and all-purpose, but you're eating not-to-be-sold today." Well, he laughed and laughed. Well, sometimes when he'd get tired and worn out, I'd have some kind of joke like that to tell him. He enjoyed it so much. And if I had to go away, he was always so glad when I came home. "Who did you see?" I said, "You don't ever have any-﻿56
BH: (cont.) thing to tell me. You think my mouth ought to run all the time?" He said, "Beulah, I don't know what in the world I'd do without you." So that condition, I mean, that relationship continued all during our married life.
FB: How did you feel about not having any children?
BH: I felt very badly, first, then I asked him what he felt. He said it
was all right. One of our trustees came to us one day, and had a little girl that needed a home. And the trustee said, it was something about the little girl that reminded him of me. So my husband said, "Well, we'll think it over." So he said, "Beulah, these people have so much trouble with their own children. You adopt a child, it's not like it is in the South. There you can take a child and adopt them. They don't go through the legal procedure, they just adopt a name. But up here, you adopt a child, that child goes to jail or whatever happens to that child, you got to be.,." And he said, "T've got so many relatives, if I had to have somebody, I'd rather have one of my sister's children, and I'd feel better." So we told this man that we decided that we wouldn't.
And sure enough, I think about two years after we came down South, his youngest sister's little girl had been sick. They took her to Durham, Raleigh, Henderson, Oxford. Her father told me that they couldn't find out. I said to the little girl's father, Dewey, I said, "Dewey, why don't you and Tip let us take Jackie?" He said, "Miss Beulah, I don't know." He said, "We will talk it over." Said, "Maybe that would help her." "So let us take her," I said. "Let us take her. She can stay with us for a while." So they considered, and we carried her back up with us. She was six years old, going into second grade, and she was a darling little girl. I told her mother the other day, I think the only time that I put a switch on her was coming from school alone. It was during the days of the NRA, and we had the girls to give some extra work to. I had a girl [Mary] come by and take her to school—she went to the afternoon session—and then she would help me with the housework and get dinner started, then go back and get her. One day she came home and didn't wait for Mary, and that's when I gave her a good spanking. "Don't ever try that again," I said, "because it's bad enough having somebody else's child, and you're run over or something like that, neglect, and I couldn't stand that." So she never did that any more. She was a beautiful child. They say she looks like me.
FB: How long did she stay with you?
BH: She stayed, oh, about... I know she graduated from clerical school and she worked a year, and she went back to college, got her degree, she got her master's. She a teacher now in the city schools in Dallas, Texas.
FB:	So she stayed at your house till she was grown?
BH:	Yes.
FB:	So she was like your child?
BH:	Just like my child. Just like my child. They say she looked like me.﻿(cont.) She'd go to church, she'd go all appropriate, you know. We'd have her all dressed up, you know- She'd stand on the platform, and instead of looking at the audience, she'd look right straight at me, her eyes, repeating her verses she had to say, her eyes right in mine. They'd say, "I wonder why Jackie looks at Mrs. Hester all the time." [laughs] She was just the sweetest little girl. If ever anybody else took sick, she was Tight there. She came up and spent Christmas with us, and also, when he [Reverend Hester] passed, she came back. Her husband has an office, office manager in Bishop College. And she never forgets me. Sometimes when I feel lonely, I think about Jackie. I say, "My goodness, I still have someone." She's just as loving, kind, and sweet as she cane be. She has two children, one daughter graduated from high school, last year. She's getting ready to go to college now.
You were married for forty-six years. How did you handle it when your husband died? I mean, there you had been with someone for forty-six years, and here you were alone.
I don't know, that's the question. I don't know how I managed. He told me, he said, "Beulah, I know it's going to be hard for you when I'm gone. I hate to leave you. But you've always been brave, always stood up under circumstances, whatever the circumstances. I know you're going to do it now. Hold your head up, control yourself. Bear your grief, ask the Lord to help you. You'll make it. I know you will, because you're just strong. You're just Beulah." He said, "I hate to leave. You go to visit your brother's family, or stay at home. You can make it." And it was a hard thing to do. Then my husband, then my baby brother, then my older brother, all within a few years—husband in '64, my baby brother in '67, my older brother in '69. I didn't see how I could take any more. I moved down here in '70. I don't know, I don't know...
Did you live by yourself after your husband died?
We had a home, and it was an apartment house, and I lived down on the first floor apartment, and rented out the other two floors. Finally,
when my brother told his sons to help me___ See, the boys had knocked me
down. I told you that. And he wasn't satisfied. He said, "You all can't do anything for me but help my sister Beulah. Help her to get out. You all help her." So my two nephews—I have four nephews, but two of them helped. Their father lives in Philadelphia. But my brother Robert's children...one son lives in Oxford, who has the undertaking business and the other son lives in Ypsilanti, Michigan, and they just feel like they own me. They want me to tell them when I'm going. I asked them what would they do if I did get married again. What would they do? Richard said, "Why, if he came down there, Aunt Beulah, and I thought somebody was going to marry you, I'd say, 'Sir,' and look at my watch, 'I think your plane leaves about two o'clock, and if it's all right with you, it takes about an hour to get from Oxford to the airport, and I can arrange to... I think you'd better leave here about half past twelve."' I said, "The man hasn't told you he's going." "That's exactly what I know. I'm telling him that it would be convenient for him to get to the station." And I said to my sister-in-law, "Could we have the reception in your house?" "Reception? For what?" They're just as nice to me as they can be. Richard, every night he or his wife Edna call up to see if I'm﻿58
BH: (cont.) all right. It was a little hard when I sold the car. I get
transportation all right. He can provide transportation, but otherwise I can always get the bus from the center to get around.
FB: Did you want to come back?
BH: Yes and no. I didn't see how I could stay there without my husband.
And I hated to come down here and leave his body there, because it seemed like when I was there, I was nearer to him. I could go up to the Blue Hills, and I just felt that nearness. But here it was a little different. But I'm getting adjusted pretty well, trying to keep busy, doing personal things, you know, decorating the house, attending club meetings, church once in a while. Since I've played for the church, I just love that.
The pastor is very nice. I said to him, Reverend Davis, "Reverend Davis, when you were a boy, did you ever do any hard work?" He said, "Why, Mr?, Hester?" T =aid, "Because your bands are so soft." He said, "Yes, I ploughed a cornfield and all." I told his wife about it and she laughed, she laughed. She laughed. She said, "She ought to see how hard it is for me to get you to do anything here at home." And I went to church last Sunday, and she said, "Mrs. Hester, I was sitting at the dinner table thinking about you, what you told Davis about his hands." And I said, "She didn't know how smart you were. I didn't tell her how nice you were about washing the dishes." Well, she laughed. We had more fun. And he said, "Mrs. Hester, you have so much humor. It's a pleasure to be in your company." Little things like that make it easier. But I'm very adjusted now. Some days I feel pretty good. When the doctor said, "Mrs. Hester, you're better off than I am..." He said, "If all my patients were like you," he said, "I'd have to go out of business." I said, "Doctor..." like the lady told her husband. She lost her teeth, other things. She couldn't talk very well. And [the doctor] said, "Oh lady, you know you're the sweetest thing I ever saw in my life." She said, "Oh man, I know you're lying, but God knows I love to hear you say it." That's what I told my doctor. He laughed, he laughed. I said, "That's what she told me. 'Oh man, I know you lying, but God knows I love to hear you say it.'" I said, "Now all this about looking well and all like that, I know you don't mean it, but it does me good to hear you say it." He said, "Well, I'm telling the truth. If all my patients keep on like you, I'll have to go out of business."
FB: All right, Mrs. Hester. You lived through the war. You saw black people change in your lifetime. What do you think is the most important thing that happened over the years?
BH: What do you mean?
FB: In terms of the progress, how do you feel about what has happened to the
world and black people? Do you feel good about the way you see things now?
BH: I can't get accustomed to the changes. Seems like years ago they had more poise, seemed like they had something to offer. They had more of an interest in race. Things that could be accomplished. I mean, I can't get accustomed to the, to the looseness, changes in the couples, seemed﻿59
BH: (cont.) like they had more finesse. Of course, that's the new style, I mean the profanity and things that I see. Of course, they say that's been going on a long time, but not in the group that I have been associated with. I mean, women seem to drink more than they did when I was younger...because I didn't know. They say that's been going on all the time. Maybe I was more sheltered, but... Women drinking, profanity, I can't get accustomed to it, this vulgarity. I don't know how to cope with it. So that's the way...I just stay out. If they say things like that, I laugh and smile and all, because I don't want them to think that I'm critical of everything. I just cannot get accustomed to it. Women, seems like they had more pride or something. They weren't so loose. I don't know how to explain it. I don't talk about it, because they say that I'm old-fashioned and all that, so I adjust myself as best I can, don't let it worry me. If I get upset and worried, I bring on the migraine headaches and that's not good, so I try to keep myself aloof. It seems to be a habit of younger women and older women, too, to use such vulgarity. I mean, it <?e;"mp to me you can have fun. I don't mean you got to be, oh, so exclusive. It's too much for me. And they say, "Well, this is a new day now. That's old-time stuff." And I don't know what to say. And some of my friends, a few of them, when they get around me, they, you know, "Beulah won't..." And I hate for them to set me apart, and yet I don't feel free to join in with it.
FB: I think perhaps one of the major changes that has come to pass for you
has been in the area of the attitude of women toward premarital sex, and living with people and that sort of thing.
BH: Yes!
FB: What do you think about illegitimate children, and about people living together who aren't married?
BH: I can't get on to that yet. I don't understand. I saw a young lady, and she's telling me about her college, and I say, "That is so nice. When do you expect to graduate?" She said, "About two years." I said, "Do you live on the campus?" "I do this year, but this is the last year. I'm going to get an apartment." And I said, "You feel that's the thing to do?" She said yes. She said, "You have more freedom. And I can manage, I'll budget better, staying off campus." The next time I heard of her, she was out of school. Now what happened, I don't know. She's going to school, and she got this apartment, and the next thing, she's out of school, such a brilliant young lady. Wonder why she changed. Evidently she made her classes. But sudden changes like that. I talked with her, and I was asking her about what she wanted to do. "I don't know," she said, "I think I'm going to live with this man..." She said, "I want to tell you, I'll shack with him, but I wouldn't marry him." Now those things shock me. I didn't know what to say. When she admits that she would shack with him, but she wouldn't marry him... Now I say, Well, maybe it's good I am an old lady, because I couldn't, I didn't know how to adjust myself to such a situation. I didn't know what to say. She told me that she would shack with him, but she wouldn't marry him. And then if I remarked, [she would say], "Well, everybody's doing it now." Now what am I going to say? She wouldn't listen to me. I didn't have﻿60
BH: (cont.) anything particularly to offer. So I just kept quiet. I just
said, "Well, I wish you well." First thing you would hear about, I'm an old lady! What was I going to argue about? Best thing is to keep quiet. It's too much for me.
FB: What did your mother tell you about it?
BH: My mother said, "Beulah, I love you, but I'd rather see you in your grave than bring disgrace on me. I couldn't stand it. Put me in my grave, I know it would." And she said to me, "Not for the sacrifices that I made for you, but it would hurt me so that I know I couldn't stand it. Not that you're any better than anybody else, but I just want better things for you. I don't think that you should hurt me like that when you know I've explained everything to you. I think that you should try to show your appreciation for what your father and I have done. You're the only girl we have, and we have done all we could for you, and it would just break my heart. It would just break my heart. I couldn't stand it. Because I see no excuse for it. We made every sacrifice. I've tried to advise you, and I've tried to lead you. Anybody can tell you a lie. In a way, generally, I speak to young people. If you should fall, they call it falling, then you should fall. But I don't think I could stand it." So that's the way I was brought up. I didn't want to break my mother's heart. She had done everything for me, made sacrifices, she and my father. And after my father left, the whole responsibility was on her, and it was beautiful how she handled it. "I want this for the boys. The boys can make it." The last night she lived, she said, I'm ready to go, but I just hate to leave you, because you're so by yourself like that." That's the only thing. "I hate to leave you." So I just thought, you know, that I had to hold up for my mother. Temptation on every hand, but with the Lord's help, my mother's prayers, my father's prayers, do the best that I could... That's the way she put it. "Don't let me down, Beulah, don't..."
I can't get on to this new way of living. I just can't get on to it. And you don't say anything, you're interfering, and that's the way everybody's doing now, everybody. I don't know what we're going to do.
FB: You were always brought up in the church as a minister's daughter, then
a minister's wife, played in the church choir. How do you see the church is making any difference? Did it make any difference in your life? Did your prayers, did your church make any difference to you?
BH: Yes. I went to New York, went to Small's Paradise. I wanted to see it.
I didn't want to grow up and be an old lady, never go to a nightclub. I went there. Once or twice I took a group to New York, and they had a free day. Before then I went to Small's Paradise because I wanted to see what it was. I didn't want to grow up in the world and never go to a nightclub, never see what was going on. So I went. Some things I liked about it, some things I didn't. But it wasn't a thing that I wanted to continue. I mean, I wasn't one of these kind that never went to anything. I used to go to parties. I grew up in social work and you had to be there at parties, supervising, and to see what's going on. But you had fun. But I liked the church work, too. But it was a difference, to me. I wasn't always at the church. I mean, I didn't go to church every﻿61
BH: (cont.) Sunday. Now some girls, because their parents went to church, Sunday school, when they grew up, they said, "No, I'm through with church. I went to church." But I feel that the church still has something to offer, and I feel that I have something to offer to the church. I didn't always play hymns, either, didn't sing them in church, but had a lot of fun. I don't know, it was...my life was varied.
I didn't ever drink, because there was something about it that didn't agree with me. The doctor told me, "Don't have any alcoholic drinks." Now I didn't refrain from drinking because I was so, so righteous; it was a health problem, one of them. He said, "Don't do it, because there's something it does to your blood. Don't drink alcoholic drinks. That's it, period." And I listened to him. Now when I go to parties and they offer, I say, "No, thank you." Maybe, maybe sometimes I take ginger ale. And I'd have just as much fun. I'd go around there with a glass of ginger ale, laugh and talk and everything. I wasn't going to say, "This is ginger ale." ocuid have been water, but I'd have a glass in my hand like everybody else. We were sitting up there, you know, and I couldn't drink. They didn't know. But I selected that way of life, and it worked for me, and I'm not one who's going to tell you, "You musn't do so-and-so-and-so." This is the way of life for me. Just like certain things that the doctor told me not to eat, and I don't eat them. He said, "It's not good for you. Just like you turn around and have migraine headaches. When you feel them coming, get to a bed as quick as you can, and lie down, rest. That's the best medicine I can give you. Sometimes you take these pills, and lie down for three or four hours, and get up and see if they're gone." Well, just keep on. Because somebody else said migraine headaches won't hurt you, just as somebody else say, "Uh-uh." Now, he told me, "Be careful of migraine headaches. When you feel them coming, stop, lie down, take your pill." Now that was the doctor according to me. Now that's my philosophy. I never did go and do something because somebody else did it. I have to try.
I remember when I was just a girl going to school, I always liked jewelry, and a girl had a ring... I think it must have been one of the rings you used to get on a stick of penny candy. But it was so pretty, and she let me wear it, cost about ten or fifteen cents. And I lost it, and I think I lost it in the road out near the orphanage. But you know, I think I was about ten years old, and I lost the girl's ring. I went home and told my mother, who walked with me down the street, trying to find it. She said, "Beulah, don't borrow anything any more. What you don't have, you do without. It's a bad policy. Some people have it that went to school, a girl who borrowed clothes, or things like that. Don't do that. I want this to be a lesson to you. Now, you go to the girl, tell her that you lost her ring. If she wants you to get another, I don't know where you can get it from." And the girl said, "Oh no, it's just an old ten-cent ring." It was all right with her. But that was a lesson to me. Little things like that carried right on through my life, as a girl, as a woman, and if there was any way in this world that I could get around without borrowing anything... If you have it, you have it. If you don't have it, you don't have it. I think sometimes those principles that are instilled when you're a child carry you through. I used to talk with my mother. She used to tell me, explain things to me. "Don't﻿62
BH: (cont.) get in the habit of so-and-so, don't get in the habit. If
you have it, you have it." She bought me an old piano. It wasn't much good. I played it, played my lessons on it. Then I got another piano that was secondhand; two, three pianos, all of them were fine but they were secondhand. "Beulah, I want to get you a new piano." Those were some of the things that are a part of my life. I mean, if you can't get it, wait until you can get it. It doesn't lessen your desire for having some of these things. If you can just take time.
I said to my doctor's sister one time, I said, "How is it when people get married, they have nice things, they're going to a nice home and everything like that?" I said, "And here, I'm getting married, we don't have anything. I don't know how... We went down to the secondhand place and got this thing, got the other thing, put a piece here, piece there, put the couch in the dining room." Next time I took a course at the Y in interior decorating, and the director said, "Now, you young people, if you want to get good things, go to an organization, a used store, instead of a furniture store. That's where you can get your quality. Some of these people are moving out of smaller places. Some of them are going into apartments, some of them are breaking up their homes. Used furniture—that's where you get your quality." I was the only black in the class. He said, "If you have a piece of oriental rug, if it's no more than three-by-three, take it. It's valuable." He said, "Some people put their money in stocks and bonds, some put their money in jewelry, some put their money into oriental rugs." Little things like that, you pick up here and there. I'd go over here and someone says, "Beulah, what you taking now?" "Taking a course in interior decorating." My husband was so cooperative. He'd take me to all the places, take a newspaper, and read while I was in a class sometimes. Again, I'd go on the car [public transportation] alone. But he knew one thing, I was taking a course in real estate, didn't have a thing. He said, "Just take it to know it, know something about it." So that at least, when I was left alone, I did have a speaking knowledge of it, which helped me in selling the house.
Go to the Y, that's where I took this course in interior decorating. A lot of young people there. I was an old lady sitting up there, and he said, "Now, some of you brides, you have so and so and so," and he said, "now how can I help you?" I said, "Well, sir, I'm getting ready to retire, and all I want you to do is tell me how I can arrange what I already have, because my husband doesn't have any money to buy anything new. Now if there's anything you can tell me how to rearrange what I have, and if I should buy anything, the best buy for the least money." And he took a chart, told me to take a piece of paper, cardboard, and scale off my room, so many feet, and then take a cardboard and make something to represent the piano, how many chairs I have, and put it in a big envelope and bring it to class. And when my time came, he came around, and spread it out on the table and told me how to arrange my furniture. And he told me about a man who lived near him and said that he wanted to do something to supplement his income. He built a little house and his wife went to the drygoods store, and just bought some plain white material, and the way they painted that house and decorated with those curtains, with the color of a room... For instance, the room was blue﻿63
BH: (cont.) or green, and they put white in it, and they knew how to combine those colors. Then they put the house up for sale, and I think he said they made six hundred dollars on that house, cleared. You get little ideas here and there. So those are the things that I would pick up. I didn't have any money to pay for all those expensive courses. Sometime the Y would give, run a course for ten weeks. And my friends used to laugh at me. "Beulah, what you doing now, what you taking now?"
But that's just been a part of my life, and I just can't get adjusted to some of these newfangled things. So I don't think I'm alone. I know I'm not alone. But it has really helped me, and especially since I've been a widow, find new things to do, bargains.
When we had our home, the architect was painting the house, arranging it and everything, and he said, "Reverend Hester, you know one thing? We could use Mrs. Hester on our staff. She's got so many ideas." [laughs] He laughed, he laughed. He said, "What?" "I think we could use her. She's got so many ideas." He'd laugh at me. My husband would join in. My cousin was the same way. Her husband used to say he didn't know whether there would be a house there when he came back. She was out in California, and she's looking at baseboard. She says, "What I could do, I could put a row, or something like that, books, or some plants or something." She'd say it was early in the morning and she got a saw, and she started making a little opening, you know, in the baseboard, and she could put something... And she looked over there and it looked so light, she wondered what was the trouble. They had a baseboard like we had, and she would look right out on the ground, pure ground, and she said, talk about putting those things together before her husband came home... If she didn't get it all back, he'd say, "I just expect sometime not to find a house here." Always doing something like that. Cut the house and look right out...by the window there is the pure ground. "I don't know. Maybe it's something weird, that I don't know... But I just like the looks of it." "Well, what you going to do now?" I bought this material for these drapes and I liked the pattern.
FB: What do you like to do in your spare time? Do you sew?
BH: Sew. I made these drapes. I made the covers. I don't dressmake, I
just sew. My mother always taught me, "Beulah, wash on Monday, iron on Tuesday, mend on Wednesday. After you iron your clothes, then you mend them. Don't put your clothes away if there's a rip or a tear. Do it then. When you put them in the drawer, they're all ready for use. Thursday, you begin your cleaning, finish up on Friday. Saturday, you do your cooking. That was the week." Sometimes now when I see these tears, I say, "Dear Lord, don't let Momma see it." And I stop. And she said, "Don't put the slip on with a rip or a tear. Always have it in repair. But you ought to do your mending on Wednesday, after you iron, and don't put them in the drawer with a rip or a tear." Now, that's training, you see. But now I don't say I do it all the time, or I have done it all the time. I mean, that's the background that she tried to instill in me.
FB: You told me that you had been in Montreal and New York. Tell me something about the places you traveled and the place you liked the most.﻿64
BH: For recreation, I like Montreal, Canada. I like the Laurentian Hotel. When we first went to it, I carried the group to Montreal. I didn't know they had accommodations such as they did. So that we wrote to some club and told them how many people were coming, and they secured homes for us. Like this woman would take two, and somebody else would take three, some would take one. I think about it now sometimes. We got into Montreal, Canada, about five o'clock in the morning. Drove around and found this lodge where we were going to meet the lady who was going to meet us there and give us our assignments. So that we had to wait for her to come. We had breakfast, waited for her, she got there about nine, nine-thirty. Forty people signed up, and Beulah Hester had to stay there until everybody had their home. I'll never forget it as long as I live. "Mrs. So-and-so-and-so will take two. She lives on Delaware Street, number so-and-so-and-so." All right, the taxi was there to take them. "Mrs. So-and-so-and-so, are you going to take three? Take four, take those." Taxi's there, get them all in. All right, when I'm getting on the fifth, the flrct- ones start coming hack, "Wasn't anybody there. I'm in a strange land; what do I do?" I'd take another one, maybe she would come and get two. Then somebody else would come up and say, "The woman said that she asked for four, you didn't send her but two." Then they got to get this, these two. They get them a place. I'll never be able to explain. Nobody but me to assign those rooms. Before I could get one group off, the first ones are coming back.
[We were supposed] to meet this woman in the lodge, and she was going to have it... She handles everything; all we had to do was... Two men—we had about four men and her husband went—and two extra men. The rest of them were women. So they went, three women, or say, two women. And I thought that was all. And it would take about an hour at the most to get that [done]. Just as soon as the taxis would them to a place, that was it, and I had already told them what time to be back.
Girl, when I got to my place, it was two o'clock in the day; I sat down to eat lunch, breakfast, and the telephone rang. "Mrs. Beulah Hester there?" I went to the phone. "Mrs. Hester, there just must have been a mistake, because I'm not going to stay here. I can't stay here." I said, "What's the trouble?" "I just, I can't stay here." I said, "Now listen, you came with me. You know what time you left me? You were one of the first ones. I sent you to one of the best homes. It's two o'clock. I just got here. I haven't had a mouthful to eat since this morning. Now you don't want to treat me like that. I'm doing the best I can. What else can I do? I'll tell you what you do, just try, just try to wait awhile and see, give me time to get myself together. You can't treat me like that. You are one of my best friends and if you're going to do me like that, what am I going to do? I've never been here before, just like you haven't. Now try and see. Won't you?" All of a sudden he said, "I'll tell you, I know it's hard on you, and it's hard on me. I don't know whether this lady can keep me or not. I'm with a French family, white French family. They never had any Negroes in their home." [I said,] "Now just be patient." He said, "All right. I'll try."
And girl, I'm telling you the truth. When I got through with those people, it was about three or half-past three. I got me a cup of coffee and I﻿65
BH: (cont.) went to bed. And as I live and breathe, about six o'clock I got up to go to the bathroom, and I couldn't walk any more than a newborn baby. I had to get down on my hands and knees and crawl in and crawl out. And some of my folks that I brought missed me and they came to take me out to dinner. I said, "Girl, I can't walk." "Oh, Mrs. Hester." I said, "Well, I'll tell you what to do. You go and get your dinner." They went to the restaurant, got my dinner. I'm telling you, it was the most touching thing I had ever had happen to me. I was in bed. They took a tray and put it on my bed, and they sat around on the floor, keep from leaving me alone. Couldn't walk. See, I'd been up all night, and then all day, up until that time. I went to bed, you see, no exercise. And they stayed with me until about seven. So the next day, I tried walking a little bit, just creeping. And I finally got up.
But I promised the folks that, if there was any way, any other way, when we went back the next year... There was bound to be some way. I got the name of a hotel manager, Laurentian Hotel, and I wrote them and told them. I asked the prices, how many people would be coming, I had made out the list of the people who were coming. They sent me back a room list and I did it that way from then on, no trouble. The first time I went I didn't know how to handle the money. I was scared to go shut my eyes, because they had given me their money on the bus. There was bound to be a better way. So I went down to the bank and told him there was a problem. There's got to be a better way, better than this. So the next time, I had them to bring them money. Then we had a charge account, put the money in the bank, and wrote them, and I gave them a certified check, no problem. No problem. But you see, I had to learn. Nobody told me that. So it was no problem, meals, and so on and so on. That's better than what I had done. I paid the bus company, paid the hotel by check.
So I had my ups and downs. But it was a beautiful trip, beautiful trip. Some of those people in Canada were so nice. Niagara Falls was a beautiful place. I really enjoyed it so much. It's a wonderful experience.
We went to the World's Fair and one of my ladies got lost. Did I tell you about that? We went to the World's Fair in New York City, just out from the city. And this one woman, I told her to pair off, you know, to never go off by herself, two or three go together. So we went through the city and it was out at the fairground. We were stopping at the Piccadilly in New York. So we had it all arranged just what time we were leaving and everything. I insisted on staying in groups. "Don't go off by yourself." I thought of everything, and I saw this lady... We were in the group, she was all right. We were to leave at ten o'clock at night. It would take us about an hour to get back to the city. And you know, when it was almost time for us to go, we couldn't find that woman to save our lives. We had two buses. I said, "Dear Lord, please help me now. Were could she be?" [We looked] everywhere, everywhere. We had the state police, the fair police. We had everybody helping us look for this woman. Minnie Butler—I never will forget her. The bus man was so nice and he said, "Mrs. Hester, I hate to say, I don't know what they're doing." I said, "Well, you can't keep all of these people﻿66
BH: (cont.) here." I said, "You take the group back to the Piccadilly, and I'll stay." Some of the ladies said, "Mrs. Hester, you're not staying any longer. We'll stay with them." About four or five of them stayed right there waiting. This bus driver said, "Now, I'm going to be in the lounge of the New Yorker. If you have any trouble, call me, and I'll get a taxi or get something, come out here and get you. Call me anyway. I'm going to stay down, I'll be down in the lounge. I'll stay down there until you call. If you have any trouble, don't try to break this thing open. I have to go back and take these people." I said, "No, I don't want you to keep all those people here. Take them back, and I'll stay. These five ladies will stay with me." Well, we searched and searched and searched. And you see, this group going home, it's about eleven—the doors close at ten, this group going about eleven. Another group stayed until eleven-thirty. Of course, everybody's supposed to be off the grounds by ten o'clock, and we were included in that. And you know, around eleven-thirty we saw some taxis go by, taxis come by and get the help, you know, that worked out there. This light would go out, and this light. We were sitting there, waiting for Minnie Butler. I didn't know what to do. I called the hotel, gave her room number. By that time I was having one fit after another, one fit after another. So we sat, all five of us, sat down together, and one little light. All the other part of the fairground was dark, and we were sitting there. And somebody said, "Mrs. Hester," I said, "What?" "Why don't you try the hotel again." I said, "I've tried it twice." Said, "Well, try it again." So I gave the number, Piccadilly Hotel, so and so and so and so. "Will you please ring room number 608." The person said, "Hello." I said, "May I speak to... Is Minnie Butler there?" "This is Minnie Butler speaking." I said, "Girl, I ought to throw this phone at you." "Well, Mrs. Hester, why?" "Are you asking me why? And here it is near twelve o'clock, and we're out at the fairground looking for you? Why didn't
you tell me___" "I...I...I didn't see you all, and I came out the other
way. I went out the wrong gate, and so I just took the bus and came home. I remember we lived at the Piccadilly." I said, "I don't even want to talk to you." "Mrs. Hester, don't be mad. Don't..." "I don't even want to talk to you." And I went back and told the others. All the taxis had gone... "How're we going to get back to..." I couldn't call Norma or Ben and have them come way out there, so we were standing there at the station and the good Lord sent a taxi by. One of the ladies said, "Taxi!" He said, "Yes, where to?" "Piccadilly Hotel." Of course, all the rates were off and everything, you know what I mean? That was after hours. So we just paid it. When we got through, I called Norma, told her we were all right. I hadn't had anything to eat. And then we said we'd go and get something to eat. Those ladies were so lovely to me. They said, "Mrs. Hester, we are not going to let you stay in your room." I had a private room. "We are not going to let you stay there alone. So you just go and get your things together and come on with us." They had two beds, and two of them slept together. They gave me the other one. "You stay right here, as nervous as you are." And that's where I went.
So when I went back a couple of years ago, talking about it, I said, "You all remember the fairground when Minnie Butler got lost?" Everybody just laughed, "Mrs. Hester, we'll never forget it." And the next morning, "Mrs. Hester, you're mad with me. Why?" "Don't speak to me, Minnie﻿67
BH: (cont.) Butler. Don't speak to me." "Mrs. Hester, please don't be mad with me. I didn't know what to do." I said, "Minnie, why didn't you look for us? Why didn't you ask the police? We were all around there. Why did you take the wrong bus? You know we had a chartered bus. Don't talk to me." "Mrs. Hester, please don't be mad at me. Please don't be mad." And we were out there, I don't know how many miles from New York, and she's home, getting ready to go to bed. Well, I'll tell you, I'll never forget Minnie Butler. Every time I go to Boston and I see her, "Mrs. Hester, you remember Minnie Butler?" I say, "Don't you say a thing to me, Minnie." But those are some of the experiences that you have in going around in groups. They come with this thing and that thing. There's supposed to be a mother and a grandmother and a great-grandmother with everything, a sister and all.
I told you about the time we went to see the play, Won't You Come Home, Bill Bailey? Who played in that? Well, anyway, they said, "Since we've never been to a theater, now you be sure to wait for us, because we're afraid that we might get lost." So we had charged seats, and came out of the theater, and I expected for them to wait downstairs until we all came down. Some came down. I said, "Where is everybody?" So I asked the doorman. He said, "You looking for some of the ladies?" So I said yes. Pearl Bailey, that was the show. Went to see Pearl Bailey. Won't You Come Home, Bill Bailey? Pearl...who's in it? The man said, "I saw some ladies right down there by that beer." I said, "What?" The ladies went out after a beer, to get them a beer, and I was standing up there waiting for them. You just had to go through a little bypass, like, you know, and get on tlhe next street. You didn't have to go all the way around the park, you know, just shoot right through there, and there's the hotel, next to the theater, right there. They said, "Mrs. Hester, we didn't think you would mind if we had a beer." I said, "No. But why didn't you let me know? I'm standing out there waiting for you all." So some of them didn't go, and some of them waited for me. I'm telling you, and I learned names of drinks that I never... Those old ladies... A bloody mary, Black-and-White, and all those names of drinks, you know, that I didn't know a thing about. They said, "Mrs. Hester, you ought to try..." I said, "I don't..." "Mrs. Hester, do you mind if we get one?" I said no. I went down to the restaurant, and all of them were in the back, you know, and then they found whatever they call it was back there. And child, I never heard of such things. I didn't know my ladies even knew about it. But they were calling for sweet-and-sours, or sour-and -sweet, or something. They had those bloody m.arys—I remember that name, and all kinds of drinks. They had a good time, they really did.
FB: You worked with black women, and you were a black woman. What did you think about the women's movement?
BH: I don't even talk about that, because I don't know enough about that.
See, my ideas are so different. It seems like to me that there are a lot of things women can do, and it seems like there are things that they should leave for men. I can't see it, I can't see a woman putting on machine courses, or going on an engine and working on that. I can't see that. They think they can be engineers; all that heavy stuff. Women try to do things, bring themselves down, engineers, doing all that kind of﻿68
BH: (cont.) thing. I don't see it, but I don't criticize, because I know I couldn't do it myself. Seems like to me that they ought to be able to adjust better than that, but I don't discuss it because I don't know enough about it, and I don't see it, that a woman must be equal, have equal rights, jobs. I don't think she's physically in a position to do some things.
FB: What do you think about the equal rights amendment?
BH: I don't know. What is that, for voting women? That's where I show
where, you know, I'm a back number on there, because I don't agree with them, and unless I have something better to offer, or as good, then I don't discuss it. Because they don't see as I see it, they can't make me see, and so I just don't discuss it, because I don't know.
FB: What about the earlier women's movement, the women's suffrage movement
and those kinds of things? Did von have any opinion about those?
BH: Carry Nation and those women fighting for—what was it—temperance movement? I think if a woman feels like she wants to drink, that's all right. I told you about my aunt, didn't I? Mother of her church? Didn't I tell you about that? 1 feel that if I could make any contribution.• Carry Nation, Women's Temperance Movement...
FB: Did you know black women who were involved in it?
BH: No. At that time I was too young for that, then later on I was too old for it, so I just sort of missed the mark.
FB: I want to ask you one final question, and that's about the civil rights movement now. I don't know the story straight, but Reverend Haynes mentioned something about Mrs. King having had contact with Twelfth Baptist while she was in Boston. I'm sure you all had some kind of contact with them, while they were in school there in Boston. What were you thinking about the civil rights movement and Dr. King?
BH: Well, when my husband was a pastor for Twelfth Baptist Church, he
attended the National Baptist Convention. I'm not sure of the place, but anyway, he met Dr. King, Sr. And he said to him, "Hester, I'm sending my boy up there, Martin Luther. I want you to look after him, watch over him, lead him; I put him in your care." So that when Martin Luther, Jr., came here, it seemed like it wasn't a question of telling him what to do. Here was a home for him. He came to our house any time he wanted to. You heard me speak about Jackie, and my other niece, her sister. We called her Sunshine. They were my nieces and they lived with us. She's now Mrs. Major Jones. And Jackie is Mrs. Lovelace. Now, those two girls were living with us, and of course, it was nice to have a young man to come around. So Martin Luther King used to come out to our house nearly every Saturday afternoon. The girls would be there; we'd have baked beans and chicken gizzards, cole slaw, pie or cake, and he'd just come to our home. He knew we were going to have a nice dinner. Then when Dr. King and his wife and daughter come up to see Martin, they would always have a meal with us. In between, Martin Luther would speak some-﻿69
BH: (cont.) times at the Twelfth, or different clubs and things like that. And his wife at that time she was a student, at Boston, [New England] Conservatory [of Music]. They would come sometime, and Dr. King, Sr., would bring the whole family and stop with us, and that was our relationship. He didn't jo in Twelfth; he would just, you know, fill in and speak sometimes when they were asked. Very close.
Now, this movement, you see, to my mind, Dr. King was nonviolent. He said, "If they smite you on one cheek, turn the other." But the people around me, in Massachusetts and other parts of the country, they said that was too easy, they couldn't, they couldn't let them in there, slap them on one cheek, turn the other. So while Dr. King was advocating nonviolence, the others, it was always, "They hit me, I'm going to hit them back." Now that's my impression. So that to my mind, it didn't accomplish what Reverend King had in mind. He would do it. He would march, and would be going forward with the people, and the people in the rear, they'd be fighting. That's the way I understand it. So they said, "I'm going to let nobody slap me around." And while Dr. King was praying, the other people were fighting in the rear, in great long lines. To my mind, they weren't quite ready for it. I mean, they weren't going to be submissive to what Dr. King said—while he was right—and let other people go around and fight and kick them burn them, and all like that. The thing for them to do, they thought, would be to fight. Now, that's my impression, and I don't feel that he got it over to them what he had in mind. They weren't quite ready. Now, when they were going to get ready, I don't know. He would speak well, but it was just hard for them. They hadn't been accustomed to it. They'd been sitting in the back seats for long time. You go from here to Washington in a Jim Crow car, and you're packed in there, and then four and five cars ahead of you, a few people. And then after you get to Washington, when you start up the other way, plenty of good seats. That's the way it was all the way down South. And they couldn't understand it. Now, all of a sudden, you want to change, and the white people didn't. They had oppressed you. They weren't quite ready for a change. How it was going to be done, I don't know. For instance, you come from Boston, to Washington, sit anywhere you want, and from Washington, just packed, stand up in a car, sometimes sitting on the end of the seat, and vacant seats ahead. Sometimes they let you go in there. That's pretty hard.
Now, for Martin Luther King to say, "Now if somebody [strikes you..."] Oh, I can understand it, I can understand it. They weren't quite ready for it. And Martin Luther King's doctrine was proved, but I don't think they were quite ready. Some people are quick tempered, and all like that. Of course, I'd been used to riding Jim Crow all my life, and I hated like everything to have to change, when I'd go from Boston to Oxford, change in Washington, sit there all cramped up. I was hoping a brighter day was coming, but I didn't see where it was. I just couldn't assume the responsibility. Maybe I was chicken, I don't know.
FB: Were you glad when things changed?
BH: Yes, I was glad. I was glad. We've been waiting so long. Say, "Well, we've waited long enough. We're not going to wait any longer. We're going to do it now." And the black people just got excited. "We're not﻿70
BH: (cont.) going to do it any more, we waited long enough." And it went
back to slavery, slavery, slavery, and all like that. But that's true, too, for everybody. I used to hear my grandma tell about the terrible time that they had in slavery. But everybody didn't have it. Her master was just as good to them as he could be. They knew that they were going to be free long before. And he gave them an option, "Stay with me and I'll pay you a salary, or you can go."
Then when Martin Luther King came up, "Let's do it right now. We're going to march right now." I just don't know. And they weren't quite ready for it. Now, how long it's going to take them to get ready, I don't know. Then you see, some of the white people were ill tempered, and so were the black. And if you say anything, they feel that you are against Martin Luther King. Some of the whites hated it, too, that situation. Some of them felt that they shouldn't have done it.
But you hear it now, that there are some little communities where the white and black,get on beautifully together. I heard last week of a community. They all had nice homes. They all take an interest in their garden, and their yard. There are not too many people there. They have a nice time. Some people, you couldn't even hear of that. Then they'd go back to what they used to do, and that's what makes animosity, to my mind, between the races. And how they can overcome it in a year, or a few years. Oh, it will be fifty years, will be sixty years, be seventy years, and all like that. That's long enough, waited long enough. I've heard them tell me that. "I waited long enough, I'm not going to wait any longer. Now I think that spirit was promoted or perpetuated more by the war, you know. It just got that spirit of going to fight, anyway.
FB: Which war that that?
BH: I mean this last one.
FB: The Vietnam war?
BH: Yes. All of them. They were perpetuating those things. Vietnam, especially. You see, in the First World War, they came back, and they gave the soldiers their rights, they give them a good job. But this new Negro who came back, he was different. He didn't take it like the rest of them. They suffered much, as I understand. A lot of the white people got a chance to pay back some of the Negroes during the war. And the Negro did the same thing. If they got a chance to shoot a white man, they'd shoot him down. That's what they tell me.
Our group used to go down to the station. We had breakfast for them during the war, Friendship Club, we served breakfast for them—I think I told you that. Waldorf Astoria, we would buy pots of coffee, and dozens, oh, I don't know how many dozens of doughnuts. Serve 'em doughnuts and coffee. The spirit was different when they came back. They had more animosity, more emnity, more something. And everybody was touchy. The boys would come back to town, and the colored boys got a chance to vindicate some of the things that the whites had done. Then, you see, each person had so much animosity in him, they wanted to get it out. The whites had some-﻿71
BH: (cont.) thing against the blacks, blacks had something against the
whites. So that it's a terrible thing. War is a terrible thing. The scars are hard to heal. Every time you think you are getting ahead, somebody goes back to "What they did to my grandma. My grandma..." That raises up animosity all over again. You can't forget. And you can go back and back.
I remember when I was at the orphanage, I had charge of the music down there, and one Sunday, the teacher said, I didn't ever teach a class unless someone was absent. But I was sitting in the class, and the lesson was on love. And after the teacher said, "Mrs. Hester, do you have anything to say?" I said, "I don't know, Mrs. Teacher, I think it's been very well explained. I wonder if the children realize what the lesson is about, love one another, love your enemies, love those that spite you." I said, "I wonder if they know that." One boy said, "I don't know what it means. Does it mean love the white folks, too? It doesn't mean to love white foks." I said, "What did the white folks do?" He said, "They didn't do anything to me, but look what they did to my grandma." I said, "Who told you?" I said, "Well, listen, my grandmother was a slave, too, but she didn't ever tell us... I don't say it didn't happen, but she didn't have any resentment against her masters. She said that they were very good to her, and they knew, the people on his plantation, that they were freed before the others. And he'd give them anything that they wanted, within reason. They were freed before the other slaves. They gave them their wages. Told them, 'As long as you work for me, I'll give you so much,' and as times improved, they increased the salary." Now, this boy, he was about twelve, eleven years old, and he was telling me, "It doesn't mean to love white folks." "Why?" "Look
what they did to my___" "Your grandma," I said, "boy, I'm almost old
enough for your grandma myself." They didn't hear me. And, "Why do you think that this passage, this Scripture, doesn't mean for you to love the whites? Love everybody." I couldn't convince the boy from the time that I had him, that loving everybody meant loving white folks. So just as in other things, I gave up the discussion, because I couldn't convince him. He'd put up some argument to me. I told him that was a long time ago. "I know it was a long time ago. What do you expect us to do about it, Mrs. Hester? Wait for the white folks to change their standards? And they started way back then, and we've got to love them." They had me stumped. I don't know. This thing was so embedded in them. I heard of some atrocities, of some atrocities that they had. Everybody heard of them. But right now, 1967, 1969, this boy was telling me, "What you going to do?"
FB: You said you heard of some atrocities. Did you hear about lynchings?
BH: Oh, yes. There were lynchings right here.
FB: Did you ever see anybody lynched, or hear about anybody?
BH: No, I heard my grandmother say things. There were some masters, they're so mean to their... Some lady would be knitting, she'd be knitting and she had some maids. She'd be knitting, and she'd just have this woman get down on the floor and put her hands down on the floor, and this﻿72
BH: (cont.) woman just rocked back and forth until she was just bleeding.
I said, "Grandma, why'd she do that?" "Just mean, that's all." "But did you ever..." "No," she said, "Judge Gilliam didn't ever do things like that." But she said, "Maybe that boy's grandmother had told them... But I didn't ever hear it." And I could... I mean, so far as the race is concerned, I don't think they did right, but I couldn't just pick out one, one white person, and hate you because of what you did to my grandmother. Because if I went by that, my grandmother said they fared better than any of the servants around.
Now, that's what she told me. They'd ask him, "Could we go so and so and so..." He said, "Do what you like." Others said that they couldn't even go to prayer meeting. Slipping and sliding. So it's hard for me to judge on an individual basis. And I'd hate all white people because the black people hated all white people because of what they did to their grandparents. I feel for the general, but specifically I couldn't do that. You know, Judge Gilliam, his parents just as nice as they could be. They helped my mother to go to school Anything they'd ask, they would help. Now, why should I turn against all white people? Some people say, "Why do you say that, Beulah? How did Judge Gilliam treat your grandmother?" Well, I say, "He was very nice to them. As a race." "Well, how do you know? Your grandmother didn't tell it to you. You don't know what happened." Some of them were very nice, but I can't say they all were. You know they did this, did that. All right. And I can't defend them. So, all those things, I don't know what to say. Some were just as kind. Kindness begets kindness. Now I know that's old-fashioned. You go find anybody that believes that. But I don't feel that, I don't feel that way, against all white people.
Of course, some of them...and some Negroes, they do it to each other. How are you going to fathom that? It's hard to live with it... If one gets a better job than another, all turn on this one. I don't know. This is a problem. Then you think, and the Negroes are not the only ones. You find, one race of people, when they love everybody, going to have something. Look at the massacre of the Jews. You just mention it, and they go back and tell everyone all those Jews were killed. You remember that time when they killed the Jews? They're not going to forget it. And why do they expect for Negroes to forget? When Negroes remind them of what you did, the white people don't want them to say it. They don't want to hear it, because they didn't do it, and they say, "We're not responsible for what our parents did." That's what the white people say. The Negroes say, "We're not responsible for what our children do." And if some way we could kind of equalize things, I don't know. That's too much for me.
Now, you speak about this education. If they arrange it so that they all can go to school. They'll have some way for the whites to get a better schooling. If they don't, they'll make the examination so hard, they can't make it. And there are plenty of whites that can't make it. So how're you going to equalize it? If you put the examinations, put it up higher, then there are whites that can't reach, Negroes that can't reach it. You bring it down, bring it down too low, so that the children don't learn anything. Like some schools, children say, "All the teacher can do is to keep order. Some can't keep order." Now, how﻿73
BH: (cont.) you going to teach them? Then there are schools from the time that the teacher strikes the door, she so stimulates the class. She has something interesting each day, starts off with a quotation or something. They wonder, "What's coming next?" Each day, black and white. But some white teachers, I imagine don't feel like being bothered with black children. And I guess black parents say the same thing. "She'd better not look at you." What do you want them to look at, not going to take anything. We go to school, go to school with the idea of fighting. "We're going to do this for the blacks, and we're going to do this for the whites." And they don't do them. You see, a new race is being formed. They don't take anything.
On the other hand, I remember my grandmother saying that they were going to lynch a man right here in Oxford. Somebody dropped a paper in the post office, "We understand that you white folks are going to lynch (they called the man's name) tonight. This is to let you know that if you do so, you'll do so by the light of this town." Dropped it in the post office about nine o'clock in the morning. And by three, every white man in Oxford knew what had happened. By the time they went down to the jail to get this man, this black man to lynch him, see... Told him, "I understand, one man, black man, said... I understand that you said that I was heading this way... And I understand that you said that I was in the gang for the lynching." And he said, "If you did, if you said it, I'm going to put that bullet in your head." He said, "No, don't put it in my head; here," (over his chest). He said, "But I said it, I saw you, looking at you with my own two eyes. Now if you want to put a bullet, don't put it in my head. Put it right here." My grandmother said they walked away. No fighting.
I don't know. Now there I am going back. But history repeats itself, and it seems as if we got to get farther than we are, so that we'll know how to combat these things. I don't know. They go back; there I am going back. But I hope I don't have the animosity in my heart that exists in some. Some won't even let you talk about it. "Don't tell me about white folks." I don't even want to hear it. I don't agree with a thing they say." Well, the whites say all the Negroes are the same. Now who believes in the other? Then you start talking about, "I know one so and so and so, and he did so and so and so, and he'd do it again if he had a chance." And that's the situation. Now the preachers, they're doing their part, but I don't know. Teach them love, and then their own love sometimes is lagging far behind. There's not but one way in my mind, and that's to pray, "and he that seeketh, finds. Seek and ye shall find. Knock and the door shall be opened. Everybody that seeketh, finds. To him that knocketh, the door shall be opened." Now what about all those advantages? Somebody was seeking, and you know they'll certainly be knocking at the door. Keep on seeking—that's my advice to the young Negroes and whites. Keep on seeking. There's no royal road to success, got to keep floods and flames, got to keep fighting. I don't know. I don't see any other way.﻿