Marcia Greenlee:
Arline Yarbrough: Marcia Greenlee:
Arline Yarbrough: Marcia Greenlee: Arline Yarbrough:
Marcia Greenlee:
Arline Yarbrough:
This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Arline Yarbrough. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Yarbrough's home, 1303 1st Street, Kirkland, Washington 98033. The interviewer is Marcia Greenlee.
Mrs. Yarbrough, has your career been mainly inside or outside your home, or both?
Oh, it's been outside my home.
So do you regard yourself as a professional woman rather than a housewife and mother primarily?
Primarily a businesswoman and homemaker.
A businesswoman.
...in the field of business, as a secretary most of the time.
Let's begin to talk something about your family background. Where were you born and when?
I was born June 14th, 1912, in a little community of Swink, Colorado. Swink is near Pueblo,and my family moved from there when I was a baby, just about two, I think, and we took up residence in Salt Lake City, Utah. So I remember nothing about Swink.
Marcia Greenlee:
Arline Yarbrough:
Except that you know you were born there. All right, could you tell me something about your father, what was his name and what was his background?
My father was Samuel Steward. He was born in Tennessee and he came to Colorado as a very young man, a boy probably. I know very little of the background of either my mother or father. I didn't know my grandparents, and most of what I know about our early childhood and my parents has come from older sisters. My dad was a very energetic and ambitious young man. He and my mother married, I used to say, when they were kids; my dad was almost ten years older than my mother, but my mother was scarcely sixteen when she married, and they had thirteen children. I was the tenth of the thirteen. The firstborn, Sammy, died during an epidemic of scarlet fever.﻿2
MG:	I see. Now what part of Tennessee did your father come from?
AY:	I'm not sure, I just don't know. 'Cause it seems to me if it had been
Memphis, I probably would have remembered it.
MG:	Do you know about what time he came to Colorado from Tennesee?
AY:	Well, it must have been before 1900; yes, it would have had to have
been before 1900, because my oldest brother was born in 1900, so it probably could have been as early as 1895.
MG:	And what about your mother, what was her name?
AY:	Her name was Mary Alice Steward. Sexton was her maiden name. She
was known as Alice Steward. She was born in Colorado. I think she was born in Swink, and lived there and in Pueblo until she went to Salt Lake City.
MG:	Do you know how her parents came to be in Colorado?
AY:	No, I don't. She had two half brothers, and the grandmother that
my sisters remember, they called her Ma. Let's see now, I don't know if she was the...she was my mother's mother, but not the half brothers' mother. And she was French Canadian, and she lived in Canada most of the time, and I remember stories of my older sister telling about how excited they'd be when Ma was coming tc visit, so evidently she didn't live in Colorado, at least not for long periods of time. She would come there occasionally for a visit, and I suppose bringing gifts, you know children would remember that.
MG:	Do you know about when your mother and father were born?
AY:	I don't remember offhand, but I could certainly find that out
easily enough.
MG:	All right, maybe we could add that later.
AY:	I could add that later.
MG:	What are some of your earliest childhood memories? I guess you
remember growing up then in Salt Lake City?
AY:	Yes, I remember Salt Lake City as my childhood days and home. Of course,
Salt Lake City was and still is a Mormon community, which meant that it was sort of a clannish type community, prejudiced against Negroes, at least in our estimation. Though black people seemed to think so, the Mormons don't...
MG:	The Mormons don't?
AY:	No. They don't admit to the segregation and discrimination which
existed prior to World War II, for example, in the restaurants and in the stores. As a matter of fact, I was sixteen years old and had moved to Seattle before I ever knew what it was like to sit at a counter in a drugstore just to have a soda. It was just something﻿3
AY:	(cont) we didn't do. There were very few restaurants that would
serve Negroes. There was a black man in Salt Lake who had a small hotel where blacks stayed when they had to be there overnight. It was the railroad men, really, who kept the hotel, I guess, in business because there were not that many tourists coming through Salt Lake to want a hotel. One or two Chinese restaurants, little places, would serve Negroes. Other than that we just didn't eat out. Even at the five-and-ten cent stores, the counters were segregated, so it was not a happy situation. I suppose my childhood was not what I'd call a happy one, but somehow or another then it never occurred to me to think of myself as being unhappy. Being in a large family, we were not lonely and there were a few black families there, and we had a black church. In fact before I left there, there were three black churches, a Methodist and two Baptist churches.
My parents were founders of Calvary Baptist Church, and all our family were raised in that church. We often think back and laugh and say they should have called that the Steward Baptist Church because there were so many of us. Without our family, there wasn't much of a church service. I remember when an older sister was superintendent of the Sunday school, and the next children in line would be the teachers, and the youngsters would be the students. Then after Sunday school we'd go into church service, we'd all go into the choir and that made up the choir. And at the times that the church was without a pastor, somebody in our family seemed to be conducting a service of some kind. But we were kept quite close to the church. Of course, there were very few social activities anyway, so this was really our only outlet for social contacts. And black people lived in most sections of Salt Lake City. There was not what you'd call a black district or ghetto, and we went a good little distance to church. We had to go on the bus or streetcar and transfer before we got to church. But it was vary important to us. In the worst kind of weather we always managed to get to church and Sunday school. We'd go in time for Sunday school in the morning, and then of course stay for church, and then often went back in the evenings for young people's meeting, BYPU,* and then stay for the evening service. So Sunday was a day in church, and in the summertime, usually the church would end up at our house—we had a big house and a large yard. I guess it was the typical old-fashioned kind of gathering, always plenty of food. We'd make a freezer of ice cream and that sort of thing, you know.
MG:	What was your father's employment?
AY:	My dad was a laborer in Colorado until he became the first black
policeman in Pueblo. And I have learned in recent years, through research in Colorado for the black museum there, that my dad is credited with being the first black man to register and vote in the county. And when he moved to Salt Lake City, he went as a laborer to build the state capitol in Salt Lake City. That was his first job. Later he was employed by the city of Salt Lake City, and he supervised what then
* Baptist Young People's Union﻿4
AY:	(cont) were called comfort stations. You probably don't know what
they are, Marcia, but you see, in those days they didn't have automobiles,
so there were no service stations, so you had to have public restrooms and there were several scattered throughout the city of Salt Lake. So he had the job of supervising two of those, and he did the hiring. One for men and one for women, and so he worked at that. And while it was the typical Negro kind of job and not what we think of as having a very important position these days, it was the kind of job that put him in the position to meet a lot of influential people. And, as I say, he was his own boss, and he was in the position to hire my brothers to help him there. You see, as they came along, each in turn worked with him, took a shift to relieve him and so on. So it wasn't all bad. I often wonder sometimes, how did he stand it, but he did, and we girls took turns in the women's comfort station, each in turn as we became old enough to do this.
MG:	What kind of employment was generally open to black people in Salt Lake
City?
AY:	Just laborers, and most of the men worked on the railroad. And of
course in those days there weren't many, probably, oh, I would guess, maybe twenty or thirty families at that time.
MG:	That lived in the city.
AY:	That lived in the city, black families, well, maybe up to fifty because
we did have, as I say, the churches there. It continued to grow very gradually until during the war, like most cities in the West, then there was an influx of population.
MG:	Did you ever hear why it was that your father left Tennessee for Colorado?
AY:	No, I never did. Somehow in my mind, I'm thinking whether anyone
told me or not, but he must have been orphaned as a young boy, and he just struck out on his own with a brother, Louis. Why Colorado? I don't know, but he had an older sister, he had two sisters, and I guess those are the only relatives that I know anything about of Dad's family. My mother had an aunt whom I remember vaguely. She died when I was a little girl, Aunt Lai, and she lived with our family until she died. She was the sister, evidently, of this Grandma or Ma that I was speaking of, and my sister Doris looks just like her.
MG:	What spurred the move from Colorado to Salt Lake? Did you ever hear
why it was the family moved?
AY:	I really don't know why, unless there might have been some possibility
of better employment opportunities there. I just can't imagine Salt Lake City being better than any place else. [laughter] I don't have a very high estimation of Salt Lake City, you see. Evidently there must have been some opportunities there that made a man pick up a family that size and move. I really don't know exactly why.
MG:	now you said earlier that you were the tenth of thirteen children.
Could you tell me your brothers' and sisters' names in the order, birth order?﻿5
AY:	Yes, I'll start with the oldest one then. The oldest one was a
brother, Samuel, who died in infancy. Willis is the interesting character of our family, a nonconformist. He left home when he was quite a young man, I would say he might have been even still in his teens. Now he was a kind of wanderlust type, and he was always attracted to the Indians and wherever there were horses, and he actually was adopted into an Indian tribe, and they gave him the name of Buck Chuana. He was a kind of storybook hero to all of us kids. When he would come home, he would sit and tell us stories, and many of them, of course, were madeup, but they were the kinds of things that he knew that children liked to hear, and I remember him telling us about the Red River bandit, and of course his experiences as a cowboy and a rodeo . rider. He became a veterinarian, treating horses, never licensed, but I understand that he was really a very good veterinarian and he was good at training horses, and rode in rodeos. He never lived at home any "more after I was old enough, really, to remember, and sometimes we wouldn't hear from him for several years, then all of a sudden he'd show up some place, either at my oHider sister's home or he'd come back to our house. But he was quite a character and a hero in the eyes of the younger children. Then the next one was Ethel, Ethel Goins...
MG:	That's her married name?
AY:	That's her married name. She married a fellow named Eddis Goins who
was from Arizona, and they moved to Idaho and made their home in Pocatello, Idaho. That still is really her home, although she lives with a daughter in Los Angeles now. Then Thelma, she became Mrs. Clarence Beridon.
MG:	What was the last name?
AY:	B-E-R-I-D-O-N. And then Blanche, she became Mrs. John H. Hamilton.
Then Doris, she became Mrs. Reginald R. Frye. And after Doris was a brother Edward—oh wait, before Doris was a brother Ted. Theodore Steward and then Doris and then Ed Steward or Edward. Then came Susie, who became Mrs. Percy McVey, and I was next, Arline Steward, became Mrs. Letcher L. Yarbrough. Then a brother, Louis Steward, a sister, Ardell Steward, who is now Mrs. Durwood Moore, and our baby sister was Melva Steward. What in the heck was her married name? She died right after she married. What was Earl's name? Humph, I'll have to give it to you later.
MG:	All right, we'll get it later.
AY:	Now some of these others are deceased now, and I don't know whether
you're...
MG:	You said that your family, of course, was very important for your
social life and activities and the rest. Were there any others of your siblings that you were especially close to, or that you shared interests with? You mentioned Willis and his role in the family.﻿6
AY:	Yes, well of course in our family, there were a variety of
personalities and likes and dislikes, and of course when we all get together, one of our favorite pastimes is telling stories as we remember about each other and anybody who did something amusing or something very nice...and most of my brothers, as I remember, were pretty good at teasing. They liked to tease. And of course my dad nicknamed all of us. I think this was an interesting thing in our family. For example, my oldest brother who was Willis was always called Booster. We never called him Willis; I never heard anybody ever call him Willis. I don't remember that Ethel had a nickname that really stuck, it seems to me the older ones called her Sis, and then Thelma was Puss, and Doris was Hunk, H-U-N-K, or Dode. And actually Susie was never really named Susie. That was her nickname, she was Wilma Alice. We never called her anything but Susie. Dad started calling her Susie because there was a very dear friend of our family who was Susie and wanted this baby named after her. Mother never consented to name the baby after her, but she might just as well have, 'cause that's all we ever called her was Susie. Then let's see who came... well, of course the boys were Ed for Edward and Ted for Theodore. Louis, my younger brother, we used to call Lum, Ardell is Dell, and the baby sister was Pud. And I have the choice nickname of them all. Snit. And you're too young to know what a snit was, and I was almost grown before I ever knew it. I knew that as a youngster I didn't like that nickname, but when I was a little older, someone asked me, "Do you know what a snit is?" And I said, "No." Well it seems that a snit was a small glass of beer about the size, as I understand, it must have been like one of these little cheese glasses. In the saloons in those days, they would give the men one of those little glasses of beer as a chaser when they bought a glass of whiskey, so the snit was the chaser. And because it was small, I guess because they served beer in these great big schooners, but this was just a little snit of beer. I was always the runt of the family and my dad called me Snit because I was small, and I never knew what it meant, as I said, until I think I was a senior in high school and someone told me that. I didn't like the nickname, but after being away from my family for a good many years and not hearing it for a long, long time, suddenly I started hearing that nickname again, and do you know, it was just like music to my ears. I got so I just loved it when anybody called me Snit. [laughter ] And I had nieces and nephews who would call me Aunt Snitty, and I used to think that was just wonderful. [laughter] So I had what I think was really the choice nickname of the bunch.
MG:	What are your memories of your mother?
AY:	My mother was a very beautiful person, beautiful in every respect, and
every sense of the word. One of my most cherished possessions is a small picture of her as a little girl. Actually, what I have now is a reprint from an old old tintype, taken when she was maybe six or eight years old in Colorado. One year I took that old tintype, and I had enough reproductions made to give each of my sisters and brothers one at Christmas time. And it was just, oh, I guess a few years before my dad passed away, we were looking at that picture, and she's in a little blue dress and high buttoned shoes and oh, she just looked so cute. And I said to Dad, "You know, her little cheeks are so fat and chubby, wasn't she a cute little thing?" And Dad said, "Well.﻿7
AY:	(cont) you know what that is, she wasn't that chubby in the face. She
was crying because Ma had made her get dressed up and go have this picture taken and someone, to stop her crying, gave her a couple of jawbreakers and she had both of them in her mouth at the same time." And when he told me that, I could look and you just see these little chubby cheeks as jawbreakers, [laughter] So it always amused me to think that even Mother was a typical child; you know we sometimes forget that our parents were children too.
But she was just a beautiful person and I often wonder how in the world she ever learned all the things she knew. Marrying when she did at the age of fifteen or sixteen, naturally she didn't have very much formal education. She probably finished what is comparable now to our eighth grade, seventh or eighth grade maybe. She read well and wrote beautifully, and she was really quite a brilliant woman. She loved music, had a nice singing voice, she was usually director of the choir, and had a way with young people that was just unbelievable. All the young people whenever they came to Salt Lake were always attracted to our home and she became the mother to one more, one more, and one more, and everybody who knew her called her Mama just like we did. She could sew. She made our clothes. I don't know where in the world she ever learned to sew. She knew first aid. We had the services of a doctor rarely, she always knew what to do for us. And a most wonderful cook; she could make bread and pies and cakes and cook in such large quantities you know, for a big family, and not only for our family, but no matter who came, there was always enough food for everybody. And I just marvel at how she managed to get all of us kids dressed and fed and off to school and what have you.
I remember she used to like for me to go to school with curls, my hair was quite long, down on my shoulders, and before I'd go to school in the morning she would brush my hair and she'd make curls around her finger, wetting the hair, brush curls. They started out about so high. By the time I got to school, and my hair dried, they'd be down on my shoulders. And oh, I'd squirm and I'd twist and I'd yell, and the more I'd yell the harder she'd comb, and if I got too out of control I'd get a whack on the seat with a hairbrush, and she'd say, "I told you to comb out your hair and braid it last night," and of course I hadn't, and it was all snarled and...how in the world she had the patience to stand it, I don't know. I certainly didn't inherit any of that.
She was truly a beautiful person and she died a relatively young woman, before she was seventy, but she had certainly lived a full and beautiful life. Aside from her church work, I guess her only outside activities were the Eastern Star, and Dad was quite an active Mason and Odd Fellow, so they enjoyed their lodge work, and they'd go to Grand Lodge in Colorado and Wyoming and the states around there. And of course it was always a real occasion when any of those groups would meet in Salt Lake. That's the only time we'd see any other black people, and so it was nice that they had that contact. I guess that was— besides raising her family—just about it. She kept well versed on what was going on, and oh, she had a beautiful sense of humor, just beautiful. When my brother Ted's wife died of childbirth, my mother raised one more child. Her grandson, Teddy. There was always room for one more in the house; it was just beautiful.﻿8
MG:	Let's talk a little bit about your formal education. You began school
in Salt Lake City, but you must have gone to an integrated school, or you integrated the school...
AY:	Well, it wasn't segregated, of course, because there were not enough
blacks there to say that it was segregated; it was just discrimination, really. Yes, I went to public school there, but the only other black children I ever went to school with, except sisters and brothers, until I enrolled in junior high school, were two black girls from other parts of the city who were in junior high the same time I was. Other than that, it always was just my own sisters and brothers, until I came to Seattle at high school age.
MG:	How were you treated, how did the other children react to you, and the
teachers and so on?
AY:	Just about the way you might expect. I think the thing that I remember
most about it was that...of course, I have to back up just a little bit to tell you this. We moved from one home to another in Salt Lake, just about the time I was about to start school. We moved to an area where no black people had ever lived, and my dad bought this big house on the corner and the little house next to it. Dad was a very farsighted person. He realized that there might be some problems there, so he got both houses so we wouldn't have any close neighbors to fight with. The place on the other side of us was a vacant lot, so he bought both houses, and I might just say that he bought them with Liberty bonds. Can you believe buying two houses with about $500 worth of Liberty bonds? So being the first blacks in the neighborhood, of course, this in itself was very startling to our white neighbors and friends. We used to fight our way to school, we'd fight our way home for lunch, we'd fight our way back to school, fight our way home, and we didn't dare strike out one at a time, we'd have to go to school in pairs or more. This is one thing that my mother and dad (I have to just admire them so for) used to say, "Now you have as much right living here as anybody else, you hare as much right in that school, and you don't have to take any abuse from anybody." We were cautioned not to fight unless we had to in self-defense. There were many times when we wished we could have. But these little devils (white children), when they knew that we would fight back, they'd stand way up on their porches, and as we'd walk by they'd stand up there and yell, "Nigger, nigger, nigger," all that, where you couldn't get hold of them. The next time we'd catch them out on the street, we'd teach them a lesson.
And so I learned a pretty good art of self-defense as a young girl. The teachers, of course, some were better than others, but for the most part I feel that their attitude was just sort of, "Well, she's here and so I'll have to put up with it." You know, never aiy special kind of help was offered. I can remember when we'd go out for recess or to play games, sometimes even the teacher would manipulate to get as far from you as she could, so when you made the circle and had to take hands, nobody would take your hand, you'd stand out there with your hand outstretched and nobody would take it. Maybe the next year you'd get a teacher who was a little bit more broad-minded, and she would make it a point to stand next to you and take﻿9
AY:	(cont) your hand, so that the youngster on the other side thought,
"Well, if the teacher can do it, I can do it too." But there were plenty of times when that would happen, and I got so I would just remove myself from the circle somehow, you know, rather than to have this happen. Of course when we'd fight, sometimes the kids would tell their parents, and then that would be reported to the teacher and rarely would they take our side. About the best we could ever expect from them, was to say, "Well, you know you mustn't fight," that sort of thing, you know. Sometimes they'd call my mother or ask her when she could come to school. Well my mother, with small children at home, was not one who could be picking up and going to school every time one of the kids got into trouble. So it was usually one of the older sisters and brothers who would have to answer these calls, and Mother would tell them what to say. "Well, you tell them when they stop calling my children names, or stop attacking them, I'll tell my children to stop fighting back." She would take our side, and sometimes if we were a little bit overaggressive, we'd catch the dickens for it, but never in front of the others. She'd take our side in front of the white parents or teachers. After they'd gone, she would lecture us.
MG:	How many grades did you complete in Salt Lake?
AY:	I finished junior high school there and then came to Seattle for
high school.
MG:	Do you remember the names of your schools?
AY:	Yes, I went to Whittier Elementary School and South Junior High,
and then when I was ready for high school, that year my sister Blanche who a few years before had moved to Seattle, looking for better opportunities... She had finished high school in Salt Lake and no jobs, nothing available, no social life, nothing at all, and so somehow or another she managed to get away from the family and she came to Seattle. She wrote back and asked Mother to let me come here to Seattle to live with her, and promised that she would see that I had an education and that all my needs would be met. And of course it took a bit of doing, there were a lot of family councils, and I'm sure my mother went through some very bad times with Dad about it, because he was one of those people who believed there was no place like home. Other children could come to our house, for example, and stay overnight with us, but never could any of us ever go to any other child's house and stay overnight. He'd always say, "You got a bigger house than they have, you tell them to come over here." So home was the place where we were supposed to be as far as he was concerned. But I did get here to live with my sister, and she married here in Seattle to John Hamilton, whom you probably have heard of as Doc Hamilton. Well, I'm pretty sure that had this been known before I came here, or if my parents had known about Hamilton before I came here, I never would have gotten here, but they didn't know that and I have some very warm feelings about Doc. I can't honestly say I have any great admiration for him. In fact, there are times that I think of him as being anything but a pleasant, desirable kind of person, but he did do the best he could for me.﻿10
MG:	What year was this that you came?
AY:	That was 1928. And he allowed my sister to do for me; they were good
to me, both of them, very good to me, and he was as anxious as she was to see that I got a good education. He was not a very successful businessman in that he had no business sense. He must have made at some time or another almost a fortune, but it would get out of his hands as fast as he'd make it, one of those kind of things, and I think that there were probably hundreds of black men who have done that same thing because they had no business background. He had a charming personality, just the kind of personality that a person operating a restaurant should have; he drew people to him, but he was just a good-time kind of person who never learned that you don't have to give the shirt off your back to keep people coming to your business. He'd give away to people who could afford to give to him, and should have been giving to him—oh, maybe some of the public officials and people like that, you know. He'd want to play the big shot. He'd say, "Don't pay your bills, that's all on the house." It was kind of sad, really, when you stop and think of it. But he was an interesting personality, and as I say, in many ways he was a generous person, maybe generous to a fault, and I think for what he knew and his background, he was the best kind of husband to my sister that he knew how to be. I would hate to have been married to him. In his way, he was trying, and I think that my sister understood this; I think that she loved him and I think he loved her. But it was just a different kind of situation in those days, people put certain values on things that they don't think about now, so he was quite a personality around Seattle and I think all the old-timers, black and white, will always remember Doc Hamilton.
MG:	Which high school did you attend here?
AY:	Garfield High.
MG:	What were your experiences there?
AY:	Oh, I loved it, I just loved it from the first day that I enrolled
in Garfield, because this was the first time, you see, that I gone to school with black children. I had heard from people in Salt Lake who had come from the South about black schools, all-Negro schools, and I used to sit and listen to them and think, oh, it must just be like heaven. And so when I came to Garfield, I guess there must have been thirty, maybe fifty black students at Garfield, and oh, I really loved it, I enjoyed life. I often say, well, I probably wasn't the best student academically, but I think I was the happiest. I just had a really good time, and then from Garfield I enrolled in Washington State College. Of course during my years at Garfield, I had almost forgotten about all this prejudice and discrimination, you see, because we lived in a kind of a small circle of friends, and stayed with them; you went to certain places and didn't run into this discrimination. I'm not saying that it wasn't in Seattle, but we﻿11
AY:	(cont) didn't get into it as boys and girls. So when I went to
Pullman and ran into it, it was just like being suddenly tossed right back into Salt Lake City.
MG:	This was about 1932?
AY:	This was in '31.
MG:	'31.
AY:	And we had preregistered, of course, and all the freshman girls had
been assigned to their dormitory and their rooms, and I had been assigned to a room with three other girls. It was a suite of rooms; there were three rooms, two bedrooms and a center room for study. When the housemother saw who I was when I got there, why, I had already been taken to the room and met the girls I was to room with, and we were just getting acquainted, and I was getting ready to unpack my things. I was told by the girls, this is your bed and this is your desk. Everything would have been just lovely. The housemother called me to her office and went on to say I couldn't share that room.
MG:	Did she say why?
AY:	Well, of course always avoiding saying because you're a Negro, and
of course, even at that age I had sense enough to know that this is what she was trying to say, so she wanted to know if I would go to another dormitory. I think this is what she was suggesting, or she'd find another place for me to live, and I think what she was suggesting probably was a room off campus. Because the only other minorities on that campus at that time were two Indian girls, and a black man who lived in Moscow, Idaho, who was getting his master's and he didn't live on campus. These Indian girls lived in a little house in downtown Pullman, so I think this was probably what this housemother was hinting at, I'd have to get off campus. So I told her I couldn't do anything without talking to my sister, and so I called Blanche, and I don't know everything that was said, but she talked to her. So after she had talked to Blanche, she said, "Well, we'll arrange for you to stay here in the dormitory." This was Stevens Hall, and do you know, she put a senior girl out of her private room to make a room for me.
MG:	So that you would be alone.
AY:	So that I would be alone. And this-, of course, was just something
unheard of for a freshman girl. There weren't a half dozen private rooms in the whole building, and of course the senior girls were issued those rooms on the basis of scholarship. The housemother talked that girl out of that room, and I had a front room, it was right at the front of the building, it was a choice room, no question about that. But it never occurred to her how lonely a girl that age away from home and all of her family and friends for the first time could be. And it was a lonely time. The girls with whom I would have roomed turned out to be my best friends, and whenever they were going anywhere, they would usually let me know and we'd all go together. Occasionally I went down to their room and we'd study﻿12
AY:	(cont) together. I did	play on the basketball team for that
dormitory, and we were a	champion team that year, so that kind of
helped to make me a bit	of a heroine, shall we say, that year, with
all the other girls, and	the housemother finally did warm up.
But as I started to say, the depression hit about that time and it was necessary for me to go home. My sister just didn't have the money to keep me there and I wasn't a bit sorry, I was really glad to get to go home. When I left, I remember the housemother saying she just wanted to say how glad she was that I had stayed on, and that she and all the girls had enjoyed me, and that kind of thing, you know. In her way, she tried to make amends for the way she had treated me at first, I think, but I never, never felt any kind of warmth for that old lady at all. I thought of all people, a housemother, a woman who was designated to be a person who could counsel young girls, you'd think that she couldn't be that insensitive, but she wasn't about to let me room with those girls, and she didn't. But shortly after, I guess about a year after that, the next year, my present husband and I married. We had met shortly after I came to Seattle.
MG:	What year was that that you married?
AY:	I married in 1932.
MG:	Uh huh.
AY:	My son was born in '33.
MG:	Oh, okay, so '31 you went to college, '32 you married...
AY:	Yes, and in '33 I became a mother.
MG:	Now you completed then one full year at...
AY:	No, I didn't; it wasn't a full year.
MG:	it wasn't a full year.
AY:	No, I left shortly after the opening of the second semester. We were on
semesters rather than quarters, and it was midwinter. I remember it was very cold in Pullman. And I moved out of the dormitory right away, as soon as I knew that I was going to go home, and I moved in with those two Indian girls. I stayed with them for about a week or so, and then came home. But it was cold, oh my, it was so cold in Pullman, one morning we got up to fix breakfast, and the eggs had frozen on the back porch. You'd crack an egg and they were just solid; I had never seen frozen eggs before. [laughter]
MG:	Well, before we move on to talk about your marriage and your life
thereafter in Seattle, what was your parents' attitude toward education for a daughter?﻿13
Oh, they wanted all of us to finish high school and we all did, except my oldest brother, Buck, or Booster, the wanderlust. And of course in those days just to complete high school was quite an achievement, and so we did, and I think that this was something that was to the credit of our parents. High school was rather expensive in those days.
But they didn't distinguish in any way between the boy and the girl children.
Oh no, no. We used to sometimes think that the boys got a better break in life, but that was only because they were boys. Some of us girls enjoyed doing things that the boys were doing, like playing baseball and riding bicycles. They were the ones who had the balls and the bicycles. Of course in a family the size of ours, we were fortunate if we had one bicycle in the whole family and one pair of roller skates. We had to take turns, but no, there was no real difference in the treatment of boys and girls.
Now besides the influence of your parents on your life, were there any other relatives or nonrelated persons who you think of as influential for the early period of your growing up?
Well, I would have to say that my sister Blanche was an influence on me. Blanche was a very reserved, very ladylike person, always very particular about her appearance, still never goes out of her bedroom until she is completely groomed—dressed and made up, hair, face, everything. She did her best to make a lady out of me, [laughter] and sometimes I think she succeeded and sometimes I wonder. But she did give me a sense of appreciation of some of these things that maybe I would have had anyway if I'd stayed home. She did try—and she was conscious of the fact that she had promised our parents that she was going to see that I got an education, to take good care of me. She was very particular about the company I kept—she wanted to know all my friends, they all had to meet her first and she would pass judgment on them. She liked Letcher from the very beginning, so any time that I was going out and my date was Letcher, that was all right. Anybody else, she'd want to know, "Where's Letcher, why isn't Letcher going?" In other words, if he didn't think it was worth going to, I shouldn't either, you know that attitude, and one or two of the girls she felt that way about. We didn't have any conflicts really, there were some times when I thought she was a little bit hard on me, a little bit strict, but there was never any real problem. We got along quite well.
Now in 1932 you married Letcher Yarbrough. Could you tell me something about your husband and his family background?
Yes, when I came to Seattle, Letcher had just finished his high school education at Garfield and had enrolled at the University of Washington. He lived with his grandparents. His mother and father﻿14
(cont) had divorced, and actually even before that time, his grandparents sort of, I'd say, spirited him away from his mother. His mother was a very young woman, and I think it was just natural that the grandparents raised him.
What were their names?
Their names were John and Louise Cragwell, and they came to Seattle from Washington, D.C., in 1890. Mrs. Cragwell was from quite an outstanding family, all of whom were professionals, doctors, lawyers, and so on. John Cragwell had come up the hard way. He started out as a shoeshine boy in a barbershop in Washington, D.C., and it was there he learned the trade of a barber. Somehow he had an opportunity to take a trip out here with a rather well-to-do white man, and he went back and got his family and moved them to Seattle. It was a few years later that Letcher came out with his mother and father from Pittsburgh. Letcher was born in Pittsburgh, and so they came out here to Seattle after the grandparents had moved here.
What were his parents' names?
His parents were Letcher and Beatrice Yarbrough. The Cragwells had two daughters, Beatrice and Pauline. After Mr. Cragwell had been here for a while, I don't know how long, he did establish a first-class barbershop downtown in one of the rather exclusive white hotels. Of course, in those days you had to cater to one or the other, black or white, and he was downtown, so his customers were white. Of course, there were some Negroes who at that time accused him of trying to discriminate against blacks, because he had his barbershop downtown, and all of his clientele was white. In his scrapbook, which we have, there were pictures of him, for example, cutting the hair of Theodore Roosevelt when he was out here. It was in this hotel where so many of the public officials and prominent people stayed.
What was the hotel?
The New Washington Hotel. Mr. and Mrs. Cragwell raised Letcher. Of course, he was raised as an only child and raised rather well for a black child in those days. He had pretty much of everything. Of course his grandmother had ambitions for him to become a professional man, a doctor to be exact, and when he went to the university, he enrolled in premed school. Well, his education was halted for the same reason mine was, the depression came along and he had to drop out of school. He was very fortunate in being able to get a job, and this was something that was very rare right then, especially for a black person. He was working for Wallace Steel and Bridge Company. During the depression eventually they cut it down from five days to four, four to three until he was working about two days a week. Many industries were doing this so that they could hire more people and spread the work around. But we went ahead and got married anyway during the depression, and we lived first at the Adelphi Apartments.
Of course, I should say that when I left college and came home, I did have to look for some kind of work. By this time of course,﻿15
AY:	(cont) Doc's business had folded and my sister wasn't well.
In fact she was in the hospital that year, I believe. But anyway, my sister Susie had moved to Seattle by this time, and she and I roomed in a private home. I'd answer ads in the newspaper. Mind you, for just even day work they'd turn us down as soon as they'd seen we were black. I remember one time besides just being angry, I just didn't know how else I was going to get home. I had used my last dime for carfare to get out there for that interview, and then when she saw me, she let me sit there and finally said, "Well, I don't think we'll need anybody after all because..." I think she said her relatives were coming or something, you know, and well, I just didn't know what else to do, so I sat there. I didn't have a dime to get back home. Finally she said, "Well, I guess you didn't understand me, we won't need you," and I said, "Well, I don't think you understand that I have no other way to get home now." And it was way out somewhere, I'd had to transfer, no possible way for me to walk home, and, "You let me spend my last dime to come out here with the understanding that I was coming to work." Over the phone, I was just the person she needed. She swung around and went out, and she stayed out of the room for quite a little while, and pretty soon she came back and she said, "Well, what do you think a fair amount would be?" Actually all I had hoped for was some carfare. And I said, "Well, at least two hours'pay. It took me that much time to come out here and get back, I've been here two hours." I think that was the first time I was ever really bold enough and brave enough, really, to do something about it. So she paid me, gave me two hours'pay which probably didn't amount to more than a dollar anyway, we were working for fifty cents an hour in those days, you know, five dollars a week was about the best we could get for any of these kinds of jobs.
MG:	Now even domestic employment was at a premium, and then blacks
were discriminated against even in that area.
AY:	Oh heavens, yes. And before that, when I first came back from
college, I have a friend who still lives in Seattle, and she was up against it too, trying to find work. We went together one day to all the hospitals. They always needed help in hospitals, and we weren't looking for jobs as nurse's aides. We were willing to scrub floors or anything. Why, they practically laughed in our face. We couldn't get a thing, not a thing. Big restaurants, which used men and women for dishwashing jobs, wouldn't hire us, so there was nothing but these little house jobs and baby sitting jobs, which would usually be for a day or two, a week at the most. The pay was very low, and such demands they'd make. They would tell you what the duties were before you started, and you'd get there and they'd have you doing everything under the sun. Usually you'd do it to keep from losing the job, you didn't have anything else to do, but it was a pretty cruel situation for all black people, but particularly for the young people, because now you see the older people went on relief. They didn't call it welfare then...﻿16
MG:	Some of the relief programs associated with the WPA.
AY:	What did they call that? I've forgotten now. But anyway, they
set up stations in different areas of the city where you could go and get food, and they'd give you little packages of food to take home. Oh, it was degrading, to say the least. And of course then when Letcher and I married, we couldn't get that, because he had a job, so we couldn't get any help, and because he had a job we were expected to pay our bills. We had to pay our rent, but our neighbors next door, they weren't paying a nickel.
MG:	Where were you living at that time?
AY:	Adelphi Apartments. We were just constantly having somebody
dunning us for something or another. It was during Franklin Delano Roosevelt's administration that things began to take a little bit of a turn for the better. I think by the time Jimmy was born, Letcher probably was working every day again, I don't remember now...
MG:	This was your first child, Jimmy, born in 1933.
AY:	'33.
MG:	Yes. Did you have other children?
AY:	No, just the one. And his name actually is Letcher Steward
Yarbrough. And we started calling him Jimmy when we knew that he was on the way. Letcher's grandparents always called him Jim, so when we knew this baby was coming, we said, well,little Jim is on his way, and so we were calling him Jimmy. If it had turned out to be a girl, I guess she'd still have been Jimmy, because for nine months we called this baby Jimmy. [laughter] I guess the first time he used his full name was when he opened up his bank account. He'd finished high school and had a job, and he opened up a bank account, and I remember that so well because the bank got the two accounts mixed up.
MG:	Between your husband and your son?
AY:	They didn't know that there could be two Yarbroughs. I told
Jimmy, "Don't you ever open up a bank account in the same bank ever again. "	Oh, it was horrible trying to get that thing
straightened out. It seemed all the deposits had gone to credit Jimmy's account but all the checks and withdrawals were against poor Mom and Dad.
MG:
Well, now how did your business careers, both your husband's and your own, develop, after the depression period?
AY:	I got my first chance during the war, when everybody was needed
to do something. I had always been quite apt in commercial subjects at school, and I liked to type, in fact I taught myself to type before I even went to junior high school. As I mentioned, Dad was quite a lodge man, and had occasion to have letters tvped and his speeches and reports. Dad was one of those kinds﻿17
AY:	(cont) of people who didn't stop to ask questions. He went and
bought a typewriter and brought it home, and said, "Here, I want you to learn to use this thing so you can type my letters." [laughter] And so I did. From the library, or somehow or another I acquired a book, a typing book, and I did learn to use the typewriter, quite well, too. I taught myself some bad habits that I had to unlearn when I finally got to junior high school and took typing, but that didn't take long and I was a good typist.
Of course, I never had an opportunity to use it before the war, and even during the war, oh, I can't tell you how many jobs I tried to get before I finally got a job in civil service. Even then in civil service, they had offices set up where one could apply, and then they would refer you to various agencies where they knew help was needed. I'd get there and there was always some excuse. I'd go back, and I remember one little Jewish woman in particular, every time I'd come back, I could just see her cringing. She'd be just as angry as I was, but she had a job to do, you know, and she was afraid to say very much, I guess, but she'd always send me back on another one. Finally one day, and it was just amazing to me how that particular day I got a job, because I was really at my worst. I had been to a couple of places in the morning, and stopped for lunch at a little counter along Second Avenue. This job that I was going to see about was in the Exchange Building, and I had to wait. So I went to this little counter to get something to eat, and the man waiting on the counter, I think probably was the owner, said, "We can't serve you in here." On top of everything else, I was just about ready to collapse, just give up. So I walked on out of there, and I walked around the block and around the street, waiting for the time to go in to see about this job. It was a hot day, and I was tired. There was a reception desk, a long counter, and I walked up to it. I'm sure I must have been scowling by this time. And pretty soon I got waited on. A man came and talked with me and he asked me if I would come into his office. He was a little lame, as I remember, and his name was Vanderbilt. We talked, and a little later on he said, "Well, I'd like for you to come to work tomorrow," and I was so surprised I didn't know what to do. It was much later, after I started working there, he said, "You presented the most sorrowful picture when you walked in," and I told him what had happened. He said, "I sensed it," and he said, "I just was so glad that you came here, and that I was here when you came." We became good friends. This was at the Alaska Travel Control.
The government had set up this agency to screen people going to Alaska during the war, because you see it was so close to Japan. Everyone who was traveling to or from Alaska was supposed to have a permit, so this was the office where they all were screened. I started there as a typist. Then I was a receptionist, and I was in charge of the mimeograph room for a while, and then I was on the teletype machine. One of the greatest thrills in my life and Letcher's came at this time. Letcher, by this time was in the service, and was stationed in the Aleutian Islands, and he had written to me and told me that they were putting in this wireless. He was way out on Amchitka Island, and when their teletype was installed, I've forgotten how we finally made connections, but anyhow, Letcher was the first one to use it. I guess I had written him and told him what I was doing.﻿18
AY:	(cont) He said he stood there and watched the men install the
service, and as soon as it was ready for use, he was the first one to make a call. I happened to be on duty when it went through and got the teletype message from my own husband. Oh, my goodness, what a thrill. Well, of course I had to write and tell him that. It was an interesting job, it was a pleasant experience. I stayed there until the war was over, and then from there on I just moved from one job to another in clerical work, and finally, I guess it must have been in about 1936, I thought I had enough experience that I could strike out on my own. And I set up a little shop and called it Yarbrough's Letter Shop.
MG:	Where was this located?
AY:	First located at 19th and East Madison in a back room behind Geneva
B. Miller's real estate office. She rented me space there, and I did mimeographing, mail advertising, notary public and just general stenography, a lot of typing. I did things like church bulletins and programs, newsletters, advertising brochures, correspondence, et cetera. I stayed there for several years, and then moved my shop to 14th and Madison, on the south side of the street of 14th, and I think there's a Van de Camp Bakery in there now. But I stayed there for several years and that was a large place, and in connection with that, I had what I called a hobby shop. I took in things that people had made and sometimes on consignment, and I had a greeting card shop as well. I could operate that in connection with the letter shop.
MG:	Well, did the name of the business change then, or was it still
Yarbrough's Letter Shop?
AY:	Well, it was still Yarbrough's Letter Shop; I gave the hobby
shop another name, but it was all in one building.
MG:	What was the name of that, the hobby shop?
AY:	Just called the Hobby Shop. My slogan then was "Your hobby is
my hobby." It was interesting, the things that people brought in, everything from needlework to little bits of carpentry and lamps and oh, all kinds of ceramics. Ceramics were becoming very popular about that time, and I had a large front shop window where the merchandise displayed nicely.
MG:	Now you were serving primarily the black community?
AY:	No, actually I couldn't say primarily. Particularly after I moved
up there to 14th, most of my trade was from Jewish people. I was able to get into that building through Sidney Gerber, whom I'm sure you must know. Because there again, the man who had the building had subrented the space to me, and then I don't know whether somebody put pressure on him or what, but before I had been in there a full month, he was telling me I'd have to leave. I knew Sidney Gerber by this time, because his wife had been in to have some work done, and we became friends. I called him because I knew he knew the owner of the building I was subleasing. And so Sid Gerber said, "Well, let me talk to the owner." His name was Eugene Levy. He was quite a wealthy man, and a well-known﻿19
AY:	(cont) philanthropist. "I'll see what I can do," and he straightened
everything out just like that, and the man who was subleasing to me was very surprised. He tried to pretend that it was all a misunderstanding. But it wasn't long before he got out of there himself, so that's how I happened to have this extra space for a hobby shop. I just stayed on„ I told Mr. Gerber, "I don't know that I can afford to least the whole building, but I'd like to stay, and I'd like to try it." And there again, through Sid, the rent was lowered, and soon I was able to get a renter. Believe it or not, an agent of Safeco Insurance Company came in there and subrented from me, and he stayed there, I guess, a couple of years, but he got his business going so big, he moved out. So it did work out beautifully, and I loved the work; it was very interesting and I liked meeting the people. I didn't make a fortune, but it was good work, and I made as much as I would have on a job, and I hired extra help when I needed it. Sometimes it was a woman who did stenographic work, or usually my own son and some, of his friends. I'd get them to come in and help with stuffing envelopes and folding and little jobs that they could do. I would go back in the evenings, after dinner sometimes, if I had a big job to work on, and I'd finish it up and get it out on time. It was a nice experience. I gave it up when I had a sick spell and had to have surgery. I had negotiated with a woman to stay there until I was able to come back, and she wanted that kind of business, and we thought, well after I get back, we'll talk about a partnership. Meanwhile, the war was over, and she had an offer for a job in Okinawa and she wanted to go. I wasn't able to go back to work. I just locked the door, and when I felt up to it, went down and got the things moved out. I stayed home for a good little while after that, maybe a year that I didn't work, and I got bored and broke and decided, oh, I just had to do something, so I started looking for a job again. This time it was with the state civil service, and I started working for...well, first it was State War Surplus Properties, I stayed there a while, and then I finally worked up to the state health department. I stayed there for, I guess, five or six years, and the health department was moved to Olympia, out of the Smith Tower in Seattle to Olympia, and my boss wasn't about to go to Olympia either. He took employment as head of the special education department of the Highline School District, and he asked me what I was going to do when they moved to Olympia. This talk of moving to Olympia had been going on for years with "one more month" or "six months." I said, "I'm just going to wait until they back the moving van up to the door, and then I'll decide what to do." So he said, "Well, I just had confirmation; I'm going to work in Highline School District, they told me I could get my own secretary. I wish you'd put in your application." And I said, "Highline School District?" and he said, "Yeah, halfway between here and Tacoma. It's a long way, and maybe you wouldn't want to come that far," he said, "but I wish you'd consider it." Well, I just couldn't see going way out there, and I thought, my goodness, there must be a job closer to home than that, and the next day he brought me an application form and he said, "Fill it out and I'll take it out when I go tomorrow."﻿20
AY:	(cont) I filled it out and within a week I had a call. They
okayed the application form, I went out for an interview, and they said, "When can you start?" I said, "Whenever you say," and this was like Thursday or Friday, and they said, "How about Monday?" I stayed there six or seven years.
MG:	About what year did you start there?
AY: Oh, let's see.
MG: Early fifties sometime?
AY:	It must have been in the fifties, because...1'm just terrible
at remembering dates.
MG: That's all right, it's not that important.
AY:	I could count back, let's see...now I left the university five
years ago, 1972. I had been at the university six years, so that would have been '66 that I started there. So I must have started out at the Highline School about 1960 and so then, you see, all of this of course was still state employment. Then just about the time I decided I was getting tired of those long drives out there in heavy traffic, I had an opportunity to move to Bellevue School District for a while. I was there just a very short time, maybe a couple months, when I had an offer to go out to the University of Washington. At this time, you know, we didn't have affirmative action programs, but a lot of pressure was being put on public institutions to hire blacks, and the dean of the School of Social Work said he was going to be the first to start this. And he had hired one associate professor. So he asked her, Alethia Aliens was her name, if she knew of anybody who would be a good secretary. She called me and told me and asked if I'd go out and put in my application, so I did. I stayed there until I retired. I completed my twenty years of service in state civil service and I decided that was long enough, so I retired five years ago. It was very timely, a very good time to do it, I never regretted it, I've enjoyed it.
MG:	Now how did your husband^s career develop during this time?
AY:	I can't remember the very first federal civil service job that
he had, but it was when he came out of the service, and I think it was at the port of embarkation, though I don't remember what the job was particularly- He's gone through so many, and in civil service they transfer so often, and then finally the job that he retired from was with GSA* where he was an EEO** officer. He retired three years ago. Then last year he went back to work. He had served on the Urban League board for many years, and they were having some problems there and needed some help. The board asked him if he'd be interested, and wanted him to serve as an assistant to the director, because of the kind of administrative problems they were having, and Letcher was well trained in that
General Services Administration Equal Employment Opportunity﻿21
AY:	( cont) area. So he went to work for the Urban League and stayed
there a year until the first of this month, and now he has retired again.
MG:	For how long we don't know.
AY:	For how long I don't know. He's ambitious, and he's still very
active, and he's a very intelligent and smart person, he has a lot to offer. So I think it's nice if he wants to do it. I tell him, "As long as you enjoy it, it's all right, but there's no need to be going into something that's going to be a grind." He doesn't need to do that, and we both planned rather carefully for our retirement, and that's one reason we got his boat three years ago, so that when he retired he'd have the boat. So we used it for a year before he retired, and then he said, "Well, when I retire, I'll have plenty of time to work on the boat, and do these things." But we've just gotten so busy in retirement, we haven't done nearly the things like that that we thought we would. We've traveled a great deal, we've taken at least one, two, or three trips a year and that's been nice, so we really are very grateful for the life we've had and the life we're living now.
MG:	Mrs. Yarbrough, you've been a wife, a mother and a professional
woman, businesswoman...do you view these various careers in any particular order of importance?
AY: Well, of course I always felt being a mother is the most important thing women could do. I have never been really Sorry that I had to work during those years, and I think most black women did in the period that I came up, it took two paychecks to exist. There may have been some moments when I used to think, oh, I wish I could stay home and just be a full-time mother and watch my youngster grow up, but I actually was very fortunate in having responsible people to look after him while I was at work. These were before days of baby sitters, you just got somebody to mind the baby then, you know. One woman in particular, a Mrs. Garrett was very, very nice in helping out, and she kept Jimmy for me most of my working years, I would think, along with her daughter Clarine. There were others of course, sometimes Letcher's family, grandmother or his Aunt Pauline. There usually were people that you could get that were reliable and that you knew. They were always people that I knew. I never had to leave him with strangers. They didn't have nursery schools and day care centers then, so I think, by and large it worked out quite well. What it really, I think, does for a mother who works, though, is that you really learn to utilize every moment that you're not working, and devote that time to a youngster. I think that we grew particularly close when Jimmy was small, that way, because when I wasn't at work, I spent all my time with him, we did things that he would enjoy doing. And being an only child too, I think we probably developed a very close relationship. For example, I'd keep him entertained when I was cooking. He learned to cook, he learned to appreciate how to prepare food. I remember a friend of mine made him a little apron, like a little butcher apron, because he was always hanging around in the kitchen with me, and if I made biscuits, I'd give﻿22
AY:	(cont) him this little piece of dough and he'd make a biscuit too.
So I don't think either of us really missed a great deal by virtue of the fact that I was a working mother.
MG:	How did your husband react to your working?
AY: Well, I think like most men in those days, just grateful that
there were two paychecks coming in, although I'm sure that in later years, and even since I've retired, I think that was something I never even took into consideration when I retired, how happy my husband would be. All of a sudden it dawned on me, why, he's really pleased that I'm not working, and I think for the first time in our married life, he felt like, "Now I am the man of the house and I am the breadwinner." He was really very solicitous; at first, I was quite surprised. I was telling a friend one day, "I didn't know it was going to be like this." I stayed in bed when he got up to go to work. He'd bring me a cup of coffee in the bed and the paper, and I'd be in bed reading the paper when he'd leave to go to work. I thought, "Gee, am I ever spoiled," I just enjoyed it.
MG:	Do you have any preference among the terms, colored, Negro, and
black?
AY:	No, I really don't have any preference. I had to learn to use
the term black, however, and it became popular while I was working at the university. I remember one time in particular I had occasion to call the Black Student Union, and I think it was the first time I had ever had to really come right out and say it, I guess, and when I got ready to say, over the phone, somehow or other my throat closed up, I couldn't seem to get it out. Black Student...Black Student Union.[timid voice] Well, after that I felt, I couldn't help but laugh at how unaccustomed we were to using that term, because really when we were children, we didn't call people black, this was something you just did not do, because so many of our folk were really very sensitive about color. I remember a neighbor of ours in particular who came to Salt Lake many years after we had moved to this area that I was telling you about, and she was from Shreveport, Louisiana, a very dark woman and very sensitive about her color. And I remember one incident that occurred one Sunday night, when we were all waiting for the streetcar coming from church. Somebody had a bag of jelly beans and they were passing them around the crowd. Someone took a couple out of the bag and said, "Oh, you can have this one back, I don't like the black ones." And this Louisiana woman fussed all the way, "You don't like nothing black," and she really was upset about that and it was something...My mother and dad had told us, "You just never say—I never want to hear anyone in this house call anybody black." We grew up believing this was something derogatory, that this wasn't good. But I can understand why, because of this one instance where this woman had shown how sensitive she was about it.
MG:
So what term did you use?﻿23
AY: We said Negro, I think more than...well, it was interchangeable with colored. I think in my earlier years probably colored was used more than Negro, and I find myself saying all three now, sometimes it's colored, sometimes it's Negro and sometimes it's black. I belong to an organization, which like the NAACP has continued to use the word colored, and I know that a lot of young people, young black people now just resent it so much. It tells a story in itself, there's some significance there; it says, well you know, one time we used colored because, to try to get white people to say Negro, it was impossible, so you said colored; and then we moved from colored to Negro and that still was not quite satisfactory. There's something about that like the youngsters say, well, that's a term the white man gave you and probably it's true. So now I can say black, it doesn't bother me, and I probably say black more than I do anything else now.
MG:	You have any objections to being referred to as black yourself?
AY:	Oh no. No, I think, I really don't have any strong feeling about
it one way or the other. I think it's acceptable and this is the thing we're saying now, if you say anything else, you date yourself. So I just accept it as the expression of the day, it's timely.
MG:	How has your race affected the options available to you in your life
and the choices that you've made?
AY: Well, I think as I've told you they have really affected my options, and I think one of the things that I sometime© feel most keenly is that I was cheated a little bit out of some things. I can't help but wonder what would we, as a family, have been like, how much more might we have progressed, had we lived in, like in a southern community, had we been exposed to black education, had we ever known any black doctors, lawyers, and so on. Even here in Seattle, we didn't have those people to look up to. There was one lawyer, I think, when I first came here; probably one physician, who didn't practice as a black physician, he moved way out to Burien and lived with the Italians there, the very first black doctor in Seattle, Dr. Maxwell. He couldn't get any practice going around the black area, there weren't enough black people, and he moved out there. He practiced with the Italians, and whether they knew he was black or not, I don't know, but that's what he did. Later there were, I think, maybe two or three dentists, one woman who was a nurse and I'll show you how this does affect you. When I went to college, I had to decide on something to take, so I said, "Well, I want to be a nurse." Why in the world that I should ever say...I would never make a nurse. I could never have been a nurse, I'm not cut out for it, and dislike anything that's connected with medicine or sickness or anything medical, but she was the only black woman I ever knew who had been to college, who came out with a degree, and was practicing at doing what she was trained to do. So I said, "Well, I guess that's what black women do, they're nurses." And it just wouldn't have been for me at all. I probably would have realized it, had I stayed﻿24
AY:	(cont) in college, you know, probably would have realized it in time
to change. But I think that this is one of the things that I really wish and long that we might have had an opportunity for, is to actually see more black people in these professional and business positions, there might have been some incentive to all of us. My mother and dad did a beautiful job, I think, of making us aware of our race and we always subscribed to the Chicago Defender, and my dad started the first chapter of the NAACP in Salt Lake, we were always members of the NAACP...
MG:
Do you know about when that was? Or shall we check that later?
AY: The first I remember about the NAACP, I must have been about twelve
years old, so if I was born in 1912, and twelve years later...I would think about that time...
MG: About 1924.
AY:	...and I've been NAACP-conscious ever since. I remember my first
experience with Federated Clubs. I don't recall that my mother was a very active club woman, but she must have belonged to one of the Federated Clubs, because she took part when they met in Salt Lake. It was probably a regional meeting of some kind and women came from Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, and they met at Calvary Baptist Church. The picture is still so vivid in my mind because it was hot, oh, it was so hot in Salt Lake, and these women were almost all wearing white. The minister's daughter, who was about my age, and I had been asked to be pages. I never knew women could drink so much water. [laughter] We were constantly up and down the steps, down to the kitchen, making ice water and bringing it up, and then they were fanning, they'd raise their hand, and we'd run over there with a glass and a pitcher, pour some ice water. And that was when I first recall ever having heard, "Lift Every Voice and Sing," and I'll never forget it as long as I live. It just seemed to me when those women would open that meeting, and sing that beautiful anthem, I just thrilled. It was just beautiful, they sang with so much zest and fervor, you know, it was a beautiful thing to listen to, and it was many, many years later that I became a clubwoman, but I never forgot that first contact with them. They took their work so seriously, it was really quite an experience.
MG:	Was this the Association of Colored Women at this time that was
meeting in...
AY:	Yes, and of course, they called themselves Federation then. They
changed their name in later years so that they could distinguish themselves from the white Federated Clubs who had refused to admit them to membership.
MG: Yes.
AY:	And there are still some states in the association who have retained
the name Federation, they still call themselves, like Texas State Federation, but the national name really is the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs.﻿25
MG:	What is the women's movement as you see it, and what's your
opinion of it?
AY:	Well, I first became really conscious of the need while I was working
at the University of Washington. I heard a lecture, and I heard some statistics that woke me up; I guess I had been a little bit indifferent to it up to that time. But for example, this lecturer was saying that there were more, let me see if I can remember how...there were more single women who were heads of families than there were single men, and yet these women who had these families to take care of could not get the salaries that the men could get to take care of these families. I was wondering, well, if that's true of women generally, then a large percentage of those women who are working as heads of families have got to be black, and it's about time that we started doing something about that. That was, I think, the first real awakening to the importance of a woman's movement.
I really became quite interested, and I could see the real need for the Equal Rights Amendment. I suppose I would say, I think rights are rights and nobody should be denied their rights, but I really feel that everybody's rights should be protected, there shouldn't be any discrimination in that regard. I wouldn't be completely honest if I didn't say that I have had some mixed feelings in the past year about the way the women's movement is going about some of these things. Now maybe it's because I'm a little squeamish about some things, maybe it's my age, I don't know what it is. But I am a little squeamish about abortions, and I'm squeamish about homosexuals, and I haven't yet arrived at that point where I can say that I for one could be an active person in securing their rights for them. You see what I'm saying.
MG:	You mean women who wished abortions or homosexual women?
AY:	Yes, abortions and homosexuals and....now this may sound like I'm
talking double talk and maybe I am, I don't know, but I do believe equal rights should be equal rights for everybody. I believe this, but still I haven't quite arrived. I could go out, I could do anything to help get equal rights if it's going to affect the salary, employment opportunities and so on for black women, I could go all the way. I couldn't go all the way for some of these other things.
MG:	So you see it more in an economic sphere than in a social one, is
that right?
AY: Maybe that's it, maybe that's it. I've always said well, now every voman should have the right to do as she pleases. For example, I don't want to go out and dig ditches, but if somebody else wants to go out and dig ditches, I think she should have the right to dig ditches, but I haven't yet arrived at that same conclusion about homosexuals. I'm not a homosexual, and don't want to be one, but I haven't yet said, somebody else should have the right to be.﻿26
MG:	I see.
AY:	Now, is that double talk? Yes, it is.
MG:	Well, I'm not sure, you've just limited your definitions, there's
a certain area that you feel...
AY:	There's some things, you know, you just kind of...I suppose we're
opinionated, and likes and dislikes or something...
MG:	Now you've had memberships and offices in several professional
and scholarly organizations and women's clubs and the rest. Are there any of these memberships or offices that you feel have been particularly rewarding?
AY:	Yes. I think the office I hold now as president of the Washington
State Association of Colored Women's Clubs has been particularly rewarding. I've enjoyed working with the women throughout the state, and I think that we have progressed considerably in the two years that I have been president. The membership has increased, we have four more clubs than we had before in the association. We're working very hard at organizing more girls, and preparing for our national convention next year, which will be here in Seattle.
MG:	Could you say a little bit about how your organization is organized
and the nature of some of the clubs that are associated with it?
AY:	Yes, it is an association of clubs, first of all. Individuals do
not join it. We start with a national organization, with the headquarters in Washington, D.C. Then the United States is divided into five regions, and our region is known as the northwest region. Then within that region we have state organizations, and it is the Washington State Association of which I am president. Now the Washington State Association is comprised of the clubs throughout the state. We have twenty-two clubs in the Washington State Association. The clubs are made up of women from all walks of life, and their interests vary, their programs can vary, but must not conflict with the purpose and objectives of the national association. But that leaves a very wide berth, the purpose is so broad, and there are so many programs that are included in the national, that I think any women's club could work independently and still be within the framework of the national.
I belong to the Cosmopolitan Century Club in Seattle. We have twenty members and it was founded by Mrs. Vivienne L. Penick who was a remarkable leader, and really, I credit her and Mrs. Eliza McCabe with being the persons who have kept the state association alive. Mrs. McCabe was not the founder. There were clubs here, and there was a state association before she came, but it was through her leadership that they were reactivated. We have survived eighty-one years as a national organization, and there have been many, many changes in eighty-one years. I like to think of it as a kind of grassroots organization, like the NAACP, anyone who really can subscribe to its purpose, its goals, can join it. The only difference is the NAACP takes individual membership, and we take clubs. Our women are prone now to lean toward sororities and the﻿27
AY:	(cont) more glamorous kinds of organizations, the Links and the Jack
and Jill, and some of these others that have a little more social status, perhaps, than our organization has. But when you read the history of the organization, and you think about how brave those women were, way back then, Mary Church Terrell, Mrs. Booker T. Washington and people like that. I don't know whether you ever heard how they happened to organize this association, the NACWC.*
MG:	I think that would be good for you to say on the tape.
AY:	It was a result of an article written by a southern white newspaper-
man, who referred to Negro women as being immoral and lazy and ignorant, and so Mrs. Ruffin, Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin, president of the Woman's Era Club, sent out a call to all black women, colored women I guess they were then, and they met in Boston. The National Federation of Afro-American Women was the outgrowth of this first national conference of the Colored Women of America.** They had another meeting within the year, and the membership grew and grew throughout the East and South, and finally they had their first trip out West to Oakland, California. I can just visualize those women on the special train, hundreds of them, with all their luggage that it must have taken them, no airplanes of course, in those days, you know, we traveled with trunks and bags and hatboxes. Much luggage was required for those long skirts and petticoats. It must have been quite a sight. They made such an impact that, mind you, even in Salt Lake City, when the train was late, the Mormon Tabernacle Choir put on a special concert just for them. It was unheard of to see all these black women traveling across country, it was something to behold, it was real news, and the city of Oakland donated the Civic Auditorium for the meetings. Just fabulous things happened because these women were brave enough to start out and do it. I can't help but admire them, and I think if we don't do anything else, we must keep this organization alive in memory of those brave black pioneer women. I think we owe it to them.
MG: Well, now what other organizations and memberships do you have or have you had?
AY:	Well, membership in Iota Phi Lambda sorority, Beta Kappa chapter
in Seattle. I served in various offices in the chapter, including president, and I was chairman of the national convention when it met here in '62. I've enjoyed my work with Business and Professional Women's Clubs (BPW), and I'm a member of the Kirkland Club, and served as president of that club, and membership chairman and attended a few conventions. I like my club, my Cosmopolitan Century Club (NACWC), I think we do some very interesting, worthwhile things. We have some very capable women in that organization. Mrs. Penick always said that this club was an outgrowth of prayer, that every member that belonged to it when she organized it came to her thought through prayer. That's why she asked them to be charter members and there are about, I think we have only two left who were charter members.
* National Association of Colored Women's Clubs.
See Elizabeth Lindsay Davis, Lifting as They Climb (Washington: National Council of Colored Women's Clubs, 1933).﻿28
MG:	When was the club established?
AY:	Thirty years ago. We had our thirtieth anniversary this year, so
that would have been, let's see, '47. Mrs. Penick is at Judson Park retirement center now, and the club visits her. We take turns so that there's someone there at least every month, most of us try to go every month so that means that eighteen or nineteen of us visit her during the month. The CCC gives her a little check each month for her to spend for miscellaneous items that she might like, because we feel we're all her family, and she's always so glad to see us, and it's always so nice to visit with her.
MG:	What kind of activities are you involved in, your club?
AY:	Our club, CCC, for the last twelve years, has been mostly involved
in scholarships. We created the Vivienne L. Penick Scholarship Fund, and we have raised the money for scholarships by selling automobile license tabs. We were agents of the state to do this, and we set up a booth in one of the supermarkets. It was our only money raising project, we'd work very hard, all of us during the month of January, but then we were all through. We've been raising enough so that we've been giving two or three $500 scholarships each year. Now the State License Department has changed all that, and we're looking for another project. Yes, now you know we renew our automobile license plates periodically at staggered months and purchase license tabs directly from the State License Department.
MG:	Directly with the state.
AY:	Yes, and so that everybody's doesn't expire at the same time, and
then we get it directly through the state.
MG:	Well, are there other organizations that you'd like to mention that
you haven't? Or do I have them all?
AY:	Oh, I think those...well, my church of course. I've been very active
in my own church here in Kirkland. And it might be worth mentioning too, because sometimes people are surprised that I have changed my denomination, having been brought up in the Baptist church. One of the things that I'm most grateful to my parents for is the early training that they did give us in Bible study and church contacts. But many of us in our family have changed, and I'm sure I speak for the others, when I say I never once felt like I was not being loyal, or that my parents would not approve, I felt perfectly free, and I think they would want us to feel free to make that choice. I'm a Christian Scientist, and I did not change until after my parents had passed, so I don't know what their reaction might have been. But I do know the others in the family, my oldest sister, a Seventh-day Adventist, two or three of them have gone from the Baptist church to the Methodist church, and we all respect one another's religious beliefs. And I've been very grateful for that, because I think that sometimes this doesn't happen as easily as that in some families. The transition could be very disturbing, perhaps, and I'm grateful too for other reasons that... And I've tried to remember this when I have had to adjust to the fact that my son didn't choose my particular belief, a very different kind of﻿29
AY:	(cont) religious faith, almost conflicting, and yet I have to remind
myself that I was free to make my choice, and I must let him be free to do the same. So I'm grateful for that too, you know, it's been a little bit easier to adjust to it. I think, for me, it was a very wise choice, I have certainly gained much by making that change. I am grateful for what I learned, and appreciated everything I learned in the Baptist church, but somehow or another it didn't take me far enough. So this is kind of like something, I graduated from that into something a little bit more of what I needed, and maybe everybody wouldn't feel that way, wouldn't be ready for it or need it the way I feel like I did. It has really met my needs and made a big difference in my life. I'm very grateful. I served as first reader in our church, which is the highest office in our church, we don't have ministers. I don't know if you're familiar with it...
MG: A little bit.
AY:	...but our readers are elected by the membership, and I'm really
very grateful for having had it find me, if I didn't find it.
MG:	Have you received any awards or honors that you'd like to mention?
AY:	Well, oh, before we do that, perhaps under organizations, is this
the place to talk about ROOTS? It's not an organization as such, because it's not a very formal structure, but my husband and I were the founders of this, and it came about just out of what we thought was a need for people to get together. We had lost contact with so many of our friends, particularly after we moved to Kirkland, and occasionally when I'd go to a funeral of one of our friends, we'd see some of these old-timers that we hadn't seen for years. Everybody just greeted everybody else with so much warmth, we'd always say, "Isn't it a pity that we don't see each other oftener." And so when I retired, I thought^ I think I'm going to try and do something about that, maybe I'll have time to do it now.
So finally the day came. I thought about it a lot, but I never seemed to know just where to begin or how, and after my sister Susie died, her husband gave me a little snapshot that had been in her album. It was a group of about twelve young ladies, including my sister Susie, and about three others who had passed on. And I thought, now isn't it too bad we don't see each other oftener. So finally I decided. I sent invitations to all the people in the picture and invited them to come to my house for dinner. And everybody who was in town came with husbands, about five couples of them. We had just a beautiful time, and so after we finished dinner I told them what my thought was, and I said, "Now I think we ought to really try to get together oftener, and isn't there some way that we can round up some of the old- timers and have a reunion?" "Oh, yes," they said, "let's do that." And I said, "Well, how about a picnic?" "Yeah, let's do that next year," and I said, "If we wait until next year I'm afraid we won't do it." This was in June, so I said, "Let's try to do it before the summer's over," so we finally decided on a date in September which was the Saturday after Labor Day. I said, "Everybody you know, just get on the phone and tell them to come to Seward Park, we're going to have a﻿30
AY:	(cont) picnic. Tell them to tell their friends, and come out,
bring their dinner and just come on out."
So as the time got nearer and nearer, and every time I'd call somebody to tell them about it, they'd be so enthusiastic about it, and I thought, gee, I wonder how many people we'll have, and so I thought, well I'd better reserve that picnic area out there even though it was after the picnic season. So I called to reserve the area and they said, "Well, we can't reserve it, but if you're having a big picnic we can register it, and if anybody else calls in, we can tell them that you asked for it first. So how many do you think you'll have?" Oh, my gosh, I'd better make it good, and
I	was thinking well pretty near fifty, and I said, "Well, I expect we'll have at least seventy-five and maybe one hundred." Do you know that at the first picnic, there were three hundred people. [laughter] Three hundred people! Or more. And this didn't count the children who didn't register. Well, it was so exciting, I don't think
I've ever seen anything in my life that was as exciting as that day. The people would see each other, and they would hug and they'd kiss, and they'd laugh; there were tears; there were slaps on the back; and oh, they were just having such a good time, and of course everybody wanted to do it again. So this year will mark the fifth anniversary of that picnic, and last year we had over seven hundred people. And they're coming from all over the country.
MG:	This is called ROOTS?
AY:	ROOTS, which is for Relatives of Old-Timers. And we got the name,
we were just thinking about the old-timers, we were thinking of people who lived in Seattle prior to World War II, because that's when Seattle changed. You see, when the great influx of people started coming to Seattle, that's when we lost track of each other. People began moving out to the suburbs and different places, and we all got involved with so many other things; we had new friends and new activities. So we thought, well, World War II was what changed all this, so anybody who lived here before World War
II	would know what we were talking about. So we were just saying the old-timers, and it was confusing, because after that picnic I had, oh, at least three or four people who said, "Well, if I had known you were having an old-timers picnic, we'd have been out there." Well, they were elderly people, you see, and they got it confused with senior citizens, so I thought well, we just must find another
name.
I thoujfit about that thing for months and months, and finally one day I sat down and went through the alphabet. We knew we wanted to include the old-timers part of it in there, and I started just filling in the alphabet, putting letters in front, OTS and I got down to the R. Well, I think there might have been one or two that made a kind of a word, R and it was ROTS. "ROOTS," I said, "Relatives of Old-Timers." Well now, as strange as this may seem, this was before Alex Haley's book became known to us. We don't know whether Alex Haley had chosen a name for that book before that time; this is just interesting speculation. A local man, who is writing a book﻿31
AY:	(cont) on the history of blacks, insists that Alex Haley's
title was suggested to him by a publisher, who had seen the local man's book, who has a foreword in it about our group. I said, "Oh, I don't think so, you know this is the kind of thing that happens. Thoughts just kind of take wing. They just go all up in the air, you'd be surprised how many people think of the same thing at the same time," and I said, "I don't think that really is where it came from, but in any case we think we've got a pretty good name." It does describe beautifully what it's all about. So that is one of the things that has given me a great deal of satisfaction. It's been most rewarding, because it's made so many people so happy, and they just love it, they really do. So I think with that, that's about all of the outside activities I need to talk about. Former Washington State residents are attending these reunions, coming from all over the country, from Hawaii and Mexico.
MG:	Okay. How about awards and honors now. Were there any that you'd
like to mention?
AY:	Oh, none that are really very special. I've had awards from these
organizations that I belonged to, Iota Phi Lambda, BPW,* as president of Washington State Association, you know, that kind of thing, there's nothing really special.
MG:	Do you have any hobbies? You're so busy, I wonder how you would
find time.
AY:	Well now, I call my going to school a hobby. I usually take a
course of some kind during the fall and spring. And I've been trying to learn to write, I've been taking creative writing, and I'm writing a few articles these days. I sold an article to a local magazine. I haven't done much with it this summer, and of course my organizations are my hobby. And keeping up with my husband's hobby of boating. I've almost given up golf, I used to do some golfing, and I haven't done much of that since I've gotten so involved in my club work. But these are things that I do and I enjoy doing them, I call them hobbies. Also I'm learning to paint and am doing a landscape in oils.
MG:	This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Letcher Yarbrough.
The interview continues in Mrs. Yarbrough's home. Mrs. Yarbrough, I would like to ask you during this part of our interview about historical information you may have regarding black people in the Pacific Northwest. So far as you are aware, what were the origins of black people in the Northwest, that is, the geographical origins?
AY:	I'm probably not the best person to give you this information,
because I don't consider myself a pioneer of the state of Washington, so all the information that I have is what has been passed on to me from other people. But I understand that a large number of pioneer black people who came here, came to Roslyn, which was a coal mining city, or area, and they were recruited as strikebreakers. They came by trainloads up to Roslyn, Washington, and from there many of them
* Business and Professional Women﻿32
AY:	(cont) settled around the Yakima Valley in the farm regions and made
their homes there. Others I think probably came in, oh, a family or two at a time, seeking better opportunities. A lot of the railroad men, having run out here on the railroads, saw opportunities and moved their families here, and then there was a source of employment through the steamship companies. We credit the Alexander Line, for example, as having provided employment for many a young man which financed his education. We like to cite Dr. Ralph Bunche, for example, as one of those young men who came out here and worked on one of the boats during the summer months and went on to success.
MG:	He came up from California, then.
AY:	Actually I don't knew where he came from. Was California his home
originally?
MG:	Not originally, but he lived there very young, he had moved there
with his grandmother...
AY:	It might have been from California, I'm pretty sure I don't really
know. My husband probably would remember, he can remember when he was working on the boats.
MG: Were you ever aware of large numbers of blacks coming to the
area from the same state? What states did they seem to come from more than another, if there was such?
AY:	I really don't know where the earlier ones came from. Now those
people who came to Roslyn probably came from pretty much the same state. I have no idea where that would have been, I'd have to make some inquiries about that.
MG:	Were there any distinctive residential patterns for the black population?
AY:	There was not in early years, and before we leave this business of
populating the Northwest, of course, the great influx, as you know, came during World War II, and you know about that.
MG:	That's right.
AY:	But there was no definite pattern, except that I think many of the
black people, at least when I came to Seattle, lived either in what we called the East Madison area or the Jackson Street area. However, there were people even then living way out in Ballard and out in Rainier Valley. One or two families owned property even on the east side, in the Bellevue area. I think perhaps these were isolated cases of people living that far out. Most of them were in a concentrated area of East Madison or Jackson Street, I would say.
MG: Now about what period of time are we talking about here? 1930s...
AY: Prior to 1940, certainly, and maybe...well, when I came in 1928,
this was the pattern. I knew people who lived there and that probably continued until past World War II.﻿33
MG: When the big influx came.
AY:	Yes.
MG:	We mentioned a few of the reasons, earlier, that black people
came, for opportunities in employment, you mentioned steamship lines and railroads. Were there any other areas of employment that were open to blacks or that blacks filled? Were there any, for example, in farming and agriculture?
AY:	Well, I'm sure, yes, those who came to the eastern part of the
state were in the farm industries. Fruit ranchers and small truck farming and gardening. I suppose there must have been some who were employed in the fishing industries, and lumber, and working as longshoremen...
MG:	Now I don't know if we said earlier that the people who came to
Roslyn, employed as strikebreakers, were working on the mines.
AY:	Yes, yes, they worked in the mines.
MG:	Now you had a business of your own for a time. Who were some of
the other black businesspersons in Seattle?
AY:	Mrs. Geneva B. Miller and her husband are among the earlier ones that
I can recall. They had a little grocery store at one time, on 24th Avenue, then they had a hotel at the corner of 21st and Madison. It was called the Dunbar Hotel, and they operated that for many years. There was a nice little dining room on the lower floor where we used to go for our meals occasionally. On the corner of 22nd and Madison, a Mrs. Art Smith had a restaurant; it was kind of a home type atmosphere and a very popular place for Sunday meals. People dropped in there after church for their Sunday dinners. Then there were larger restaurant owners. Doc Hamilton's place, for example, was a very exclusive dinner club, where not too many black people could afford to go. It was an exclusive, lavish place, with thick oriental carpets, and silver and nice glassware, lovely dishes, a doorman, a canopy and all that, you know, to impress the monied people. A man named "Noodles" Smith had a beer tavern. Before that he operated a nightclub called the Black and Tan. Both businesses were at 12th and Jackson, in different buildings, however. Doc Hamilton's place was on 12th Avenue, 908 12th Avenue, and it was called The Pit. "Noodles" Smith, as far as I know, was the first to have a nightclub and evidently very well known all along the coast. Then there was a little restaurant called the Copper Kettle, operated by a Mrs. Taylor, between 21st and 20th, where Dr. Joyner's clinic is now.
I'm sure there must have been one Or two more local barbers in the East Madison area. One was Howard Brown who was a barber, and I'm not sure I know just where his shop was. Then John F. Cragwell, who came to Seattle in about 1896, I think I said, just a year after the fire, operated his barber shop in the New Washington Hotel, in downtown Seattle. Mrs. Miller, after her husband died, continued to operate businesses of one kind or another. She was quite a fine﻿34
AY:	(cont) businesswoman, and she was the first black real estate
broker in Seattle, and she had her office at 19th and East Madison. She also had apartment houses and other rental properties. Later one of the Norris brothers opened a real estate office on Madison Street.
MG:	Do you remember which Norris it was?
AY:	Let's see. I wouldn't like to get that wrong now.
MG:	Okay. Well, maybe I can check.
AY:	I think it was Claude, though. And then let's see, there was another
one that came to my mind just then. Oh, there was a hotel, the West Coast Hotel, operated by Mrs. L. B. Smith, and I believe before that time Fred Woodson had a hotel in Seattle. I think his was the first one, Fred Woodson, Sr. And of course the hotels were very necessary things in those days, because black people didn't stay in the white hotels, and there were quite a few railroad men who came to Seattle and needed a place to stay.
MG:	Were they barred from those hotels, or did they simply not try to
stay?
AY:	They were barred, they just weren't given any service at all. There
were still few restaurants, really, that served black people willingly, and I think in those days people didn't eat out as often as they do now, so they probably didn't miss it too much. They went to Chinese restaurants and black restaurants in the Jackson Street area or Madison Street area. Mr. Samuel Stone owned and operated an excellent catering service. His clientele was mostly affluent white people. His family was one of the earlier black pioneer families. That's about all I can remember, just offhand, about businesses, and I'm sure I've forgotten some.
MG:	Well, now do you recall, apart from Mrs. Miller and Mrs. Smith,
were there other black people in business?
AY:	Yes, Ethel Stone, daughter of Samuel Stone, had a lending library
in the Rainier district. I don't recall any other black women in business. I remember a Mrs. Loddie Biggs who was a bacteriologist, one of the few professional women, and a Theresa Dixon, who was a nurse.
MG:	Now Theresa Dixon was a relative to William Dixon.
AY:	Perhaps I should have mentioned to you even before this interview,
one of the people, I think, in Seattle who has made a remarkable name for herself is Millie Boer Russell. She was born here in Seattle and graduated the University of Washington, was a bacteriologist, and held quite a responsible position for many years in the King County Blood Bank, and is now teaching at the University of Washington. You probably know her, don't you, Marcia...﻿35
MG:	No.
AY:	You've never met her. A lovely, charming person. I think that's
about all I can tell you, as far as business persons are concerned.
MG:	How about male professionals?
AY:	There were a few doctors. I think Dr. Maxwell was the very first
black doctor to practice in the state of Washington, but his clientele was mostly Caucasian. He moved to the south end of town, out in the Burien area where he set up a practice.
MG: What was his first name?
AY:	Now, that, I just don't know, I really don't. His daughter still
lives here in Seattle. His daughter is Muriel Maxwell Pollard. Then along came Dr. Calhoun who was an M.D., William Calhoun. And there were several dentists, Dr. Clarence Allan and Felix B. Cooper and
Dr. Burton. And there was a very successful lawyer, Clarence Anderson. He became quite a hero in the black community, because he was instrumental in breaking down some of the segregation in public places, discriminatory laws.
MG: Were there any unions of black employees or professional people, any cooperative efforts?
AY:	I don't think so. It was many years later that the unions began to
accept blacks into membership.
MG:	And there were no all-black unions.
AY:	No, no. And of course this was the thing that made working con-
ditions very difficult, because business would say, "We can't employ any but union people," but the unions would not accept blacks to membership. So it was a vicious circle. I think perhaps the exciting time in my life, as far as economics was concerned, was when we finally had a fair employment practices law passed in the state of Washington. My husband and I had been very active in the NAACP, and
in other civil rights movements, and had worked with them so hard over a period of years, and every time the legislature was in session, we were writing letters and making trips to Olympia, and putting pressure here and there trying to get that law passed. Finally it was when Governor Langlie was in office that it did pass, and one of my most treasured pictures is a picture of my husband, Charles Stokes, Nat Dotson, who was with the Urban League then, and one or two other people, standing behind the governor as he signed that bill, and that was really a day of rejoicing for most of us. Of course that didn't solve everything, but it certainly did help. It was a big step in the right direction.
MG:	Was it enforced?
AY:	Yes. Of course, the law had many loopholes at first; it was handi-
capped in some respects due to the lack of funding which did not provide adequate staff. It probably was not as effective the first﻿36
AY:	(cont) few years as it should have been, it was something new. The
staff, I think, was probably not as well informed as to how to go about it as they should have. They still were a little bit afraid of rocking the boat, so to speak. But it has, over a period of years, done a remarkable job, I think, in helping to break down discriminatory practices in industry and business. That was a real step in the right direction.
MG:	Now you say it was passed during Governor Langlie's administration.
Do you have an idea about what year that was?
AY:	It must have been in the late forties, I would think. I could look
that up for you if you think...
MG:	That's all right, we can... Now in the area of politics, we talked
about the passage of this bill which was very important, and you mentioned earlier that Attorney Anderson was active in antidiscrimination fighting. What was the nature of some of the actions that he was involved in?
AY:	Well, he was the one that is credited for breaking down the discrim-
inatory practices in restaurants and theaters. Even when he won a case... I remember once that the guilty party was fined only one dollar. But it did give a moral boost to blacks in the area, who had been deprived of their rights. I' m not sure that it made us go out and eat out more than we had before. I think we did enjoy going to movies more, and not having to be told to sit over on one side, or upstairs in another designated, less desirable area. It was interesting with the movies; at least when I came here, it seems to me, it was some of the smaller ones and the neighborhood movies that practiced this more than the large movies downtown.
MG:	Do you remember the names of any of the restaurants or theaters that
were involved in these actions?
AY:	The theater that I have in mind was called the Roycroft, I think at
that time, at least later it was, and it was on 19th, oh maybe around Mercer. It would be north of town, I think, around that area. And of course, it was within walking distance of the black community, and one which the black community would certainly patronize. I can't remember names of the restaurants right offhand, I think there were at least two I recall which were sued.
MG: This was before the 1940s, obviously.
AY: Oh yes, yes. This was before 1940.
MG:	How active were blacks in the political life of the city, voting,
office holding, and so on?
AY:	I think they must have been remarkably active and militant, really,
because we had a black newspaper that was considered a very militant newspaper, Horace Cayton's newspaper, and later E. I. Robinson and Mr. Wilson were editors of community newspapers. I remember when my﻿37
AY:	(cont) husband's grandfather ran for an office. It seems that he ran
for a public office of some kind every four years, precinct committeeman or some of the lesser offices of that kind. He was very active in politics. Mr. Pitter, Edmund Pitter was a very active man, as far as politics was concerned. I think probably J.T» Gayton was at least as active; he didn't run for public office, but I think he was active in politics. It wasn't until after the forties that I know of any who ran for any major office like state representative or mayor or city council.
MG:	What were the political affiliations of these persons that you've
mentioned?
AY:	Oh, let's see. I think perhaps John Cragwell was a Republican,
and probably Mr. Pitter was a Democrat. Now this I couldn't say for sure. I know his family seem now to be Democrats; whether he was then or not, I don't know. Just like John Cragwell's Republican, but I know some of his family who are not. [laughter]
MG:	What were the names of the newspapers published by the editors
you've mentioned? Cayton's was the Seattle Republican and then I think you said E. I. Robinson...
AY:	Northwest Enterprise...
MG:	Yes, and there was a third newspaper publisher...
AY:	A Mr. Wilson, I can't remember, what was his -name? It seems to me
it must have been J.B. Wilson and it seems to -me it was the Dispatch, some kind of Dispatch...
MG:	Were there any women's political clubs, or women active in politics?
AY:	Well, Mrs. Miller was always active. I don't recall that she ever
ran for any office, but she was a very farsighted woman and up and coming, she was quite a remarkable businesswoman. I don't recall if she ever ran for any public office. I think once she did file for an appointment to fill a vacancy in an office when Mrs. Powell retired, and of course this was many years later than World War II. Mrs. F.F. Powell had been on the city council for many years Mrs. Miller was not appointed to the position, but she was interested enough to try.
MG:	Were there any other newspapers that you've not mentioned, that
had, you know, a fairly long life and impact?
AY: No, I don't believe so. It seems to me that after the Enterprise there were several attempts at newspapers, but none of them seemed to run for very long periods of time.
MG: Were there any journals or magazines?
AY: No, I don't think so.
MG: Where did black students attend school? Could they gain entry into any of the public schools, or were they concentrated in one or two?﻿38
AY:	They could gain entry, but of course because of their living
pattern, they attended the schools close to where they lived, which were Longfellow Elementary School and Meany Junior High, Garfield High School, Broadway High School. There may have been one or two in Franklin, and there were a few other elementary schools, I'm sure, that blacks attended. And of course those who lived out in Ballard and out in the Rainier Valley, they went to schools in their neighborhoods, where they lived.
MG:	What, so far as you know, was their reception in these schools? Were
they all black in terms of the student body, or were they mixed, or what was the nature of the faculty and the rest?
AY:	Oh, they were all mixed. There were no black faculty. Oh, that
was another very exciting time when we got the first black school teacher in Seattle. And that came after the war, it has been relatively recent. There again, that was a result of pressure from civil rights organizations, like the Christian Friends for Racial Equality and the NAACP and the Urban League, just pounding away at it every year, just constant, constant, constant attention to the problem.
MG: Who was that first teacher?
AY:	I think that Mrs. Thelma DeWitte is credited with being the first,
and about that same time, if not before, Marita Harris was employed by Ed ison Vocational School, and this was really quite an achievement. You see up until that time, the few black girls who had finished college and wanted to teach had to go away from home and find employment, to teach in the black schools in the South and the East. I think Tessie Miller, Geneva B. Miller's daughter, was one of those and Merry Newton (now Cole) was one of those. Many of them went to college away from home, the black colleges, to prepare for teaching at black schools.
MG:	I was going to ask you that next. How many black students,
graduates of the high schools we've mentioned, went ahead to attend university here?
AY:	Not very many. Their percentage would have been very, very small.
MG:	Were they discouraged from entry, or were they simply unable to
afford...
AY:	Well, they certainly could have gone, there was no reason to
keep them from enrolling. But I think that they felt that if they were going to teach or go into almost any kind of profession, they'd need the contact with a black college, or at least back East where they had contact with other black professional people. I think this was part of the reason; there just wasn't any employment for them anyway; and of course we were really counseled out of going to university when we were in high school. The girls were told to take home economics so they would know how to cook and to clean house and sew, in other words to prepare you to go to work for a white woman, as housekeeper or maid. The boys were told to take things like﻿39
AY:	(cont) automobile mechanics and vocational courses. As a matter of
fact, I remember very well one teacher asking me, I said something to her, I think, about wanting to be a secretary, and she said, "You'd better take home economics, where would you go to work?" Surely she thought she was being a good counselor and advising me, and then I couldn't answer her, where would I go to work? And it was many, many years after I was out of high school that I was able to get a job just as a typist, let alone a secretary. And that came only because of the war. The great need for everyone who had any kind of a skill, and those who didn't have skills were needed. So we weren't encouraged to go to college- They didn't have very many counselors as we have now; anyway, they usually were like a girls' advisor and a boys' advisor, and they had to play this dual role. I don't remember even any particular interest shown in seeing that we were taking the right subjects to prepare us for college, that sort of thing, you know, like they do now. It was just a case, you'd take what you wanted to take, and graduate, and you were through. That was all there was to it for black girls and boys.
MG:	Did any blacks who had been educated outside the Seattle area
return? Or once they left, did they tend to stay away?
AY: Yes, the two that I've mentioned, for example, Tessie Miller came back to teach here in Seattle, and Merry Cole has had a brilliant career as an educator, both in the classroom and in the special fields of reading and setting up programs for reading courses for children who have handicaps and difficulties in learning to read. She had done remarkably well. I don't recall offhand now, others who went away and then came back and taught. I don't know where Maxine Pitter received her training—perhaps you've learned that from her sister—but she's a professional woman, a registered nurse, and Juanita Alexander is a registered nurse.
MG: What were some of the important black churches before the Second World War in the Seattle area?
AY: Mount Zion Baptist Church, "First A.M.E. Church [First African Methodist
Episcopal] and the Grace Presbyterian Church were the three major churches before the war. If there were any others, they were so minor that I don't even recall...I think there were just the three.
MG: Was religious worship generally along segregated lines? In other words, were there church congregations that were integrated or...
AY:	There were some. I'm sure that some black people went to some
white churches, and they often visited back and forth, I think, on special occasions. But by and large, black people went to their own churches.
MG:	Did the churches continue to maintain a wider social role before the
Second World War, I mean apart from just religious congregation, did they have other programs or projects that...
AY:	Before the war? Oh yes, I think it's just been traditional with
black people that our churches have been really the hub of our social life. It seems that everything else was an offshoot from the﻿40
AY:	(cont) church. It did provide a kind of recreational program for
young people. For example, we had joint picnics, when all three of the churches were together at a huge picnic during the summer. Churches cooperated with one another. If one was having a concert, the others supported it and so on. As far as I can recall, and the way I felt about it, it was quite a nice rapport between the three churches.
MG:	That reminds me of something that Mrs. McCabe had told me about the
churches in Tacoma. She said that there weren't enough black ones to be able to have two social events at the same time, so they again worked cooperatively and supported each other's affairs.
AY: Yes, it's a nice spirit.
MG: You had an ecumenical movement then.
AY: Right.
MG:	How about fraternal organizations, both for men and for women, did
they play an important social role before the war?
AY:	Yes, I'm sure they did, particularly for those people who were
really closely involved in their programs. The Masons and the Eastern Stars and the Elks were strong organizations here in the state. I don't recall that there were any fraternities or sororities before World War II.
MG: Were there any other sorts of self-help societies?
AY:	Self-help societies...
MG:	That might not have been associated with churches, I'm thinking of
groups like Dorcas, you know, that would be involved with social welfare in some way. Were there any literary societies or book clubs, anything like that?
AY: Well, I think within these clubs that belonged to the federation perhaps, who specialized in these kinds of things, and I remember Mrs. Alice Howard was a member of a poets' club.
MG: This is the National Association of Colored...
AY:	Colored Women's Clubs, that's what I'm thinking of. They had study
clubs, they had charitable clubs, and during the war they played a very active role as volunteers in the hospitals and the Red Cross. You mentioned social welfare, which brought to mind one more woman who made a great contribution to Seattle as the first black social worker, Mrs. Carter. Has anyone told you about her, Nella Carter?
MG:	I think I have that name, what was her first name?
AY:	Nella.
MG:	Nella.﻿41
AY:	And she was a West Indian, and I think the remarkable thing about
Mrs. Carter, as I see it, was that she was not a young woman when she decided to do something in the area of social welfare. She went back to school, the University of Washington, and got her degree and worked for the state as a social worker. She was the only black social worker at the time. I'm sure she must have run into many, many difficult problems, not only because of her work, and being the only black probably, but it was a time when black people didn't understand about social work either. She had to investigate sometimes families who needed social welfare, and I think often was looked upon as more of a kind of truant officer. And it must have been very difficult for her, because we weren't really oriented to that kind of thing, we just didn't know what it was all about. But as I think of her, I admire her because I thought here was a woman who in her late years saw a need, and something that she would like to do and took the time to go back to school and prepare for it.
MG:	You were going to say something now about Mrs. Carter's daughter.
AY:	Yes, she had a daughter, Juanita, who was Juanita Russell. Juanita
had a business, an import business. She imported her merchandise from Africa. Here again, she was a first, and I don't think fully appreciated either, because we had not become conscious of the fine art of Africa. She had many lovely things in her shop and eventually was very successful with it. I don't know to what extent black people really supported her business. I know we made a few small purchases from her, but I think the expensive items, the big items, she sold to the white community. She had several locations of this	business. It seems to me once it was on 23rd
Avenue and Olive, a little shop there, and then she moved downtown to a market on 3rd Avenue about Stewart, I think, called the City Market then. She had quite an extensive shop there, some beautiful things, carvings and baskets and weaving. And I think that actually she was the first one to make most of us really conscious of African art, and then during the World's Fair in '62 she had a beautiful exhibit at the fair.
MG:	What did black people do for entertainment?
AY:	In the early years? Well, of course a lot of it was done in the
homes and in the churches, and believe it or not, when I came to Seattle and for many years before that, there was a tennis club in Seattle. It was located where the present YMCA is, at 23rd and Olive. There were tennis courts, and occasionally they'd have a dance in the tennis club house, and it was quite an active group. I think there was always a bridge club. The women, of course, were in various kinds of clubs. The Washington State Association of Colored Women's Clubs owned property on 23rd Avenue, just off Union; they called it the Sojourner Truth Home, and it was used for many years to house single women when they would come to the city and needed a place to stay. It served as meeting place for many groups, not just the Federated Clubs, but other groups could rent it and had meetings there and parties, receptions and dinners. That has since﻿42
(cont) been torn down. There were circles within the church itself which would give dinners and teas and other social activities.
The young people, most of their time, I think, was spent, during the summer months at least, at the beaches and picnicking, campfires. I don't recall that there was ever anything like overnight camping trips. I never was lucky enough to be in on one. They had parties sometimes at the tennis club, and later when that tennis club became the YMCA, it was used widely for parties for young people. There was a YWCA where girls were very active. In later years the YWCA did have camp sessions where we'd go for a week or maybe a weekend. There again there were activities at the YW, dancing parties and socials, usually games and that kind of thing.
It seems to me that people were very happy here, but you think in terms of so many things going on now, you wonder if they weren't bored. But we did seem to keep busy, and I think perhaps this is the reason that the black community developed such a close relationship with one another. People in those days knew everybody, and you knew what their problems were, and you knew if one of them was ill, you knew if there was a death in the family, you knew most of the important things that were happening. And everybody seemed to be a little bit responsible for everybody else. There was a deep sense of caring. And even though there was a distinct social line drawn between those who lived in the Jackson Street area and those who lived in the Madison Street area, it seemed to me there were times when that line just seemed to be let down and everybody enjoyed one another.
The Madison area was considered the more prestigious?
Yeah, self-appointed, maybe. Anyway, this was where the churches were, this side of town, and so on. And the red light district and the sporting life, so to speak, was in the south end of town, the Jackson Street area, and I think this probably was the reason for the division. But we used to refer to it as going across town and nice girls, for example, didn't go across town. But I do remember many times at social functions when all these people could get together and enjoy one another and seemed to respect one another. It was just an unwritten law. It was something everybody understood and I think, as I look back, that was really pretty nice.
That was good, because so many of the people who were over there on the Jackson Street side of town, for example, were people who came to Seattle quite well educated and with great ambitions, only to find when they got here that there was no place for them. They were people who were not willing to accept the kinds of jobs that were available to them. They were just not going to stoop to that, janitors and maids and cooks and cleaning, just the lowest kinds of menial jobs seemed to be all that Was available, except for the very few. And rather than to resort to that, they went to the south end of town where they could make a living, have enough money to send their children to college, perhaps, and live comfortably﻿43
AY:	(cont) at a little bit higher level of living. Some who came
earlier, the light-skinned Negroes, found that they could not take the kind of discrimination and the lack of opportunities that were presented to them, and they just simply passed over on the other side and were lost completely to the black community. This seemed to be a well-known fact too, most of us knew this. Where they may not have done the thing to win friends and influence people, I think it was accepted as a decision they made and no one seemed to condemn it. That was the way they had of working out their problems and there again, I think it speaks well for the other Negroes who lived here in those days.
MG: How did the people in the south side of the black neighborhood, the Jackson Street area, support themselves?
AY:	Oh, in various ways. Of course there were the small businesses, the
restaurants, and hotels, there were sporting houses, prostitutes, pimps, bootlegging during Prohibition, gambling, almost anything, I guess, that you could think of that might have been illegal, but would bring in a source of revenue. So there were a variety of things that they did, and this is a reason that across town was not considered the place for nice people to go. This is not to imply that everyone living in the south end of town indulged in unlawful activities.
MG: When did this feeling of group unity and closeness change, as you remember it, and why did it change?
AY:	The black life in Seattle changed during World War II, when the
great influx began to arrive, when many of the local men had been enlisted in service, had been sent away from Seattle or Washington State. By the same token, many new ones came in for the same reason. Many of the blacks who moved away during that time never returned, just as many who moved into this area never returned to their homes. And of course then there were so many new people who came in, it just sort of swallowed up this little nucleus of original black people. And I can remember so often that in the late forties, we'd go out somewhere and there was a large group, we'd just look around and you just didn't see anybody you knew. We'd be a stranger in a crowd, and we used to say, "A stranger in my own home town." We just didn't know people.
In a way, it was a sad situation because we lost track of one another. Oh, with some exceptions, maybe I kept in touch with two or three, and someone else kept in touch with two or three others. But we just never saw each other in a large group, except maybe at a time of a funeral, or maybe occasionally there'd be a wedding of a daughter or son of one of the old-timers, and they'd invite all the old-timers. And I remember invariably when we'd get together like that, we'd all be so glad to see each other, and somebody would always say, "Isn't it a pity that we never get together, never see each other except at a time like this?" It usually was a funeral, and I remember, uh, I guess about ten years ago, I went to such a funeral as that. And standing there with a friend, watching some of our friends coming out after the service, and the way they greeted﻿44
AY:	(cont) their old friends whom they hadn't seen for so long, we
said to each other then, "What a pity." And I said, "Well, why don't we do something about it?" And she said, "You know, we really should." And so we vowed we were going to do something about it.
Well, several years rolled by and nothing was done about it. So finally when I retired, I thought, now I'm going to see if I can't do something to get some of the old-timers together again. I talked to this same woman that I had talked to before. She was all for it, but we could never seem to make any connections and get moving on it. And it would be pushed aside again. Finally, it was after my sister Susie died, and her husband gave me a little snapshot that was among her possessions. In that picture were about twelve young women, and out of that group about four or five of them had passed on, including my sister. I thought, well, this is a perfect example of why we should get together once in a while. Some in the picture I had not seen for so many years, and I carried the picture around with me for quite a while. Finally it was in Mexico City when I showed it to a friend who had moved there—not in Mexico City, but San Miguel de Allende in Mexico—and I asked her (this was Sarah Green Haith), I said, "Do you remember this picture?" She thought a while, she said, "Yes, that was taken in front of my house, it was a shower for you." And then as we talked, I remembered the occasion.
So I came back home then, and after thinking about it some, I had twelve prints made from this little snapshot, and sent one to each of the women i». the picture and their husbands, along with an invitation for them to come to dinner at my house, and all those who were in town came. The one who lived in Mexico called long distance the day that we were together here having dinner, and the one in Hawaii had written a lovely letter to be read to the group that day. Well, we just had such a beautiful time, so then after we had dinner, we were sitting around talking, I told them what was on my mind. I said, "I think we ought to try to do something to get together oftener." They thought it was a great idea and said,. "Well, let's have a picnic next year." So this was in June and I said, "I'm afraid if we put it off till next year we just won't do it." We finally set a date for September. We would just call all the people we ceroid think of and tell them to come on out to Seward Park on the given day, we're going to have a picnic. This is the way it started.
MG:	This was ROOTS that you're...
AY: Yes, it was this little group, There were just about six couples
of us. As we called our friends, everybody showed so much interest in it, I thought, my goodness, we might have a good-sized crowd at that picnic, so I'd better call the park department and see if I can reserve a space. The park department said, "We don't reserve picnic areas, but if you're having a large picnic, we'll register it, and then if anyone else calls, we can say that you had asked for it first." They said, "But that's something you just have to take your﻿45
(cont) chances on." Well, it was after the regular picnic season and after Labor Day, so we thought our chances were pretty good. But I thought, I had better just make this the maximum number that I think could possibly come and I said, "We'll have at least fifty and maybe a hundred." Well, do you know Marcia, when that picnic day came, we had over 300 people? We had signs up that said, "Reunion of Old-timers of Seattle," "Happiness is Old Friends." It was truly one of the happiest days I have ever seen anyone experience. I just had no idea how deeply it would affect people. There were tears, they were slapping each other on the back, they were hugging and kissing, and they were laughing. It was just really something to behold. So of course everybody said, "Let's do it every year, we must do it every year."
So we found out later that some people in the area heard about it, old-timers, and they thought it was for senior citizens, and they had been left out. "Why didn't you tell me, I'd have been there?" So we said, "We really should have a name, instead of just calling ourselves Old-timers," because that was misleading. And so we all thought about it. I said, "Everybody think about a name, think hard about it." And I thought and I thought, and I wrote down all kinds of names. I knew we had to keep in there somewhere a reference to old-timers, because this really was what we've always referred to ourselves as. So I sat down one day, and I went through the alphabet and I put every letter in the alphabet in front of OTS. I finally got to R, and I think that was the first one that made any kind of sense of a word, and that was ROTS. [laughter] And finally it was in the middle of the night, one night when it came to me, I guess in the middle of the night or early morning, relatives of old-timers. ROOTS. I thought, that's just perfect, that's what they are, they're the roots of Seattle. I went to Letcher, I said, "I've got it, I've got it." He said, "You've got what?" But anyway, I presented it to our committee, the others who had started it with us, and everybody thought it was just perfect.
So we decided we'd call ourselves Relatives of Old-Timers of Seattle, and by this time, of course, we'd realized we had to include all the state of Washington, because so many of the people who had come into Seattle had come from all over the state and some of their relatives were still in Yakima and so on, and there was Tacoma and Everett, and all these places, you see, so actually it means all of Washington.
And it was interesting that we hit on that name before we had ever heard of Alex Haley's book. Now I don't know whether that's good or bad, but I think it's interesting in that it did spell out exactly the same thing as the title of his book. So that's why we call ourselves ROOTS, and this ROOTS picnic, this will be our fifth annual picnic, this September. It's just been delightful. Last year we had over 700 people, and people are coming from all over the country, Chicago, Illinois, Louisiana, all over California, the Bay Area and Los Angeles and on down to San Diego, all over Oregon and of course all of the state of Washington. We had the couple from Hawaii, and we're expecting some from Washington, D.C., this summer, and it's just been, really, a very rewarding experience,﻿46
AY:	(cont) heart warming.
MG: Were there any tensions that developed between the newcomers and the old-timers after this great influx of the forties?
AY: Yes. I think there probably were. I'm not sure that they were as
serious as a lot of people seemed to think they were. I really wasn't even aware of it for a good many years, this feeling. But I do recall such remarks as, "Well, we didn't have problems like that before all these sharecroppers came in here." On the other hand, remarks like, "Well, they've been here all these years, why didn't they do something about it, why have they got all these...these problems were here before we came." Both of which were true, really. The problems were here before they came, there were a good many problems. They just were enlarged, there were just more of them, 'cause there were more people and it became a little more visible. I think that it is true that a lot of old-timers had very narrow ideas and had pretty much assumed that this is our country, and this is the way we want it, and this is the way everybody that comes here should act and dress and do, and probably were very resentful; in fact, I know some of them were very resentful. And I think in many cases, nothing more than it was reminding them that perhaps their ship hadn't docked much earlier than this one had. And they came looking and acting pretty much the same way as many of the newcomers. But I think that really it was never as serious as a lot of people would have one believe. Maybe a few really felt it very strongly, but I never really sensed that there was anything that was really bitter or hostile in the feelings. I think maybe some of the old-timers did give the impression that; well, we're a little bit better than some of those who just arrived. I think on the other hand, some of the newcomers really did the same thing, you know, if this is the best you could do, you didn't do very well. But of course, it had taken a few years for each to appreciate what the other had done. They come to find out that we did have problems, and I think with so few black people to work them out, I think we did very well.
MG:	Are there class distinctions, would you say, among blacks who reside
in Seattle today? And if so, what are those distinctions based upon?
AY:	Class distinctions now?
MG: Yes.
AY: Well, if there are, I guess I'm just not aware of it. There probably could be, but I don't think it's anything that's that much. I'm sure that there must be some who... I really don't feel that way. I think that if the professional people probably tend to have a great deal in common and may feel that nonprofessionals are not part of that group...I don't know, but I'm not conscious of it, Marcia. It would be interesting to know, I haven't heard anyone really discuss it. We seem to have friends and social contacts in all kinds of groups, some professional, some nonprofessionals and the old-timers, some very new people and...﻿47
MG:	So certainly from your own experience then, it's not a factor that
you recognize.
AY:	No, I can't honestly say that I do recognize that kind of feeling. Now
maybe some people feel that way about me, and I don't even know, [laughter] If they do, I'm so busy with other things that I haven't even noticed.
MG:	You mentioned Mrs. Carter's experiences as the first black social
worker, and she worked for the state. What social services were available to blacks in the early days? Were there relief programs, any kind of public assistance?
AY:	Well, I think they were primarily relief programs, so far as providing
some funds for food and housing. I don't recall there was anything... Well, I guess there might have been free clinics, I was going to say no health programs. I guess there were free clinics, especially for children, at the county hospital for other outpatient - services, yes...
MG:	Any assistance in the area of employment?
AY:	I don't think so, I doubt that very much. See, even state employment
services came later, about the same time as Social Security, I guess. No, I don't believe there was anything like that. There again, you know, our churches and organizations, clubs, sort of carried on that business of welfare, helping people, providing their needs and essentials.
MG:	I'd like to ask you a little bit about the nature of race relations
in Seattle, relations between blacks and whites, and relations between blacks and Orientals, which is not a factor of consideration in many other areas of the country. Generally, how would you describe the relationship between blacks and whites in the period before the Second World War? Indifferent, hostile, how would you describe it?
AY:	Well, I think our discussion about my attempting to get employment,
and my experience at college gives you some idea of what the real feelings were. There were not the overt hostile attacks that I have experienced, for example, in Salt Lake City, the name calling and this sort of thing, but I think they definitely felt that there was a place for black people and that you were not supposed to step beyond that line. For example, the same housemother in college, it was okay for me to come to college, but I certainly must not room with white girls. That was going too far. You could go almost anywhere you wanted to go, if you had the money, but just try to get the money to go.
I think one of the most degrading things that we accepted, I suppose because there was just such a need for some kind of social life... I recall for example, one of the clubs, one of the Federated Clubs, the Self-Improvement Club, the oldest women's organization, I guess, in Seattle, used to have an annual Thanksgiving ball, and the only time that they could rent a hall was on Thanksgiving eve, and that was﻿48
AY:	(cont) because nobody else wanted it on that night. We'd have to have
our dance on that night and then, of course, the next morning it meant the black women had their day cut out...and we did it. For years and years we did it. And I think back on it now and I think, oh, it was a degrading thing that was imposed on us. Sometimes I think now, I wish we hadn't done it, I just wish we hadn't accepted it at all, but we'd only been cutting our own nose to spite our face if we hadn't. They wouldn't have cared one bit, it wouldn't have made any difference to them whether we accepted it or didn't accept it, and so why cut off that source of entertainment? It was a lovely affair, it was something the people looked forward to each year.
But these were the kinds of little subtle things that happened in early Seattle. It was discrimination, maybe not like some of the others that we'd experienced in the South, and as I said, in Utah, but it was there. Trying to get employment. You could work as a maid or a janitor, but my goodness, why would you even consider doing anything else? That attitude, you know, this is not for you. On the other hand, now it seems strange, a paradox almost, in a way that certain white people were so helpful and took part in many of the black community activities...
MG:	Did they have any particular class or ethnic identity, those whites
that involved themselves in black affairs?
AY:	No, do you mean was it any more one ethnic group than another...
MG:	Than another, or any more one socioeconomic class than another?
AY:	No, I don't think so. For example, Letcher's grandfather received
an awful lot of support and help from well-to-do white people in getting his business started, and supporting him when he'd run for public office and that kind of thing, and I'm sure the same is true with Mr. Gayton.
I have a quilt in my possession right now—I wish I owned it, but I had to borrow it—which had been on display at Marymoor Park. It was a quilt that evidently was made by a group, church circle at either Mount Zion or First A.M.E., I suspect, and there must be several hundred names on that quilt, and it's dated 1896, I believe. In those days it was what they called a friendship quilt, and these circles would embroider the names on the quilt for a fee, they probably didn't charge much more than fifty cents a name in those days, and then when it was all finished they raffled it off. So it was a source of income for the group, a money raising project. This quilt has names on it of my husband's grandfather, for example, and Joshua Green and Gayton and some of the old, old-timers, black and white, the names were all on this quilt, some of the Denny family. All of which said to me, well now, this was a group of black women who had this project, but they were going to the white people they knew and selling them space on this quilt too and their names were on that quilt. Well, there must have been some degree of cooperation.﻿49
MG:	But now those whites whose names were on the quilt, the Greens, the Dennys
and so on, were definitely the upper class among the whites in Seattle?
AY:	So far as I could determine, some blacks got the names because they
worked for them. They may have even been domestic servants in their homes or something like this.
MG:	What I was trying to see was whether or not there was a distinction
so far as these whites were concerned, than, say, recent European immigrants to the area, in terms of their relationships with blacks. But there wasn't, so far as you're aware...
AY:	I wasn't aware of that. Now for example, out in the south end they were
mostly Italians where this Dr. Maxwell went to set up his practice. I have never known any close relationship between the Orientals and the blacks, even though many of them lived down around the Jackson Street area, the international community which it has become known in more recent years. I've never known of any real hostile feelings or problems between them, but neither have I ever witnessed any real cooperative community interests.
MG:	But now you were able to enter Oriental restaurants...
AY:	Yes, Well, yes.
MG:	Were the neighborhoods ever mixed, that is black and Oriental?
AY:	Oh, the neighborhoods were mixed, oh yes, the neighborhoods were mixed.
MG:	But the contact simply didn't go beyond...
AY:	It didn't go beyond there, and of course, they had their churches, the
blacks had their churches. And of course Garfield High School, when I went there, probably had more Orientals in school then than there were blacks. We all got along all right in school, but I never made any friends with any Orientals,, and I don't know of any of my friends who did, who visited back and forth in each other's homes. Our athletic teams, yes, we'd play together on the teams and in the classrooms together and that sort of thing, but they stayed pretty much to themselves, and I think they must have let the blacks know that they were drawing the line. I don't think they were ever overly friendly, but of course after World War II, then it just was almost an impossible situation, they just wanted no part of blacks, you know, after they'd been in those camps, what did they call it...
MG:	They called them detention camps.
AY:	Relocation centers. I understand that they were told that they were
going to be allowed to come back to the West Coast. And we heard that they were told, "When you get back, if you want to get along, stay out of trouble; don't have anything to do with Communists or Negroes."
MG:	Did whites, at any time that you were aware, make distinctions within
the black community based on what they perceived as class differences or differences in skin color? In other words, was a professional light-skinned black person more acceptable in white terms than a darker-skinned domestic?﻿50
AY:	I don't think so. I'm trying to think now of maybe some circumstances,
and it may appear that those with fairer skin got better jobs or were more easily employed than some others, but on the other hand, I'm sure I can think of some very dark-skinned blacks who got along very well and had some responsible jobs.
MG:	Now Seattle has become quite a center of interracial marriages. Was
this a pattern before the Second World War, or is this a phenomena of very recent origin?
AY:	There were some interracial marriages before, and of course they were
few, but then there were few black people, too.
MG:	And how were those accepted by the white and black communities in
the early days?
AY:	They seemed to be accepted. I can think of only one family in particular
that was really well known, and really involved in the social life of the black community, and they were very well accepted. I don't believe there.was any great distinction made.
MG:	Did those couples identify with the black community then?
AY:	Yes, they did. This one family in particular that I'm thinking of...well,
I can think of two. I think it was based more on those people themselves, and how well they related to the black community, rather than how the black community felt about them.
MG:	When did the great increase in numbers of interracial marriages begin?
AY:	Oh, I think like everywhere el se in this country, since World War II, and
I think since then, this seems to be universal.
MG:	You don't perceive Seattle then as having a much greater proportion
of interracial marriages than other parts of the country?
AY:	No, I hadn't ever thought that they did have. Is this supposed to be
a fact, a statistical...
MG:	Well, I don't know if those things are actually counted, but it has
that reputation, yes.
AY:	I didn't know that. Well, I don't know, it could be, even more so than
California?
MG:	Yes.
AY:	Is that so? I know there are a lot of them, it seems to be very common.
MG:	To what extent did black people use their political power for the redress
of grievances? Did they ever unify to vote a certain way, or to boycott, or any other sort of political action?
AY:	Oh, I think there were isolated cases when they did. That is in recent
years, because there never were enough of them prior to World War II to﻿51
AY:	(cont) make that much of an impact. I can remember in recent years when,
oh, like Tradewell Store, on 23rd and East Union, was boycotted because blacks wanted more work there. I cannot remember any time when there was a really organized effort to vote as a bloc. This I just don't think was ever heard of in Seattle.
MG:	Well, I've reached the conclusion of the questions I had prepared for
you. Was there any other subject or area that we haven't talked about that you'd care to comment on?
AY:	Why, I don't think so. I think you've covered everything very well.
MG:	Are there any persons that you might want to note or name that we've
missed?
AY:	No, I don't believe so. Probably I'll think of a thousand things
after.
MG:	Lat er. Well, thank you very much, Mrs. Yarbrough.﻿ARLINE YARBROUGH
