Merze Tate:	Today is April 4, 1978. The interviewee is
Mrs. May Edwards Hill; the interviewer, Merze Tate. The interview is taking place at Mrs. Hill's home, 2946 Chain Bridge Road, Northwest, in Washington, D.C. Later on in the interview, Mrs. Hill will tell you something about this particular location, which means a great deal to her in her life's experience.
Mrs. Hill is the wife of the Reverend Doctor Daniel G. Hill, Jr., who for years was dean of the [Andrew Rankin Memorial] Chapel, and dean of the School of Religion at Howard University, and she feels that her life is so intimately connected with his that she hasn't much to report. But I am sure this reel, this cassette, will prove that she does have much to contribute.
Mrs. Hill, since Haley's book on Roots has become so popular, we are always interested in your parents and grandparents, if you wish to mention them, where you were born, and so on. I know some of your relatives, but it's up to you to place yourself with your kin at this time.
May Hill:	I was born in Washington, D.C., in the home
of my grandfather, on 6th Street, Northeast, between L and M, very close to Gallaudet [College] for the deaf. My father always boasted of the fact that he never lived in a rented home. His father, although an ex-slave, had acquired some money and bought this home on 6th Street, and my father was born there. I was born in the same room. And he was always proud of that fact. My grandfather, Jesse Edwards, was a slave, as I understand, from a plantation in Virginia, and his wife, my grandmother, was Lucinda Carter Edwards. She died before I was born. But I do remember my grandfather. He came to live with us after my father bought a home for himself and his new baby on Linden Street, Northeast, which was a very pretty little short street lined with linden trees, and near a public school. My father thought it was an ideal situation in which to rear a family. The other three members of our family were born in that house.﻿2
MT: Did you attend the school on that street?
MH: No, I attended Lovejoy School, which was four blocks away at 12th and
D Street, Northeast. My mother was always very interested in our teachers in school. In my eight years in public school, grade school, I attended three different schools, because whenever I came to a teacher that my mother thought was not quite efficient, or didn't have an excellent record as a teacher, she would transfer me to another school. So from Lovejoy I was transferred to Logan School, which was about ten blocks from home.
Then when I got to the seventh grade, she didn't favor the principal of that school as my teacher, so she transferred me to Slater School in northwest Washington, because my father knew the principal there very well, who would be my eighth-grade teacher. And the supervising principal of that division was a former teacher of his, Miss Marian Shadd. He loved her dearly, and he was one of her pet students. So he told me, "Now when you go to school, and Miss Shadd comes around as a supervising visitor, you be sure to go to her and tell her that you're Tom W. Edwards's daughter," and I did. She said, "Well, that makes you my granddaughter in school." And I was so proud to be thought of as the granddaughter of the supervising principal, Marian Shadd, that I boasted about it all the time.
MT: She was an elegant lady, wasn't she?
MH: Yes, she was a lovely person. Well, she was the aunt of Harriet Shadd Butcher, and Dr. Shadd, her brother, was one of my father's teachers in medical school. So my father felt a very close relationship there to the Shadd family.
MT: Eva Dykes, Dr. Eva Dykes, mentioned Miss Shadd as being such a superior person. You were both fortunate in having her as a teacher.
MH: Oh, she was the quintessence of intelligence and refinery, and so warm and beautiful.
MT: That's a fine memory, then, to have. And two different people, then, have mentioned her. Well, Mrs. Hill, you said your other members of your family, your brothers, your sisters... How many were there in your family?
MH: I was the oldest in my family, and I could never forget that I was oldest, because my mother would always say, "Now remember, May, you're an example for the other children." I had a brother next to me, Elmer, and then there was two years' difference, in the next two years came my sister, Lena Edwards. And then when I was in college, my father said we had what was an afterthought in the family, and I had a brother Tommy Edwards, Thomas William Edwards, Jr., who was born when I was in my second year in college.
MT: That was quite a gap, then.
MH: Quite a gap.
MT: Was he really babied, and favored, and made over?﻿3
MH: Oh, we adored him, but he was never spoiled. And to this day when I write to him on his birthday, I always say, "Tommy, if there was ever a wanted baby, you were that baby." Because we lived in a neighborhood of large families, and there was always a baby for some older child to be pushing around in a baby carriage. I thought that was great, and we all just wanted a baby in our family. There were three of us children, rather close, so we thought it would just be a wonderful thing if we had a baby, a family of five or six, like some of the families. So when Tom was born, he was just adored, and my father was able, as he used to say, to enjoy him, because during our baby and early days, he was busy studying dentistry, and working at night in the city post office. So he had a very busy life, and not much time to play and to relate to us three older children. But with Tom, he adored him, and showed him off to his patients, and he came to the office, and he took him on all his vacations.
MT: Now your sister, Dr. Lena Edwards, has a son named Tom. Was he named after your brother?
MH: After my father, that's right.
MT: And after your brother—that would be his uncle, wouldn't it?
MH: Yes, his uncle, who's still living, of course. But he was named for my father. My brother is Tom, junior.
M:T Oh, I see. So there are three Toms in the family. Tom is now Father Martin [Madison], isn't that right?
MH: That's right, Tom Madison.
MT: Tom Madison, and he is a fine, fine gentleman. That's very interesting. Your being the oldest in the family, you had to set the example.
MH: That's right. Always, always.
MT: Did you feel a burden from that?
MH: No, 1 didn't. It made me feel sometimes as if I were expected to be a
goody-good, you know? And one of the amusing things... My brother Elmer and sister Lena were kind of pals—I was sort of the older one on the outside—and when they'd concoct some mystery and get in trouble, my mother was free with spanking. She'd give them a spanking and I'd stand up and bawl and cry, and she'd turn and look at me and say, "What are you crying for? I'll give you something, too." [laughter]
MT: Sounds like my mother!
MH: So, I'll never forget that constant reminder, "You're the oldest and you must set the example."
MT: Now then, you attended three different schools while in the elementary level. Then where did you go to high school?﻿4
MH: M Street High School, which was the high school.
MT: That's what I hear in all the reporting.
MH: And if there was ever a school in which the faculty were a motivating
factor in seeing that you went ahead ambitiously in the world of scholarship, that faculty was there. Carter G. Woodson, Jessie Fauset, Judge Andrew Simpson, and all. I can't recall the names now. But they were people who had special interest in students, and motivated us to want to be somebody. And the school brought speakers like W.E.B. DuBois; Eugene Kinckle Jones, founder of the Urban League; and Azalea Hackley, who was one woman, we looked forward to her coming every year. She taught us how to walk, how to stand, how to sit, how to hold our heads up and look straight into people's eyes when we talked, and carry ourselves with dignity, no head hanging. And those were people who inspired us as students.
MT: And that M Street became...
MH: Dunbar High School. My class was next to the last class, as I remember— I was in the class of 1914--.was the last class to graduate from the old M Street High School, because this beautiful new Dunbar High School... And the rest of my family went to Dunbar.
MT: Rayford Logan mentions that so often in his speeches. Well, it has a great name, and of course now there's a biography of Dunbar, and the graduates and so on.
MH: That's right, done by Mary Gibson Hundley, who was a classmate of mine...
MT: Mary Hundley was?
MH: Mary Gibson Hundley, was a classmate of mine.
MT: And of course she's a Radcliffe woman, and this will be interesting on
tape. I don't know whether we have interviewed her yet or not. By your being the older of the children, were you able to go off to college, or did you remain here? Because many did, for Howard.
MH: My mother's ambition for me was to go to Wellesley. We lived in a neighborhood of young women, fine families, whose parents were in the federal service, because those were good positions at that time, for Negroes. They were graduates of Cornell, Wellesley, Smith, and Oberlin. Those were some who used to come see her during vacations, and she thought Wellesley was where I must go. But my father decided he did not want me to leave home.. I think he was probably particularly attached to me as the first born. He could not bear the thought of my leaving home. He was a Howard graduate, from what was the public school here in Washington, then the old Academy at Howard, and he said now... At graduation time I was in the top ten in the class and I got a scholarship to Howard University, so that answered that question of where I would attend college.
MT: Top ten. So you have achieved top ten of your class and a scholarship. Then after your period at Howard, what was the next step?﻿5
MH: Well, the war came along. As you know, things were going on in Europe at that time. My senior year in high school, I had met a young man from Lincoln University, who came to visit his friend, E. Franklin Frazier, who was living in the home of a classmate of mine. She decided that she would like this young man, Daniel G. Hill, who was a sophomore at Lincoln University, decided that she wantedhim to meet me, and suggested that he and Ed Frazier come over to my house. She brought him over, and I met him, and that was the beginning of a friendship in my senior year in high school.
Then all through school he visited Washington; he'd always come to see me. He was manager of his football team and he was on the debating team, and he was back and forth to Washington. His family lived in Baltimore. In my senior year in college, during the war, he was in his senior year in college; he went out to Fort Des Moines, which was the first officers' training camp for colored officers and was commissioned a second lieutenant there, and came back and was stationed at Ford Meade, Maryland, which is just outside of Washington. So of course, we saw more and more of each other, and he decided that we just must marry. But I was still in school, and I wasn't thinking about stopping school to marry, because at that time Kelly Miller was dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, and one was expelled from the school for marrying. But we decided we just had to get married, because there was a fear of his going overseas to France. So we married secretly in April of that graduating year, April of 1918.
MT: Yes, because we came into the war in 1917.
MH: That's right, and he did ship out in June 1918, for France, and he left.
I applied for substitute work. I had graduated from Howard, because it was kept secret, and our parents announced in June that I was married. I applied for teaching in the school system, and was appointed a substitute teacher in high school in Washington; so I substituted briefly in high school. Then the Bureau of War Risk was set up, which is now the Veterans Administration, and they needed workers badly.	I answered their appeal
for workers and was appointed a clerk in the Bureau of War Risk.	I took
a from four-to-eleven job in order that, if I did get substitute calls, I could take them. But I finally just became a full-time worker in the Bureau of War Risk. I worked there until my husband's return from France.
MT; Fortunately, the war ended very soon.
MH: Yes, fairly soon after that. He returned from France in February of 1919.
MT; Well, it was way over a year, almost two, after all. But that wasn't like four or five years, as Europeans were involved, European women, like the English and the French, some hundreds never came back. He returned to Washington?
MH: He returned to Baltimore. But I was living with my parents in Washington. So he came over here and I lived...took a room briefly with an aunt of mine while he was looking for employment. That was a time of terrible unrest, almost turmoil, because of the men coming back from overseas, you know. And the unemployment was because the war workers were being released then. So he went to look for work, and went to Camden and Philadelphia. He found a job in Camden, to fill out a teacher's year there, in an elementary﻿6
MH: (cont.) school. So he got me, and we went up to Camden, New Jersey, to live, and lived there till the end of the school term. Then he still needed to look for work; he went over to Philadelphia, and found a job there at the Berean Community Center and Industrial School. We lived in Philadelphia; we had rented an apartment, and our first child was born when we were living there. Around the corner, all the way around...Girard College around the corner, to Women's Lying-in Hospital, entirely staffed by women, and that's where my first baby was born.
MT: And which one was that?
MH: Jeanne, my girl, Jeanne Marie Hill. We gave her a French name because of •. • Jeanne Marie, because that was after her father's service in France, and we liked the name, and Marie was my mother's...
MT: That's fine. How long were you in that area of Philadelphia?
MH: We were there till...we left there in '21, because he wasn't satisfied with his work. He was restless; he was really suffering from the shock of the war, and very restless. He went to Temple University and took a course in salesmanship and some prelaw work. I had just settled down, thinking that he would enter the law school and go into law. He had been a debater, and an excellent one, on the Lincoln University team, and I just had it all thought out, that this was going to be his career. But he was restless, and didn't want to remain in that area.
His father sent for him to come to Baltimore and to consider entering the ministry. His father was a prominent minister in Baltimore at that time, and his family had been there... His father had served most of his ministry in Baltimore. So we moved to Baltimore with our baby, and lived in the parsonage with his parents, and he decided to enter the ministry. His older sister was living in Kansas City, and her husband was pastor of the First A.M.E. Church there, and they had a very fine bishop, and she thought that he could find work in that, what they called the Fifth Episcopal District of the A.M.E. Church. So he decided to move out to Missouri. In the meantime, our second baby, though, was born in Baltimore, and he left me with a young baby and then went out to Missouri to find work. When he did, he was appointed there, during the middle of a conference year, to a small church called Cain Memorial—it was really a mission—in Kansas City, Missouri. And he came back for me, and there were two babies.
MT: What was the second baby, a girl or a boy?
MH: The second baby was a girl, Margaret Theresa Hill, the Theresa after my grandmother's middle name—Margaret Theresa—and his mother's name, Margaret. So it was his mother's name and my grandmother's middle name, Margaret Theresa. So I went west with these two babies, to Kansas City. Later Dan was appointed to Independence, Missouri, as a full-time pastor, and we were there for three years. This was really a cultural shock for me. To begin with, I was born and reared—born is the saying, or reared— a Roman Catholic. I had never been in a Protestant service. I knew nothing of Protestantism, and it was really a cultural shock, denominational-wise. So far as community living was concerned, Independence, the home of﻿7
MH: (cont.) Harry Truman, was a little town, well outside of Kansas City, I
guess about ten miles outside of Kansas City, and there was no public high school there. Very limited population of Negroes; many, many old people who had been born in slavery there who were still living—this was in the twenties—still living in that area. We lived, our parsonage was just one block from the slave block where some of those people in our congregation were sold in slavery. The public library was not available to Negroes. You couldn't enter the public library there, and this hurt me very much, because at that time my two girls were interested in books and storytelling. One of my older girl's first words was, when she'd go in my husband's pocket and pull out his memorandum book, and said, "Book, book." So we knew she was going to be an intellectual. [laughter]
I decided that I would feel most at home working with the children and the young adults in the church. Because I didn't see how I fitted in with the sisters, and the members of the mission society, and that sort of thing. I just couldn't fit in with them. So this fact that they could not use the public library worried me greatly. My father, who believed in reading, "Children must be exposed to reading," sent me a set of books called the Children's Book House. I think there are eight volumes. And then he subscribed to a children's magazine—I think that was called Saint Nicholas-^-and another nature magazine. So I decided, well, I would let the children come to our house on Saturdays and use our books, and I had a little pre-teenage group, for instance.
MT: And these were other children in the community.
MH: They were community children, yes. So they came in...in our little living room, we had built in some bookshelves, and then our books and the few other books that we had, and they used a set of books my father sent to our children, the Book House. To this day, that first book, Rhymes, Nursery Rhymes, and Fairy Tales, is worn to threads almost, from the wear that those children gave it in the three years we lived there.
MT: It should be a fine souvenir, if you still have it.
MH: It is, it's-up in the county now, in our place up in Frederick County,
Maryland. Because when I started taking my grandchildren up there for the summer, I used it for them. But they were quite an asset to me because it helped relate me to the community, and I felt that even though perhaps I wasn't doing all the things that a pastor's wife was supposed to do, about which I knew nothing, I was relating to the families and the children of the community. They loved coming in, and I had cookies and cocoa for them, or lemonade, according to the season. They loved coming to the house. And we would give little plays based on some of the stories we read in the Book House. Well, that was my life there in the parsonage, and it really helped to make life bearable for me in this community.
MT: You were a social worker in a sense, with the children.
MH: In a way it was, yes. It was a volunteer service to the community.
MT: it was good for you, as well as for the children.﻿8
MH: Yes. It broadened my concept of life, because I had been reared in a very sheltered sort of community, people who were homogeneous. All of them were postal clerks, or worked in the Bureau of Engraving, or in the Patent Office, or something of that kind.one policeman...and found this lower-middle class comfortable living quite close. All ambitious. Nobody ever stopped at high school. Most of them, a good many of them, were ambitious enough to go to Howard or away to college, families that I knew. And here I was in a community, I don't think there were six high school graduates in the whole town, black, and no high school, just a grade school; one physician for that part of the county, and that was it.
MT: This is an interesting description of Independence, Missouri, in the early twenties, that would be.
MH: That was in the early twenties. We lived there from...
MT: Well, anyway, it would be in the mid-twenties.
MH: ...from '21 to, well, my boy was born there in 1923. We left there to go to Denver, Colorado, and we were delighted to come out of that area into a place where we thought there would be some freedom of life and access to good public education, and libraries and museums and theater, and all the things that we could enjoy. So we moved there, to Denver, in 1925.
MT: Don't worry too much if you don't remember the exact date, but that's
interesting, to be able to leave Independence, Missouri, to go to the great city of Denver.
MH: That's right, and we lived there from '25 to '28. Well, in Denver, my
husband decided that ...he was a fairly good speaker, but he was not trained for the ministry. So he wanted to pursue his education in the field of religion. So he matriculated at the Iliff School of Theology, on the campus of the University of Denver. And he went there for three years, till his graduation. The two older children started in grade school there, at a school just about a block from our house, called the Twenty-fourth Street School, which was also referred to as the "League of Nations School," because every nationality was in that school...
MT: Because of the university, it was near the university?
MH: No, it was not near the university. It was just a neighborhood of foreigners. .. a good many Mexicans. Because of my children in school, I became a member of the PTA, and was their secretary; and then I represented that PTA in the area PTA, that's the City Council of PTAs, and I worked with them there. Then I became a member of a book review club there, so that really began to brighten my life up a good bit. In spite of the fact that I had three babies and my fourth child was born there, I had a chance for outside activities in this book review club called the Coterie, a very lovely group of women, mostly college graduates or career women in Denver. It was sort of the first bright spot in my life in the ministry, as a minister's wife.
MT: That's interesting. It's a beautiful city, too.﻿9
MH: Oh, yes. We gloried in the beauty of Denver. We would go out for drives at that time—we got our first little Ford—and we'd go out into the canyons and out on the highway. It was like looking at what...I had been accustomed to looking at the screen, as a scenario in moving pictures, and to feel and know they were the real thing was just captivating. And we loved it. We had two very dear friends there, a Methodist minister and his wife, the Walker Clairs^were there at the time. We became very close friends, and we would go on jaunts up to the mountains and on picnics together, buy food between us, and she would take care of the children, help to take care of the children. When my fourth child was born, she took the three older children and kept them for a couple of days for me. We were very, very dear friends. Living in Denver, although the church was small... It was a very difficult church; it had been split, as I found churches could be, and my husband was pastoring the hostile remnant of the church. So, churchwise we had a difficult time. But we felt that we were getting somewhere because of his work at the University of Denver in the School of Religion, and he felt that he had an opportunity to move on up to something else, and sure enough we did.
From there—this was in '25—we left there, and he was appointed to Portland, Oregon. We had heard glorious things about Portland, Oregon, because an older sister had lived there. So we were very happy at the prospect of living in Oregon. But at the same time, I was griefstricken, almost, at the thought of leaving home, being so far from home. Denver was far enough, but Oregon back in 1928, it was like going across to China or something. My father said that twice he can remember crying in his adult life was when his mother died, and then I told him I was moving to Portland, Oregon. We were a very close family, and that was quite a detachment, you know. He came out to Denver and visited me, with my brother Tom, who was just a kid then, and he knew what it was like, and he knew we wanted better work, so he had to approve, in his way. So we moved to Portland, Oregon,with my four babies, which is quite a trip across the continent, because my husband went out in advance to the church.
And I came back East because he didn't know just what the living conditions and so on were like out there. So he went on to Portland, Oregon, and I went back East, sort of to say a goodbye to my East Coast relatives. I visited home, and then with my sister Lena in New Jersey at that time, with my four babies. And when we went...my husband arranged all the travel affairs, to cross the continent.
MT: And did you make any stops?
MH: No, we transferred in Chicago, and he had the Traveler's Aid to meet us in Chicago with my four babies, and then he met us in Omaha, Nebraska.
MT: oh, he came down to Omaha?
MH: He came down. The church sent him. They wanted him to bring his family on out there because they didn't think it was good for him to be out there by himself, and he did miss his children so. So he came as far as Omaha and
*
Walker Clair became a bishop in the United Methodist Church. [M.T.]﻿10
MH: (cont.) met us, and we traveled together from Omaha, Nebraska. He was so thrilled because the baby hadn't forgotten him. She threw her arms around him, and hugged and kissed him, and just didn't want to be taken away from him. She was less than two years old then.
MT: But she had remembered.
MH: She had remembered, and he was so pleased with that. So on we went
to Portland, Oregon. And Portland, Oregon, was a church that was very appreciative of the fact that he had been a student, and although he wasn't considered a seasoned minister, he was ambitious, as a student. During the first month or two that he was there alone, he registered at the Portland center of the University of Oregon for work in social work and sociology. So back to school he went. And when I came out there, he was already in graduate school at the University of Oregon, the Portland center.
MT: Always studying, always moving up.
MH: That's right.
MT: And they did appreciate having a scholarly minister.
MH: And the people really appreciated us there, and were very cooperative.
It was a small church, I think about three hundred members, but they were homeowners. There were less than two thousand black people in the whole state of Oregon at that time. But they were people who had been there for a generation or so, had been brought there by labor agents from the South, to supply labor for the hotels and the railroad. So there were people who were personal servants and railroad people, and they owned nice little homes and lived well, and we enjoyed living there. The parsonage was fairly new, and the church was a good church, structurally a good church.
MT: The main thing was that they appreciated Daniel Hill, and the qualities they saw in him.
MH:
They appreciated him, that's right. And the children, three children were ready for school then, and they went to the Halliday Demonstration School, which was a school with a platoon system, which was an experiment in elementary education then.
MT: I know. Was it part of the university experiment?
MH: No, no, it was not. It was just a part of the public school system itself. The principal of the school, Julia Spooner, was a national president of the Platoon System Teachers, and she was a great person. When she found out my husband was a sociology major in graduate school at the university, she used to call on him for talks to the PTA on interracial relations and that sort of thing. Through my husband's work, we got interested in interracial workshops and study groups, and we made a number of interracial friends. My children had, I guess, as many Japanese friends as they had black, if not more.﻿11
MT: There was quite a colony, quite a group of Japanese there?
MH: There were some. I'm mixed up a little bit—Japanese in California.
MT: But they had come up from California?
MH: There were a few Orientals, but not many. I'm mixed up a little bit in my continuity there.
MT: That's all right, it's interesting. You were discussing your children's friends in school.
MH: Yes. Again, I found that I related best to the youth and the children of the church, and I found that they knew little or practically nothing about the Negro in Oregon. They felt no kinship to the masses of black people at all. In fact, most of them were mulattoes because they had been brought there for their looks to serve in the hotels. This is a fact.
MT: The colored people were mostly mulattoes, yes.
MH: They were. There was almost a color caste. Not self-imposed, but because of the way they had been brought there by a labor agency going South to bring them there for its personal service in the hotels. That was very interesting, being as brown as my husband and I are, you know. So I thought that surely something must be done about this. We were in the midst of what was then known as the Negro Renaissance, and black books, by and about blacks, were coming out. And so, instead of the Children's Book House, I said, "Now Dan, we are going to try to inform these young people especially about what black people are like."
And the thing that made us more determined was that during that time his father was ill, and he came back to Baltimore, and about nine Hills had graduated from the high school there. This is some distinction, and his mother was quite proud of him. His father was pastor of the largest black church in Baltimore. And so they called an assembly in the high school there for Dan Hill, Jr., to speak, and they sang "Danny Boy" for him, and the whole thing just overwhelmed him. So when he came back to Portland, he told the young people there about his experience back East and how inspiring it was, and their mouths were open and they said, "Two thousand black kids in school?" They had never seen more than a couple of hundred black people at any time. They couldn't get over it. So he told them all about his experience back there.
Then Alain Locke's A New Negro had come off press, and I got a copy of it, and some other books by Negro poets who were becoming vocal then, and so I got some of their books, and other books, Crisis magazine, Opportunity magazine, which was a publication of the Urban League at that time. I organized a study group for the study of—we called ourselves Negroes then, but much like the black studies now—and so we organized a group called the ftude.
MT:
Etude, using French, E-T-U-D-E.﻿12
MH: I think somebody in high school decided that's what we should be, the
litude Club. I don't know whether that was redundant, the Etude Club, or not. Anyway, we had the Etude group. And we had study programs that became... Oh, I was so happy to be able to tell them that Alain Locke had been my teacher at Howard University—not only my teacher, but my counselor at Howard University. Carter Woodson was a friend and teacher and... Who else at that time? Well, some of the other people who were writing and becoming known.
MT: Was Cook there at the time that you were, at Howard? Often his name comes up in reports.
MH: George Cook was secretary-treasurer of the university. Is that the Cook you mean?
MT: There were two different Cooks there at different times.
MH: Oh, then there was Miss Bessie Cook who taught romance languages in the language department, if I'm not mistaken.
MT: And was Kelly Miller?
MH: Oh, yes, Kelly Miller was dean of the School of Arts and Sciences, then, and Lewis Moore was dean of the Teacher's College. Well, there were many people that I had seen or known or had been taught by, whose names appeared during the Negro Renaissance. And so I was able to tell these young people about my firsthand relationship and experiences with these people, which made me very proud, not only to have been a member, a graduate of Dunbar High School, but of Howard University, which at that time was being called the "capstone of Negro education." I was very proud of those things, and proud to be able to relate them and to tell them how much pride they should have; they must feel that they were a part of this whole thing, and at the same time they were a part of the masses of Negroes in the deep South. They were all related. But they felt no relation at all until we started studying and talking about these things. And Carter Woodson's The Negro in Our History came out at about that time.
MT: And that was your litude Club?
MH: Yes, we studied.
MT; Now there were adults in that?
MH: Some young adults, what we call late teenagers and young adults. We had a drama group there. Mrs. Gregg was a graduate of one of the southern schools in Texas, and she was very good in dramatics, and she organized a drama group. We put on plays and we had workshops...
MT: That would be young adults also?
MH: Young adults. And then we had children, to learn something about Negro history and our background. They would borrow our books, they stayed lent. David Gorden Houston, who was one of my teachers in high school and college, he used to say all of his books were Catholic because they always kept Lent I﻿13
MT: Mrs. Hill, you were mentioning the drama and workshops that you helped establish at Portland, and that you had referred to the exhibits that you carried to the community, the white churches and so on.
MH: The churches became interested in race relations, and we...
MT: Your husband brought in some speakers at times?
MH: Yes, he brought in excellent speakers, especially from the university, to speak to the groups...such as Alexander Goldenweiser, the anthropologist; and Sadie Orr Dunbar, who was national president of the public health services, something like that; and A. Philip Randolph, who was quite a labor leader, and who was branded red. They were afraid to grant him speaking privileges on any platform around Portland, Oregon, because of this tinge of red. But my husband said, "Well, you must hear him," so he brought him to our church in spite of it all. And he remembers it to this day.
MT: Was he then with the Pullman porters?
MH: Organizing, organizing, yes. See, most of the members of the community out there in that area were Pullman porters, the black men were, or were related in some way to railroad employment, and he was such an eloquent speaker, too. So he brought A. Philip Randolph as one of his speakers. And then, my husband, who has always been very fond of music, organized a chorus. They did Negro spirituals and he would interpret them. They would go around to the churches, singing. He would have a concert with conversations by Negro artists like R. Nathaniel Dett, and transcriptions of the spirituals by Harry Burleigh, and Marion Cook. We had two excellent young women pianists in our congregation, and one had studied, was a music major from Wilberforce, and they would give concerts and go with him and the choir to do instrumental numbers. His choir was very popular in the white churches, and it helped to build up very good race relations. There were so few Negroes that the whites knew nothing about us and we knew little about ourselves. So it really helped a lot.
MT: That was important, to know more about yourselves.
MH: About ourselves, and to let the other folks know something about us too, beside being servants and in menial capacities. Well, we stayed there for five years.
MT: You're mentioning, Mrs. Hill, that many of the people were, many of the men were Pullman porters. Patricia Roberts Harris is proud to mention that her father was a Pullman porter.
MH: I've heard her say that.
MT: She doesn't try to keep it a secret.
MH: That's right. Well, that was the main employment for black men in the West. I used to wonder how it was that their wives could travel so in the summer, then I found out they were traveling on their husbands' passes, you know.﻿14
MH: (cont.) 'Cause I yearned to get back East to see my family, but couldn't afford the fare. But they would come back from traveling all over the country on their husbands' passes.
MT:
But your husband was a minister, and not a Pullman porter. [laughs]
MH: They were people, in Portland,Oregon, of unusual refinement. I guess it's because they had been trained as personal servants, and had been around upper-class people. And they took on some of their ways. For instance, a thing that really amused me, they were great on giving teas and luncheons, and one of them would put on a maid's uniform and serve her friends luncheon as though she were a hired servant. That was something...
MT: You would have expected her to be the hostess. [laughter]
MH: That's right. That's something that was quite unexpected for me to have the door opened by a friend of the hostess in uniform, acting as her maid or her waitress or something of the kind. That was amusing.
MT: But they wanted the service to be correct?
MH: That's right, everything had to be just like the other folks did, just like their employers did. And they succeeded. [laughs]
MT: This is very interesting to me.
MH: Well, it was very interesting to me. Well, after staying there until
1933, my husband was transferred to Oakland, California. Oh, California sounded just grand and glorious, just the name of California to an easterner, sounded great—the land of sunshine and fruit and flowers. So with great expectancy, we moved with our four children to California. And found the church there, a small church, rather poor physical plant, and a group of native sons and daughters who were the pillars of the church. There were not many of them in California in those days, because most of the black folk in California were from Texas, and Louisiana, and North and South Carolina. But the natives were sort of upper crust sons and daughters...
MT: They thought they were quite superior, too. They were the early pioneers.
MH: Yes, in the church.
MT: Like the old settlers in Michigan, my people, my grandparents.
MH: Yes. But my husband felt this was another opportunity, the University of California, he just had to get back in school. So again he decided to go to school. The University of California is surrounded by several schools of religion—Presbyterian, Methodist, Episcopalian, Baptist, Congregationalist-so he went to Pacific, which has quite an excellent name, Pacific School of Religion, a Congregational school. He went there for graduate studies, to study for his master's in sacred theology at Pacific College. After he had been in school a year, he said, "Now, May, you've always, from high school days, you said you wanted to be a black woman scholar because of the example of your teachers. Now's your time." So he sent back East to﻿15
MH: (cont.) Howard for my transcripts, and escorted me to the registration
office and pushed me in line, practically, to register at the University of California in graduate school. I said, "Well, I don't know how we're going to do it, with four children." The youngest child was about six years old or seven, and because he was in the pastorate, his time was pretty... It was not like an eight-hour-a-day job, you know. He could supervise a good bit of the children's life. I said, "Well, with the cooperation of the family maybe I can make it, but I don't think I can study after all these years." He said, "Well, give it a try."
First of all, he insisted that I perhaps try out by taking some work at Pacific School of Religion, because they had excellent scholars there. One of the internationally famous archaeologists was one of his teachers. So I went to the school of religion, and did some work for a year in religious education. It was quite revealing to me, and it sort of freed my mind of some of the religious bias that I had, being born and reared in the one and only true church; I got a much broader perspective of religion. It was really, it was a wonderful education for me, but I only spent a year there, and I said, "Well, I do believe I can sit in class and listen to lectures." So then he pushed me into the registration line at the University of California for graduate studies, and social work was what I wanted, so I went to begin my work at the University of California. I had to do a year of prerequisite work because I didn't have the required studies in psychology. I took labor economics and psychology,clinical psychology...
MT: Some sociology?
MH: ...sociology, and work in order to fill the requirements for admittance to the graduate department of social work. At that time it was not a school, it was a department of social work. So I took a year, 1935-36 there, in the graduate degrees from the university with a major in sociology. Then the next year I was admitted by examination to the graduate department of social work. And I was the second colored ever to matriculate in the social work there. Muriel Taylor was the first. Anyway, I was the second to be admitted. My daughter became a freshman on the campus, so we were in school together. She was sixteen when she entered college, she was a brilliant little rascal in high school, and she was sixteen when she entered the University of California. So we were on campus together, sixteen-year-old Jeanne Hill and Mama Hill as a student in the department of social work. And I did my casework in San Francisco, in social work, which widened my vision of black life on the coast, the San Francisco black community.
We were rather happy in our years in California. The children were in good schools there, the older children were in excellent high schools, and were active in the school activities, and my husband and I were still attending interracial workshops and conferences. At the time of my graduation, they had a home there, a Community Chest agency for dependent children, with a day care center. The Community Chest insisted that they employ a trained social worker on their staff in order to qualify for funding. They just had matrons. So I was the only one available, and the board appointed me. Well, that was a somewhat trying experience, because the board felt they owned that home, and were not obligated to anybody for reporting on the home and observing any directives concerning the administration of the business of a home. But I was appointed as a social worker for the children, and the executive director of the home.﻿16
MT: And this was an interracial setup?
MH: No, it was not interracial. It was all black. It was supported by the colored women's clubs of that city. They were not too happy about my appointment.
MT: Wonder why. Because you were so well qualified, and maybe had some idea...
MH: Well, I had to report to the Community Chest monthly. Any agency that receives an allotment from the Community Chest had to...and they resented my reporting. I was, well, you know what they call a white folks' so-and-so for doing that. It was their business and the Chest didn't have to know about it. But I had to report to them monthly—I was their caseworker, I took the children to the clinics in San Francisco if they were from San Francisco County, or to the local clinics. I supervised their recreation and their health, everything. Fortunately, the WPA, Works Progress Administration, the Roosevelt administration had these welfare agencies, you know, and they were most helpful. I will always feel obligated to the Works Progress Administration for what they did. Because the home was an old mansion that was converted into a children's home, with a long dining room and a long boardinghouse table, and the kids would all sit at the...tw©nty children at this one table. I had a lot of imagination, I guess, in those days. Besides, I had had the advantage, during my social work, of visiting all the children's agencies in the area, and seeing what they were like, and I knew that that home did not have to look the way it looked. So I called on the WPA. In fact, Community Chest told me they thought if I could get any help I needed to renovate the home, to make it a part of the sightseeing tour which the Community Chest had every year preceding the drive for funds, so that the people could see what the agency was like that they subscribed to. So we got that home painted inside, we had the boardinghouse table taken out, and card tables which we bought at an auction that was getting rid of card tables, and set up card tables in the dining room. The youth project painted a surface mural on the dining room wall for the children.
I was so proud of the work I did there! And we had even a little dance group, a girl from the dance—you know, they had all kinds of projects in the WPA then, art and dance—and came and taught the children dancing once a week. I could sew, and I made the little costumes for them, little shorts, little costumes for them to take their dancing lessons. And we transformed the appearance of the home through the WPA. But then I had the work of a woman who was a dietician; she was on the health project, to come in and help me plan menus. Because that was one of the things that was against the agency before they appointed me as a social worker. And we planned the menus and posted them, so that anybody coming in could see what the children's menus were like. These were things that were contrary to the wishes of the women who had formerly run the thing themselves. It was this kind of overrunning thing. But it was a thing that made it an acceptable children's home. And I was proud to work in, in spite of the opposition.﻿17
MH: (cont.) I had a few friends 011 the board who understood what it was all
about, but most of them resented it, because they had run the home their way when they used to stand on the corner with a tin cup and take up collection. But that was a day long past, you know, and we were getting more money. They weren't collecting enough before to pay the milk bill for the agency, with twenty-two children in residence and maybe twenty-some in the nursery setup. And our milk bill was more than what they were subscribing monthly for. And there was the cost of utilities, clothing and salaries for five staff members. Furthermore, some of the children were deserted children, and so I got clothing for them through the surplus commodities. We got food and clothing for them through surplus commodities. That's the reason I say I will ever be indebted to what they did to help me through my first employment as a social worker.
We renovated the place so that it was really attractive. We put light linoleum for the broken-up stuff that was on the dining room floor; they covered the children''s play area with linoleum, they covered the whole first floor with linoleum. The sewing project made bedspreads for the children's beds. And we found all kinds of, just bundles of rags and old clothing in the attic. The women took those bundles of clothes and cut out the bright-colored pieces, appliques, and appliqued the children's spreads for their beds. They were really ingenious, you know, in doing things like that. We transformed, made curtains, covered the floors, put new furniture in, auction furniture, secondhand stuff, redone, repainted and redone. We made little planters for each table. We took carrot tops and things like that and made little planters, centerpieces for each table, and really made it an attractive room. And when the Community Chest thereafter had "See-For-Yourself Tours," that home was included in their tours. My salary was guaranteed by them, and it made a happy experience for us in spite of the board.
Then we started, my husband, because of his social work training ... The State Relief Administration came into being then—this was during the time of unemployment, those depression years, the thirties. He was appointed a caseworker, and he worked for a couple months, and then they made him a supervisor of casework for the State Relief Administration. So between us, we were beginning to live comfortably, and we bought our own home in Berkeley, California, which was in walking distance of the University of California. And so that was a very pleasant and wholesome experience for both of us.
MT: in the meantime, the children were having a fine education...
MH: In excellent schools, and good friends. For the most part, the people in the church, I think, appreciated what we were trying to do. There was no open hostility, at least to our program. There are always disgruntleds, you know. My husband would put in a budget system that was ridiculous for someone. . . that was ridiculous for the church, you give what you want, you know, and what the spirit of the Lord tells you to do. But that doesn't pay the bills of the church or the parsonage. Anyway, for the most part, we had a pleasant experience there.﻿18
MH: (cont.) My second girl went to San Francisco State College for a year. But the war came along, Second World War, and I felt that if there were any opportunities in war work related to social work, I had spent enough time—I was there four years in the home—and I could even work in a more pleasant environment, as far as the board was concerned. So the USO was coming into being then, and asking for workers. So I applied, and I gave my background. I had worked as a board member of the YWCA in Denver, in Portland, and in California. And I was YWCA girl reserve counselor in Oakland, so I knew something about the YWCA as a board member and as a volunteer worker.
When I applied, I was accepted, and I was appointed a USO director of a joint operation that was the YWCA and YMCA. I was appointed by the YWCA, and I had a man from the YMCA as an associate. We were a joint operation, YM-YWCA, USO Club in De Fermery Park, in Oakland. That was the first USO Club there. I worked with soldiers and the wives, and trained junior and senior hostesses. They sent out training faculties from New York headquarters to train us. I went to some marvelous places for training—the Valley of the Moon, Jack London country. We went there on one of our assignments for a week of training. We went to Huntington Park. It was a marvelous experience for me, because the training courses were so good in the USO work. Then I stayed there, and they wanted to open a new club in southern California, in Riverside, and they asked me if I would accept the appointment there. After much hesitation, I said yes. At that time, our family was scattered far and wide because of the war. My son had spent a year at Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, because for three generations Hills had gone to Lincoln.
MT: Therefore he should go.
MH: Yes. But he was seventeen when he went there. When he was eighteen he was drafted; he came back to California and was drafted, so he was in the army. My oldest girl did a dietetic internship at a hospital here in Washington, D.C., and then she later was employed by the Red Cross as a lecturer in nutrition. She was a biochemistry major in nutrition in the University of California. And my second daughter came back here, took an examination. All the teenagers were taking examinations for clerkships here in Washington. Washington was then full of federal employees. She got an appointment with the Signal Corps at the Pentagon, and she was so thrilled. The children were already away from home, and it was just my husband and baby girl then— she was in high school. So I said, "Yes, I'll go," and so went on down to Riverside. Dan would come down frequently to visit and bring Doris, on weekends.
MT: Did you take your daughter with you?
MH: She came down and spent the summer with me. And that's when my voice was
failing, as it is now.	I knew something was wrong with me. Some of the
people down there told me about the very best throat specialist who was out at Loma Linda, which is a sanitarium, hospital and sanitarium, outside of Riverside in Loma Linda. So I went out there, and the doctor examined me and decided I had to have surgery because I had a growth on my left vocal cord. Then when it was analyzed, it was malignant, and then I had to stop work. My husband was back East and was coming through from a conference he had﻿19
MH: (cont.) attended. Margaret, the daughter at the Pentagon, was homesick, so he brought her home, 'cause I think he was homesick for the children. So he picked her up and brought her to Berkeley and he came through Riverside and picked me up, and I had to break the news to him that I had cancer. The doctor said that I had to start X-ray therapy immediately, and the nearest facility was in San Francisco. So I returned to Berkeley where we were living, and I went daily, took radical X-ray therapy at the University of California in San Francisco.
MT: That's not an incision, it's from the therapy?
MH: No, that's the burning, from X-ray therapy. So I took radical X-ray
therapy for a month, in San Francisco Hospital. It's very enervating. I used to faint every time I went into therapy. I was really, I guess, a couple years just sort of getting back strength again from that. I had to stop working, work that I really liked, because I loved the YWCA. The training and the staff, the national staff people who would come out to supervise our work were so wonderful, and the program material was great, just beautiful. I really enjoyed it, it was a job that I really enjoyed.
So we returned to Berkeley, for my husband to finish his tenth year in California, and the bishop offered him work at the
Shorter Community Church in Denver. I said, "Back to Colorado." Well, at least that is getting more than a thousand miles nearer home. Not knowing what the outcome of my condition would be, because I had to be examined—at first it was every thirty days they were checking, then every two months and then every six months-"-to find out whether the case was in remission or arrested or just what was what. So we consented to leave our home, which I dearly loved—that was the nicest place I ever lived— Ashby Avenue in Berkeley, California. Most of the furnishing and furniture in this house here, and some that we have in the country, came from there... it was a lovely eight-room house, spacious and well planned.
MT: On one of the hills?
MH: No, it was on Ashby Avenue near the campus, in walking distance of the university campus. I enjoyed living, and was proud to live in it. We moved on to Denver, moved our furniture by van to Denver, and stayed there. This was our second time in that capital.
MT: You were there how long, Mrs. Hill?
MH: We were only in Denver from '43 to '45. So we got back to Denver; the
Shorter Church of about maybe twelve hundred members was a good-sized Negro congregation, a new institutional church with day-care facilities and a staff of workers. It was the oldest black church in the state of Colorado, and the largest. Thus it gave us a little prominence, you know. He did very well during the time we were there. Then I was referred to the clinic in Colorado Springs, which was founded by a prominent family from Philadelphia—it was founded by the head of the family who had throat cancer. It was called Penrose Pavilion, and he brought from France the man, Dr. Coutard, who invented this system of radical X-ray therapy for throat cancer. And so I went to that clinic, my husband used to take me down to be checked by him.﻿20
Was there treatment? Yes, there...
Continued treatment, yes, but there was repeat of the treatment, or a different type?
MH: No, he just checked my throat to see whether it was in remission or not, and I went down there regularly to be checked.
But the real treatment came...
The treatment was in San Francisco.
...but they kept checking to see if there was a remission. That's right.
Did you ever have to have treatment after that in San Francisco? No, no.
You are fortunate.
This place on my throat gave me a good bit of trouble, and my sister wanted me to have plastic surgery, but I said, "No, I'm too old for that, it doesn't bother me as a scar no matter whatever I look like now..." I just didn't care. So I didn't have plastic surgery, but it left a scar. And for a long time the scar was rather painful because it was like a deep burn, you know, a third-degree burn, almost. And he would prescribe an ointment or something for me, and that kept it covered a good bit. But I had no further trouble. He said it was the most beautiful case of surgery that he had seen on the throat. They had removed the tumor so thoroughly from the left vocal organ that I had no recurrence or growth there at all.
MT: There was actual surgery and then X-ray treatment, removal of the growth.
MH: Yes, the growth was removed and then analyzed, and that's when they found it was malignant, and then that was followed by X-ray therapy in San Francisco, in San Francisco University Hospital, where they had the best X-ray facilities on the coast at that time. And they used to call me the miracle woman, because I was very fortunate. They said it was either that... And I had to swallow, well, no matter how painful it was, he said I must swallow, I must eat, I must swallow, or they'd have to insert a glass tube. And so I used to chew Aspergum for an hour or so before I'd eat a meal or swallow anything, to numb my throat, you know.
MT: But you would swallow.
MH: Then I would. Yes, I was determined.
MT: This is one case that is a miracle to hear.﻿21
MH: It is, because I've had several friends, one was a friend of my husband and my dearest girlhood friend, Dr. George Page in Baltimore, died of throat cancer, and several people whose mothers have died of throat cancer, that I knew. So I don't complain. I hate this voice of mine, this husky voice of mine, but to be able to talk at all...
MT: And to be alive.
MH: They used to call me the miracle woman there in Denver, the staff at the hospital, because I did come through so well.
MT: You have much to be grateful for.
MH: But that ended my employment with the USO and the YWCA. And I was just not able to work. I was just too completely enervated.
MT: Especially when you had those treatments.
MH: Yes, they were very enervating.
MT: Now, how long did that feeling, that you had no energy, last?
MH: Well, I would come home and go right to bed.
MT: Yes, I mean after the treatment. But I mean, how many years, did it gradually diminish?
MH: Oh, it gradually wore off. But when I came back to Washington, there was a vacancy in the Northwest Settlement House here, and I had a cousin who was on the board. She said, "May, you're a trained social worker. We need a worker there so bad. Why don't you try it?"
MT: This was after your return to Washington?
MH: Right here in Washington, 1945.
MT: Because that was when Dean Hill...
MH: Came back to... He was appointed, after he got his doctorate. Stuart
Nelson found out about the training background of Dan and became very interested, and so he sent for him asking if he would be interested in employment at Howard. Stuart was a classmate of mine in college, he was interested in somebody with the training that Dan had, in the School of Religion. So, Dan said yes. And I said, well, it will at least be home. My father and brother, older brother had passed, but my mother was still living and my sister was in Jersey City, and they were my close relatives. And I said, well, since this is my condition, and it's rather tenuous now, I didn't know what the outcome would be in the next three or four years, I think I'd like living nearer to home. So we decided to move; he decided to accept the appointment, and we came back to Washington.
MT: You made a circle, a semicircle.﻿22
MH: That's right, we did. From Denver to Oregon to California, then back to Denver, and then to Washington.
MT: Remember. Washington, Philadelphia, Independence, then —
MH: Yes. And I would chuckle with my father when I had my baby in Denver,
Colorado, that was my fourth, and there were 48 states in the union, then. My father said, "May, dear, there are only 44 more states for you to live in." [laughter] But each child was born in a different state.
MT: So you were back here in 1945, and I came to Howard in '42, and that's
why we're contemporaries here. Because I didn't know you so well, but I did obviously know Dr. Hill.
MH: Yes, I remember saying, when I became a member of the Howard University Faculty Wives, that I felt at home. That was one other thing, at the University of California we had a very active sorority group, and it was the first time I had the chance to be identified again with black college women, you know, because there were none in Oregon. So a group of us organized a graduate chapter of Delta Sigma Theta, Omega Sigma chapter, and I was a charter member of Omega Sigma chapter of Delta Sigma at the University of California, and I enjoyed that very much.
MT: Yes, I can see how you would, and how California meant a great deal in your life.
MH: Oh, yes, it did. We had our home there. The things that you see around us here came by United Van Lines across the country to Washington, D.C.
And part of it, because our house was so much bigger there--- We have a
place up in Frederick County. We bought a part of my mother-in-law's farm in Frederick County and we built a little house, summer home, so the children would have some place. After having lived in the West, we had to spread out a little more than we could in Washington where I was living then, in my father's old home on Linden Street.
MT: Oh, then you moved back to Linden Street?
MH: The house was vacant at the time, and we moved back to it. And then we
bought this place, here on Chain Bridge Road from-my great-aunt's property.
MT: Now, a little bit more about that. Here, this is very, very beautiful, almost like Rock Creek Park.
MH: It's in the country. It's really like being in the country, because we adjoin a federal park, you see. It can never be built on.
MT: Yes, I noticed that. Yet you are within what is nov the District of Columbia, because it was extended.
MH: That's right. It only took my husband about seventeen minutes to drive from here to the university, from out here in the country.
MT: Yes. But it is beautiful. Now you said all this in here, much of this territory, had been owned by Negroes before incorporation.﻿23
MH: Yes, this whole area was owned by Negroes, from MacArthur Boulevard on up to Nebraska Avenue near American University. They had small farms. After slavery the land was parceled out by the owners, and Negroes had small farms. And my great-aunt's farm—	she
was my grandmother's sister—ran all across University Terrace. Those houses you see over there were all on her property. They were sold in lots since we've been out here, those buildings have been put up. They were bought from her, my cousin, and that was all part of her farm, this land that we own here, and the land next door. She was born in the house that was next door. Not that house there—she and her husband built that— but she was born in a little frame farmhouse on that place 102 years ago, the one that I bought this land from.
MT: So in a way, you came home. This is interesting. Did you build this house—that is, you had architects?
MH: We built this house. I'm ashamed to say it, because it fails in so many respects, but it's adequate for the two of us. By the time we came out here, our children were all married and away from home, and so there were just the two of us.
HT: But you think back at that home in Berkeley?
MH: Oh, yes, I loved it, I really did love it. And my mother sent me out some things, antique china, et cetera. I used to pick up things at sales, and I bought a whatnot shelf, that old whatnot right there, and I said... I always thought of a whatnot as having to have some nice old things on it, pieces. She sent me out the pieces that are in those shelves on the wall; she packed them and sent them out to me to put on my whatnot, those pieces of bisque china.
MT: Oh, they're beautiful pieces. And they mean so much, because they were in the family.
MH: Yes, for years. Including some pieces that were on her dresser as a little girl, she used to have them on a little pin tray. And the pitchers that were gotten, those milk pitchers down on the bottom shelf, and they were pieces that were precious to her.
MT: That looks like delft china. I don't know whether it is, from a distance.
MH: I don't know, I think the piece on top, the blue piece, is delft. But
anyway, we are, I think, a sort of sentimental family. Things like that lamp was in my mother's home; that was her parlor lamp, you know. I grew up with it, and we used to have to fill it with coal oil. My children can't get over the fact that I lived in horse-and-buggy and coal oil days. We had gas in our house, but parlor lamps, for lamps we had coal oil; we didn't have electric lamps. She had it electrified. It needs cleaning badly now, it'd be a shame for her to see it.
MT: But it is a beautiful lamp to keep, and I hope someone in your family appreciates it.﻿24
MH: Oh, my children all appreciate things like that,
MT: I've had a couple of lamps electrified.
MH: Yes, my mother had that electrified, and it's a shame that it looks the
way it does now, because I usually keep it polished. But anyway, then we came back here to Washington; I was not a well person. I mean, I wasn't ill, I was just exhausted. I didn't have any energy. I went to work for Northwest House, and they said, "Well, we'll get somebody in a month or so." And they kept on putting it off- I stayed there a year; I said, "I can't take it any longer."
MT: What house was that?
MH: Northwest Settlement House. In settlement houses, you know, your programs are most alive in the evenings, and I used to go to work at two in the afternoon and work until eleven at night, and I just couldn't take it. I took it for one year, and 1 had to stop. And then, at that time, my mother was ill a good bit. I came back here, ambitious again, and I talked to Dan's boyhood friend, E. Franklin Frazier, and he ordered my transcripts from the University of California, and I had a lot of courses in sociology. At that time, University of California was very slow in recognizing a department of sociology. They called their courses in sociology, economics this, that, and the other. And he said, "You should be teaching ecnomics." I said, "Oh, no, I'm not for that. But I would like to continue my work in social work." What was the name of the head of the school of social work?
MT: Oh, Inabel Lindsay?
MH: Inabel Lindsay was the head of that school. So I took my transcripts
and I registered.	I had taken .some classes and bought my books, and my
sister Lena wrote that my mother was quite ill, please come up. My mother had gone to New Jersey to live with her, and of course, I wasn't employed, so I went up there. I did that three or four times and I just gave up. Then she brought my mother here to live with me, and she stayed eight years, and she was bedridden a good bit of the time. And that and the illness of my husband—and this was in the early sixties—he had surgery— and just one thing after another—he was diabetic and all.	I was having
grandchildren, and they would .say, "Mom, can you come up for a few days while this one or that one is in the hospital?" So I just gave up going back to school, and here I am just obsessed with family life, and busy about it.
MT: It's a very, very interesting review.
MH: But really, my life now is with my grandchildren, and we have sixteen grandchildren. I just have to tell you something about them.
MT: I was hoping that we would include the grandchildren.
MH: Well, I just have to show you—and meantime I can tell you—show you lots.﻿25
MT: Mrs. Hill, before the break for that delicious lunch, we were about to
turn to your children and your grandchildren. You have mentioned them from time to time, their birth and experiences in different cities. But now, looking back on their careers and what they are doing at the present time, I think would be very interesting to record that.
MH: My oldest girl is Jeanne Marie Hill Flateau. She was graduated from the University of California, where she was a major in biochemistry. She did an internship in a hospital, a dietetic internship, and then she was employed by the Red Cross as a nutrition lecturer. When their funds gave out—she was in New York City with the Red Cross—she decided to take an examination for social workers at that time. This was back in 1949. And she passed the examination, high average, and was appointed immediately as a social worker, caseworker. She worked full time as a caseworker, and then was promoted to a supervisor of casework, and at present she is an administrative manager for one of the welfare centers.
MT: Is this in New York?
MH: New York State Department of Social Services. She has a staff of 175 persons, carrying a case load of around 7,300, which is a sizable job. And these are all people who are on public assistance. She has seven children. She had two pregnancies during her career there as an employee of the department. Her husband was a graduate of the University of California in business administration. He was with IBM in New York until he left them, quit the job to take another job, and then he decided to go back to school. He took the master's in social work at Fordham, and he is now working with adolescent youth who have had drug and drinking problems, alcohol problems. The oldest child, Sydney Flateau, Jr., has his bachelor's degree from Saint Francis College, a Catholic college of New York City. He has a master's degree from New York University in history, and has a master's degree from City College of New York in counseling. He has three master's degrees, including one in education.
MT: This is August 9, 1978. We are at the home of Mrs. May Hill, 2946 Chain Bridge Road, Northwest, Washington,D.C., with Merze Tate recording. We are preparing to discuss Mrs. Hill's supplementary material, primarily pictures of herself, her family, through four generations, and the occasion of her and Dean Hill's sixtieth anniversary, which occurred on April 20, 1978, after her initial recording on April 6 of that year. Now, the first picture that you have, Mrs. Hill, is of you, which we wanted, and will you tell us about the period?
MH: I was about fifteen or sixteen, I'm not quite sure. It's strange, I remember what I had on better than I remember my age. My mother was sewing for the two of us girls at that time, and she loved tucks. As you can see in the picture, the body of the dress is all tucks, even down the sleeves were all tucks, and it was a green and white voile dress; I remember that very distinctly. The chain has a little locket that was given to me on my thirteenth birthday by my father, and so lhat was May of the year, at fifteen or sixteen.﻿26
MT:	You must have been in high school at the time.
MH:	Yes, that was at M Street High School.
MT:	I remember when I was in high school, I had some dresses with tucks.
MH:	My mother loved making tucks, and it shows in this dress.
MT:	And the next one?
MH:	The next picture was taken when I was at Howard University. I was a senior at that time.
MT: That would be a senior in high school?
MH: Howard University.
MT: Yes, but that was high school, or the university part?
MH: No, the university.
MT: Because you finished high school at...which high school?
MH: M Street High School, which became Dunbar High School.
MT: The famous one for college entrance exams.
MH: That's right, and we had a wonderful faculty at that high school. The
faculty members were really committed to teaching, and many of the students from there were admitted to Ivy League colleges and universities.
MT: It was a famous preparatory school for the New England universities and colleges and so on. Then you were at Howard as a senior...
MH: I was at Howard as a senior then, in the College of Arts and Sciences-.. I.
was being courted—this was the Year of 1917^1918, when we ended the world
war__aiKi the boyfriend was a senior at Lincoln. But he went to camp out
in Fort Des Moines, Iowa, to officers' training camp. And our friendship then picked up considerably.
MT: Now which boyfriend was that?
MH: That was Daniel G. Hill, the man I married, and that's the year in which I married, 1918.
MT: Now you married in April, 1918, the year that the war ended. We were in only a little over a year. Did he have to go overseas?
MH: Yes, we married in April, and because he was going overseas. So we married in April, and he was in France in June. I attended school, I finished. At that time, if you married while you were in college, you were expelled. But I kept it secret, and my parents didn't even know about it, and it was announced by them on the day of graduation that I was married.﻿27
MT:	You mean at Howard University in 1918, you —
MH:	You were expelled if you married while in school. Can you believe it?
MT: And now they do everything.
MH:	Believe me. They go to school pregnant, and they have their babies...
MT: And they weekend in the dormitories too, I understand. But we'll not go into that. Now, the next picture of you.
MH: Here's Lena, and I was living on the Pacific Coast in California. My
husband had been going back to graduate school in Colorado and Oregon and California, and he said, "Now it's your turn." He sent for my transcripts at Howard, and almost pushed me into the registration line to make sure I stood there until I was registered for graduate work. This was in 1935, and I did two years of graduate work,	I finished with a social work
certificate. At that time, it was called the department of social work; it was not a School of Social Work, it became a school a year later, and that's in '37.
MT: Did you tell me, when we were reviewing, that one of your daughters...
MH: My daughter, my oldest daughter, finished high school at 16 and entered the University of California as a freshman, and we were on the campus together. She was a freshman and I was in graduate school.
MT: Mother and daughter.
MH: Mother and daughter on the campus together. That was in 1937.
MT: Now that one...
MH: That was in 1938, that sstme daughter who was in college with me, married, and this was in Denver. We were living in Denver then, and she married.
MT: You were mentioning your older daughter, who left, apparently, California and came to Denver, is that right?
MH: No, she went to Washington to work .after finishing the University of California, and then she married a ;young man from the University of
California__he was in the School of Commerce—and she came on back East
and was working in Washington, and had a baby, and when her sister... We had moved to Denver, and when her sister married, she came out with my mother and the baby to the wedding, and this gave us a four-generation group. I had the picture...
MT:	And her name is Plateau now?
MH:	Her name is Jeanne Flateau.
MT:	Now, this is a boy or girl?
MH:	This is a little boy, Sidney, junior.﻿28
MT: The first child was a boy. One of the six or seven of the Flateaus?
MH: One of the seven, first of the seven, and my mother is holding the baby.
MT: Could we pause? We'll continue recording. Now, you didn't say too much
about your mother, but your sister, when I interviewed her, did say something about your mother being quite aristocratic and very correct. Would you like to enlarge upon that? You spoke of your father in our first recording, and of course, you mentioned your mother's name and the family name...
MH: Well, my mother was a very proper person, and she was a very loyal person. The young girls in the neighborhood were very fond of her. We lived in a neighborhood—northeast Washington—of families. I was born in northeast Washington, my father was born there. I was born in the same house my father was born in.
MT: But that wouldn't be far northeast?
MH: No, 6th Street, Northeast, near Gallaudet College, that part of northeast Washington. My mother was a very refined person. I remember distinctly, we would come from Sunday school or anywhere out, swinging our gloves and our hankies. She would say, "A lady always wears her gloves, she doesn't carry them." She was that kind of person, very correct in everything. Her family and housekeeping were her forte; she was a real homemaker. But she was active in the PTA, and was one of the early members of the PTA in the grade school we attended, and she belonged to several neighborhood groups when they were having some food problems back in those days; she helped with the sort of a cooperative at the school, a food cooperative. She did things like that. But she was principally a homemaker; she was not a career woman.
MT: And trained her children in the precise way to go.
MH: She hoped that we would be.
MT; She appears there as quite fair. Were some of her ancestors on the other side?
MH: Yes, yes. Evidently, now, her father was a freedman, and her mother, I've been told—I never did get the story clearly—was a domestic worker. She worked in the...she was a part of the slave system, but she was a needlewoman in that system.
MT: Yes, the fair ones were always the ones who worked in the Big House.
MH; Yes, she was never a farmhand or anything like that. She was an inside worker. I can remember my grandmother, she was very light. In fact, I thought she was white, you know. She was very fair, with brown hair, long brown hair. I can just vaguely remember her. My grandfather, maternal grandfather, died before I was born, and my grandmother used to visit with my mother. She was very concerned about the kind of company we kept, you know. The children in the neighborhood would come to see us, but she did not like the idea of our visiting in other homes...﻿29
MT: I see. Very interesting. Now then, this is Mrs. Flateau, with her
first child, and of course, you're directly behind your mother. Now, the Flateau children, on the next picture.
MH: Oh, yes. This is Jeanne in the center.
MT: Now Flateau is a French name.
MH: Yes, it's Creole. He was from Louisiana, a Creole. But he was reared in California, so when his father died, his mother sent him out there with a number of children, sent him out to California to live with his aunt, and that's where they met and married, in California. And then this is the oldest boy, Sydney Joseph, who was married, and you want to know something about...
MT: Go ahead.
MH: Sydney Joseph is the eldest, and he's sitting in the lefthand corner. He's married, and has two children. He married a lady from Trinidad who was educated in Scotland. She's a registered nurse, and since coming back in...she has her master's in hospital administration, I think. Oh, then, standing behind her is his sister Adele, who is very active in a labor party, and she writes under the name of Adele Sinclair for labor publications. My son tells me she writes very well, and she travels frequently, and she's over in Europe for a bit. Her family are always concerned about her labor activities. But anyway, she hasn't been arrested yet. [laughs]
And next to her is her brother, Richard, who enters Harvard in September. He was a student in school for exceptional children in Brooklyn, a Jesuit school—I can't recall the name of it now. And her brother, John, he has a master's in public relations—I think that's what it's called. He is executive secretary for the black and Puerto Rican caucus, legislative caucus in Brooklyn. Alice, who stands next to him, is a language major, and she has studied at the Sorbonne; she's a graduate of Brooklyn City College. She's bilingual in French and has studied several times at the Sorbonne, but she has no degree from there. But she's going over, we used to tell her we thought she was going over...we thought maybe she had a boyfriend over there.	Anne is working on her doctorate—the fat one, sitting behind
Mother to the right—is studying on her doctorate in medical chemistry. She has a master's in biochemistry at New York University.	Andrea is
a research assistant,which she did for four years ,but some required paper or something she hasn't finished yet kept her from getting her degree from Brooklyn City College, and she is a research assistant at Brooklyn City College. That takes care of the Flateaus.
MT: Flateaus, yes. The next is Margaret Martin.
MH: Margaret Martin, and Margaret was a student at San Francisco State College, and she was a piano major. We came back East; we were transferred from there while she was a student, and we came to Denver and she married there. She is now Margaret Martin. And the little girl over here is her first child, that's Linda.﻿30
MT: Linda? And I think you told me, this was taken at your retreat.
MH: This is taken in our summer home we have up near Harper's Ferry.
MT: That was Linda, when she was about three or four years —
MH: Yes, she was about three years old then. Now this is Linda, the young
lady, who graduated from the University of Denver, and is a teacher in a school there. She teaches elementary science, and she had her own television program for a year, as a part of the public education system. She was released from the classroom, and had her elementary science program for a year. She's back in the classroom now, and looking thinner. I think she's making better money now. She has relatives there on her father's side..
MT: That's the son...
MH: And this is Harry.
MT: That's the son of your daughter, your grandson.
MH: Yes, this is Linda's brother, Harry. He's nineteen now and a student at West Virginia Institute, and he's doing very well. He's six feet three.
MT: Six feet three. Does he play basketball?
MH: He did until he injured his knee, and had to have two operations on it, so that stopped basketball.
MT: I know you're rather glad that that's over.
MH: Yes, that was quite an experience.
MT: Now, that's an interesting family coming up.
MH:	Then the third child is my son, Daniel G. Hill III, who studied at
Lincoln University for a year, was drafted in the Second World War, went in the service for four years, after which he came to live with us, his parents. We had in that time moved to Washington, D.C., and he did his college work on the accelerated program at Howard University. Then he finished and went to the University of Michigan for a year, and then decided that he did not like the University of Michigan, and transferred to the University of Toronto, received his master's degree there. Following that, he took a leave of absence for a year and came to Washington and commuted to Morgan, where he taught for a year. He met his little wife at one of the international student houses here, married, and then they returned to Toronto at the end of the school year, the school year at Morgan, and began his work on his doctorate.
MT: Now did he marry an American, or a Canadian?
MH: He married an American, a graduate of Oberlin College.﻿31
MT: You mentioned she was one of a twin, if that's the one?
MH: Yes, she's the one with an identical twin. Her identical twin went to
Radcliffe and did her graduate work at Harvard. And Donna, my daughter-in-law, graduated from Oberlin, was a secretary for Senator Lehman when he was here, and that's when my son met her; and then he married her here in Washington, then they went to Toronto to continue his residence and his work on his doctorate.
MT: MH:
MT; MH:
MT: MH:
She is a white American?
That's right. And her father is Dr. George Bender, medical historian. They've lived in Toronto, and their three children have been born there. Metropolitan Toronto—they live in Don Mills, Ontario. He was the first full-time director of the Ontario Human Rights Commission, and during the period that he was the director of the commission, he was called upon by the federal and eight provincial governments to advise in establishing their human rights programs. In 1971, he became current chairman of the Ontario Human Rights Commission. In 1973, he left the commission, resigned from it, and established his own human rights consulting firm, Daniel G. Hill and Associates. He has among his clients government agencies, private agencies, labor and educational institutions, and he is advisor to the University of Toronto, having established their Human Rights and Civil Liberties Institute. And he is the author of many news articles in his field. He was commissioned to write a human rights in Canada primer, Human Rights in Canada, A Focus on Racism. He has just finished writing a book on the history of blacks in Ontario, which is quite a comprehensive book, some 510 pages, which will soon be published. He is proud to say that his wife was his editor. She edits all his writing, his news articles.
He has a very interesting family of three—a boy, Daniel IV, a second boy,
Lawrence Arthur Hill, and Karen is the youngest, a daughter. The older
boy is a recording artist for Twentieth Century-Fox.	_
The second
boy, Lawrence, is a sophomore at the University of British Columbia. He spent one year away from school and traveled all over Europe. He just wanted to do that because his father had done something similar; and then he studied at the University of Oslo, I think.
University of Oslo?
Same as my son—his father studied at the University of Oslo. After finishing his work there, he bicycled all over Europe. So I guess his son was following his tradition, and wanted to see Europe and also he said it helped him with his French and his Spanish. Then he's back at the University of British Columbia now, in his sophomore year. The youngest in the family, Karen, is now a junior at the University of Ottawa. She's bilingual in French and Spanish. She's taking all of her courses'in French and this past summer, '77, she received an International Travelers Scholar-' ship, and she traveled all over France. During summer vacations in previous years, she had acted as a guide at the international airport in Toronto.
In Toronto?
Yes.﻿•3?
MT: Where she would use French...
MH: Her French and Spanish. She speaks some Italian, but she's fluent in French and Spanish.
MT: And of course she knows English, obviously.
MH: Oh, yes, very well.
MT: And I can see how she would be very important in an international airport.
MH: Yes, that's right. And she was very popular as a guide there at the airport. We came in there several times to, in Toronto, from the States, and she met us with her little guide uniform and badge on. We were very proud of her.
MT: Now, I think the next picture is of your daughter Doris, who is married to a doctor, Dr. Salter Cochran, and two, only two, of their four children.
MH: Doris started taking violin lessons when she was about seven in Oakland, California. By the time she reached high school, she was considered an advanced violin student, and she was concertmaster for her school. She was the only black child in the Berkeley Youth Symphony Orchestra under the direction of the internationally known Jessica Marcelli, who was the director.
MT: What was the name of that orchestra again?
MH: Berkeley Youth Symphony Orchestra. She graduated from high school in Berkeley, California. When we moved to Washington, she came here and entered Howard University School of Music, and she studied there for four years, but it was a five-year course, so she did not get a degree from there. She was a music education major, which was a five-year course. She was married to a physician who was in medical school when she married him. He finished and took the state board. He went to North Carolina to practice, and she moved there with him. She has continued her music to some extent, but she had four chilren, which consumed a good bit of her time during those first years down there, adjusting herself to a home life there, and building, making a home for her husband, and being an asset to him in his work, and becoming involved in some of the community activities, especially in civil rights. Her time was pretty well taken.
But then she went back to her violin, and one of the colleges there*— Chowan College, a private college--' had a small symphony orchestra, and they needed some more people, some classical strings. And they heard of her work in the violin through some of her friends, so they asked her if she would assist them. So she did for several years, she played with the Chowan Symphony. And then she had four children, three girls and one boy, and the two youngest children went to violin school. She put them, as soon as they were old enough to hold a violin, she had them playing. And they have played in the orchestra that's there,as a family group, the mother and two girls, with another family, who are really distinguished musicians there. They have given concerts during the annual festival of arts in that part of North Carolina.﻿33
MT: Where does she live now, in North Carolina?
MH: She lives in Weldon, North Carolina. That's in Halifax County, the northeastern part of North Carolina. She's still very active in civil rights, and has seen many things come to pass there in her part of North Carolina. When she first went there, her husband was not granted the privilege of being on the staff of the county hospital, and he kept fighting, protesting, and reminded them that back in Reconstruction, his grandfather had contributed $5,000 to that hospital, which was quite a sum, back in the 1880s. And finally he was admitted to the staff. She is now secretary of the board of trustees of the hospital, and she is active in...she is on the board of several state institutions, and a member of the Choanoke Area Development Association, which is an economic development and community action group in North Carolina. So she's been very active in civil rights the whole time she's been there. She's an excellent public speaker and keeps quite busy with the children, her four children, and her community activities.
Two of her children are in college. The girl, Leslie, the oldest, will graduate this summer from Western Carolina University, a major in psychology, and has already been accepted in the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, as a student in advanced studies in clinical psychology.
MT: Now, you say she's their first born.
MH: She's the oldest, and she's totally blind, has been since she was fourteen. She had a seeing handicap, I think, from birth. She was a forceps baby, and they fear that there was some damage, probably, to her optic nerve at birth. She was totally blind at fourteen, and she really went into a trauma when she found out she couldn't see at all. They took her to Duke, where they had had her under treatment for years in the ophthamology department there. She had had two operations already, and then they put her under the care of a psychiatrist in the ophthamology department, and he did wonders with her.
MT: At Duke University?
MH: At Duke University. And they did wonders with her. Her morale is beautiful, she's a beautiful girl, she loves sports, goes to the basketball games, or football games, and cheers with all the rest of the students. Goes to movies, and whoever sits beside her sort of talks to her a little bit, and she comes home remembering more of some of the characters than some of the rest of us do. A very outgoing, lovely young girl. She has boyfriends, and she's been quite a person... She was homecoming queen for her high school. And this child, as well, she and her brother integrated the school.
MT: in what place?
MH: in Weldon, North Carolina. That's in Halifax County.
MT: That's where her father practices.
MH: That's right, where he practices. Her mother and father have been very active in civic affairs, and as the newspaper article says, her mother's persistence paid off for Weldon civil rights.﻿34
MT: MH:
MT: MH:
MH:
MT: MH: MT:
MH:
MT:
That's your daughter's activity.
That's my daughter Doris. When schools were declared integrated, she tried to interest black mothers in preparing their children to go to the integrated school, and to go with them to register in the school, but when the day came for going to school, she and her two children were the only ones there. But finally, the others have come in, and now the high school has a famous basketball team, and they're mostly black, as usual. And she is on the board of several organizations, including the public library, and the Halifax Hospital, which is a tri-county hospital. And her husband is now practicing, has practicing rights in the hospital, which he was denied for years.
Right. Now the little boy... [Anthony Cochran]
The boy is now a junior at A&T in North Carolina, Greensboro, North Carolina.
And the two younger children are in high school, and violin students, and doing very well. They appear in concert frequently.
That's interesting. Mother and daughters.
Yes, mother and daughter, very often.
Do you think the grandchild will go on in music, or that's an avocation, that's an interest?
I think the music will probably be an avocation for the children. I think they want something a little bit different.
Many physicians have music as their interest. I know in England, and in India, and here in this country, especially some who come from the West Ind ies. They'll play the violin or they'll have music.
MH:
MT;
MH:
My son-in-law laughs and says they come in the house sometimes and the children are raising cain all over the place, and Doris is playing her violin, practicing, oblivious to all of it. She says practicing is very relaxing to her. She's always been a lover... When she was a tiny tot it was my pride to go and hear her in her little recitals that her teacher used to...in Berkeley and in Oakland. When we came to Denver, she continued lessons there under a very fine violinst there, and she took lessons after we moved to Washington and she went to the school of music.
Now it's called a university, {North Carolina] Agricultural and Technical [State] University, and it has an enormous plant. I was down there last year, and that whole area of Greensboro, you wouldn't recognize. Old Market Street, that used to be there, it isn't there any more, and the university has expanded, and a new post office is out there. But the university has a huge plant. Well, it's getting the aid, you see, from the state, and it is a university now.
Well, Anthony's very pleased there, and doing very well. He played a little bit in high school, and Mother and Dad had to keep behind him, and once in a while go to school to see why he wasn't doing better, what was happening. But he said, "Mom, no goofing now," and he's really coming home with good grades, and enjoying his work.﻿35
MT: That's two, then, of Dr. Cochran's and your daughter's children. We'll
come to the other two, I believe, in a picture that will be a little later. The next one, I believe, is celebrating your...
MH: Fiftieth wedding anniversary. This is the one, me and Dan are seated, and this is taken in our yard in 2846 Chain Bridge Road...
MT: Right here.
MH: And that April was a beautiful warn April, and all the azaleas... this was a bank of azaleas back of us there.
MT: And your four children were present.
MH: Yes, the four children, and twelve grandchildren.
MT: Now, the four are here.
MH: The first one, the one standing to the left, first on the left, is Jeanne Plateau. Next to her is Daniel G. Hill, who's Dr. Daniel C-. Hill III, and that's Doris Cochran, and this is Margaret Martin.
MT: That's a very interesting and beautiful picture. And it's nice that...
the background there of your home, in which we are now recording. The next one is your recent anniversary, which was your, that would be for your sixtieth? The one we saw there was for your fiftieth.
MH: This...Dan and I, in North Carolina. We went to North Carolina to celebrate it, and our children all came there, and this is at one end of our daughter's living room there, with Daniel seated and me standing behind him.
MT: Like that, the two. Now this here has a larger number.
MH: Did you want this one? We were seated, and the cake, the anniversary cake, is in front of us, Dan and me seated. And Dan Hill, whom we call Buddy, is the first, and then next to him, from left to right, is Margaret, and then Doris, and then Jeanne.
MT: And the final one there shows the other two Cochran children, who were not in the earlier picture because they were not yet born. Now this is still...
MH: The two girls seated in front.
MT: This is still the sixtieth anniversary, isn't it? Down in North Carolina?
MH: That's right, in North Carolina, still in my daughter's living room there. Seated on the floor on the left is Christine Cochran, known as Chris, and she's quite a girl. She's very active in school affairs; she's active in dramatics...
MT: Is she in high school?﻿36
MH: Yes, she's in high school, she'll be a senior this year in high school;
in the '78-'79 school term, she'll be a senior. She's an excellent student, a National Honor student in high school, and active in many school activities. This is her sister Robin, next to her. We call her "the bird," and she is in her second year of high school, and she is somewhat of a gymnast. She rides a unicycle in all the parades down there. She takes acrobatic dancing, and is quite an active little girl. A very likeable youngster.
MT: I can see that both of them are charming.
MH: And this is Dan IV. Here are the three Dans: Dan Jr., Dan III, to the extreme right, standing, and Dan IV next to him with the T-shirt and all the beard and whiskers. Dan IV says...in spite of all the clamor that he has received in Canada and the United States, when he calls up home and says, "Dad, I've made another gold record," his father says, "Yes, but have you had your hair cut yet?" And that's the father, that's Salter Cochran, the father of these two, and this is his wife, Doris, seated. That's Margaret Martin, and that's Donna.
MT: Donna from Canada. And they came down to North Carolina. And are they planning to come to the seventieth anniversary?
MH: We're not counting that far ahead. We made it this far, so...
MT: Maybe the sixty-fifth.
MH: Maybe so. Hopefully so.'
MT: How many grandchildren have you?
MH: We have sixteen grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. My grandson in New York, who is the oldest grandson, has two children.
MT: Oh, he's the one who has the two. The others	haven't yet.
MH: No.
MT: Well, I can see what you so often state, that	your life is tied up with your family.
MH: That's right. And this grandson...
MT: The one who was at Kennedy Center.
MH: Yes. We all kind of look at him as the celebrity of the family, of that generation.
MT: Now he's the grandson, and last week at Kennedy Center. He is on many records, because you said he had two golds.﻿37
MH: Oh, yes. We hear him on radio all the time. The other morning at five-thirty I wasn't asleep, and I woke up and heard him singing, "Sometimes When We Touch," his record. We hear him all the time on the radio. And the children down in North Carolina... When my granddaughter in Denver heard about his record, she went to one of the music stores there to inquire, "Do you have any records by a Dan Hill?" And the man just pointed up the ceiling, and there were strung all across the ceiling these cutouts of Dan Hill's head and his record. He just pointed to them and said they sold out most of the time. We've been very surprised to hear things like that. He's sold over two million of "Sometimes When We Touch" in the States. That's not bad. He's very popular in California. Well, he sings all over. He sang in Norfolk Easter Sunday night, and then he was here Easter Monday. He had already been in several cities in the South, then. He flew back with his manager up to Toronto for a day of practice before the awards dinner, because he played at that dinner, and then he flew right back to the States, my son says, to Minnesota to fill some engagements there. He keeps busy all the time.
MT: And he's about what age now?
MH: Twenty-two. He flew over on a Concorde to England and gave three concerts there, as a Canadian artist, and he was quite accepted.
MT: Yes. Oh, he would be.
MH: So, we feel very proud of him. And he's a nice kid, very down-to-earth. He doesn't run, as he says, with the entertainers after his concerts. He doesn't drink, he doesn't smoke, he goes home and gets his rest. He's very interesting.
HT: Both you and your sister have a great deal to be thankful for in your children.
MH: Oh, she has a marvelous family, she has. Lena has a great family, she really does.
MT: And there are grandchildren starting how. You have more.
MH: My father always wanted a flock, as he would say, of grandchildren. Well if he had lived, he would have seen a flock of grandchildren. Nineteen and sixteen is thirty-five, isn't it?
MT: Lena Edwards has how many?
MH:	Nineteen grandchildren.
MT:	And you have?
MH:	Sixteen grandchildren.
MT:	Oh. Well then, she has more than you.
MH:	Oh, yes, she has three more than I have. She had more children; she had six children.﻿38
MT: Of course, her son who's Father Martin will not have children.
MH: No, no children. But she has one child who is a pediatrician who has eight children.
MT: That's the one in New York? No, he's in New Jersey. Yes. And the daughter there with her in Lakewood, and then one up in New England.
MH: Vermont, who has five children.
MT: Well, Father Martin is just a joy to know.
MH: Yes, he's a nice fellow. He's very helpful to me because he takes me and my husband to the doctor. He can manage, he has a station wagon. We get Dan in and out of there, and I don't know what I'd do without him, getting Dan to the doctor.
MT: He took me to Lakewood to interview his mother, and then picked me up the
next day to bring me home. It was a delightful trip, and just to hear about his career and why he chose the name Martin, you know. And he told me about that saint in South America and it was a very, very interesting experience.
MH: Yes. He went to Brazil and Canada and several other countries.
MT: Well, as you look back on your life, you don't have too many regrets.
MH: Well, I guess the early years, which I might have looked upon regretfully, were really growing up years for me. I was expanding. Because my life in Washington, as I said, had been sheltered. My father was a good provider, an excellent dentist with a fine clientele, and so I never knew anything like want or discomfort or anything like that. All of our associations were very much with the same kind of people. So getting away from home, and living in a little semirural, yes, prejudiced community, really southern community, was an expanding experience for me, and certainly widened my views of life and mankind. I mean, there were a lot more different kinds of people than I had any idea of in this world.	I had to learn to get
along with them, because my husband's living was coming from them, and I had to learn to live and get along.
MT: What parent influenced your life perhaps more than the other? It's always
interesting when I ask that question. What influence on your education, and so on? Was it greater on one side from your father than from your mother, or was it about the same?
MH: Well, I don't think it would be altogether fair to say one influenced me
more than the other. Except, because of circumstances, my father went back to school, dental college after the three of his children were born—I being the oldest—and worked in a post office at the same time as a clerk to support the family. So he didn't have much time to be with us children, and so my mother was the dominant figure in our life. I laugh at that program, "Well, wait till your father comes home." My mother never waited for my father to come home. The punishment she had to deal with, or problems﻿39
MH: (cont.) she had to solve, were solved then and there by her. There was
no waiting till Father came home. So, in a way, she was really the dominant figure because of the circumstances of my father's life.
MT: Yes, then she was dominant in the rearing and taking care of you. But I think early in our interview you mentioned that your father didn't want you to go away to college. You wanted to go to Wellesley, but he...
MH: He wanted me to stay at home.
MT: And go to Howard.
MH: That's right, go to Howard, where I would be at home. He didn't want to see me leave home. I think it was just the fact that he didn't want to see any of his children leave, he felt that closeness to them. As he became prosperous enough in his dentistry to give up his postal work, he felt that he wanted all the time he had possible to give to the family. And for me to go away at that age, I was seventeen, he just couldn't approve of... And so, I got my scholarship to Howard from M Street High School, and this pleased him very much.
MT: Of course, your life might have been different if you'd gone to Wellesley, or Smith, or Vassar, or Radcliffe. You may not have met...
MH: ...the Dan Hill that I met!
MT: Yes, but you may have met some other person.
MH: That's all very iffy. But anyway, we've been married now, I was a war bride, married in 1918, and this year, April of 1978, we celebrate our sixtieth wedding anniversary. And I think we've been very fortunate as a family. We're still living within our means without debts in our little family, and really no serious illnesses, except my husband's health has been greatly impaired in the last fifteen or twenty years.
MT: And you didn't have a serious illness?
MH: Well, I came through it. In the last few years, I have felt so completely ...they say you never say you're cured, but I feel so completely almost cured of cancer that I don't even think about that...
MT: Now, it's been way, way past your five years, way beyond that.
MH: Oh, yes. This was back in...I had my last treatment in '45, and I came back to Washington. I had to report back to the University of California Hospital in San Francisco every six months, and a doctor here, a throat specialist here, would examine me, and I would have him write a statement for the hospital there. And when I missed a period, they'd write and tell me, what about Mrs. Hill's condition? That's how closely they kept in touch with me.
MT: They wanted that record.
MH: They kept the record, yes.﻿40
MT: And probably they would have wanted you to come there, if necessary.
MH: They didn't want me to leave there to come East.
MT: I mean, for further treatment,if it had been necessary. Well, you have a great deal to be thankful for.
MH: Oh, I have so much. I had forgotten the names when I was telling you.
But Dr. Coutard was a French surgeon, throat specialist, who had treated Spencer Penrose for throat cancer, successfully. Penrose was a prominent Philadelphia industrialist who had made a fortune from the gold field at Cripple Creek, Colorado. So the Penrose estate brought him to the United States, with the stipulation that he would not leave here, and they founded the Penrose Pavilion in Colorado Springs. And he came to Colorado. Dr. Coutard was my physician, and I went there for examination. He had his own staff of nurses from France...you know, they were nuns. And he brought his own nurses from France with him.
MT: Well, it's something to be very, very grateful for. And I am grateful to you for your finally agreeing to be included in this project, because you are an example of...
MH: Well, I tried to tell you, Dr. Tate, that I really didn't think I had any achievement to offer, because my life had been so intimately family, that is, husband and children related, that I didn't think I had anything to say that would interest anybody else. I intend for my children to know these things and my grandchildren, but I didn't think it would be of interest as an achievement.
MT: It is. First thing, you did many things on your own, in working with groups even in Independence, then in Denver, and from Denver to Portland—isn't that right? Then started back at the University in California. And then conquered, with your doctor's aid, your physician's aid, something many people do not conquer...
MH: One thing that the doctor insisted, the surgeon, he said, "Now, Mrs. Hill, we have a catalogue of cases here of cancer that have been arrested..."
MT: ...arrested?
MH: Arrested. But he said, "You have to have the will to live. That's the
important thing." And I try always to remember that. I said, "Well, I have a lot to live for. I have a good husband and four children, and that's something to live for." And my youngest child was still in high school then, you know, so she needed me. I said, "I have a lot to live for, and you can bet your life I have the will to live." And he said, "Well, there are going to be times that you will feel like just giving up the whole thing. But I want to remind you always, you must have the will to live." So, here I am, talking too much, running my mouth!
MT: Well, I'm happy that you had that will. Is there any last word that you
would like to give to others who might find themselves in the same condition you were in? Of course, I suppose you would say the same thing.﻿41
MH: Well, I was fortunate in having excellent medical care. The surgeon in Riverside, California, Loma Linda, was excellent, I was told, and he must have been. When I went to San Francisco, the doctors there told me I had had excellent surgery. And then from there on they went with the radical X-ray therapy. We had to get special books of tickets to go across the bridge then, because gasoline was rationed during the war, and we had to get special medical permits, I guess you'd say, to go across every day to San Francisco for treatment. I went daily.
MT: But that was certainly a decent request that would be granted.
MH: Yes, it was honored, because the gasoline was rationed in those days. I am very grateful for all of it, every bit of it. I am glad to be here still. And thank you for your patience in my house.
MT: Oh, it's been enjoyable. I've learned so much about Independence, Missouri, in the twenties. I've heard about it in other ways. And then, the type of colored people in Colorado at the time that you were there, and then the Portland... I knew Portland on the map, and I knew its industries, and I know something about its climate, and I have visited there. .But that background of the early colored people who were brought there, the fair ones, the attractive ones, to be domestic servants. And then, interesting light you had on the Pullman porters, the people working on the trains. Of course, when we say Pullman porters, that also includes dining car, I mean because they're the same category.
MH: That's right, it did. They worked for the Southern Pacific Railroad, and Northern Pacific, and Union Pacific, and Santa Fe. They had beautiful trains in those days. The Portland Rose was a beauty, in the city of San Francisco. Beautiful trains in those days.
MT: Because they didn't have the airplanes.
MH: No, they traveled by train in those days.
MT: Well, Mrs. Hill, on behalf of Radcliffe College, the library of Schlesinger Library, which is the library dealing with the history of women, I want to express all our thanks to you for agreeing to this interview. You will hear from Radcliffe. You will receive the transcript, and make any corrections that you wish, and places that they have left blank you will be able to fill in, and thanks again for this opportunity.
MH: Well, thank you for considering me.
MT: Mrs. Hill, you reminded me that there were some facts about your maternal grandfather that you omitted earlier in the interview. We'd be very happy to have you include it now. It's better to have it here than not to have it.
MH: My maternal grandfather was Gabriel Coakley, a Roman Catholic, considered by the black Catholics here a leader among them. The colored Catholics, freedmen Catholics, had been attending Saint Matthew's Church, but they﻿42
MH: (cont.) could only sit in the gallery, and could only receive communion
after all the rest of the membership had been served. They became indignant about this situation, and asked my grandfather to consider some means of raising some money and a committee for the idea of giving a garden party on the White House lawn. To get this, he would have to get permission from the General French Commission of Public Buildings and Grounds. So they designated my grandfather to go to General French to ask for permission to use the White House. He did, and General French said that it was agreeable to him if he could get permission from President Lincoln. So then he had to go to President Lincoln, and Lincoln said if General French said it was okay, go back to him and get a permit and then bring it back to President Lincoln to be signed, and he did so.
On July 4 of 1864, the group received the permit to give a garden festival to raise funds to finance a place of worship for their black group. The commission willingly granted, and so they gave the activity, and raised twelve, hundred dollars. Later, the pastor of Saint Matthew's Church saw how determined they were to have a place that he helped the diocese give a festival in the basement of Saint Matthew's, and they raised seventeen hundred dollars. They put the two sums together, along with some other donations, and bought a lot on L Street, on 15th Street between L and M Northwest, and they built a little two-story house there which they used for a school, and a wooden chapel for their services. Later, much later, that became a very beautiful church, and I attended Sunday school there from grade school on through high school, Saint Augustine's Church.
MT: Saint Augustine's. That was the leading Catholic church when I came to this city. But now they've been united with Saint Paul's.
MH: That's right. Saint Paul and Augustine. They razed the Saint Augustine
church and put high-rise apartments there and then moved the congregation to another location. But they took the beautiful stained-glass windows and the marble altar to the other church—I think it's at 15th and V Streets, Northwest.
MT: Yes, I've been there several times for funerals of friends. But I've heard stories about some objects that disappeared in moving, and some things that they had before that aren't here at the present time.
MH: I wouldn't be surprised. It was a beautiful church, because it was in the area of embassies and legations, you know, and the church altar was always banked with flowers from the people from the Latin countries and the French, I mean, the Catholic countries who were living in the area. And it was well supported. The congregation, although it was built for blacks, you'd go there and the service was almost always attended by more white than black because it was in the midst of the Catholic countries, you know, their embassies and chanceries.
MT: Now, what did this grandfather do for a living?
MH: He worked in the Government Printing Office, and whenever my mother took
us car riding and we passed the Government Printing Office, which was then at North Capitol and H Street, Northwest, she would always point that out,﻿43
MH: (cont.) that's where Grandpa Coakley worked. And I think he was probably a messenger or something of that kind. He was not an ordinary laborer, he was something of a blue-collar, I guess you'd call it, worker.
MT: Blue-collar worker, no doubt, at that time. And the leader of the Negro activists, as they called them.
MH: Catholic activists. This was a sort of Catholic caucus.
MT: Do you remember anything about your maternal grandmother?
MH: Yes, my grandfather died before I was born. I only knew him from oral history. But my maternal grandmother, I understand, lived at home in slavery. She was a house slave, and a very fine seamstress. My mother did beautiful handwork that had been taught to her by her mother, beautiful French rolled seams, and inserting lace, and beautiful hemming. She did beautiful handwork. She taught me how to sew. And her grandmother, her mother, was a fine seamstress, and that's all I remember about her.
MT: Well, I think that is an interesting addition, and particularly this about the history of the black Catholics wanting... Colored Catholics, we would say, but this word black annoys me.
MH: Yes, it was colored then. We didn't use black. Black was a term of
disparagement. You didn't want anybody calling you black, but this was about Negroes or colored people.
MT: And many of them were among the fairer ones, and also in the Episcopal church that was true.
MH:	Yes, my father was Episcopal.
MT:	Yes, some of them were lily white.
MH:	This is off now, isn't it?
MT:	Any addition you would like to make?
MH:	No, that was all.
MT:	Fine, well, I'm happy that you mentioned that, because it's important.﻿MAY EDWARDS HILL
