Marcia Greenlee:
This is an interview with Mrs. Eliza Champ Gordon McCabe. The interview is taking place in Mrs. McCabe's home. The address is 2509 South 56th, Tacoma, Washington 98409. The date is August 2, 1977. The interviewer is Marcia Greenlee. Mrs. McCabe, how would you describe your life's work? Have you worked mainly inside or outside your home or both?
Eliza McCabe:
Both. Because I taught in the public schools in Texas, and also taught my piano classes
in the home.
Marcia Greenlee:
So you're not really strictly housewife or professional, or both?
Eliza McCabe: Marcia Greenlee:
Both.
Both. Would you discuss a little bit of your family background? I know that you were born in Boyce, Louisiana, on the 5th of March, 1886. Could you tell me something about your mother and father?
Eliza McCabe:
I remember my mother, Harriet Harden Champ, but I don't remember my father. He died... I just saw him when I was a child, but I don't remember him; he was a teacher. My mother was just a housewife. We left the Piney Woods home on the eighty-acre farm of my grandfather when I was six years old, and my mother, being a young widow, came to Orange, Texas, where many of her brothers had gone. A very humble life situation we lived. When I was in early childhood, she would say, "You're going to Straight University, you're going to Straight University, and that was her desire for me and my younger sister, too, but I was the older one, so she told me that. So we lived in Orange, Texas, and I finished high school in Orange and went to Wiley College instead of Straight University.
Marcia Greenlee:
That's fine.
Eliza McCabe:
I went to Wiley College after finishing high school at seventeen...
"Straight University" was a well-known church-related institution in New Orleans, Louisiana.﻿2
MG: Now Wiley College is...
EM: In Marshall, Texas.
MG: Marshall, Texas.
EM: It was called Wiley University at that time. Shortly after I had finished high school in Orange, Texas, the college president, Dr. Matthew W. Dogan, came to the community. It's a Methodist school, a church-related school, and he preached in my church that morning in Orange, Texas. Since I was a graduate, he talked with my mother and he told her if she could give him fifty dollars, and let me work when I went to school, he'd take me in. Fifty dollars was a lot of money then, you know. But she managed to, in washing and ironing, and I'd go with her early in the morning and help her, before going to school, for a time, to help her get the money.
And I went to Wiley College in the fall of 1903. When Dr. Dogan was in Orange, seeking students, I asked him, "If I go to Wiley College, would you let me sing in your choir?" I loved music. My mother could sing. So when I went to Wiley that first year, my freshman year, I kept going to that office asking for Dr. Dogan, the president. "You think he's going to let me sing in the choir?" I guess I worried him so; every Saturday they'd have choir rehearsal I'd ask him, "May I go to the choir?" So the last time I went down (after many a time), to get rid of me, he gave me a little note and sent me up to the director of the choir and I sat in the choir. I was enjoying it to the full, though I didn't know one note from the other. I think I was satisfied to be in that music group. We'd have auditions every now and then. I was singing soprano, sitting on the front seat, and the director came right down that row, right down one by one, to make a certain note. So when he came to me, I eked out something, but I didn't know what it was. When the audition was over, I returned to my usual studies, and in a day or two the director sent for me and informed me that I made a high C clear as a bell. But I wasn't knowing what it was all about.
Then the teacher of music, who was very excellent, wanted to give me a special time to come to help me with my voice. I told him I didn't want voice lessons, I just wanted to sing in the choir. "I don't have any voice. I don't really want to do this; I just want to learn to be a teacher, so I can keep my mother from washing and ironing." After quite an argument, and of course I was always, as a rule, obedient, but I was hard on that. "I don't want to do anything to be wasting my time. Let me get my studies." Well finally, he persuaded me to come to him at a certain time. And I gave a concert. So you can see how it ended up...because I had my graduating recital in voice. And what is more, we used to have troupes, singers who traveled every summer.
I went there to Wiley College in 1903 and I remained through 1910. Traveled over the Southland, churches and the communities, singing for the college. I was called "the Nightingale of Texas."
MG: That was for fund raising, those tours that the choir would make.﻿3
EM: That was fund raising and advertising. When I first went there, my work was to do the boys' laundry, and every Saturday I would have to do a hundred pillowcases and fifty sheets. Whatever the weather was, I had to do it. But a part of the second year was when I began serious vocal music study. No more washing. Practicing and practicing the quartets and the trios and the solos—largely I was a soloist, and that was a wonderful experience for me. Being a Christian school, we attended regular chapel services and also visited the churches in the community. I was deeply impressed by the religious services, whether on the campus or in community church, because I believed that God was leading and guiding me and I did want to be used of Him.
MG: Well now, what was the music that you performed? Did you just do traditional hymns? Did you use...
EM: As a college choir, our repertoire included selections from the vast field
of the various forms, types and arrangements of choral music: from oratorio and opera, to our beloved spirituals and traditional hymns.
And when I first sang in public in Palestine, Texas, the audience threw money on the stage and frightened me so, I ran off the stage. I was purely a country girl, of course.
MG:	Was the money for you?
EM:	No. A fund for scholarships.
MG:	But it was because of you.
EM:	And it made it possible for me to stay in college until I graduated.
MG:	Do you have brothers or sisters?
EM:	I had one sister, there were two of us. Both of us were there in Wiley College together.
MG: What was her name?
EM: Rosa Champ. There were just two girls in the family. So there was a
wonderful music department at Wiley College, wonderful music department. Harry Weber, H.W. Weber was the one under whom I received all my training, my voice, particularly.
MG: Well now, after you graduated from Wiley, what was your life like then?
EM: Well, I graduated in May, and I married in December of the same year.
MG: This is in 1910.
EM: That's 1910 I married. I was teaching at Wiley when I finished, that
May 1910, and I had a little vacation, and I came back and began teaching in the music department at Wiley College. But in December I married. And then I went on to Beaumont to be with my husband.﻿4
MG: And what was your husband's name?
EM: Lionel V. Gordon, Lionel Vergil Gordon.
MG: And you went with him to Beaumont?
EM: To Beaumont, Texas, and that*s where I taught. Am I going too fast, or what am I doing?
MG: No, you're doing fine, you*xe doing fine.
EM: We had our first baby in Beaumont. And as soon as it was convenient I began teaching.
MG: What was your first child's name?
EM: He was named Floyd, Floyd Champ Gordon.
MG: For your mother.
EM: Floyd Champ Gordon. Floyd was his father's younger brother. And of
course, my maiden name. Before I began working with city schools in Beaumont, however, I was a college professor in Baldwin, Louisiana, at Gilbert
Academy___and I went down and headed the music department, at Gilbert
Academy.
MG: This was after your first child was born.
EM: After my first child was born.
MG: Well now, did your husband go then, too, to Baldwin?
EM: No, no, he was working in the post office in Beaumont.
MG: At Beaumont, I see.
EM: In Beaumont. And then there came such a call for me to.come to Baldwin, a small place, a special place by a bayou. So then I went and spent a couple of years. But it was my college professor who had called from Wiley College to go down and head this school.
MG: So he looked you up.
EM: So he was very fond of me and I, of him. So he had me to come down. And that was a delightful experience, teaching -music, piano and voice, and choir. Then the little girl was on the way, and I had to return to Beaumont.
MG: And what was her name?
EM: Her name was Naomi Lois. Gordon, of course.﻿5
MG: Yes. So you returned then to Beaumont.
EM: To Beaumont. And then began teaching, until the third child was born, and that was Lionel V. Gordon.
MG: Junior.
EM: Named for his father. But he was born after my husband passed.
MG: Oh, my.
EM: My husband was ill along with pastoring a church. Pastoring McCabe Methodist Church.
MG: Saint James Methodist Church?
EM: McCabe Methodist Church. And we were in the parsonage about a year. So right in the middle of his pastorate, I moved and I took him out of Beaumont, and I went to a little country place about twenty miles from Beaumont, because it was better for him there.
MG: For his health?
EM: For his health.
MG: What was that place called?
EM: That was Silsbee, Texas, and that's where I kept hoping he'd get well.
But he didn't get well. And two weeks before the baby was born, I lost him.
MG: What year was that?
EM: That would have been 1916. The boy was born in October 1916.
MG: So now you were a widow with an infant and a young...
EM: With an infant and one tied to my apron. But I was with my mother in
Beaumont. And as soon as convenient, I got in the city schools. I taught first in the county, Jefferson County, for three or four months, and then after, I was transferred to the city schools in Beaumont, Texas, and that was English again, and music.
MG: Well now, what was the condition there, or situation with the public
schools? Were there many of them available for black students? I'm assuming that of course they were all segregated, at this time.
EM: They were segregated and there was music in the white schools, not for segregated schools as ours. I had to take over the choral groups for commencement. That was the biggest thing, to get that music ready for commencement. But when I saw Mrs. Milam, Lena Milam, who was director of music for the white schools, I talked with her about it. And I found out﻿6
EM: (cont.) she was teaching public school music that started with the first grade. So I went three consecutive summers, to American Institute of Normal Methods on the campus of Northwestern University...
MG: And then in 1925 you got your certificate from the Institute of Normal Methods.
EM: I did that, and then I came back and established it in the black schools. I was given permission by the school board.
MG: So you actually introduced a new program of music to the black public schools in Beaumont.
EM: I did. Since all they did was just sing at commencement. I wanted our
children to get what was needed at that time. And I wanted to be ready for it, so I finished that course. And I started the first grade. I had my
rhythm bar.ds, and my little choruses, et cetera, little five- and six-year old ones, and right on through junior high. And at the same time I organized a music study club of adults, about fifty voices, in the community. Also I had my choir contests in the city of Beaumont.
MG: And it wasn't even a matter of one school, you went throughout the system in the city.
EM: No, only in Pipkin Junior High. Later on, other teachers prepared themselves to teach the course in public school music.
MG: And then did you have private students as well?
EM: Oh, yes. Being widowed with two children> I'd leave school, and the children would come and have their lessons after school, and on Saturdays. And I had a choir in the Methodist church...out there twenty years with that choir. School superintendent would bring his faculty over to hear my choir sing. And then I became president of the Texas Association of Negro Musicians. I was president of that ten years, I forgot that.
MG:	Now, did you have the support, then, of your mother, by that time?
EM:	I was with her in her home all the while.
MG:	You were with her.
EM:	With her until the boy was four years old. And then I lost her.
MG:	I see.
EM:	And then that left me with the two children.
MG:	Well, what experiences then did you have other than music during this time in Texas? Were you involved in church work, or community work?
EM: Mostly the church. Taught junior class in the Sunday school, and directed the choir. No club work there. I would be in school, I couldn't be in federated clubs then, though I was interested in them.﻿7
MG: What was the name of the church that you went to?
EM: That was Saint James Methodist Church. I got the yearbook from Beaumont just recently, observing their 100th anniversary.
MG: Oh, did you? Okay.
EM: I'll let you look at it just as soon as you have time.
MG: Oh, that's nice.
EM: I was president for ten years of the Texas Association of Negro Musicians. Getting around when I was traveling and singing with the college choir, I came into contact with other musicians, and found that we were organized into a national association. And I don't know how it was, but I got into two national associations. Then I wanted to get one going in Texas. Each summer then, T taught. We had a school of music in Fort Worth, Texas. Also in Houston, Texas, and then from that, well, we organized a large association. And when I left to come here, I had been president for ten years. I have some of the letters, and the programs, and so forth. I don't know how it went on after that...
MG: So you were establishing the Texas branch of the National Association of Negro Musicians.
EM: Yes.
MG: I see.
EM: My coworker was Mrs. Manet Harrison Fowler.
MG: Minny Harrison?
EM: Manet. M-A-N-E-T. Manet Harrison Fowler. She and I together organized the Texas Association with the help of Dr. F. Rivers Barnwell.
MG: So how did you come to leave the South? When did that take place, and why, what happened?
EM: Well, you got to add this on to that. I'll tell you about it first, and then we'll see what...
MG:	All right.
EM:	I came to live [in Washington] in '33.
MG:	Oh, you came in 1933?
EM:	in 1933, that's when I married, 1933.
MG:	And you married Mr. McCabe then.
EM:	I married Louis McCabe.﻿8
MG: What was his first name?
EM: Louis. Louis McCabe.
MG: Okay.
EM: Louis McCabe. And I've lived here since. That makes forty-four years here.
MG: Okay. What was Mr. McCabe's work?
EM: Mr. McCabe was custodian at Fisher's store, department store, one of the largest ones. It's called Bon Marche now.
MG: Is that right? That's Bon Marche?
EM: That s Bon Marche.
MG: Now, Mr. McCabe. Can you tell me something about him? Has his family been in the Northwest for a long time?
EM: The thing of it...he came from Alexandria, Louisiana, to Orange, Texas.
MG: Is that right?
EM: I knew him down in Orange, Texas, as a little girl. He was about
twelve years older than I. And he said I was always a smart little girl. He watched me when I was a little girl.
MG: Did he come with his parents, or did he come alone?
EM: No. Now, that's another story. That's where I had known him as a child in Orange, Texas.
MG: And you had also...
EM: He was a very outspoken man, straight, high integrity, fearless, speak the truth; he was very courageous. And he knew he couldn't live in the South because he had seen so many of our people lynched for speaking out. So he took a group of men and came out here.
MG: He brought other men with him?
EM: He brought some men with him. Some stopped in Marysville, California. He brought a group of them out here. The Grogans—maybe you've heard about the Grogans—he brought them with him. The wife just passed lately.
MG: What year was this that he brought the...
EM: He did this before I came.
MG: So it must have been the first part of the twentieth century. Had he been here, say, ten years?﻿9
EM: I don't know.
MG: How long?
EM: He mentioned 1918.
MG: Oh.
EM: 1918.
MG: So he'd been here more than ten years —
EM: Yes, he'd been here...
MG: ...before you came.
EM: Yes. He bought this place, and had it paid for before I came. Of course, he and Cynthia, his first wife, had lived here several years. So when he passed, we'd been together twenty-seven years.
MG: When did he pass?
EM: He passed in 1960.
MG: I see.
EM: In 1960 he passed. And so then when I came... But you know that other part?
MG: Did you live in this house?
EM: I lived, since then, right here.
MG: So this is the house that's been the family house---
EM: Yes. He brought me to this house, and I've been right here. And he kept the place like a park, beautiful lawn, lovely garden. All of it here was filled out with flowers and vegetables, and fruit trees which are still here.
MG: I've noticed that you have a lot of trees.
EM: Yes. Grapes and prunes, apples, pears and cherry trees, which he planted.
MG: Did both your children come then when you came West?
EM: No, my children were grow, you see.
MG: They had already graduated from high school and had been in college.
EM: High school, and my daughter had gone through the junior year in college. Then she married.﻿10
MG: I see.
EM: My daughter married in May 1933, and I came here and married in June 1933.
MG: That's good for your background.
EM: Mr. McCabe came to Beaumont for a visit. He found everything to his liking. He wanted to see what I had, because he knew what he had to give me, and he wanted to know what I was used to. [laughter] He thought everything was all right. Why did you ask me that?
MG: After you came here, did you work? Did you start to work right away?
EM: I was just lost when I first got here. What he had told me before I
came.t . He said about my piano classes, "Now you can't teach up there because there aren't enough of your people to teach. Not enough of them. You can't teach, you are coming up there to retire." I was just forty-seven. And I thought that was right, what he was saying. And when I got here and saw the splendid things he'd done, I knew I couldn't sit here in the house and be a housewife. I began to investigate, and in about two years later, I decided to apply for a teaching position. And the man looked at me. I carried all my certificates. He says, "You have the proper credentials, but we aren't ready to hire Negroes."
MG: Is that right?
EM: That's what he told me.
MG: And this was in 1933.
EM: That was in 1935. You see, after I'd been here a while.
MG: Oh, I see. Then you went.
EM: I played for the church, was the pianist there for a good while, while I
was looking out and planning to build a music class. So I started with white children in the neighborhood. When Mr. McCabe knew anything, students were coming here, white and colored.
My daughter, Mrs. Naomi Lois Bradford and I present our joint music classes in recital annually. Both piano and organ. My daughter, Mrs. Naomi Lois (Gordon) Bradford, lives with me here in Tacoma. She is a successful teacher of piano and organ, and minister of music in Allen A.M.E. Church, and church mother of True Vine Church.
My son, Lionel V. Gordon, Major U.S.A.,Retired,is an architectural planner and housing consultant; an instructor, in building construction and development, Prince George's Community College, Largo, Maryland; head, drafting and engineering, Phelps Career Center; and principal, Phelps Adult Education, D.C. public schools.﻿11
MG: This Is part two of an interview with Mrs. Eliza McCabe. The interview continues in Mrs. McCabe's home. Mrs. McCabe, you've been a teacher, a singer, an important club woman, a wife, and a mother. Do you view your various careers in any particular order of importance?
EM: No. I really didn't think about the importance. I did what came to my
hand to do. I wasn't thinking about it being a career. It just came from the blue, and I accepted each and went on. I had no trouble; various activities correlated very well. Teaching in Bible class, or whether I was teaching piano lessons, or voice, it was just a medium of self-expression. I felt that I really owed the world a whole lot; the world owed me nothing. I really felt that because I'm living, I must make the world a better place where I am.
MG: But was it difficult raising children and working, and being a wife and having a career outside the home?
EM: Not too difficult. I found the best persons at different times to look
after the children, but just for a little while. We didn't have the baby sitters we have now. And then as soon as the children were old enough, I'd take them to school with me. The boy was four, the girl was six for kindergarten, and he sat right in the class with her. I didn't have any trouble.
MG: So you made it work.
EM: It came out quite well, and I enjoyed the various activities.
MG: Do you have any preference among the terms colored, Negro and black, and if you do, could you explain why?
EM: Well, I'd prefer colored.
MG: What you're used to saying.
EM: I am used to saying colored. National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People, National Association of Colored Women's Clubs, so that's the title that came to me more often, colored. And in the organizations that I loved, there it was. And I got used to it in my admiration for those two organizations, so that that word, colored,after all, I think, is the one I prefer.
MG: Is the one you prefer.
EM: I prefer.
MG: So when you hear especially younger people today using the term black, does that ring strange to your ears?
EM: Well, I'm getting used to it. Usually when they used to say it, I resented it. But I don't now, it's just all right.﻿12
MG: How do you feel your race has affected the options and choices available to you in your life?
EM: My race hasn't affected my choice, not that I know of. I haven't known what color I was. Not even in the deep South. I was born in Louisiana. Of course I don't know anything about that. But in Texas where I lived, as an adult, I went everywhere I wanted to go. I know Paderewski came to Beaumont, Texas, and that's the deep, deep South. And my little girl was about seven, eight years old, and I wanted her to hear this man, so she could say she had heard Paderewski. Permission was given me. "You can go if you go up in the balcony," but everybody was on the main floor. So I went up in the balcony with my little daughter and we saw and heard Paderewski.
But I did have to run one time—going to see and hear one of those other great musicians who came. There was a new city hall downtown, and we were not allowed to go there at that particular time. However, my friend, Elsie, and I slipped in there to hear him. But there was a different doorkeeper there that I hadn't spoken with. He said, "You'd better get out of this place."
MG: He wasn't even willing to let you sit in the balcony.
EM: He didn't want me to sit. "You'd better get..." He said it in such a
hateful way. And she and I ran out and got on a bus and went on down her way. But you see, I lived north, and I had to come back by, because he could have gotten a policeman. That is the worst thing I'd ever met. I was really terrified, because he said it in such a hateful, "Get out from there." So I rode on down with her, and then I got on that bus and when I came back by the new city hall, I slipped down between the benches so that no one could see me going by, till the bus got by there. But otherwise. ..
Then this great harpist came to Beaumont, and I wanted my little daughter to go see this harpist, that was over at the white women's club. So white people got used to seeing me around places like that. And then of course, I was teaching in the city schools there. And I did have a large music study club, and they made friends, and of course that was an advantage. White people often came to my church to hear my choir. Coming up all that time there in Beaumont, that's where I spent most of my time teaching. I enjoyed a certain freedom—with no bodily harm, nor insults.
Now when I went to Northwestern for this course, I had an embarrassment, but it didn't harm me physically. I just kept going right on, until I finished that course in public school music. The occasion was the time for the graduating banquet and reception. I'd paid my money for whatever things were needed for graduating that year. I was in Chicago, and I'd go out to Evanston every morning to the Northwestern campus, you know, and study. And so I went the last day, the banquet going to be that night, they gave me my money back and gave me my pin, diplomas, _et cetera, and told me not to come that night.﻿13
MG: Did they try to explain it or not?
EM: No, they didn't try to explain why or nothing. But that didn't crush me neither, because I got what I went there for.
MG: The training.
EM: I got the training, and I could see things then that I wanted to take
back to my people in Beaumont, Texas. If I got to do this thing, I must prepare myself for it. So I was just as happy as I could be that I got my certificate and all the little things that go with it, my book and my pin, et cetera. So that didn't kill me, nor did it crush my spirit.
MG: Well, now how do you think that being a woman affected your choices and options?
EM: I had no trouble, I did what T. wanted to do. When I went to Wiley, I was going to be a teacher, that was in my mind. I was going to be a teacher. That was my goal. I chose that field because I saw the life teachers lived and how they conducted themselves and that's what I wanted, though I came from a very humble background. I looked at it, and those teachers were shining examples... I loved them and I could see every day they'd give me the best they could, and so I wanted to be like them. I never had trouble being a woman and I've done everything I wanted to do. Still doing what I'm big enough to do. [laughter]
KEEPING ON
I've dreamed many a dream that never came true I've seen them vanish at dawn
But I've realized enough of my dreams, thank God, To make me want to dream on.
I've prayed many prayers when no answer came Tho' I've waited patient and long, But answers have come to enough of my prayers To make me keep praying on.
I've trusted many a friend that failed, And left me to weep alone,
But I've found enough of my friends true blue To make me keep trusting on.
I've sown many seeds that fell by the way For the birds to feed upon,
But I've held enough golden sheaves in my hand, To keep me sowing on.
I've drained the cup of disappointment and pain, I've gone many days without song,
But I've sipped enough nectar from the roses of life To make me want to live on.
Author unknown﻿14
MG: What is the women's movement, as you see it, and how do you feel about it?
EM: Well, I think at this time the women do need such a movement. But for me, I've done my best. It's a little late for me to participate to any large extent.
MG: Are you sympathetic to the women's movement?
EM: Well, yes. It's so different from when I came on. The world is different, entirely different, and if that gives the women a sense of fulfillment and satisfaction, and they think that's going to open new doors for them, so let them go on. I wish them success. So let them go on the Equal Rights Amendment. It is an opportunity to discover and develop unused talents and skills.
MG: You don't think it would have any effect, as far as you're concerned?
EM: One, maybe they think they've got to do this to help themselves. Two, maybe this movement will help them add new dimensions to their lives.
So I would have no argument and no feeling against them.
MG: What do you consider to be the most important achievements of your life? When you look back over time, what gives you the most satisfaction?
EM: The most important achievements, and the most satisfaction comes through
my teaching experience. The person to person contact created the beginning of warm friendships, which have lasted even until now. Opportunity to give counsel that led to right decisions just at the turning point of someone's life. This is a valuable by-product of the teaching profession. Very often over the years—from faraway places—come letters, long distance telephone calls, and sometimes personal visits, recalling our yesteryears: teacher and pupil.
MG: You have memberships and have had offices in many professional and scholarly
organizations. Are there any of these that you consider especially rewarding? Discuss a little of your club work.
EM: Well, club work. I wasn't able to do any club work down in Texas because, as a rule, the clubs had their sessions at one o'clock in the day. Well, I was teaching in the public schools, but I joined the club, my name was on the rolls. Once I went to a meeting and found it very interesting. Just paid my dues and went to a meeting once in a while. But when I came here in 1933 I was given the opportunity to participate, and I promptly and gladly accepted, and found club work most rewarding, satisfying and challenging.
An important, rewarding, achievement with the club women of Tacoma in which I participated was with the Tacoma City Association of Colored Women's Clubs, composed of six clubs, including fewer than one hundred members spearheading the project. We have bought, built and paid for a clubhouse, situated in a most desirable location, commanding an unobstructed view of Mount Tacoma. Instead of using the required ten years, the clubhouse at 2316 South Yakima, was paid for in five years.﻿15
EM: (cont.) This most noteworthy project was achieved under the inspiring, dynamic, dedicated leadership of Mrs. Bertie Edwards, president of the Tacoma City Association of Colored Women's Clubs, Incorporated, and chairman of the building committee. She was most ably and efficiently supported by her husband, Cyril A. Edwards, a prominent citizen, who supervised every detail of the structure. The value of the clubhouse is $70,000.
MG: Yes, that's fine. What about some of the other clubs that you worked
in, in conjunction with this, and offices that you've held at different times. I was remembering that list I saw from your notes.
EM: The Women's Christian Temperance Union. I have been an active member since 1909. I was in the National WCTU before I was in the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs. And then the local clubs, so many make up the state. And so then T became the state president. It was not until I came here that I began my activities in the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs. And we entertained the National out here, the first time it had ever come to the far Northwest, that far west.
MG: What year was that, do you remember?
EM: 1948.
MG: 1948.
EM: Since the NACWC had never been to the Northwest, you know what they expected? To find us in tepees and wigwams. That's what some said. You talk about putting life into it—that meeting in 1948 brought the National up. It was an epoch-making meeting.
MG: And you were president at this time?
EM: I was president. The State wanted to send me back to a National. I said, "Don't do that, let us bring the National here. Let's see, let's bring it here." And I gave them the idea and they did it and it was an overwhelming success.
MG: How long were you president?
EM: Eight years.
MG: From...
EM: From 1943 to 1951.
MG: Now, what were these? Tell us something about these clubs, colored women's clubs that were formed here.
EM: Well now, let me see. There was the Cloverleaf Art Club, our oldest club. Mrs. Nettie J. Asberry was the moving spirit in the Cloverleaf Art; she passed, of course, at the age of 102. The Matrons—and Bethune WCTU, that's three of the pioneer groups.﻿16
MG: That is the Bethune Women's Christian Temperance Union.
EM: Bethune WCTU had the double responsibility belonging to both the National WCTU and NACWC, Incorporated.
MG: The Temperance Union and the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs.
EM: Well, that's the last one. Irene McCoy Gaines Improvement I organized. Oh yes, here it is.,.1974. Oh, here it is here...Irene McCoy Gaines. It was organized in January of 1974 as a newcomer's club.
MG: What was the function of the club?
EM: Well, each had its aims...that gives you an idea right there.
MG: "To promote active participation in civic and religious activities in the
community, to foster the study of Negro history, to improve racial relationships ."
EM: Every year each club observes Negro History Week. The Irene McCoy Gaines, that is named for one of the national association presidents, as was the Bethune named for Mary McLeod Bethune.
MG: Lindseth Iota Sigma Club.
EM: WCTU. That is another WCTU. Younger women or businesswomen who can't meet in the daytime, that's called Lindseth Iota Sigma WCTU.
MG: That's theirs. The Stafford Study Club.
The Stafford Club was organized in 1939 and that was the first one that you organized.
EM: I believe Stafford was the first. Stafford was organized in 1939, and then in 1940 was Bethune, and then 1947 was the others, at intervals. Here's a little yearbook of the Stafford Study Club. There's our prayer. That's the '73. We are compiling our new one for '78-'79. We have a city association where all these clubs come together in monthly sessions.
MG: This is a tremendous amount of time that you invest in all this work.
EM: I enjoy it. It keeps me studying for a while.
MG: Let me see.
EM: That covers, that gives an award every year for an outstanding woman. I got that award too. I can show it to you, I think.
MG: Now, this says the club was organized in March of '39, joined Washington State Association of Colored Women's Clubs in 1940, and is a member of the Tacoma City Association, Incorporated.﻿17
EM: Now, that is the city association that owns the clubhouse.
MG: I see. Northwestern regional.
EM: That is what I was president of, at one time. The national association comes from a local, to the state, to the regional, to the national.
MG: This is an award presented. "Third annual award presented by the Women's
Study Club, December, 1952, to Eliza C. McCabe for her notable and consistent contributions to the civic, social, educational and spiritual development of the community." That's nice. Do you belong to the National Association for the Study of Negro Life and History?
EM: No.
MG: Now I have a list here of other awards that you have received...
EM: Some for music and some for civic...
MG: Yes, and I will type these up and submit them for the record. But just yourself now, thinking about these awards and honors, are there any you find particularly satisfying? It's kind of a bad thing to single out one, but is there, are there one or two that you really are proud of?
EM: Well, what awards —
MG: Well, you have the Women's Study Club, you got the third award there, and then all your certificates: Northwestern, Wiley, Meissner Institute in Chicago.
EM: Well, you see I was studying and branching out on a new course of music at Meissner, that was a part of getting me ready for my life work.
MG: Yes, I listed that one.
EM: And that's a certificate for... I don't know, I just couldn't say. I don't know which one. I would think the greatest was the diploma from Wiley College when I graduated. That would really be the foundation, from all the state and through that, and get all that contact in the college and so forth, and then come through. I was salutatorian of my class, my college class. I think that is what made all these other things possible. I think that would be the one that I would be so grateful... Because if I hadn't had that, I couldn't have, I wouldn't have known how to face the other things. I wouldn't have known. Well, don't you think that would be...
MG: I would.
EM: Because if I hadn't remained in college and obtained my degree, I could not have earned the other awards.
MG: Do you have any hobbies, and if you do, what are they?﻿18
EM: Gardening and flowers and music. Of course, the music is a profession,
too, but I am apt to go always studying and beginning and so forth and so on. But I've been out in the yard this morning now already. But the garden is what I really... I mean you have a garden of beans, peas, and cabbage and beets—I'll give you a mess of beets to take home with you. But that's it. And when I'm out here, it gives me a chance to enjoy the varied aspects of nature.
MG: That's what I was going to ask you, what the hobbies mean to you.
EM: Well, they're recreation and relaxation, all of that. Because, now for
instance, I would just take my books and sit down and read them. I'm not playing very much now, but there's still history to look up, and there's still theory, see, the background of the thing, and there's still the periods of music, and there's still these composers and what conditions in which they rompnsp, So that's why...I'm thinking of those things, and that's refreshing. That's a hobby and a profession.
MG: So you still study in your field?
EM: I still study. I had to stop some of them because I just did not have enough time to get around to them all. And of course, I still teach my Bible class in Sunday school and that means studying too. Then I have a Missionary Society now, I'm vice-president. I was president of that for about eight years, now I'm vice-president of that. Well, that is studying too. And I have the Altar Guild that has a... We are studying history of the A.M.E. church. I guess that gives you an answer to...does that answer your question?
MG: Yes, that's fine. Now I know you have traveled widely in the United States. Have you ever been outside the country?
EM: After I came here,	I did go up to Canada.
MG: You did.
EM: And then I went to	Mexico. I spent some time in El Paso and we had a chance
just briefly to go	through parts of old Mexico.
MG: Well, now besides the pleasure, I'm sure, all this travel has given you, do you feel that it has changed your opinions or your viewpoints in any way—the experiences of traveling?
EM: No, no. I've just gone right along, whatever, something new to see, and not find something there that I could use in developing my own self. But I wasn't affected in any way. Like the corner carnival, I just took it in stride.
MG:
Okay, there are a couple of things now to say about your grandparents, what were their names?﻿19
EM: Yes, my grandparents. He was named Nathan Harden and she was named
Rachel. But anyway, he was a circuit rider. Parson, they called him. Parson Nathan Harden. They didn't say r.everend as much as they do now. Parson. He was a parson and he was deeply religious. Came out of slavery, and then he bought this eighty-acre farm in the Piney Woods.
MG: Of Louisiana?
EM: In Louisiana. And there were sixteen children—eight girls and eight boys — and my mother, Harriet, was the baby girl.
MG: Harriet Harden.
EM: She was the baby of them.
MG: Well now, this property that he purchased, did it stay in family hands?
EM: The children, when they got grown, went off the farm; they left—the men left, married, and went elsewhere—and so I just knew the property went back to the government. Everybody moved away. Then Grandmother was there alone, and then one of the nephews took her with him then to Mansfield, Louisiana, until she passed.
Rachel Harden. Nathan and Rachel. Devout Christians. I remember them having their devotions on every morning, bringing their little grandchildren in. My mother had gone to Texas without me. First she took my sister, the baby, and went on to Texas, and then after a while, she came back after me. Grandfather died and then she came to take me to Texas. But Grandfather would often gather around that old clay fireplace and have prayer with us.
MG: Do you have any idea about when your grandparents Harden were born?
EM: I wouldn't know that.
MG: Were they from that area?
EM: You know, I think Grandmother came from Mississippi. I'm afraid to say, because when I left there I was just six.
MG: Too young, yes.
EM: I was the favorite grandchild, but it was Grandma and Grandpa for me. And they said Grandma was a midwife, and her duties were not so burdensome— she didn't get the bitter end of slavery, because she was in the house with the young mothers and children. And Grandfather was tall, straight as he could be. I remember that.
MG: Well now, is there anything else we should include here for your personal experiences that we haven't talked about, because if we have covered everything, I wanted to move on to talk about blacks in Tacoma.﻿20
EM: I don't know, I have to be guided entirely by you. In the first place I didn't see anything to do, I didn't see anything to write about. But I did want to speak about my grandmother and grandfather, that were just out of slavery. I know they were free, but it hadn't been long.
MG: Yes. Now when you came to Tacoma, that was in 1933, to your knowledge, about how many black people were living here?
EM: I don't know—I would go downtown and go into many of the stores.
I would not see a single black person. There didn't seem to be very many of them. I had just left a school down in Texas with all my little black children coming and going, but for years I wouldn't see a single black one among them going to the school as they passed my door daily. At that time, there was two churches, that was the Bethlehem Baptist Church and Allen A.M.E. Church.
MC: You mean in one building or two?
EM: Each had its own church, but such small congregations. We could go to one or the other church, but it wouldn't be enough of them to divide the crowd. But now in this little book, it gave all the names of the churches, any number of churches, and you can get anything you want and you draw your own crowd. Because the military personnel has helped us. They come in and they find a good place here for schools—they're just filling up. Of course, sometimes they are here a while and then they go away, but then some others come and stay. Now, when we first came here—when I first came here—this house was here. We had no colored neighbors until just about five years ago. A man right down on 56th Street there now has eight children. Nicely ordered family, house is, you couldn't tell it from anybody else's for that matter. That metal fence around it; children neat and go to school and so forth. But heretofore we had no neighbors. The nearest colored family must have been about fifteen or twenty blocks away. And, then you couldn't buy property in this neighborhood.
MG: Property.
EM: Property. The salesman would say, "Yes, you can get it," and when you come back, they say, "It's sold." And they didn't let colored come in. And we were surprised when this family got a nice home there on the corner on 56th Street. If you worked in Olympia, the state capital, you had to go down there and work, and come back. You couldn't spend the night down in Olympia.
MG: You had to come back to Tacoma?
EM: Yes, you had to come back to Tacoma—that prevailed. We were the only colored here for a long, long,long time, and of course, when my husband came in here, it was different, because it was woods. My husband just chose this place and greatly improved it, because if he hadn't got it then, he never would have gotten in here. So the whites come in; they found him here. We made friends. I have no problems. When the sickness come, and death comes, all the things that happened to us—the white neighbors come and share—they came bringing us food and did other neighborly deeds and also helped with my gardening.﻿21
MG: I was going to ask you for those black people who were here when you came. Do you know the different places that they had come from, geographical areas?
EM: A good many of them came from southern states, other than Texas. They really came from all over the U.S.
MG: There didn't seem to be a predominance from one place or another?
EM: Well, now no, but my husband did bring several men with him when he came from Texas, but it seemed to me they came from all over. As visitors in church, they said, "I came from..." such and such a place, or "I came from Alabama," or "I came from Chicago, Illinois," or "I came from..." scattered around like that. Far more come now than there used to. Now, Mrs. Stafford would tell you much more about that because she was here ahead of me and she is intelligent enough to make observations, and she lived in the central area. Not many lived out like we are; and my husband, having a farmer's background, now he came out here.
MG: When you came, central area was the main concentration of many blacks.
EM: It's pretty much that now. So it seems.
MG: Today.
EM: There is a new development on the east side and many of us have bought homes and settled on the east side.
MG: But that is a newer development.
EM: Yes. The government established homes for the low income people including for the military families. It is called "Salishan." But now they buy those houses that they rented from the government, and they are renovating them so as to make them comfortable homes.
MG: So there are two main areas, concentrations of black residency then.
EM: Roughly speaking, yes.
MG: Now, how when you came to Tacoma, how were black people employed, what kinds of jobs did they have?
EM: There was a large smelter for refining ore, and that had many men there.
That was for the men. And these jobs around these buildings—could not call them engineers, because they didn't have the background of engineers, but they were taking care of these big buildings. And women were looking after the ladies' rest rooms. Caterers. There were truck farms also. Women also worked for private families. Men worked as longshoremen, in railroad jobs as train porters, in packing houses, and sawmills. They did construction work, and worked at gas and aluminum plants. Now that is as far as I go. That's as much as I can remember.﻿22
MG: Now, did they encounter difficulty in being hired?
EM: Yes, but a few were accepted.
MG: Yes. Why don't you tell about that again, about your teaching, or attempts to teach school.
EM: I wanted to teach; I was just out of the schoolroom, and I took all my papers, diplomas, certificates, and went down to the central building there on Tacoma Avenue, and made my application. The superintendent looked over everything, and he said, "Well, you have credentials here that some of my English teachers who are teaching don't have..." You know they do let you teach, while you are working toward a degree. "But we are not ready to hire black teachers." And of course, you know, I was crestfallen. And I just looked right at him and said, "All right, thank you." If I just had had a little more courage, I might have been accepted. You have to have somebody, some x^hite friend you know who speaks for you, but I was strange and not acquainted here.
MG: So now when blacks could find employment, it was in laboring capacities.
EM: Menial. Working on the...even then the bootblacks, you know, and so forth and like that, and all working on the streets, which you don't have many of them working on that now. But conditions are much better now.
WPA. Yes, I worked on that, that was a sewing project—I had forgotten that—I worked while I was waiting to get this piano class built up. I just happened to think what I did between that—I worked on WPA and that was sewing.
MG: Were there other black women who worked on that project?
EM: Yes, there was.
MG: Did they segregate them, projects for black women and projects...
EM: No, no, no, no, I sat right beside the white worker, and right now a
touching thing happened. There is an old white lady who is in a nursing home now, and whenever she sees me, she — she said she didn't know how to do one thing about sewing, but I'd always take her sewing and get it straight for her. When the supervisor came to inspect, I'd help her right quick, get her sewing ready, so's it would pass.
MG: Because she didn't know how to sew.
EM: She didn't know how to do a thing, but she had to be on WPA just as I
did. My husband was blind, and he wasn't able to work any more down at the store, so I wanted something to do so... But that's the kind you met there, her name's Mrs. Campbell. She's a little older than I am. I visit now and then. She has to stop right there and tell how I saved her. Well, working on WPA, when that project changed, then I was a practical nurse, and I went from house to house attending low income people who were sick. In some cases there was a mother coming home from the hospital, and there were small children to be cared for.﻿23
MG: Were you employed by the city?
EM: That was...
MG: That was WPA? Oh.
EM: Then after that, here they changed, all that was changed. I was sent to American Lake Veteran's Hospital in the nurses' dining room. Now what they were doing, they were taking so many persons who were on WPA, who were on the sewing project, to go do the practical nursing. And so many of them were given to work with the patients—mental cases. But they didn't let me go work with patients. I think they may have thought that the patients were already off; that would have been too big a contrast for me, the one black among all the others. I don't know what happened, it didn't matter to me if they were mentally off. When they see this little black woman come in, don't tell what they might do. So now they sent me to the nurses' dining room. That was just as nice as can be. But I wasn't among the patients. I enjoyed being out there, but the only trouble was I didn't have my Sundays off, no Sunday school, no Sunday worship service. I was most unhappy.
MG: You worked seven days?
EM: But my off day wasn't on Sunday, it was on a Thursday.
MG: Oh, I see.
EM: I did real well, and they liked my work, but I wasn't satisfied. I wanted to go to Sunday school and church. So I asked to resign. And what did I do that for? What did I ask for that for? They let me go with a black mark.
MG: Oh, for having said you wanted to leave.
EM: They were getting ready to send me to some other hospital. They wanted to exchange me for someone, to send me to someplace else, because I was doing something they wanted done.
MG: Oh.
EM: And I didn't understand that promotion was coming. I said, "I don't want to go anywheres; my husband's at home and he's blind. I'm working because I have to work. But I don't want a thing, I just want to get this little job to take care of us during this time." But "with prejudice," that's the way they did—they let me go "with prejudice/' Well, when I left, there was a big store, a jewelry store downtown. And I got a job in the stockroom there—that paid more money. About three months afterwards, the officials of the veteran's hospital sent me a note saying, "We removed all prejudice against you."
MG: Oh, is that right?﻿24
EM: They removed all prejudice against me. About that time my class, my
piano classes, were increasing very well. I was glad to be working in this stockroom and not in the ladies' rest room.
MG: Do you know, do you remember what the name of the jewelry store was?
EM: Fraser's. Just Fraser's. It has gone out of business. That's where I was in the stockroom. I was the only little black one down there. That was my last job. The piano class met our needs, and I remained at home with my husband.
I was traveling all over Tacoma singing for the women's meetings, and lecturing about conditions in the Southland. And they would ask me to tell about conditions there. Different churches, missionary societies, and women's guilds and so forth. I was a member of the YWCA.
MG:	Was that a Phillis Wheatley? What was the name of it?
EM:	YWCA here in Tacoma.
MG:	It didn't have a name for the branch?
EM:	No. Just YWCA. 401 Broadway.
MG:	Were there any black businesses here in Tacoma when you came, during the early years?
EM:	I am sure there were, but I didn't know of them.
MG:	Restaurants and barber shops and beauty shops?
EM:	Oh yes. They did have beauty shops.
MG:	Yes. But you were a ways from it.
EM:	I'm away from it. That's the main thing. I wasn't there. I had no contact.
MG: Well, in the political area, was there any special black activity, attempts to hold office? Clubs and all the rest?
EM: I had no trouble when I was running for freeholder.
MG: Why don't you tell us about that? Well, of course, this was fairly recently now, that you ran for freeholder, wasn't it?
EM:	Well, it was around 1952, as I recall.
MG:	Oh, it was a long time ago?
EM:	Long time ago. We haven't had a freeholder election for quite a while.
MG:	And this was the American Association of University Women?﻿25
EM: The American Association of University Women only commended me for participating.
MG: Yes, yes.
EM: I belonged to them for a while. It became too difficult to keep up with all of those activities. And I had to give more time to this husband. So I had to let go of the American Association of University Women, and I had to let go of my work at the YWCA.
MG:	But now freeholder was for the city of Tacoma?
EM:	For the city of Tacoma.
MG:	What did that office entail?
EM:	That's too much for me to attempt to explain at this time. It's been so long.
MG:	Were you successful in that?
EM:	No, but I made a pretty good run, to be a newcomer.
MG:	Were there other blacks who attempted to run for office?
EM: We have had them run. Harold Moss was another. A first black council member. Harold Moss. He ran successfuly and served the required time. Harold Moss.
MG: Now in the area of social life... The schools were desegregated...
EM: Now when I came here, they were not supposed to be segregated. McCarver was predominantly black. McCarver has had quite a battle over there for quite a long time. McCarver, that's central area. Dr. Beckinridge, E.H. Beckinridge, he just retired as a second vice-principal of the schools here. They just had a party for him. Why don't you call him up?
MG: All right.
EM: Let me get his number for you.
MG: You've told us a lot about the clubs and societies that you were involved in. Were there fraternal organizations?
EM: I never joined any of them.
MG: You've never been into fraternal organizations...
EM: Well, I was in Eastern Star in Texas, but fraternal organizations had no appeal. When I came here, the first thing was that I was so far out, and my husband doesn't drive, and I didn't try.
MG: It would have been a big trip for you to go into...Hilltop.﻿26
EM: It would have been a big trip. And then, of course, these other clubs
had me so involved. First the churches, and then the club life. The club was very exacting, teaching and training and so forth, so I didn't try the Eastern Star, nor any other fraternity.
MG: What sort of entertainment did black people have? Do you remember?
EM: They had their parties and the usual activities that go on, but on a smaller scale. Only as far as a function related to one of those banquets for one of the clubs, or something like that.
MG: Was there a lot of church-related social activity?
EM: Not too much. Church and Sunday school picnics, pastors' anniversaries,
choir anniversaries, et cetera. The missionary societies had their functions and that's the biggest... The lodges had the big functions.
MG: Well, now you told me earlier that you supported both the NAACP and the
Urban League. Were there any other civil rights organizations in Tacoma? Or were those the main ones?
EM: Those are the main ones. The next thing you had were fraternities—the
Elks, and the Eastern Stars and the Masons, who gave support to the NAACP and Urban League.
MG: How would you characterize race relations when you first came? And then did you see any sort of change in progression with race relations as time passed?
EM: A great improvement in race relations since the early years. But now, positions, you find them now in the banks, department stores as clerks, telephone system, and Penney's got somebody in his shoe department-and Bon Marche, Sears.• All over, they are everywhere now. That wasn't so then. I remember one man, and his name was Mr. Washington, and he was in politics.
MG: What was Mr. Washington's first name, do you remember?
EM: J.A.G. Washington. I will never forget him, J.A.G.. He was dapper; you was speaking about a dapper one with his hat on the side and his cane and so forth. I remember I invited one of the officers, the state president of the WCTU came over, I had one of my meetings, and she came over and talked... And he just came on in and he was just sort of amazed... "How did you get in touch with her? How did you get in touch with me? You must have had..." I had a pull, some way or another.
MG: That he needed to know about.
EM: "How do you know her?" I just got here.
MG: Were there instances of white discrimination that you witnessed? I mean apart from the area of employment?﻿27
EM: No, because I was going to the YWCA, and I was going to the churches, and I was going to the AAUW, and I was going everywhere where I figured I could go. I joined right off. I had no trouble whatever. No discrimination. Maybe if I have gone to their churches. And now there's a church right near by here, where for five years I had to go to the church right down here, because Mr. McCabe was blind and sick, and it would take too long to get down to my church and back. This church had their services in an hour. I would get up and fix my husband's breakfast, and see that he was comfortable and then I would go to Pine Street Christian Church down there, and be back in an hour. Well, they wanted me to join. Now, the Methodist church was further away, and they wanted me to join there because I came from a Methodist church in Texas. It wasn't United Methodist when I came here. However, I was invited to join them. But I didn't because I knew with what little talent that I had, I must go where my people were. I felt they could use it. I felt I could help. Your own people need you. I attended both of the nearby churches until my husband passed, and then joined Allen A.M.E. Church.
MG: Now did black people as a whole, do you feel, suffer discrimination apart from economic discrimination? Did you hear of instances and experiences?
EM: Not to my knowledge.
MG: I thank you so much, Mrs. McCabe, for your interview and I know that we have a lot of valuable material to use here. Thank you.
EM: I hope you have.﻿ELIZA CHAMP GORDON MCCABE
