Marcia Greenlee:
This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Clara Miles Peters Dickson. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Dickson's home, Mashpee, Cape Cod. The date is the 27th of June, 1978. The interviewer is Marcia M. Greenlee. Mrs. Dickson, have you worked primarily inside or outside your home during your lifetime?
Clara Dickson:
I have worked outside a great deal, for many years. I worked for the army, and the air force, and the Department of Conservation, but of course, I raised eight children during that period so I did spend a good deal of time home with them.
Marcia Greenlee:
Would you describe yourself, then, primarily as a career woman, or as a housewife, mother, or something of both?
Clara Dickson:
My working days were really a forced thing, because it was during the depression. It was very necessary that I work because my husband was unable to get work, or very little work, and very small pay. I had gone to Burdett, a business college, so you might say that I aspired to be a career person.
But during the depression, the early thirties, my husband was without employment, and I was forced to set aside my business training and go out and get whatever work was available. Even our house was put up for auction at one point during this hard time of depression. Meanwhile I had eight children born within a ten-year period, I always had a baby in my arms. I would take the baby to work in a bassinet with me, going down to Oyster Harbors and Hyannis Port, doing whatevei jobs were available, housework, cooking. I'm an excellent cook! I even made a dinner once for Wilhelmina, Queen of the Netherlands, when she was on a visit to the United States.
Marcia Greenlee:
Let me ask you something about your family background. What was your father's name?﻿2
CD: My father was Oscar Columbus Miles.
MG: Where was he born, and when?
CD: In South Carolina. Greenville. Many of the Miles family still live in Columbia, South Carolina, and Macon, Georgia. They are well established there.
MG: Do you know the year?
CD: I'm not sure, but I believe he was born July 4, 1880.
MG: How would you characterize your father? What kind of man was he?
CD: He was an ambitious man, very ambitious, and he wanted all the best for
his family. He worked on the railroad, and as a result, our family traveled all over the country. During this period, we lived in Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, California, and Utah before settling in Boston.
MG: Did you know his parents?
CD: Oh, yes, I knew my grandmother and grandfather.
MG: What were their names?
CD: They were Miles—Lindsay and Clara. In fact, I'm named after my grandmother who was mostly Cherokee Indian.
MG: Were they also from South Carolina?
CD: They were from South Carolina. I think they lived in the country near Greenville.
MG: Now how about your mother, what was her name?
CD: My mother was Amanda Hill.
MG: And where was she born?
CD: She was born in Sparta, Georgia. She was born on the family homestead. Her father was a cotton farmer.
MG: Do you know the year she was born?
CD: Momma was born on August 23, 1880.
MG: What about her parents?
CD: I knew her parents. My grandmother was Amanda Dickson and my grandfather was Alfred Hill.
MG: How would you characterize your mother?﻿3
CD: My mother was a very frugal woman, I would say. She was ambitious, and
she wanted for the best. I will always remember her as an excellent cook!
MG: How and where did your parents meet and marry?
CD: They met in Atlanta, Georgia, and were married there.
MG: And how did they make a living?
CD: My father came to Boston shortly after they were married, and he worked for a company that set buoys between Boston and Gay Head for the U.S. Coast Guard.
MG: Did your mother work?
CD: Not as a very young woman with young children.
MG: Did your father have any feelings about her working or not working?
CD: He did not like her to work. He felt that she should raise his family. That was work enough!
MG: Now, were there other children in your family?
CD: Yes, I had a sister, Alice, and two brothers, Bill and Oscar. Oscar died at the age of nine.
MG: Could you tell me their names in order of their birth?
CD: Yes, I was the eldest, followed by Alice Miles Love, Oscar Reginald Miles, and David William Miles.
MG: So it's Alice, Oscar Reginald, and David.
CD: Oscar Reginald, and David William. We called David "Billy," and the nane stuck.
MG: Where were you in that order?
CD: I was the oldest.
MG: You were the eldest child. Now, with your brothers and sister, could you tell me something about each one of them. What did they do?
CD: My sister, Alice, was about two years younger than I, but we were very close. She was a trained ballet dancer, and also wrote poetry on occasion. She died at the age of thirty, and left a daughter and two sons. My brother, Oscar, was a year younger than Alice, but unfortunately, he died at the age of nine. Billy, the youngest, was mechanically inclined and could fix almost anything. During most of his adult life, he owned and operated auto service stations.
MG: Did they settle in the Boston area?﻿4
CD: Yes, they did.
MG: Were you especially close to each other as children?
CD: Oh yes, we were very close.
MG: Did you share a number of interests?
CD: My sister and I were very close, and at her death, I was torn apart. We
had had our little fights and whatnot, like sisters do, but I just couldn't get it into my head that she had gone.
MG: Where did you grow up?
CD: As I said, I grew up all over the country! [laughs]
MG: Well, tell us something about that. How did it happen?
CD: As I said, my father was an ambitious man. For many years he worked as a Pullman porter on the railroad. If he couldn't make money here, he'd have to go there, and see what he could find, greener fields. He was always looking for greener fields. Therefore, we went all over this country looking for better opportunities.
MG: From Boston where did you —
CD: From Boston we went to Chicago. I can remember that very well. My father worked as a meat cutter for Cudahy Meat Company. From Chicago we went out to California.
MG: What part of California was it?
CD: Los Angeles, and then it was just moving around from one area to another.
We also went out to the state of Washington, your state. (Our home was in the part of the city where Hollywood is now.)
MG: And you said, I think, earlier, that you were in Utah, too?
CD: Oh, yes. We lived in Salt Lake City, Utah. We lived there for about four years. My father worked on the railroad and was based there.
MG: I see. Now, about what age were you when you left California? I guess that was when you moved to Utah?
CD: No, we came back to Massachusetts when I was about ten years old. We came back to Boston, and Rhode Island. We spent a little while in Rhode Island. And then we were just moving around. We lived in Buffalo, New York. In fact, Bill—we called David "Bill"—he was born in Buffalo, New York. My father just had the wanderlust, and we would go anywhere at the drop of a hat. We were down in Mexico, and up in Canada. We went everywhere.
MG: Now, what kind of work was your father doing as you went to these different locations?﻿5
CD: Well, he would do whatever he could find in that particular city. Once I can remember, in California, he was working at the Broadway Department Store, which is still there. He worked on the railroad, and he worked, well, he just did whatever he could find in that particular place. Finally, my father tired of traveling, and took a job with the Christian Science Monitor, and that was the end of his traveling days.
MG: Looking back on it now, does it seem that this moving around and the rest made any particular strain on your growing up, or not?
CD: No, no. We were very much at home traveling. Many of the experiences of our travel are still with me. For example, we were able to observe the Indians and how they lived. This made a lasting impression on me. We saw the West when it was still young. But we were glad to get back to the East. The only problem was that folks used to tease us about our western accent!
MG: Tell me something about your earliest childhood memories.
CD: Nothing unusual. We just lived...we thought we were having a wonderful time. That's all I ever thought about.
MG: What was the family's sort of daily routine like? Were there certain sorts of rituals for every day...
CD: No, no. Well, we went to church. We attended church wherever we stayed, or wherever we stopped long enough. But outside of that, we just lived a normal life once we settled in Boston. We were always part of a respectable social set and had affairs, and gatherings on occasion.
MG: What constituted special occasions? Did you have any particular celebrations that you remember?
CD: Well, we celebrated each birthday. I can't think that we had too many
celebrations. Our biggest celebration was when we would return to Massachusetts or Rhode Island to see all the other members of the family. I can remember that we went South when I was very small, very young, to see my mother's family and my father's people, whom we hadn't seen or didn't know too much about. As we grew older, Alice and I belonged to service clubs in Boston during World War I. We both loved to dance.
MG: Are there any events that stand out in your mind past your childhood, as a youth or a young woman?
CD: No, just going to school, and our social life in Boston at that time. I was in Boston as a teenager. We had been in Vermont. We had lived in Vermont because my father's work was in Vermont and New Hampshire at that time, but I was very happy to get back to Boston because I missed my friends. You see, I had grown then to understand that I had certain friends, a certain group of people. And I was very unhappy in Vermont because they were all... everybody was white. It was just the same as it is today. So we like our own people. Also during this period, I attended Burdett College, a business school. There I began a new phase of my life by preparing for a career.﻿6
MG: So Boston really was in your mind a sort of center, then.
CD: We always considered Boston our home. We always ended up back in Boston.
Once in a while we'd go to Rhode Island and spend the night. But finally we bought a home in Boston, the area known at that time as the Back Bay.
MG: And then did your father cease to travel?
CD: Yes.
MG: About what time was that, do you remember?
CD: Oh, I was about eighteen.
MG: Now, when you were growing up, do you recall,in conversations with either your mother or father, any discussion about what you might do when you
reached adulthood?
CD: I had always planned to be a nurse, and I was going with a young fellow who was planning to be a doctor, and he was determined for me to be a nurse. However, I'm deathly afraid of blood! So that's when I began to think of a business career.
MG: He hadn't thought of that part. [laughs]
CD: And I was___ What is the name of the hospital in New York, the big...
MG: In Harlem?
CD: Yes. He had a sister who was working in this hospital as head nurse, and this boyfriend of mine was going to see to it that I went to this hospital where she was, so that she could look after me and keep me in line, I suppose. But anyway, after my father read through the papers that he had to sign so that I could take this nursing course—I think it was Harlem Hospital— he came across a little part where it said that I would have to ride out on the ambulance at night. And of course that was out, so far as he was concerned! He was very careful about us, and he always had our welfare in mind. Well, that stopped that, right there. So I gave up the nursing idea, and I went on to Burdett. It's a business school in Boston.
MG: Let's talk a little about your earlier formal education. Where did you attend grade school?
CD: Now I think my first schooling was in Los Angeles. I went to school for
quite a long time, four years, in Salt Lake City, Utah. That was the longest time that I stayed in any one school.
MG: Were you still at the elementary level in Salt Lake City?
CD: Yes. We finally came back to Boston. We used to have a graduation in those days from the grammar school, from the eighth grade. And I finally graduated from the grammar school in Boston, and went on to the Girls High.﻿7
MG: Do you remember the names of those schools, the grammar school in Boston, and then the Sirls' High School?
CD: The grammar school was the Hyde School, and the high school was the Girls' High. That was just what it was called. I graduated from both of those schools, and then went on to Burdett.
MG: Was there anything during these early years in school that you particularly enjoyed studying?
CD: I was very fond of geography, and I was a good student in history. Very bad in Latin. 1 liked geography because I had visions of going to Europe some day.
MG: How were you received by your teachers?
CD: My teachers? I was liked by my teachers, but I wasn't the smartest girl in the world. No, I can't say that.
MG:	How about by your fellow students?
CD:	I got along well.
MG:	Well, now, after your plans for going to nursing school were...
CD:	They were shattered. I couldn't get past the blood!
MG:	And you went on then, you said, to Burdett College in Boston. What did you study there?
CD:	Well, it was a business course: typing, bookkeeping, shorthand.
MG: Did your parents have any particular attitude toward the education of
females? Did they encourage the girls in a different way than the boys, or not?
CD: They had visions of their two sons being doctors. But do you mean, like a
girl wanting to go into the army and things like that? No. In fact, I never thought of anything like that. I worked as a clerk at the state house for a short period of time prior to my marriage to Steve.
MG: The state of Massachusetts?
CD: Yes. And I worked for the Department of Conservation. During the 1950s I worked on all aspects of prevention of fires, in fire towers here on Cape Cod.
MG: Were you still living at home then at that time?
CD: Oh, yes, I stayed home until I was married.
MG: You mentioned, earlier on, church attendance as one of the social activities in the family. What has been the role of religion in your life?﻿8
CD: Well, I'm not overly religious. In fact, I'm ignorant about the Bible.
I always tell my minister that.' But my parents were religious. My father was Methodist and my mother was Baptist.
MG: What churches, or what church, did you attend?
CD: While we were in Boston, we attended the Ebenezer Baptist Church. Even my
father attended there—he liked the minister. Then, when we moved here after I married, we always went to the Mashpee Baptist Church.
MG: When you look back now over your growing up years and the rest, what would you say were the primary influences of your parents on your development?
CD: I think they were wonderful. I had the feeling, like most teenagers,
that my mother was the strictest person in the world, and sometimes I think I didn't like what she was telling me. But it was one of those things. I had to do what she said to do, and I made out very well because of this! My values were good.
MG: Did you think that being the eldest child put you in a different sort of relationship with your parents than, say, your younger siblings, or not?
CD: I idolized my mother, although she didn't spare the strap either. [laughs] And my father, he humored us a lot, and he was never very harsh with us about anything. They gave us everything they could give us. We were just the ordinary struggling family, growing up. But we thought we had everything.' My mother was the strongest influence in my early life.
MG: Has there been any nonrelated person who you feel has been important in influencing your life, other relatives or friends?
CD: No, I can't think of anybody who influenced me that much, because we weren't with other people that much. We kind of lived together, and that was it. As I said, today you hear of very few young girls or young women who stay at home until they marry. They're out with their own apartments and their own way of living. In fact, I have two very beautiful granddaughters that are living in their own apartments. I don't see their pictures here—I would like very much to make a home for them, but they don't want to live by my rules. [laughs]
MG: How important have friends been in your life?
CD: Oh, I've had lots of friends! And they are friends that I have known for many years, right through my life.
MG: Are there any that you'd like to mention who are particularly close?
CD: I have a friend across the street. She's here as a summer resident, Mrs.
Willa Walker, and we have been friends. In fact, we adopted each other back more than fifty years ago, and we're still friends.
MG: I'd like to discuss with you a little bit now about your husband. You
mentioned that you had been married twice. Could you tell me about your first husband, what his name was, and something about his background.﻿9
CD: He was Steven A. Peters and we met after the war. He was a World War I
man, and he was in the real estate business. And very young—I was going to say, very handsome.
MG: How old were you when the two of you married?
CD: I was eighteen, almost nineteen, and he was twenty-three, I believe.
MG: And you met and married in Boston?
CD: Yes.
MG: What was his family background, where was he from?
CD: He was from Mashpee. His parents, Mashpee native Americans, were dead.
I'd never seen his parents. I did know his grandparents, one set of his grandparents, Grandpa Peters, a native from Chappaquidick,and Grandma Cordelia, a native of Mashpee.
MG: And then your second husband?
CD: Steve, my first husband, and I were married thirty-five years. Steve was
raised in Mashpee and?after serving in the army, moved to New Bedford where he went into real estate. But when we moved to Mashpee, he was determined to put Mashpee on the map. Mashpee was a small Indian community which desperately needed improvement. The town didn't have what other towns already had: electric lights, water and so on. There was no electricity at the time I So, Steve was continuously looking to give us improvements. He became selectman and remained selectman for twenty-six years.
MG: And he's the father of your children?
CD: My eight children, four boys and four girls. Now Earl, I had known him many years before I knew Steve, before Steve and I were married.
MG: Where was he from?
CD: He was from Sparta, Georgia. He and I were second cousins.
MG: So when your first husband died, then you married Mr. Dickson?
CD: Well, Mr. Dickson had a wife that I had introduced him to. Mr. Dickson, Earl—they used to call him "Fess" for Professor—came to Boston with the intention of marrying me. But I had already met Steve, you see, and since Earl and I were second cousins, that was much against my mother's idea. So Earl and I didn't marry. I eventually introduced him to the girl that he did marry, and we were all good friends, all through their married life. Steve died in June '54, and Earl's wife died five years later. It was just one of those things. Earl and I got together again and were married for thirteen years.
MG: That was what I was going to ask you, when Mr. Dickson died.﻿10
CD: Yes, thirteen years. He's been dead now about six years. It will be six years in August.
MG: What was his work?
CD: He worked for the school department in Providence.
MG: So did you live there when you married?
CD: I lived___that was his promise to me, that we would come back home, to this
home in Mashpee. I lived in Providence for about three years, and I just nearly died. I even got sick, living in Providence. So, as soon as he retired from his job, we had our honeymoon. We spent about three months in Europe traveling here, there, and everywhere. My oldest daughter, whom I hope you'll meet, she and her husband were living there in Grafenwohr.
MG: So you saw them, then, while you were on your honeymoon.
CD: That was our headquarters while we were there. But he and I went on trips, you know, traveling. In fact, we went to Paris and all the places where my first husband had been during the war days. And we went to Italy...I mean, these are the places that we spent time in, a long time.
MG: Did that trip have any effect, do you think, on your outlook or your attitudes? I mean, apart from just the pleasure of the traveling.
CD: I had been to Germany prior to that trip. My youngest son, Randy, was a commander in Bamberg, Germany. I spent a couple of months there with him and his wife. But prior to that trip I had been very bitter because of the loss of my son with the Germans.
MG: This was your eldest son that you lost?
CD: Yes. But by going to Germany, I met German women who had suffered too. They had lost so much, and yet they were so nice to me. They were so kind. We became very friendly, and traveled around the country together. I'm still corresponding with several.
MG: These were German women?
CD: These were German women. They tried to teach me the language, and I learned the European driving rules and obtained a driver's license. It was a very strict license. In fact, it was an international license. Then I met a young girl at Nuremberg, stationed there with the USO. Her mother and I were very dear friends in Arlington, Massachusetts. This young woman and I traveled by car to many different cities and places. We saw everything. I just had a wonderful time because she was in a position so that we could go to all the big, grand affairs. It was really wonderful to be over there with her.
MG: So the travel, then, taught you something...﻿11
CD: Europe gave me the idea that we were living in a very good place right here in the good old USA! We were far ahead of those countries. Of course, there had been the war, but many places, especially France, where I expected to see so much beauty, were very disappointing. It was just terrible. Nothing had been cleaned up from the war.
All that traveling gave me the skill to be more tolerant with other people, people who hadn't had the privileges that I had had. I wrote a story about my travels. I merely took my daily diary notes and put them together. My little articles were read at several different schools, and always ended with the fact that it was a beautiful thing to be back in the "good old USA!"
And I lost that bitterness toward the German people. There was a time when I didn't even want Germany mentioned because my boy had been killed there.
MG: We'll talk more about that, but could you just say now the name of your eldest son?
CD: Of the boy that was killed? Steven A. Peters, Jr.
MG: And then it was your youngest son, Randy, Randolph, who was in Germany at the time you were there?
CD: Yes.
MG: What are your attitudes toward marriage, as an institution?
CD: Well, I believe in marriage. And I believe children need the protection, and proper names, which give them certain rights and protections. This new deal, this living together, I just don't go for it. I don't believe in it. I think that so many of the young people now are doing this sort of thing, and some people want you to think that this is the right thing to do. But I just don't believe in it. I think that people should marry.
MG: You think these other arrangements are not as formal a commitment as they ought to be?
CD: I think that there are so many things that happen in this sort of living.
There's no security, number one. You marry, and if you get ready to leave, you get a divorce. I know that's alot of trouble too. But if you're married, there are certain traditions that have been made for you. It's just a better life, that's all.
MG: You think it's restrictive in any way, being married?
CD: No, I've never found it restrictive.
MG: Do you think it would be restrictive for a woman who wanted to pursue a career?
CD: Well, it's according to how those two people think.﻿12
MG: Mrs. Dickson, you and Mr. Peters had eight children. Could you tell me, please, their names and when they were born?
CD: Now Amelia was the oldest. She was born in 1923. Steven, Jr. was born in '24. Clara...
MG: That's really a family name, from your grandmother to you to your daughter.
CD: Yes, her father named her Clara, much against my wishes. Now wait a minute, I have Stevie born too soon. He and Amelia were eighteen months apart. She was '23.
MG: Well, no, then he'd have to be '24. Well, their birthdays really aren't crucial.
CD: All right. Amelia, Steven, Jr., and now there's Clara, and Muriel
Amanda Muriel—she was named after my mother. Did you want their last names?
MG: Yes, for the women, let's have their married names.
CD: Amelia Bingham.
MG: What was her husband's first name?
CD: George. And Clara, I've got to spell her name for you. Keliinui. And Muriel McKinney.
MG: What was her husband's name?
CD: George, another George.
MG: All right, now who was born after Muriel?
CD: Russell Miles, John Anthony, and Randolph, Randy as we called him. And Anne, Anne was the youngest. You got eight of them there?
MG: Now, is Anne's name with an "e" on the end, or just Ann?
CD: Well, she usually puts an "e" on the end. I never put any "e" on the end. That was something she acquired.
MG: I see. Is she married?
CD: Oh yes. She's married—Brown. She's one of my many-times-married girls.
MG: What is her husband's name?
CD: David Brown.
MG: Now, could you tell me something about each one of your children? Let's start with Amelia.﻿13
CD: What would you want me to tell you?
MG: Well, just what their work has been, what their special interests were...
CD: Well, Amelia married very young, and went to Vesper College, an art and interior design school. Her husband George was in the army and they spent quite a time in Europe. Over there, she did a lot of social things. She was, at one time, president of the American Women's Organization in Germany. They spent about six or seven years there before returning home. Then they built their home here in Mashpee, a beautiful home. That was one of the reasons I wanted you to see her home. She designed her own place. You've heard of this New Seabury section we have here? She did many of those homes. The owners had become interested because they had seen her place.
Her husband became the chief of police. Later, Amelia built the Indian Museum in Mashpee, and directed its program. I traveled with her to London in the interest of research on the English influence on native American Indian culture. Amelia was also a member of the Board of Commissioners on Indian Affairs in Massachusetts.
MG: Tell me something about Steven?
CD: Stevie went into the army right out of high school. He went to England, and was over there a year and a half before they sent him to Germany where he was killed almost immediately.
MG: Did he ever marry?
CD: No. He was only about eighteen—and had just turned twenty when he was killed.
MG: How about Clara?
CD: After graduation from high school, Clara had the New York fever. She said she felt as if she could just eat New York up! So, she worked for Macy's in the advertising department. Then after a year or so, she had had her fill and wanted to come home. She's been around here ever since, and it's very hard to get her over the Cape Cod bridge now. But she has worked for the army and the air force ever since she's been back home. She's had some very high-rated jobs there with the air force. At one time she was with the transportation department, and she spent much time shipping people all over the world. They just felt that she was a great girl with this business, and she knew all the moves.
I would like to mention that she is quite a golfer. She's been champion of the women's group here on the Cape five times in seven years. After my husband Steven died in 1954, Clara threw herself into golf. She worked very hard at it. And then she ran for the office of selectman and remained there for six years, serving as chairman and chief of police. She was the first woman selectman in the history of Cape Cod.
MG: I don't know if I asked you earlier, what year did you move to Mashpee?﻿14
CD: We moved here in 1924.
MG: Now how about Muriel?
CD: Muriel works for a child care center in Boston. She has six children, five boys and one girl. She now has three boys at U. Mass. One has just graduated, and is taking a postgraduate course this year. Muriel has been working with this child care center, parent-child care center, and she teaches crafts. She teaches women, or girls, or unmarrieds, how to sew, how to make clothes for their children, how to make things, repair furniture, and so on. She's great at it. She has her own beautiful twelve-room home and is now taking courses concerning children,at a women's college. She wants to become a specialist, so she's busy!
MG: Now, Russell is next.
CD: Russell is a graduate of Morgan State. My children had very little association with the children of their own kind here, and all of them wanted to go to the colored colleges. I didn't agree too much because I felt that we had the best schools in the country right here in Massachusetts. But they wanted to go down South. So I sent Russell and Randy South. Randy was graduated from Virginia State, and went directly into the army. Russell went to Morgan State in Baltimore, Maryland, but was allowed to finish his work at Boston University after his father died, so he could be near to us. He had to return to Morgan State for his diploma however. Anne went to Fisk, Nashville, Tennessee.
MG: This was Clara?
CD: Anne. Anne and her husband and four children went to Hawaii for adventure.' They just got up and left their house for adventure, and stayed there for twelve years. She went into the beauty product business for black people while in Hawaii. The company was one of the first of its kind, and still is prominent. Anne was a distributor, stocking these products in all the ships and commissaries. She has since remarried and moved to Japan.
Now, who have we missed? John? John wanted no formal education. All he wanted to be was a mechanic, and that's what he was for a long while. But he was also medicine man of the Mashpee Indians for twenty-five years or so, and is now supreme medicine man for the entire Wampanoag Nation. This past year, John became executive director of the Massachusetts Commission on Indian Affairs.
And Randy returned from overseas as a major, and was owner of the Pelican Restaurant in Virginia before moving to New York to be account manager for Campbell's frozen food division. Finally, he, too, returned home and became a selectman for a while, as well as owning his own construction business with his sister and several brothers. At the present time, he is with the Barnstable County sheriff's office.
We forgot to finish Russell. Russell returned from the European theater with a rank of army captain. He married Shirley. His major in college had been business administration and engineering so, naturally, he went to work for the Honeywell Corporation, and held several positions including systems﻿15
CD: (cont.) analyst, marketing representative, and finally product manager.
He, also, left Honeywell to return to Mashpee where he wanted to work for his people. He has been president of the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribal Council for the past five years. He recently completed a series of films on New England Indians for the HEW Emergency School Aid Act, and last year received a Community Fellowship at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to pursue studies of native American tribal structures. This year Russell is an economic development consultant for other tribes, while entering the graduate school at Harvard. He and Shirley have four children.
MG: This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Clara Peters Dickson. The date is June 28, 1978. Marcia M. Greenlee, interviewer. The interview is continuing in Mrs. Dickson's home. Mrs. Dickson, when we spoke yesterday, you had told me about your children. Could you just mention now, how many grandchildren and great-grandchildren you have.
CD: Thirty-four grandchildren and more than twenty great-grandchildren. That makes over fifty in all.
MG: In regard to the Mashpee...
CD: I suppose you read that.
MG: Yes, that they've (the Mashpee Wampanoag people) been denied identity as a tribe.
CD: Their identity, yes. And they're still fighting. In fact, they're going through another trial.
MG: But some of the persons involved are of the same kind of mixed ancestry as any other Afro-American.
CD: As in my family.
MG: That is, they have mixtures of white, Indian, and African, like most Afro-Americans .
CD: That's right.
MG: So how do your family members regard themselves—as Indians, or as colored people, or what, or both?
CD: Well, my first husband's family were all born here. We call them natives.
They consider themselves Indians, the ones who were either born in Mashpee, or are offsprings of the Mashpee natives. I don't know whether I have a picture of Steve or not. He was their father, a very good-looking fellow.
MG: And he was born here?
CD: Steve was a Mashpee man, yes. He was a Mashpee Indian, and very proud of his heritage.﻿16
MG: CD:
MG:
CD:
MG:
CD:
MG: CD:
So, then, do all your children consider themselves Mashpee Indians?
Yes, because they were born here and have Indian blood. But it has nothing to do with me, you know. I have never considered myself a Mashpee Indian. They do have, once a year, an adopting ceremony, and on occasions, I have been invited to become adopted into the tribe, but I never have. In fact, even though I've lived in Mashpee for more than fifty years, everyone still calls me "the girl from Boston!"
So, your children consider themselves definitely distinct from being Afro-Americans?
Yes. They consider themselves Indians. And I didn't know what kind of effect that would have on your story, either.
No, I think that's a fascinating aspect to the whole thing. Mrs. Dickson, tell me about the time when you worked, or the times that you worked outside the home. How did you keep family life running? Were there any particular problems?
No. As I said once before, we were a very close family, and we spent a lot of time together. We played together. We were all young together. My husband and I were both young, and we loved our children. There was very little illness, and somehow we managed to keep our home during the depression when others all around us were losing theirs. We were just lucky.
So, you just made it work. Whatever had to be done...
Yes. The children were pretty good. They did their share of the work in the home when I had to be away. The girls had to take turns making the meals, and now, they are all very good cooks and homemakers. There was a time when both Steve and I worked for the army. Both of us were away at the same time.
MG: CD:
MG: CD:
MG:
CD:
So who got dinner and who kept up the house?
Oh, we'd get home around four, and there was plenty of time to prepare meals and things like that. That little room there was our kitchen, that little room that I now use for the television. So we were forced to eat in the dining room. There were ten of us that sat around that table. So many times, you know, a big family didn't have time to even sit down to a table at night times. I made it our business to set that table with a tablecloth, and they were taught table manners.
And to make that a time to be together?
Yes. And that was where we laughed and talked and told our stories, or they told what had gone on in school.
Now let's talk once again about race. Which term do you prefer—colored, Negro, black—and why?
I just think colored because everybody's not black. You know, I don't have any feelings against persons being black just because I don't want to call them black. And I really don't think that all people are so black.﻿17
MG: But you see it more as descriptive of color than a racial group, and you prefer to use another term?
CD: Yes, I like the word colored.
MG: To what extent were you in close contact with white people while you were growing up, and how did you regard them, or how did they regard you?
CD: I went to school with white children, white girls and boys, but there was never any discussion, that I can remember, about the fact that they were white or I was colored, or that I wasn't the same as they were.
MG: So when was it that you became more racially conscious?
CD: Not until I became a young adult.
MG: And what brought that about?
CD: After I grew up and started to high school, I met more people of my own kind and we just got together. Later, I met a lot of college boys from Harvard, Tufts, and other places, who took me to the ball games. They were people of my own kind too. I wanted to be with my own people. I've never, never tried to claim any other thing, of being anything else but colored. However, I had friends of all races, all over the country, and in Europe.
MG: Did your mother and father discuss racial matters in your home?
CD: No, they didn't. There was never a mention about these differences in the house. And my father never allowed the word "nigger" to be used in the house.
MG: What was the nature of the colored community where you lived?
CD: The only time that we really ever lived in a real colored community was the short time prior to my parents purchasing a house in Back Bay, Boston. We got along all right. I can remember one street that we lived on where a good many of the girls and boys, whom I grew up with and knew later on, had a white parent and a colored parent.
MG: Did race, do you think, affect any of the options in your life or events in your life in any way?
CD: I don't think so, because I was never turned down for a job, and I have friends of all races.
MG: How about the women's movement? What is it, as you see it?
CD: I have never found any fault with my life as a wife, and I did not find
fault with the way my husband and I lived together. I never knew of anything that I wanted to change too much. When the children were very small, Steve used to help me with the things around the house. He even helped me wash the clothes at times, and that was when we probably just had an old washing machine. It wasn't an automatic thing like we have today. There were many times when he didn't have work, and I did have work.﻿18
MG:
So do you think there's any need for a women's movement? CD: Not when people love each other. MG: How do you feel about the term Ms?
CD: I don't care for it. I think that we got along for years with Miss and Mrs. MG: You don't see any problems with it then? CD: No.
MG:
CD:
MG:
Do you think that your career would have been different, would you have tried to do different things had you not been a woman?
I never thought of being anything else but a woman! I've never thought of being a man, or wishing to be one.
It never seemed to impose any restrictions on you, then?
CD: No MG:
Now let's move on to your community activities. You've been active in so many aspects of life in Mashpee. The community center, for example. What did you do there?
CD: Well, during the war days, we had the old town hall. I worked with a group of women who organized the social life for the boys who were stationed at Camp Edwards. We made it as pleasant as we could. And after they left here and went overseas, we formed a club to write letters, and we sent packages, and things like that. That was during World War II.
MG: What about the senior citizens' building?
CD: I belong to the Council on Aging. We were continuously trying to arrange
places for the meetings of the clubs, and it was very necessary that we have a building of our own. So, with the help of HUD, we acquired an old barracks from Camp Edwards, and eventually had a nice rec hall, dining room, and kitchen put up.
MG: And how about your work with the Department of Conservation?
CD: That was a unique job that I enjoyed very much. It was unusual for a
woman. This was a job mostly allotted to men. But I was given this job, a state job. It was my duty to locate fires and report them to the patrols, and help to keep the fire situation down.
MG: Now, organizations that you belong to—I know you've been active with the Gold Star Mothers, and you received an award from them in 1968, I think it was, as Mother of the Year. Then you also worked with the Godmothers. Would you tell us what the Godmothers do?﻿19
MG: CD:
MG:
CD:
MG:
CD: The Godmothers is a group of women, thirty of us, most of whom live on the Cape. They work for the Children's Protective Services. We hold benefits like garden parties, cocktail parties and so on. For the past three years, we have been able to raise more than $3,000 as a contribution to this service.
And the Children's Protective Services provides emergency care?
Any emergency relating to children—care, furniture, food, camping, doctors' services, eyes, shoes, and all the necessary things that children can use.
Now how about hobbies? You said that you had some special activities— you weren't sure whether you'd call them hobbies or not, but you're very much involved with helping people near you who need transportation. And what other kinds of things?
My family, my grandchildren. I'm really involved with them. I help with my grandchildren wherever the parents need a little help now and again.
Well, let's conclude with just a little more description about your travels. We talked about two trips that you had earlier, one with your husband in Europe, and then one while you were visiting in Germany. But you've had other European trips, and been to Hawaii. Tell us something about those
trips.
CD: Yes, I went to Europe once when my youngest son, Randy, was there. Now, I was'trying to think whether or not I mentioned that Earl and I went to Europe twice. We went once by boat, on the United States Line, the S.S. America. It was a very beautiful line—a very beautiful trip over there. And I think we spent a couple of months that time. A year or so ago, my oldest daughter, Amelia, and I went back to London and Oxford. We went out into the countryside and I noticed how poor it was out there. We also went to many museums. My daughter was interested in getting data on Indians who lived in England.
MG: Now how about Hawaii?
CD- Hawaii was just like a second home. We went there for seven winters, after my daughter, Anne, and her husband moved there. We'd go right after Christmas—we'd stop in California maybe a week, and fly on to Honolulu. And there, we were at home. We were happy with the weather, and the people
were friendly.
MG: CD:
MG: CD:
Who did you stay with there?
We usually had an apartment or a house of our own, a little shack, a little tumbledown shack...
One of your daughters, though, was in residence there?
Yes Anne and her husband lived in Honolulu and were always near. Clara came over to visit and spent a month with us. That's where she met Pat Keliinui. She came back home, packed her little duds, put them on a boat, and went"back and married him. [laughter]﻿20
MG: Well, one last question. As you think back now, over your life and all the things that you accomplished, what would you say you're most proud of? What gives you the most satisfaction?
CD: I get a great deal of satisfaction out of knowing that it was my work along with others that put this beautiful, modern school up. We had all modern furnishings and equipment. We had everything. The pride of that! I was very concerned that our children have the best education possible, with the best facilities. Prior to that, we'd had only a two-room school building with no modern equipment, practically nothing. Even before the new school was completed, my first move in the old building was to put in flush toilets, electricity, running water, and drinking fountains. It was a lot of work, but we did it!
MG: This is when you came to Mashpee?
CD: Yes. I won the election to the school committee. I was on the school committee for about twenty years. The schools were my interest, and I worked very hard for the schools. I also served on the finance committee for several years.
MG:
CD:
MG: CD:
MG:
CD: MG:
You know, maybe we should repeat again about Samuel G. Davis's will, and how that all was involved in establishment of the new school.
As I said earlier, this Samuel G. Davis was riding through the town in an open buggy, drawn by a horse, and his hat blew off. A young boy picked Mr. Davis's hat up, and passed it back to him. Mr. Davis offered the boy some money, but the boy refused this money and said, "My mother does not allow me to take money for doing a favor." So Mr. Davis drove on. Some time later, a great many years later, his will was read. Mr. Davis had much real estate in buildings, in Boston, all down in the theater section and places like that. In his will, he had left the sum of $65,000 to the schoolchildren in Mashpee.
We had tried very hard to get money from many different sources, enough to build a new school, but with no success. We could only get a certain amount of money from the Works Progress Administration. So then, we went before the attorney general and the trustees of the will to try to have the will broken so that we could use some of the money to build a school.
You needed to break the will because the original stipulation was that the fund would be for...
Kind, good manners, only. The scholarship pins and the $5 and $10 awards cost'less than $100 a year. So, we finally had this will broken, and the school was built.
Well now, I've come to the end of the questions I had prepared for you. Was there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to
add?
Oh, I'll probably think about a lot of things after you leave here!
Well, maybe you can add it to the transcript then. Thank you very much, Mrs. Dickson.﻿CLARA DICKSON
