Marcia Greenlee:
Annie M. Nipson:
This is part one of an interview with Mrs. Annie M. Nipson. The interview is taking place in Mrs. Nipson*s home, at 1213 Dorey Street, Clearfield, Pennsylvania, 16830. The interviewer is Marcia M. Greenlee, and the date is September 15, 1978. Mrs. Nipson, could you tell me something about the kind of work that you've done in your lifetime?
Well, my lifetime work has always been domestic work. And I guess I am more qualified to do that kind of work than I was anything else. I'm not a wonderful speaker. I just talk, that's all.
Marcia Greenlee: Annie M. Nipson:
Good, that's what we want. [laughs]
So, my life has been a very pleasant and a very happy life. I feel that anybody can be very useful in any sort of life that they are interested in, if they have the faith and hope to be so. Now, I don't know just exactly where to start from here.
Marcia Greenlee:
Annie M. Nipson:
Marcia Greenlee:
Well, now, you mentioned when we talked yesterday that you began work at a very young age. Was it ten or twelve?... So why don't we start there and talk about that period, and then when you went to Biltmore and after that.
Well, I've always worked. And my work began when I was around ten. I lived in a family, as one of the family. And I always felt very happy in this sort of work. Now, what else?
What were your duties there? This was while you were in Asheville, North Carolina.
Annie M. Nipson: Marcia Greenlee: Annie M. Nipson:
Yes.
What kind of things did you have to do?
Why, my duties there was just anything that the family, any family, would be. I ordered the home, and my chores, just take in chores in the home, like I would anywhere, in my own home, or anywhere else, with my own parents. So I was very happy. I like to do those things, and I had to have something to do. I was taught to work from a little, oh, a very small child.
* Mrs. Nipson's daughter, Martha Nipson, was also present, and participated in the interview. She is identified as MN.﻿2
MG: How was that position found for you? That first work that you took with a family?
AMN: Why, I think it was by my parents, grandmother's, because they were friends of her. And I think that...she always taught us we had to help ourselves, and so that's the way I started in my family, as one of the family in a home.
MN: And you weren't very far from home either.
AMN: No, I was close to home. That was my neighborhood. And after that, I just kept working. I worked up until I was old enough to take a higher job, and then that went to my life with a very wealthy family of people, that I had trained in my early life to do. And I was there for years, which helped me a lot, in all.
MG: Well, before we talk about that family, maybe we should talk about the preparation for that job.
AMN: Oh, yes.
MG: Let's talk about when you got to the training center there at Biltmore. Tell us about that.
AMN: Well, now, let me think for a while longer, because...when the
Vanderbilts came in, they gave this school, domestic science teaching, and I took advantage of that, which helped me very much. And that was... Did I say domestic science?
MG: Mm hmm.
AMN: That was something that I could do, something that I was interested
in, and I worked very hard in this course. And now, after I was there, I don't remember just how long I was there, but it was a course there for, oh, a couple of years or something like that. And I finished that and got my little diploma. And then, from that on, I was able to get with the very rich class of people. That was a wonderful thing for all of us. And that included All Souls', because they had the village there, and they had workshops there...
MN: That was Biltmore.
AMN: Biltmore. And anybody that wanted the training could go in, sign up and take it. So I finished there, I believe I did finish there before I.., And now I want to tell you about works of the place, that's what I want to get into now. And that was, am I going over, repeating?
MG: No, you're doing fine. You're doing fine.
AMN: That was the domestic training which prepared me to go out and
have higher jobs. And I did have some wonderful places to work.
MG: What did they train you to do? What were your classes like?﻿3
AMN: Well, let me see. Let me get into that. My classes was the
domestic science—I mentioned that once before. And it taught home work. And...
MN: That was all...
AMN: Uh, yes. Well, you...
MN: Just like you do in a normal house.
AMN: Yes, in normal homes. And also, the spiritual part of my life.
Because while I was there, I always attended the All Souls' Episcopal Church, which was a beautiful little church. And in that church, we had a colored___not colored, I'll say...
MN: No, colored...you say what you like.
AMN: We had a colored, they called 'em janitors then. And his family, and we've become friends. And after that we were all through the Vanderbilt mansion, we were allowed those privileges while we worked there, and it's this beautiful mansion that the world knows all about. But a place I go, I love to go there, to that mansion, because it was so beautiful.
MN: They had great big grounds all around it, too.
AMN: Yes. And they had the agriculture there.
MN: And the gardens.
AMN: They've got everything you can think of. And I was there for, oh,
quite a while. And then from that, I go to the family of Vanderbilts' friends, in the house of, a beautiful home.
MN: Was that the Grahams, then?
AMN: That was the Graham family.
MN: Yes, I thought so.
AMN: And they had loads and loads of, oh, money all over the world... But they usually, this was a place where they came and stayed... Now, have I forgotten Mr. Graham's work. I think...
MN: I forget what you said his work was.
AMN: His work was, he's some kind of a high official of the European countries.
MG: Do you remember his first name?
AMN: I wish I could. Right now I don't.
MN: The little boy's name was Frederick.﻿4
AMN: Oh, you mean Graham.
MG: Mr. Graham's first name.
AMN: Well, his name was Frederick. I think his naiae was Frederick
because the first son, I think, was named for him. And they had two sons, and, just little children.
MG: What was the name of their house? Did it have a name? Was that Victoria that you mentioned earlier?
AMN: Their home was in Victoria.
MG: Was located in Victoria.
MN: That was a section out from Asheville.
AMN: There's so many things that I've left out between there, but you can't get 'em all in, I don't suppose.
MG: Well, let's... Tell us something about the Boston School of Cooking.
AMN: Yes, well. This school of cooking was operated—now where was it, out of Maine or...
MN: Up in Boston. Boston, Massachusetts.
AMN: Boston. Must have been Boston. And our teachers were...
MN: That's why they called it Boston School...
AMN: And I remember the teacher that we had in our domestic science
class of cooking. She was Miss McNeer, and I'll always remember her because, I don't know, she was the one that kind of stood out in my mind. She was very tall, quiet and calm, and a nice person to work with. And she treated us all wonderfully, because she'd take time, and she explained, and she was jolly. So we, we all liked her very much.
MN: That's a lot, a great part of this school, you could learn so much more, if you had somebody nice like that.
MG: Were there any specialties that you learned to prepare in the Boston School of Cooking?
AMN: In the Boston School, mine was decorating, at these parties,
decorating the tables and arranging. And that was something I liked to do, something very nice I liked to do. So I got white ribbons on each one and thought...
MN: Then there was one thing when you worked for the Grahams, your flower arrangements, because she gathered all the flowers and arranged them...
AMN: Yes.﻿5
MN: And that went in with her decorating.
AMN: Well, I think we talked about that this morning, didn't we?
MG: I want to try and get it on the tape.
AMN: Oh, you want it on the recorder.
MG: Wait just a minute. Tell us some more now about what life was like working for the Grahams.
AMN: Well, it was beautiful. I enjoyed it. And I think they had a staff of about fifteen or twenty people, maybe more than that. And I went in the family as a maid. And they had a first maid, second maid, and our staff was mixed. It was about half and half, the blacks and the whites. And they got along very well together, only in some instance, why of course, we would have trouble. And when we did have trouble there, Mister and Missus used to hold a conference with us all the time, and they'd get things all straightened out. And we had problems, of course we had problems, because I don't think there's any place that we don't have problems to work out. And we'd get everything worked out nicely, and my job in this line of work that I had would be, well, just a maid's work, cleaning and meeting people at the door, and helping out in the butler's pantry and things like that. Which was very pleasant, at times. And then, sometimes it wasn't. I don't know... But one person I used to like to meet, was Mr. Vanderbilt and his family, and that would be his wife, himself and his wife, and small daughter. Now, I forget the daughter's name, but she's grown up and I don't know what happened to her. And Mr. Vanderbilt was a very plain-looking fellow. He wasn't very fair-skinned; his skin was sort of —
MG: Swarthy?
AMN: No, sort of a Latin tan. And dark hair. And very small, and short. And Missus was about the same. I don't know what nationality they were, you know. But anyway, this was one of the big events in my life, was meeting them, because he had done so much to help people, to help anybody that wanted to be helped. And so, from there on, let's see... I have to stop and think because I've forgotten a lot of it. Because this has been, how many years ago? About fifty or sixty years ago; it's been a long time ago.
MG: About how old a young woman were you when you were working at the
Vanderbilts' place, and then for the Grahams? Were you a teenager?
AMN: I was a teenager. I think I was about fifteen or sixteen or so.
MG: And this was Mr. George Vanderbilt, that you were...
AMN: Mr. George Vanderbilt. I might have been around, I'll say, seventeen. I don't think I was much younger then. Because this was the first big break that I got after I finished the school. And that was when—now, I don't remember the name of the house. It had a name,﻿6
AMN: (cont.) but I don't remember it. If I'd been telling this story
some years ago, why, I could have told it to you like it was, 'cause it stayed on my mind so long, you know.
But other things, in my own family then. Afterwards I was married in my twenties, in my early twenties. I didn't have a family for about two or three years, and I was anxious to have a family. I was very anxious for children, because I thought, oh, that was my dream in my life, was a family to help, you know, to try to train and to do for. I prayed for my family, and I had six children. And when I did get the six children, why, of course, I had plenty to do to take care of my family. And from then on, it's been my family and, well, my husband and myself, making sacrifices and helping them to get to the place where they could take their place in life. And I'm very proud of my family. And I'm very proud of my grandparents who helped me. And I'm very proud of everybody that gave me a chance to do these kinds of things.
MG: Mrs. Nipson, let me ask you now something about your family. What can you tell me about your parents and your grandparents, the place you were born, all those things?
AMN: Well, I was borned out about, oh, not too far from Asheville. It
was a little place they called Acton, North Carolina. And my mother and my grandparents lived there. And my mother always lived with my grandparents. And I have half-sisters and half-brothers, but I wasn't able to be with them much after that, because I was out and working for my own support. And I didn't grow up with them, but they're, they were very successful. And now it's, I guess... How many of them? A good many of them gone, because, they've, they passed on. But some of us were light, and some of us were black. But we all belonged to the black race, as far as I know anything about...
MG: Were you the eldest child?
AMN: No, no, I had... Uncle Arthur was the oldest. You remember him.
MN: I remember him.
AMN: And Laura.
MN: Oh, I forgot about her.
AMN: 'Course they passed on. And, well, Ray, he's gone. And I think there's only.••
MN: Well, what was the name of the one I just learned about?
AMN: Maggie Ripley.
MN: Well, Maggie... But there's one other. Was Maggie the one we were talking about?
AMN: And Leslie. They're still in Asheville. But I think all the others in my mother's and grandmother's side have passed on.﻿7
MG: What was your mother's name?
AMN: My mother's name was Louisa. And my father I didn't know. I
didn't know too much about him. 'Course, my grandmother often talked about my father and all, but that was when I was just a kid.
MG: What was his name?
AMN: My father's? Well, I just kept it a secret. I never said anything more about it than...
MG: What were your grandparents' names?
AMN: Moore.
MG: Moore?
AMN: Uh huh.
MG: What do you remember of those early family days with your mother and your grandparents before you went to work?
AMN: Very happy. Very happy. And we were just like we are now. There were whites, there were Germans, and different nationalities that lived in our community. And we all played together, went to each other's houses, and were very, very happy together. I don't remember us ever fighting or calling, name calling, or anything. We didn't know that. We didn't know name calling in those days. And that's a remarkable thing to think of sometimes, you know, because as you grow and move up in life, we began to come into things like that. But my life was a very happy life, because I used to go out and play and have a good time all the time.
MG: You were talking last night about some of the things that you did for fun, ice skating and Christmastime. Could you tell us about those, those times?
AMN: Yes, we had our chores all the time, and one of them was to go to the mill. We were taught that as little things. And this old mill, pond was down in the valley, and it was, well it was... People call 'em mountains. There was a snake harbor all in there. So our path was right down by this stream, and we'd have to go to the mill. We'd have to go to the mill about once every week. And we'd always have to get to this trail, you know, this little trail, to go to this mill—it was water operated, it was a water grinder—and take our grain. We'd have maybe a little bit of oats, and a little bit of corn, and I think there'd be two or three of us all the time, go to this mill. And we used to sit and wait for the snakes to get across this path. And they were, there was every kind of a snake, I didn't know snakes then by names or anything, but some of them were so long that it could take 'em, oh, a long time, to get across!
MG: You had to give them the right of way. .[laughter]
AMN: They'd either be down below, going back up to their section, or﻿8
AMN: (cont.) coming down, you know. And we'd sit there and wait for them to get across, because there were so many of them. There were, you could see them for, oh, a distance ahead. And we, we weren't afraid of the snakes. We just gave them time to get out of the way. Otherwise we'd have to walk through them. And that was always my snake... I used to have, we used to have more fun after that. And we'd go in this little mill, it was always this little fella. He was white. And he'd have a white friend in there. And they always played something with corn. What was that I told you they played with corn?
MN: I forget.
MG: A game?
AMN: A game. It was...
MN: It was similar to our checkers.
AMN: It was similar to our checkers. And we would have the best time, you know, and he'd always call us his "boys." "My boys are bringing their grain," and he'd put it up in a hopper or something, and turn on the wheel, and grind the grain. And then we'd come back. We didn't have to, you know, encounter snakes because we learned to go at a certain time of day. And the snakes would either be down, his side, or back where they had been. But that was always something that fascinated me. It was Mr. Case and...
MG: Now how about ice skating? Tell us that story again?
AMN: Oh, ice skating was... Well, it was natural, very natural for us to go out and ice skate, because we had our ponds, and we had snow. And we'd have our freezes, you know. It would freeze. And the temperatures were somewhat like the ones here. But of course the seasons were always short. And we'd go ice skating, and ice skate till we was tired out, and then we had the great big old sleds that the kids would make in the neighborhood. We didn't have, you know, bobsleds. Somebody'd go buy a sled or something like that. You had to build them. So the boys and the girls all would get together and we'd build these old-fashioned sleds. I haven't seen one since, since my childhood, because that was something that we had to fix for ourselves. Most of my life was very, very pleasant. We had a good time. And then we'd go out in the woods, and we'd get a tree limb. That was our horse. Sometimes we'd hook up our [laughs] horses and ride limbs. We always had a good time in my life, my childhood life. I didn't know any other life but that, so it was very pleasant.
MG: What made your special occasions, special celebrations for you?
AMN: Well, Christmas was one of our greatest, because we always looked forward to Christmas. Not for the gifts, but for the sacred part of it. And, well, our gifts were very, very small. And if we got a new dress, that some of the people in the village had made, or something like that, our clothing, you know, we were very happy over that. And that was made by my parents. And I remember one Christmas I got this candy walking stick, and a orange. And I thought that was so﻿9
AMN: (cont.) wonderful, that was a wonderful gift. But I don't know.
Christmas was a very sacred day, and we always looked forward to Christnas. And my parents, all on my grandmother's side, were Methodists, but on my husband's side, were all Episcopalians. And then, when we got married, I hadn't made up my mind what church I would, you know, join. But then we decided we'd go together, and have our church together, so ever since it's been the Episcopal church. And the family grew up in Asheville in the Saint Mathias Episcopal Church. And they all went there. I used to do an awful lot of church work. That was my, instead of clubs and things now that they have, the Altar Guild, and the choir practice, and all those different things, why, I attended. Because my, well, all his people were Episcopalians. And we had our own special church, though, and we had our own special minister, which belonged to the black race. But he was, he was very fair, his skin was different. And he was MacDuffy, didn't I tell you MacDuffy^
MN: Yes, I think you did.
AMN: I think that was it. By the time our babies were born, the first place they went was to the Episcopal church to be baptized, and for the early service. So, then, as little children, they were taught the same things. And then, when we came here, we found this little Episcopal church. My husband would go out and look for his church.
MG: This was when you first came to Clearfield?
AMN: That's when I came to Clearfield. He'd go out and look for his church. Am I saying too much...
MG: No, you're doing fine. A couple more things, though, I think of, that I'd like to ask you about those days in Asheville before you left. Did you ever think about or miss the opportunity to go to school? Or did you just really not concern yourself with it? How did you feel about that?
AMN: Not after my family, no...
MG: No, as a young girl.
AMN: Well, I didn't live in Asheville when I was a real young girl. I think I was about in my teens, up in my teens. And as I said, I went to work for a family there, as one in the family. And whatever that family was, why, I attended church. And I went to the white church as much as I went to the—oh, what's it called?—the black churches, and we... Somehow or other, I never liked the idea of shouting. And I don't know, before, when I was trying to make up my mind to join a church, why, I was going to all these churches. And then I went to the Christian Science church there. And in the Christian Science church, we had the Christian Science... What was the fellow, this fellow that came from Asheville, lived right down here? Frances what-you-call-her married him.
MN: Do you mean Mr. Dennis?﻿10
AMN: Dennis.
MN: Reginald Dennis. Well, he was Christian Scientist, that's right.
AMN: Yes. And I think he used to talk about it, and we were, after, if we were out on our own, as I say, we were segregated. They always had special seats. But this church in...with Mr. Vanderbilt here, there was no segregation in this church; you went in, sit anywhere you want. And that made it very nice. My throat's getting dry.
MG:
AMN:
Why, we would cook with wine, fish and different things, you know.
We always used the white wine for cooking. It's very good.	And I guess people do the same thing now, because they're, several of the recipes call for wine, you know, for cooking and like that.
What did they, you know, like for sauces and things? Did they teach you any special, sort of specialties; clear sauces or cream sauces?
Well, yes. We knew all about the different cream sauces. They taught us all kind of different sauces. But the sauce that we used more than anything else at that time would be just a plain-flavored it—white sauce. You know, just made with a little flour and different things, and seasoned well. And that went with so many vegetables, and cheese, with cheese over top. The white sauce with cheese over top. And you still get things like that, you know. That makes it very nice. I remember, I had a party to serve. It was a wedding party, and I was supposed to decorate. And I don't know, what came to me was oranges. And I made these little orange baskets. And then, sit down and cut them, cut the little handle on them and everything, and then I filled them with melons. I think it was a melon, or something that I put in those baskets. And had different colors, and it was a beautiful... Everybody praised that decoration, [laughter]' And after the table was arranged and all this, and different things___People have done away with that now, because they can't
afford people to serve the parties...
MG: To do that kind of work.
AMN: Even to your movie stars, and all your different people like that,
they've cut down on things. They don't do things like that any more. But that was just slave labor, you know, that they had going there. I don't know, it was a lesson. I think about it sometimes, I think it was a wonderful lesson: .to people. It's good that somebody had to have it done. And all kinds of things like that. I think it's for the betterment of the different people. Because if you don't do one thing, you can do another. And pretty soon you can build up till you are something special, and things like that. And maybe it turns out that you don't. [laughs] I don't know.
MN: But somebody's just really enjoyed it, though?﻿11
AMN: I don't feel like I'm saying anything.
MG: Oh, you are. I wanted to ask you something about your husband, and how the two of you met, and how you decided to leave North Carolina and come up here.
AMN: Well, we met in Asheville, and he was always busy doing something.
And we had a YMCA there where young people used to kind of congregate around. And I used to go in there a lot of times, because I had friends, you know. And then, he had a very good friend who was, they call, in the drugstore. And so we met through, that's the way we met, in this place. Then we started going together. I don't know how long we went together, for a year or so. And then we finally decided that we were going to get married, [laughs] So we did, and then after we were married, why, of course I told you about the Episcopal church and everything.
MG: Was that where you were married?
AMN: I joined the church, though, before. So I, while I was going with
him, we, he always went to the Episcopal church, and of course I would go too. And pretty soon, why, we made up our minds we were going to be married. And we didn't intend to have a wedding, but of course we were going to be married in the church. So I got all dressed up in my big hat and my white dress—and then they used to make pleated skirts, always, some of them's come back, you know—and a white blouse, and white gloves. I was all dressed up. And we went in after the service to be married, and the service, or the people of the church, they had gotten a little, you know, idea of something about, something was going to happen. Maybe we were gonna get married. And I think somebody, too, had said something. And so that night, we got up. We were married in the Episcopal church.
MN: And everybody stayed? [laughter]
AMN: And everybody stayed.' Not everybody, but we had a pretty big crowd.
If we'd had a church wedding we might have gotten some presents. But we didn't get any presents because we didn't have a big wedding. But we did get married in a church. And we stayed together until he passed away in '50, I think it was. He's been gone a long time.
MN: He has.
AMN: Yes. And I'm still here.
MG: What was your early life then like, after you married, there in Asheville? What did you do?
AMN: Oh, I used to... I worked, I had a little job. We had... And he worked. He worked in the bookstore. He used to—what is it?--retouch paintings.
MN: Restore.
AMN: Handle paintings. Restore. And he was, he worked there. And then﻿12
AMN: (cont.) I had a job, a few hours a day, in the exchange. The
wealthier women got together and set up this exchange where you sell all kinds of different handwork and things. And then we had our kitchen up above where we did our special dishes and all like that. And then, whatever you didn't like, you could take it to the exchange. And it was sold there, you know. So I started working there. And I worked there until, I think I had two children, and that was John and Peggy. And then I'd come home, and I did that for I don't know how long. And my special dish in there, it's stuffed peppers. And we started out on stuffed peppers. And do you know, we sold those things all over? And there was a big hotel... Have you ever been to Asheville?
MG: No, I haven't gotten there.
AMN: There was a big hotel, it's still there. They call it Battery Park. I think they changed the name of it. And our exchange was right at the foot of the hill where they had to come down to the street. And we had that building there, and there's a beautiful little building. They had it all fixed up. And pretty soon that place grew so big. There was a man's club, men's club, right across the block. It was a good location, you know, to be in. And we started then serving other dishes. And our stuffed peppers, though, was the thing. And another thing I used to like is scalloped cabbage. And I had been making, well, I learned all those things in my domestic training school, my dishes. And then we used to sell to this Battery Park. We had guests from there'd come in and pick up different dishes. And that's what we specialized on. And it didn't mean any more money for me, because they paid, you know, a certain amount for the privilege of being in the club, or putting your goods there. And so, pretty soon we had more than we could take care of, the orders in this place. And that was a very happy life, and a very nice, too, I think, for...things are coming.
MG: Tell me about your husband's background. Did you know anything about his family? Was he from Asheville, too?
AMN: His family, yes. His father, I have his picture, I meant to get it out and show it to you, and his mother. His father was married a second, third time. When we left there he had married to the third wife. And the first wife, she's an invalid. And her sister used to be worse, oh, her sister was married too. But they lived together, so she could, they could take care of her. Well, she passed on. And then, don't remember too much about the second wife. But I do remember the third wife, because even to the children, the third wife, she was from close around. But she was supposed to be, she was supposed, she came from the black race, but she was very, very white. She's very fair, her whole family's very fair. And they went up to New York, and she was there for a long time. But she, I don't know how Mr. Nipson met her, but he met her and they got married. Well, I know that there was a lot of jealousy there, because she didn't much want him to leave any wealth or anything to our set of children, you know. So I don't know, he finally passed on. He passed on. Why everything, she had everything, you know. So, she used to write, and she was supposed to come over here. She lived in—what was it? New York then, didn't she?﻿13
MN: She lived in New York? She lived down South and then'd go up to New York and live up there.
AMN: And, but pretty soon she died. And what happened then after that I don't know.
MG: Well, now, what was your father-in-law's first name? Mr. Nipson's?
AMN: Mr. Nipson's?
MG: Not your husband, but his father.
AMN: His father? Don.
MN: John? John James, or Don James?
AMN: It was Don, I think. Don Nipson.
MN: They called him Don, but I don't know whether it was John James or Don James.
AMN: I don't know whether...
MN: But Dad was John Nipson, Jr., so he must have been named Don John
James. Because I don't know, like some people say "Mister," I don't know whether it was...
MG: A title?
MN: ...title, you know. Because they would say, and I can almost... I talked to Dad several times, and I think, I know that Dad is John William Nipson, Jr., and John, the one you met, is John William Nipson III.
MG: Well, I wanted an explanation... You said that there were Portuguese in your father's family, and it could have been a title.
MN: Yes, like we say...
MG: Don.
MN: Yes, that's what I mean. So, because they called him Don. My mother would always speak of Don, and yet I know that Dad is John W. Nipson, Jr. And he always signed his name that way, John W. Nipson, Jr. So that was a... You say it, "Monsieur"—I can't even pronounce it.
MG: Title of respect or something. Well, what about your husband's mother's first name?
AMN: She was always...
MN: Is that Lucy's picture in there?
AMN: Yes. Where is that picture?﻿14
MG: Well, something that I asked you earlier, did you ever regret that you were unable to attend school?
AMN: Well, no. No, I never regretted it. Because I had a full life, and then, as I say, my family came first.
MG: Family took your time.
AMN: Uh huh. So...
MG: How did you and your husband decide to leave Asheville?
AMN: After, you mean to come up here?
MG: To move away.
AMN: To move away. Well, we just decided that maybe it would be better, and we would have advantages, educational advantages. Mostly, the educational advantages would be a little bit better than...
MN:	...where you was.
AMN:	Yes. Than we had there. Oh, yes, that's her picture.
MN:	On the back is her name.
MG:	That's Lucy Graves.
MN:	That's Mother.
AMN:	She's Graves. She was married a second time.
MN:	Look at her outfit here...
MG:	That's beautiful.
MN:	And I'll bring you something else for you to see.
MG:	Okay. About what time was it, year, do you remember, when you left Asheville to come up?
AMN: What was the year, Martha? We were saying here the other day, and John was saying, it was...
MN: I don't know what year.
AMN: It was 18...the date or the year?
MN: I don't know what year, but I know it was cold weather. But I will
tell you... I mean, I can find out. You just ask, you yourself. You yourself just ask John what year we came. Because I don't know.
AMN: I don't remember the year. I think it was... I used to, it was right on the end of my tongue all the time.﻿15
MG: Well, we'll come back to it later. [It was 1917.] So your reasons for leaving Asheville were to broaden educational opportunities for your children.
AMN: Uh huh.
MG: How did you happen to pick Pennsylvania, Clearfield?
AMN: Well, he had a friend, and this friend had left, and he'd been up here. And he had, was talking about how much you could, how much more that you could make up here—that is, financially—than they were paying anywhere down there. So he decided, well, he'd just come up for a few months and try it and see what it was like. So then I was pregnant with my, let me see, we have Sawy. She is next to the other kid, Carol. And I didn't tell anybody. I wasn't telling anybody anything about it, because I was rather young, you know, and... Not young, but I don't know. Just didn't want to talk about it. And I knew if I did they wouldn't allow me to come, you know. That was the main reason, because I thought maybe they'd do something or say something, you know, or maybe they wouldn't trust me on the train, because we had to ride by train.
MG: Was this your family you were concerned about, or friends?
AMN: This was my family and my friends. I didn't tell anybody. So I just went, I picked up my children, I had to get rid of everything, I had to work so hard because I had to pack things, and that's the way I lost some of the records. Because we packed them all in one room, and put it in a real estate man's house. And then we brought, you know, we moved, we could move that furniture up any time that we really had to have it. But we didn't, we couldn't; express was awfully high. And to have it hauled, you know, trucked up or anything like that, we just couldn't possibly meet the pay. So here we were, and by the time we began to get to the things, so we could go back and pick 'em up, why, things had been broken into. See, the house was rented. One part of it was rented, and I just had to store in one room. I lost loads of records that way, and I lost my regular family Bible that I had with dates and names and different, you know, births and everything I had in there. But we knew those pretty well anyway. So we came up, and then about a month after I was here, why, Peggy was born. And from then on, we've been here. And then later on, a couple years later, maybe two or three years, the baby, Carol, the one that just died, she was born. So there was two born here, don't you think? And the others were born in Asheville, North Carolina.
MG: So John was the eldest, and then came Peggy. Who was third?
AMN: Martha. Martha was third.
MG: And then came Herbert.
AMN: Yes. And he was just a little thing, he was about two years old, I guess...
MG: Then Elizabeth, and finally Carol.﻿16
AMN: Yes, yes.
MG: Now what type of work did your husband do when you got to Clearfield? How was he employed?
AMN: He was employed right down here at Harbison-Walker Refractories, I think they call it.
MG: Refractory?
AMN: Uh huh. Harbison-Walker was the first name.
MG: Did he stay employed with them the whole time, or did...
AMN: No, he didn't like it after he went to work down there. He then
decided that he was gonna change, and go off to these...another factory, because he thought it'd be a little bit easier, I guess, the job would be. And then, when we had to go out to this other factory...
MG: What was it called?
AMN: It was the tile works.
MG: Towel works?
AMN: Tile. I think they made the coverings of tile for roofing. People used to put tile roofing on around here all the time. So then he changed his job, and he went off there, and he liked it much better, because the management and everything was much better. And then we got this house here. And we, it was so much better, because when we lived down here in this brickyard, they had company houses. And we had to be put in a company house while they were trying to find us a house to live in. And that made us, you know, make the change, the difference. So then we got this house because one of their bosses had come out here, he had the job, he sent down from some of these other little towns, I think St. Mary's was where they had their headquarters. And he, we got this house and everything since, and that's a long time ago.
MG: Now your husband then stayed with the tile works company till he retired?
AMN: Yes. It was sold, though, to the Robinson Clay, and they call it,
people just for short, you know, called it sewer pipes. 'Cause that's what they did out there. It was clay works, but they called it, but they made sewer pipes out there for all these different uses. You know what a sewer pipe is?
MG: Yes. Now, did you ever work outside the family home during this, after you moved to Clearfield?
AMN: Yes. I worked right out of this office until, I just went in and cleaned, you know.
MG:
Of the Robinson Clay Works?﻿17
AMN: Of the Robinson Clay. Until I got Martha, Dad and I got Martha in
as the secretary. She was secretary. And the reason that happened, there was a white family down here, and she had children. Her husband worked at this brickyard down here. And she got all of her, they gave all of her children jobs right in the factory. And they worked there for a salary until they went, you know, out on their own. Martha, what were you out at the sewer pipes?
MN: I started in the sales department out there.
AMN: Was it sales? And you ended up...
MN: Yes. First I worked with you. I worked with you.
AMN: Uh huh. I'm talking about when we got you in out there, you know? Dad and I...
MN: Yes. Mr. Gilson and Dad were always good friends and he put me on in the sales department. And I sold pipes, and billed cars, railroad cars, and then I would check sales.
AMN: I have my medals in there, for years that I put in, I think. I think it was about twenty years that I worked there.
JIN: More than that. Twenty-five, I think, you were at the...
AMN: I don't know. I have the little medals right in there, little bronze medals that they presented me for the job. So both of us worked for tile works.
MG: Were you able to get employment for your other children as this other family had?
AMN: Well, none of the others wanted... They had gone other places, you
know. But Martha was in Philadelphia for a while, and she worked out there. And then she came, she was sick a couple times, and she never liked to stay away from home. She always wanted to be where we were, and so she... That was after you came back from Philadelphia. It was not too long before Dad passed on... So I was saying to them, I says, well, you took Mrs.—what was her name, down there?
MN: Nemeth, some Polish people.
AMN: Nemeth. I says, Mrs. Nemeth worked in your office, and you gave her children work. Why not give mine a job?
MN: 'Cause that was another time that she's speaking of here.
AMN: And so they decided right away to put some of our family on, and they put Martha on. And she stayed out there for eleven years.
MG: Now what was it like, then, with both you and your husband working, running a household at the same time? How did you manage?
AMN: Oh, we all worked. We managed it very well.﻿18
MG: But how did you organize your time so that you could manage it?
AMN: Well, my work was just a couple hours a day, and it was always in the evening, and the work at home was all done before I went out. And some of the kids would go with me sometimes, but if they weren't all home, they were somewhere else... Why, I... Martha used to go with me all the time before she went to Philadelphia. And then after she went, I had it by myself.
MG: How did you allot household tasks within the family?
AMN: Within the family?
MG: Did you make assignments for each child, or how did you... How did you do it?
AMN: Now, did I get the question?
MG: I wanted to know how you allotted the household work within the family. Did you give each child a job or a duty to do, or just how did you manage?
AMN: Yes, each one of us had so much to do, you know, to keep things. Then, my boys worked out—that's how they raised their first money, to go to school. Now, John used to go out, they had, a great bit what-you-call, a scale out there, and every load of coal that came—this is a coal-burning place, you know. And coal had to be weighed in the mornings. And he'd go out there before... He was in high school then. He'd go out there before he went to high school and weigh coal for an hour or a couple hours, or whatever length of time it took. And he made his money to enter, you know, to help make it anyway, to enter school. And he went down to Howard University.
MN: He worked one year before he went to Howard. He worked one year and came back...
AMN: Yes, one year. But that was only just an hour, or sometimes it might be a couple of hours a day. And then Herbie did the same thing, when he was going to [Pennsylvania State University]. I'll let him tell you when he meets you today. Oh, but he went over there, and they accepted him in school... That was the way our family worked together. The whole family worked together. And so, that was how we got the...
MG: What were the expectations that you and your husband had for your children?
AMN: Well, what were the expectations. We wanted them to have an education, that was the greatest thing we wanted them to have, because he used
to say__he loved music—and he used to say all the time, "Well, we'll
give 'em an education." He says, "They can't take that away from them. They can always be ready, you know, to try for another, whatever they're wanting to do." So that was his...
MG: That was the primary objective. Well, now, we've talked a little﻿19
MG: (cont.) about, probably, each one of your children. But maybe we
should go through them again and see if there's anything else you want to add about each one. John. Do you want to say anything about his career, or his achievements?
AMN: Well, what did John do after... He was out of school in...before he got married, wasn't he? He didn't marry before he got out of Howard University, did he?
MN: No.
AMN: And then after he left Howard, I guess he went on his own, just
picked up different jobs. I think he went to the Broadmoor Hotel. Who got him in there? Arthur? And Arthur Godfrey was there. Do you remember Arthur Godfrey? And he worked there for, oh, a long time, and then they sold the Broadmoor. It was sold to, who? The last people that bought that hotel? And they sold the name with the hotel, don't you remember? I can't remember. And then from there I guess he went to the Cosmos Club.
MG: Cosmos Club in Washington.
MN: But he had a bus company.
Oh, yes, he had a chartered bus company, that's right. Bison Bus Lines, in Washington. Well, he had that after, then, between... Cosmos was his last job.
AMN:
MN:
AMN:
MN:
AMN:
MN: AMN:
MN:
Uh huh. Well, that must have been the time between the Broadmoor and Cosmos, the Napoleon company.
He worked at the Napoleon's restaurant, with old Mr. Napoleon.
And then he went to his chartered bus. And then what happened? Big business pushed him out, right?
He was getting so big, that they just... They sort of ganged together and, the way I understand it, they went to Lloyd's of London, 'cause he was insured under Lloyd's of London. And they all signed up. They didn't want Lloyd's of London to insure, so he had difficulty getting insurance, you see. So he wasn't going to operate buses without insurance. And that's just one of the things that big business does to little business. You know that. So after that, John went out of business. And then, after that, then he went to the Cosmos Club. And he had, also, an ice cream store. But he had another store. A long time ago, he had the Mercury Market. That was before the government... It was a grocery store. I don't know where it was, because I never'saw it. Mercury Markets he had when he was in New Jersey.
AMN: That was his first place.﻿20
MN: Yeah, that was his first one.
AMN: So, I don't know.
MN: You'll have to ask him.
MG: Well, no, I don't want an exhaustive kind of coverage. Just whatever remarks that you, you know, would like to make to indicate what various children did.
MN: But John did have a nice organization, the Bison Bus Lines. And
everybody was very proud of him because he was getting along so fine. But then big business all got together, and he couldn't get any insurance, and his best partners were gone. So that made it hard for him.
MG: How about Peggy? I don't think you've said anything about her.
AMN: Why, Peggy, she got out of high school, and she was here for about, almost a year, in the Census. You know, where they advertise for workers. They sent a paper, an application, in here, and she signed that application and they give her the job. And she went to Washington. And then she worked until, you know, this teaching job. And she... with the, what you call it, the government...
MG: What's her married name?
AMN: Childress.
MG: Okay, how about Herbert?
AMN: Well...
MN: I don't know anything about him.
AMN: [laughs] Well, Herbie finished his high school at State College, went down to Philadelphia. He worked for Brown American. I don't know where their___Who is the fellow, Father Clark knew him...
MN: Father Russell. Was his name Brown? Oh, I don't know what his name
was. I can't think of it now. He ran the Brown American. You called his name then, and now I can't...Father Russell...
MG: That's all right.
MN: He worked for him.
AMN: And then, he worked at State, you know, and he worked out in Iowa. He has owned a paper out there, don't you remember?
MN: Yeah. Herbie, when he finished Penn State, he had an office in the ROTC, you know, in ROTC. And then he finished Penn State, and he worked down at the Brown American, and then the army called him, didn't they?﻿21
AMN: That's right. And I wanted him out of the army.
MN: And he was a lieutenant, he had finished a lieutenant in the ROTC at Penn State, and he declined that, and he enlisted. I think he... That's right, he went in as an enlisted man. Because he didn't want to be an officer in the army, he didn't want to kill anybody, he didn't want to fight anybody. But he went to the army. And you know where he went from there, don't you?
AMN: He went where? To the...
MN: He went to Petersburg or Camp Lee, for training. Camp Lee is in Petersburg, isn't it? I think that's where he was.
AMN: I know they went somewhere, because he was married then, when he went in the service.
MN: And he taught down there. He taught all these young soldiers from down South, and so many of them. And he got along fine with them. And then they sent him to officers' training school. And what did he make? Well, anyway, before he got out of the service, I think he made master sergeant. He didn't want any part of anybody's war. And then he was on duty, he went to India? Where else was he? Was he on the Burma Road somewhere?
AMN: He was on the Burma Road, the old Burma Road. Who was that? Stilwell, wasn't it, or somebody like that?
MN: Stilwell [inaudible]. He was around that area I think...
AMN: I think he was, too. Because I think he was talking about the...
India, and how they were, people starved then, they were starving. And they have these sacred—what do you call them?
MN: Cows.
AMN: Cows. And said the cows were walking around the street, and people was just dropping dead because of starvation. And I know he used to tell me this. So he wasn't in very long until the war ended, you know. And then that was the happiest time in Clearfield, when war ended. Everybody got together, because it's loads and loads of families had sons, you know. And everybody was so happy when that war ended. Everybody forgot about each other, and everybody was so happy, and congratulating families, and... It started up... When they announced the war had ended, they started up and down this street with all kinds of bells... Where were you? In Philadelphia that night, yes. And all these whistles. We used to have a railroad, still we have railroads down there, some take the bus. And train whistles. And Clearfield was just so happy that night. So we went, drove up to where... What's one of the little towns around here? Josie and John was here, that was John's first wife.
MN: St. Mary's.
AMN: Up to St. Mary's, I believe. And all the way up, every place was,﻿22
AMN: (cont.) I don't know, it's just like a dream or something, a beautiful dream. People were so happy together, because that war had ended and that meant their children were out, you know. They could come home or do whatever they wanted to do.
MG: Now after he returned home and established his career in journalism, maybe you could just say how he got started at Ebony and what his present position is.
AMN: How did he get started with Ebony?
MN: Well, Herbie went to the University of Iowa, and he and Velvin went out there. And he also worked on one of the papers, one of the Iowa papers, while he was out there.
AMN: He was some editor or something of one of the papers, I don't remember what he was.
MN: I don't know what his position was but he worked for one of the papers out there.
AMN: I know he was connected with a newspaper out there in Iowa.
MN: And then he studied, began to study photography, and---
AMN: He won honors in math.
MN: Yeah, and, let's see. Herbert was born out there, too. And, seems to me that... Oh, there was something about some kind of honors he got, like Sigma Delta Chi? Oh, he won that at State. There was one time he went to—was it the University of Miami, at that time? And he took a course on photography down there. Now I'm not sure whether this university is right. Is there a University of Miami in Miami?
MG: Yes. But I mean, I really just need a general outline of what, you know. You don't need to recall each individual thing that he did.
MN: Oh, I see. But after he finished out at Iowa, I think. How was it, was it Peggy who... And Peggy and Johnson...
AMN: ...worked together.
MN: They did work together, and they were friends. They knew each other___
AMN: And maybe she helped him, I don't know. Anyway, he's in Chicago, and he's working for Johnson [Publications].
MN: What is he? Executive editor. Hans Massaquoi is managing editor. That's what Herbie was, first. He was editor, then managing editor, then executive editor...
MG: This is part two of an interview with Mrs. Annie M. Nipson. The date is the sixteenth of September, 1978. The interview is continuing in Mrs. Nipson's home. The interviewer is Marcia M. Greenlee. Well,﻿23
MG: (cont.) you know, when we were talking yesterday, you were telling me about your children. We got down as far as Elizabeth. Tell me something about her.
AMN: Well, I got to the course here, didn't I?
MG: You did, but the tape wasn't on. So tell me about that again.
AMN: Well, after she was out of high school, she took this course over at, in sheet metal. What do you call it? Sheet metal.
MG: Welding.
AMN: Welding. And after she had finished that, they gave her a job in
a factory down in New Jersey. I think it's in New Jersey. I don't know whether it was in Philadelphia first, or New Jersey. Anyway, it was either place. And she worked there for, oh, a good while. And then, during that time that she was on the job, I think she met her husband, and that was Jerry Seitz. And I don't know whether she worked there until they married, or after they married. I don't know which. Anyway, she met her husband in either one of those places down there, 'cause he was working in the same place. And they were married. And I don't think she worked... I don't think she worked a job after that, I'm not sure. Those things I kind of lost. And anyway, I didn't keep up with them like I should. I knew that they came here and he asked for, you know, our consent to be married. And we advised him to the best of our ability. But still, they had to work this out between themselves. So they got married. And they lived in New Jersey, at the place where she owns now. They bought a little home there, and they lived there. Two children was born. And I don't know how many, how long it was before the first one. I don't know. And anyway, they had two boys. And then he had a good job, and I don't think she worked, I'm not sure. But they lived there until he was taken sick. And then, in a short time, he passed on, and left her. Anyways, they had two boys, he left her with two children. Young children, very young. And from then on, she had to care for her children and her family and all. But he left her enough to take care of the family. I don't know how much or anything like that, but anyway... And then after he'd gone, I don't know how long it was, she had a trip to the Virgin Islands. And her mother-in-law kept the children. And after she came back from there, why, I don't know what she did. She still didn't, I don't think she went to a steady job, or anything like that. She lived near her mother-in-law, or in the house with her mother-in-law for a little while, I don't know how long. And then when the children, I think they were about...I don't know their exact age. Anyway, she decided that she wanted to go down and take a few months' course in school in Mexico. So she brought the children to me and I kept them at that time. I don't remember how long it was or anything like that, but it was quite a while. Then she came back home and she lived in New Jersey for a little while. And then she decided that she was going back to Mexico, and she had some kind of a job, I don't know what kind. Teaching, I think, or something. I won't say for sure. Anyway, she took her children and went to Mexico, and I think they lived there for about nine years. During that time, she was, back, or came back for a visit a couple times,﻿24
AMN: (cont.) anyway. And then, finally, they decided that they would come back to the States, and make their home here, and she's been here ever since. She's taught in different schools, she taught down there, for, what you call it, English to this Spanish speaking people, students. And how many, I don't know whether it was two separate schools or one school. Anyway, she taught there. And that's about as far as I can go with her. She's still there, and she's still... taught up until a year or so ago. And she changed her course or something happened with the teachers, I don't know whether they were out or what happened, but something happened. And then she started studying insurance, and that's where she is now. So I don't know whether I've made that very clear to you or not, because I haven't given you all the details, I thought that... the time and all like that, it doesn't mean anything to you.
MG: What did you think about her being trained as a welder? Did you think that was unusual for a woman, or not?
AMN: Well, at the time, when I first thought about it, and then I was thinking it was right after the war time...
MG: Second World War?
AMN: Kids working everything, girls were working all... That's when,
I guess, the beginning of women starting in those jobs, of that sort. Well, then I, it left my mind. I didn't think too much about it any more. Because I just figured this was a job, and she is able to take care of it and herself, and it didn't bother me. So, she did. [laughs] And that's about it with her, to my knowledge. Of course, there may be things that I've left out, different things about the jobs and all. But that was about it for her.
MG: Tell me a little bit now about Carol, your youngest.
AMN: Well, my youngest girl, she never worked much. She was at home,
and then she got married. And for some time she lived at her husband's home, with her mother-in-law and her people. And then they decided that they'd get out and have a home to themselves. And that was what happened to them. There was an old building that they had built for themselves. And she lived there. And she didn't really go out on a job or anything.
MG: What was her husband's name?
AMN: Ervin Jones. And then, I don't know, he had several little jobs around. But finally, when her brother John went into the charter service in Washington, D.C., why, he gave him a job as a driver there. So he drove such... You know, I don't know whether he drove, whether he was with John when the... I think he'd gone out for himself, I don't know. Those things leave me.
MG:
Well, do you feel as you look back now over that early decision that you and your husband made, to leave North Carolina and come to Clearfield,﻿25
MG: (cont.) that you made the right choice?
AMN: Well, no, it doesn't bother me. It was a little hard for me to get used to, you know, after I came here, because... Strange, it was strange, it was a strange place, new neighbors, new people to have to, you know, come in contact with. But we were thinking about our family and their education. So we were really willing to put up with most anything until we could accomplish what we had started out to do. So we never regretted it. When we first came here, we had no idea of staying North. We were just going to stay here until we could get enough together and schooling, get the children through high school, anyway, and then we were going to some other place.
MG: Where had you thought you might want to go?
AMN: Oh, he wanted to go over to Ohio. There was a pottery plant or
something over there that he thought he would like to work in. And then we, I don't know, our family, they hated to pick up and move again, and go to different new schools, and so we just stayed here until high school. Each one finished high school, each child. And then, instead of us moving, they went their way. [laughter] And once they did, well, of course, they hadn't been... I didn't stay here all the time, because we were in and out to other places. And of course after he passed on, we were, you know, still free to go any place we wanted to. And we could have gone and lived with our families somewhere, see. They made us perfectly welcome and wanted us to be with 'em. But since we had the property and we'd paid for it, and everything was free here, we decided that we would just hold on to it. That was after he passed on.
MG: So you and Martha do go and visit occasionally different ones of your children?
AMN: Oh, we do, yes. They come and get us, the different ones. And we don't have to worry about that, because any time they come, or any time I would say, they'd be perfectly willing to come and pick us up or... Because even here, they don't give us transportation or anything like that. They don't worry about things like that. So, in order to be here, why, we just, you know, look after each other. And then we both are able, now, to have our little income together. Which is, maybe, poverty level. I don't know, but we just want to try it out, and see what we can do, and take... See how much we can save out of it, all that sort of thing. Because there's so many people, you know, that they can't live off a little bit of money. They have to have a pretty big salary. And so we, we don't have that much. But we decided we'd put it together and see what we could do with it. And, I don't know, I guess that's about it for that.
MG: Okay. Now tell me this. With all of the terms that have been popular in describing black people—colored, Negro, black—do you have one or the other that you prefer?
AMN: One of the other blacks?﻿26
MG: No. Of those terms, colored, Negro, black, do you like one better than another, to use?
AMN: I don't quite get your question.
MG: Well, I just wonder how you prefer to refer to what we call now
black people. Do you like that term black, or do you prefer to call them Negroes, or do you prefer to call them colored?
AMN: I don't prefer to call them anything, because I would love to see
the races all forget all the differences that there is there. That is one thing I would, I'm waiting for, and I'm hoping and praying for, that we will qualify and have things like the American people. We will all be Americans, and we won't be thought of as, you know, different. . .
MG: By color?
AMN: Yes. But I would love to see the, oh, I don't know, black man, as they call him, work to, you know, the advantages of each other, to help each other. And see them be fairly successful. But I don't know, I can't, I just can't see, you know, Americans being separated in a payroll or anything like that, if they're qualified to do the job. So I don't know, that's something I think a good deal about. But I think if we're all willing to look at each other and do the right thing, that everything will turn out all right. It's what I'm hoping for.
MG: What kinds of things did you and your husband teach your own children about race? Did you talk about it much in the family, or not?
AMN: We never talked about it too much. We taught respect for everybody, and the right thing to do by everybody. That was the main thing that we taught about. It doesn't make any difference who you are or what you are, or the special... We never taught them that there was anything special just for him, any more than there is anybody else, if they wanted work and qualified for the different things that they wanted to do. So, I don't know just exactly how to explain it, but anyway...
MG: How about in your own family, when you were back in North Carolina?
Did your grandparents, or did your mother discuss race with you, racial issues?
AMN: I don't remember. I don't remember anything about that. All I remember is that the respect and, well, love... And I never, we never thought too much about that... In fact, I didn't know anything about nationality when I was growing up. I never thought anything about it. Now I might have been discriminated in a way. I don't know, but I can't, I didn't see it, I didn't feel it, because we were with different nationalities all the time, and all of them seemed to have respect. None of them just came right up to our faces and called us names or anything like that, so...
MG: How about other black people in tliG community tlist you ssw sxound﻿27
MG: (cont.) Asheville? Were you conscious of differences between them and between white people?
AMN: Well, some of them, yes, some of them would speak of it. Some of
them would talk about, you know, racial conditions. That was after I was older, much older, you know. But that thing didn't bother me so much. The only thing that bothered me was pushing your family, trying to get the right way and... Oh, I can't think of just how to describe it.
HG: But that was more important to you than being...
AMN: Yes, that was more important to me than race. So, I feel that if you determine, and if you have enough faith, you can do the things that anybody else can do, if you have that kind of thought about different things. So that was about the only thing we, at least I, thought of. First, jokingly, my husband used to often say, tell little jokes, or something like that, but this was never in a bitter way, or anything like that. But I always felt like, well, if you want to do something and you want to do it badly enough, bad enough, you can do it through your hope and faith and... So I'm very proud of what we are accomplishing. I'm proud of my family. I'm proud of all those that are trying to help them, trying to push... And we didn't have a special wonderful home, we never thought of great wealth or big fine buildings or things like that. That didn't, that never attracted me. But to have a home and have it clean, and make people welcome and things like that...
MG: That's what was important?
AMI: Mm hmm.
MG: Do you think... I'm sure you hear a lot about the women's movement of today.
AMN: Yes.
MG: Do you think that men and women are equal?
AMN: Men and women are equal? Well, in some respects I do, and some I
don't. Because I figure that a man, he has more strength. You don't mean in jobs and...
MG: Well, all different areas. You tell me how you feel about...
AMN: Well, now, there's some areas that it's rather hard for a woman to compete with a man. All women can't compete with the men, because some of the women can't do the things that the men do. Now, like prize-fighting, and ball games, and all that sort of thing, I object, I don't think that it's right. It's all right for them to go out and have their sports, their games, but I don't like them to be, you know, competing with men. I don't... And then there are some jobs that I think that men have more strength. They've always had more strength physically than women, to my thought about different things. I don't know just exactly how to...﻿28
MG: How about jobs that don't depend on physical strength? Then do you think that there's anything that men are more suited for than women? Or are they equally— Let's say medicine, or law, or those kinds of fields.
AMN: Well, I'm not against it, not that kind of job. Because that is, well, it's brain work instead of physical, so...
MG: Well, how about in the house? Do you think that men have equal responsibility for keeping up the house?
AMN: Yes, I do. And I can't quite understand... well, if it's, you mean, if it's a marriage or anything like...
MG: Yes. Or sons and daughters in a family. Do they have equal responsibilities to do work around the house?
AMN: Yes. I think they should have. I think they should be taught things like that when they're growing up. Now of course, after they are through their growing, why, then they can go out for something else. But as long as they're in the home, I can't see anything wrong with it.
MG: Now, tell me this. As you have grown older, you've had opportunity
to see things over a long period of time, and make comparisons between the present and the past and the rest... Do you think that as you've grown older, you've become wise and more insightful? Well, tell me some of the viewpoints that you have now from the advantage of age.
AMN: Well, I have better understanding of different things, and I've had more experience. And I think it's perfectly natural that you do, as you grow older, understand and see things differently. And that's about the extent, I believe.
MG: What do you see now that you think is better than it was in the past? Are there certain things that you focus on?
AMN: Well, yes, there's a few things that is better, I can see.
MG: Like, what are some of those things?
AMN: Let me think. I don't know just exactly how to describe that, but there are things that I... I'll just say there are things that are better now than they were in the past.
MG: Are there things now that are worse? Things that have gotten worse?
AMN: Yes, I think everybody's beginning to see that. I don't think I'm alone in looking at different things like that.
MG: Do you focus on, I mean, certain things that are not getting better?
AMN: Well, I don't know just how to... But, for one thing would be, financial and financially, you know, different things. I can see the difference, but I don't know how to answer that question.﻿29
MG: Well, just let's see if we can sum it up. Overall, when you compare the past to the present, overall, do you think that life conditions, living conditions are getting better, or they're getting worse?
AMN: Well, I think some things are getting worse. And they are not... I don't know whether they've... They are getting worse, really, because in my way of feeling and thinking and seeing and summing up things, it's much worse now, than it was when my... It was so many years ago. So I don't know just exactly...
MG: Well, now when you look back over your life and the things that you have done, the work that you've had, the children you've raised, all those things, what are the things that make you the happiest, that give you the most satisfaction?
AMN: What are the things that made me happy?
MG: Mm hmm. What gives you the most satisfaction as you look back over your life?
AMN: Well, seeing somebody that has decided they want to make, go to the top or something like that, in whatever specialty they have—as long as they're polite—that makes me very happy. I like to see people do... And especially those that haven't had a chance to get anywhere in life.
MG: What are the things that you have done yourself that make you feel satisfied?
AMN: Satisfied in my religious faith. I'm very happy, and I can get
happiness there. And I always get a clear thought, and more understanding from my religious faith. And that's about the only thing I know how to do, and I don't know... May I hear this back?
MG: No, you'll see it back. In a transcript. Do you have any hobbies?
AMN: Hobbies? My hobby is, not any special hobby. I love to work, I
love to do most anything. But I used to feel like I'd want to do all the nice things, but now I don't care, I don't think too much...
MG: Were there special activities that you used to make time for, that you enjoyed?
AMN: Well, yes, there were so many of them all at once that I don't know what to say about them. I don't know. I don't know how to answer things like that.
MG: You didn't consider them hobbies, necessarily?
AMN: No, I just considered them something in my line of work.
MG: Well, were there any things that you wanted to do especially that you didn't get an opportunity to do?﻿30
AMN: No.
MG: Well, how about travel? How much travel have you had a chance to do?
AMN: Oh, I have... I'm talking about right now. I'm not talking about... Right now I don't feel that I'm up to travel. But in my younger life, of course I was very anxious to do all those different things. And travel was that one thing that I really did want. But I didn't get all I wanted. But sometimes I feel, well, I'm satisfied. I'm not going to worry about it, because I didn't get it. I'm gonna be happy, anyway. That's the way I feel about travel. Of course I would have loved to have traveled. And I'm always happy for anybody that I see out traveling, and... All those things are able for the younger people coming on now. Because I don't think there's anybody, if they go out in the right way, that couldn't do those things now. Because I think they have wonderful opportunities. And I think that more people should think about it and try to, you know, accomplish those kinds of things.
MG: Well, that's kind of what I was going to ask you next. If you were going to give advice to young people coming on today, what kinds of things would you tell them?
AMN: I would tell them to try to get the best education that they could have, and to use it to a good advantage. Because it's, well, in fact, it's free to what it used to be. And any walk of life, I would advise them to get a good education, get all the education they can get. And I think that would solve a lot of crime, and different things that's going on now.
MG: Well, those are all the questions that I had for you. But is there anything that we haven't talked about that you think should be added to the record?
AMN: Well, I can't think of anything right now. I might think of something later.
MG: If you think of something later, we can put it in, then.
AMN: Okay.
MG: Thank you very much.﻿ANNIE M. NIPSON
