Marcia Greenlee:
Deborah Wolfe:
Marcia Greenlee:
Deborah Wolfe:
This is an interview with Dr. Deborah Cannon Partridge Wolfe. The interview is taking place in Dr. Wolfe's home at 62 South Union Avenue, Cranford, New Jersey, 07016. The date is November 6; the interviewer is Marcia Greenlee. The year is 1979.
Dr. Wolfe, you are an educator, a writer, a community activist, a wife, a minister, a speaker, and a mother. Why have you pursued such a multitude of interests beyond a superficial level?
Because I believe that you should use every single ability God has given you, and I talk to God quite regularly about what He wants to do with my life. I want to use it in the way He wants me to use it. I'm very grateful that I have been blessed with a multitude of interests, and a great love for humankind.
Are your career interests separate and distinct in your mind, or are they integrated in some way that might not seem immediately apparent?
To me they seem so immediately apparent, since teaching and preaching are really very close to each other, and those are my two major careers. When I introduce myself, I say I'm a teacher and a preacher. I think of Jesus as the great teacher, so I get a great deal of understanding of my whole ability to teach, and the particular kinds of techniques that are used for the best teacher, from the illustrations I get from the life of Jesus Himself. So for me, of course, those two are very, very similar. And of course, teaching is related to humankind, and the development of human beings, and this is related to understanding the community, the society of which you are a part, and so that I must be involved in the community life.
If I'm going to help people to develop themselves, unfold, and change the nature of﻿2
DW: (cont.) society, I must myself be first of all a student of that society, and of the immediate communities in which I live and work and have my being. But I also must be forward looking enough in order to be able to make the necessary changes, and therefore I'm very much concerned in political activity, because I believe in democracy and the role of the individual in such a society. I'm a patriot, and I'm not ashamed of it. With all of its problems, America is still to me the best place to live. Having been all over the world, every continent of the world, I know no place I'd rather live than the United States of America. But because I believe that, and the reason I believe it, is because our ideals, even though they are not obtained, make it clear that one of the most important aspects of our definition of democracy is the political ideology of a government of, for, and by the people. And I believe we are the people, and therefore I must be engaged in the determination of the policies and the regulations by which my fellow citizens and I am myself to be governed.
So it means that I have to be involved in community life, both on a political level and a person-to-person and group-to-group level. I can't preach unless I understand people, and understand the forces that impinge on their lives and affect them. I, therefore, must know, as widely as I possibly can, not only what is the nature of work experiences in our society, but equally I must be concerned with the kind of groups that humankind develop for their own preservation. This is fundamentally necessary if I'm going to advise people. And, you know, preaching is more than elucidating, it's counseling. A large part of my responsibility as a minister is indeed helping people to know how to function more effectively on their job or in their community. And having been a part myself of that community life, I'm in a better position to give advice. In fact, I felt that I couldn't be ordained until I was able to talk with each human being in terms of his or her own background. For the more diversified my own background is, the more able I am to help a wider and larger number of people. So you see, all of my activities in which I am interested are integrated.
You call me, I think, a mother, and that's one of the highest and the biggest attributes of my life. I think to be partners with God in creating a human being is the greatest thing anybody can do. I'm very, very grateful to see my life go on through my son, and my son's son. And I can even already—even though it's not here—I can see myself going on through my son's son's son's son's sons, and it's just such a joy. I never thought anything much about being a grandmother until I became one. When I held that grandson in my arms when he was first born, I looked down and realized, "I can die now. I have somebody to take my place in another generation." So I see all of these as a big circle, a gestalt, a configuration that is meaningful and related. I am a better preacher because I hope I have more diversity in my own life.
I'm an athlete, I have a letter for every sport there is for women, and I keep up right now with all the sports as a spectator. I'm sorry I'm not more of an activist in sports as I used to be, and I think that shows on my size (my son just gave me a bike) and I'm going to try to rectify that, so I signed up for some exercise classes. I'm walking two miles a day, doing some things like that. But I know that it makes﻿(cont.) it easier for me to communicate with a whole group of people because I do understand their activities, not just in a superficial way, but having been a participant, I know what the rules of the games are, and all the other sidelines that accompany the experience.
I'm also a musician, and therefore, anything we have to do in the church, I can carry on. If it's preaching, I'll preach; if singing, I'll sing; if playing, I'll play. I believe in being prepared. I also believe in starting on time, hence I start all meetings on time. For many years my sister and brother and I gave concerts—a combination of song and poetry.
Well, let's briefly survey some specific aspects of your career, beginning first with your work as an educator. The interested researcher will find that within your file at Radcliffe College is a copy of your curriculum vitae. This vita is very extensive, and it also lists a number of secondary publications that have biographical sketches concerning your work. In addition to what appears in the vita, you are also listed in Who's Who Among Black Americans—that should be added to the list. And perhaps there are others as well that I didn't note. Were there others?
Yes. I didn't realize that I hadn't made that a complete list of directories and compendiums in which I'm listed. But I think that generally speaking... There's another, Who's Who in Government, which I think gives another view, because it emphasizes my political activity. And of course, you know, Who's Who in America is broken down into Who's Who in the East, so I'm also in that one. The New Jersey legislature each year publishes its own special legislative Who's Who; since I am a public officer of the state of New Jersey, since I serve as a member of the New Jersey State Board of Higher Education, I am listed also in that directory. I'm also included in Who's Who in the World and International Biography.
Now we mention these simply to let the reader of this transcript understand that we don't intend, in the course of this interview, to specifically mention every activity in which you've been engaged. They can find these things out for themselves. But what we would like to talk about is what you consider important about the various facets of your career, and their meaning to you. So once again, let's begin with a brief survey of your activities as an educator. What is it that you feel you've done, the highlights, what's most important to you, what's the meaning of your work as an educator?
I'm glad you started with me as an educator, since that has been my life. I've always wanted to be a teacher since I was a little girl playing school on the front porch here, and as I grew, this ambition grew with me. The reason it is so important to me is because I feel that the teacher, unlike almost any other person, has the opportunity to see the unfoldment of the human mind and the development of the human personality. And if I were to say, my major contribution would be in my ability to relate to my students, and to help them discover who they are. Practically, and more professionally, my major contribution would have to be in my﻿4
(cont.) work first that I did in Tuskegee, Alabama.
I went there to teach when I was twenty years old, having worked with migratory laborers in Hurlock, Maryland, on the Eastern Shore, and having been principal of an adult education school in Cranford. I was invited to be director of their rural education program and principal of the rural laboratory school, only to find that the school wasn't built. So I had the pleasure and opportunity to build the first junior high school for black boys and girls in the western part of Macon County, Alabama. In fact, there were only two other junior high schools for youngsters in Macon County—the one on the campus at Tuskegee Institute, and the one at the county training school in Roba, Alabama. So my students and I put together the chairs and the tables and desk—it was a glorious opportunity. We not only physically helped to develop that school, but I had the opportunity to move a whole group of black farmers from the eastern part of Macon County, where the soil had been leached of its mineral resources, and move them into the western part of the county where they would have a new opportunity, new jobs, new hopes. So the school was not just a school, it was the community center for a whole new community which I helped, with the community organizer, to develop into a new community.
I think it is for that reason that the people who live there now in Prairie Farms were insistent, when they got a new high school fifteen years ago, that it would be named after me. I had been so much a part of the life of that community and the development of young people, many of whom were twenty-one and twenty-two years old in seventh grade, because they had never had a chance to go to a seventh grade before. I'll never forget how I felt as I looked up to these tall young men and women who towered over me, who were eager for knowledge and learning, and glad to have this chance to have a junior high school. It was from this group that I can also point to some of the finest leaders in American life today, people who came to that school. So that's one of the highest points in my life. I could not talk about Tuskegee without mentioning my role in beginning the graduate work. When I received my doctorate in 1945, Dr. Patterson was anxious to start a master's degree program. I visited all the southern states to talk with the leaders in education for blacks. I wanted to plan a special program to meet the needs of the South. I worked with all the Jeanes teachers. It was great!
I think that the second high point in my educational career—there are so many high points—would be my role as education chief in the United States Congress. I served in that role during the administrations of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. You know that it is in the period of American life when we did the most comprehensive rewriting and innovating in education legislation. During my tenure in office, there were thirty-five public laws that were written, and I have great joy as I see them implemented. And as I mention this role, I think I would be remiss if I did not mention the fact that I think a large part of the credit must go to a man who is often neglected when we talk about the education era, and that's the Honorable Adam Clayton Powell, who was chairman of the Education and Labor Committee at the time that I served﻿5
DW: (cont.) as education chief of Congress. This is a very important period, and I guess we'll talk more about this. You just asked me for highlights, so I'm just mentioning the areas rather than details.
I guess a third major highlight in my educational career might be considered my responsibility as president of the National Alliance of Black School Educators. I list this among the most important areas because it is the first organization of its kind that attempts very directly to get at all of the people in education, no matter at what level they are working, whether it's in early childhood, elementary, secondary, college, as superintendent, as general administrators, as directors or supervisors, as members of boards of education. So it's a great coalition and cross-section of all people concerned and interested in providing the best kind of education for all children, but for black children in particular. I mention it as...my role as president, since I was the first woman to be president of that organization. It is a young organization., having had its beginning in 1973, but I think it's significantly important that, as so often happens in many of our organizations, the women may outnumber the men in the membership, but they very often don't get the leadership roles. But I feel that this is an important aspect of my life.
A fourth area that I think I ought to mention in terms of highlights is the various kinds of responsibilities I've had in relationship to science education. First of all, I should mention that I am not only a life member, but a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), and served as chairman of the Teacher Education Committee of the Commission on Science Education of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In that role I was responsible for developing guidelines for the preparation of teachers of science in the elementary and secondary schools. It also led me to my present role that I continue to serve as trustee of Science Service, which is the group that is responsible for conducting the talent search for the Westinghouse Awards. I'm sure everyone knows that these are some of the most prestigious awards that young people can obtain who are interested in science. And I am tremendously concerned and interested in it because, in my ten years as a member of that group, we had had only one black finalist, and that has bothered me greatly. I have used every role that I could to get at teachers of black children so that they can encourage them to go into science. Three of our Westinghouse awardees have become Nobel Prize winners. This present year, the Nobel physics awardee is one of our former Westinghouse awardees, and I know what it can do for stimulating interest in science, in the most scientific age that mankind has known. I also served on the Steering Committee of the Biological Curriculum Studies Program, and I have been intensely involved in development of other science programs. I worked with the development of the AAAS program entitled "Science: A Process Approach." So this whole area, I like to think that I contributed a great deal in science education as a special area of my interest and concern.
One other area, I guess I ought to give in terms of education, I have﻿6
DW: (cont.) been active in the Parent-Teacher Association and its
movement. When I was in Alabama, I was president of the Alabama Congress of Colored Parents and Teachers, and served on the national board, and served as the liaison between the National Congress of Parents and Teachers and the National Congress of Colored Parents and Teachers, and was instrumental in integrating those two organizations. So that now we have only one, the National Congress of Parents and Teachers. I currently serve on the past presidents committee. I mention this as an important part of my educational career, even though it could be quasi-educational since it could represent either my role as a parent or as a teacher. But since I teach a course in "School and Community," and my teaching area now, and for a number of years, has been the sociology of education, you see, it becomes also an integral part of professional educational experience, as well as my role as a parent or a citizen. I feel so strongly the need for understanding the role of the parent working with the school in developing the best schools possible in our country. I think those are the major areas I... There are a number of kinds of subheadings under that.
MG: Now I sort of arbitrarily picked education, to ask you about it first, because in reading over materials about you, that was what struck me perhaps with more weight than everything else. Not to say those others weren't important, but that seemed to be the strongest area. How would you rank these other aspects of your career—as a writer, as a community activist, as a minister, as a lecturer—how would we put those in order of most importance, as you perceive them?
DW: You know, you're putting me in a bind, because I've never really wanted to do it. I've already said I see it as a gestalt, rather than in this order or that. And yet, it has to take priority, because my degree is in education, so you see that that is going to always be. My doctorate s in education, and if I feel I can know anything at all, it's knowing about teaching and learning on all levels. And I guess, the speaker would be maybe the next, because that's what I've been doing longest; even before I was a teacher, I was a speaker. My mother was a great lecturer, my father was a preacher. I come from a family of speakers and preachers and teachers, and I've participated in speaking contests, and debating teams long before I graduated from high school. I have been doing public speaking all my life, practically. I was speaking about different kinds of topics, according to my age level and my particular kinds of concerns.
One of the first areas where I became known best as a public speaker on a nationwide basis was when I was working with migratory laborers. During my college years—I put myself through college, since I'm a poor preacher's child, and I had many jobs... In the summers I spent working with migrants, setting up community centers and school activities for them. It was on the basis of that that the National Council of Churches through its Home Mission Council had me go all over the country to talk about the problem of migratory labor in our United States and the responsibilities all of us have to migrants. And in fact, it influenced me so much that I got my master's in rural education, and wrote my﻿7
DW: (cont.) master's thesis on "A Background Study and Teacher Training Program for the Education of Migratory Laborers."
You see, I was doing this before John Steinbeck's Grapes of Wrath. I predate him, and I feel very good about that, because I was talking about those issues long before he had the chance to popularize it in his Grapes of Wrath. I was glad he came along and did what I could not do, 'cause I was quite young at that period. But if I raised the sensitivity level of anybody, I think I would be tremendously important. Just yesterday, when I was speaking in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, about educational opportunity programs and their continuance, I had the opportunity to talk about the integration of legislation for migratory laborers into this total stream of student aid programs that we have been fostering in the federal government and on the state level.
I've been speaking all over the country about a number of various interests, because wy ' .terests in women's activities have caused me to be a leader in speaking and that... I've been president of my sorority— national president, international president—for eleven years. That carried me all over the country and all over Africa, speaking. My role as vice-president of the National Council of Negro Women caused me to, of course, do a lot of speaking so that even before I was licensed or ordained to preach, I was doing a lot of professional speaking and speaking to social and civic groups, and I, when I describe myself, I say I make my living with my tongue. So I feel speaking is very important to me, and of course, preaching is very close to that. So I guess that would be the next thing.
I had to fight so hard to become a preacher, and that's why it means so much to me. My mother is the one that should have been ordained. She s a much better scholar of the Word than I; she could read the Bible in Greek and Hebrew, as it was originally written, she was a really brilliant scholar. She was a walking concordance. I could ask Mama any question about any place, any scripture, quotation, and Mama could tell me immediately where it was without going to a concordance. She really knew the Bible that well. But she also had an unusually broad comprehension of the application of religion to life, and I owe so much of my joy of living to my mother and her emphasis on religion and education.
You know, I'm a Baptist, and many people think, when you're a Baptist, you must have had a very sterile background. On the contrary, both of my parents were very highly educated, and both of them preached a seven-day religion, and therefore talked about how to have a good time with a good purpose. But I say Mama should have been ordained—she had a degree in theology, but she was a generation too soon. I was so determined that I was going to be ordained that I studied at Union Theological Seminary and the Jewish Seminary of America. The Presbyterians, the Congregationalists, and the Methodists offered to ordain me, but I wanted to be ordained by the Baptists, not because I'm not ecumenical, but rather because I wanted to carry on the heritage of﻿8
DW: (cont.) my mother and father, and I am so glad that my mother was
alive when I was ordained. So that my ordination is for Mom and me, I had to fight for twenty years before they finally ordained me. So I guess I have to put that up high in my list, because I had to fight so hard as a woman to be ordained. Because, even now, our church had to come out of the National Baptist Convention because they don't believe in ordaining women yet. We are affiliated with the Progressive Baptists and the American Baptists, but it is wonderful that I stand where Papa stood. I think you know that I'm the associate minister of First Baptist Church here in Cranford, where my father was the pastor. So you see, I guess that would be the next.
But community activity is just a part of living as a human being, as a citizen, as a professional; I just see that as a natural part of doing my share to make this a better world. So I'm on our local welfare board because I have lived in Cranford most of my life, and the least I could do is serve and help. I was on our local board of education because of that same reason. I am an educator and a citizen, that's why I'm on the New Jersey State Board of Education. I think all of these kinds of things belong together—one grows out of the other.
But I would think that my overall concern for human beings and for their growth and development have their roots in the two major foci of my life, God and education. I feel that with those two, I have a greater strength. I owe that emphasis to my parents because they said, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." This gives me a sense of self-awareness, and of confidence that nobody can remove, since I know God is my counselor, my leader. The spiritual roots are tremendously important in my life. And I know that even though you're supposed to separate church from school, you can't really in me, because I hope I'm a whole individual, and I hope I'm not schizoid, that I'm not a split personality.
I'm not ashamed to tell my class that I'm a preacher as well as a teacher. You'll be interested to know, just today, in my mail—I haven't had a chance to read it, but I was so thrilled—I got two letters from former students. I read one of them thanking me so much for what I had done for her as a person in giving her confidence in herself. The other one was from a young man who had studied for the priesthood before I knew him, and then he came to my class, and just this fall he came into my office and he said, "I was just hoping you were here, 'cause I wanted to tell you, I've been born again." This is a Catholic young man, using words that he knows are meaningful to me. But more importantly, the experience that he had had, and he wanted to share with me, because he knew I cared. So you can't really separate them—religion and education.
MG: I think before I ask you the next question, maybe we should insert a couple of dates here in the transcription. The period of time in which you began to work with migrant laborers was in the early thirties, is that correct?
DW: Well, in the middle thirties. I was doing that when I was in college, and that means from '34 to '37.﻿9
MG: Okay. And then I wanted to ask you, or to put into the record, the date of your ordination, which was in 1970.
DW: That's right. June the seventh.
MG: June the seventh. And to ask you where your mother received her theological degree.
QW: At the Evangel Theological Seminary, which was located in Jersey City, New Jersey.
MG: Now let me ask you, Dr. Wolfe, did you consider being a wife and a mother a career?
QW: Yes and no, it's funny. I'm one of these long-view planners. I made my plans early in life, and always everybody used to laugh at me. In fact, one of m; favorite people, ray physician, my family doctor, still teases me about it—maybe you read that letter in that book I gave you. Dr. Polk says he remembers when he first knew me, when I was three years old, I was talking about going to college. He always thought it was so funny, here was this little girl talking about going to college But I had long-view plans, and I said, before I was twenty, I wanted to have my master's degree. Then when I got twenty, I said, by the time I'm thirty, I wanted to do this in this order: I want to get married, my M.R.S., get my Ph.D. or its equivalent, and then get my M.A.M.A., Mama Because I had found that I had watched when I was getting my master's— I got my master's the year after I got my bachelor's—I saw a lot of older people having a lot of trouble studying, and for me it was so much fun and so easy, because I was right in this mood, and used to it.
I felt that it would be to my advantage to get my doctorate as early as possible. My brother had studied for his doctorate, and I had watched the precision and the dedication and the commitment that is required when one is getting a doctorate. So I had had that in mind. But I also knew that as a black woman, I'd better get a husband first, or I never, never may get one, if I got my doctorate first. That was a practical consideration, because I do think that marriage and a family is the most natural aspect in life possible. I think this is what God created us to do.
I met my husband, H. Roy Partridge, Sr., at Tuskegee Institute where I was teaching. He was in two departments. When I met him, he was more highly educated than I, which I thought was important, because he had a master's from Cornell in agriculture economics, and he had spent some time studying for his doctorate. He went to the Cornell University Hotel School, at the request of Dr. Patterson who was president of Tuskegee Institute at the time. President Patterson wanted to start a new program in commercial dietetics, so he asked Roy to change his field. So even though he was working on his doctorate in agricultural economics, he changed around to hotel management. So when I met him, he was involved in hotel management, or what we call commercial dietetics at Tuskegee, and also agricultural economics. So we married. Then you﻿10
DW: (cont.) know, that awful thing, World War II, came about, and he was determined, even though he didn't have to go to that war, because he was in 3A, and he might have been excused because of the nature of the responsibilities at the college, he elected to go into service. So while he was fighting for America's democracy abroad, I went back to school on a General Education Board fellowship to get my doctorate. So while he was gone, I had gotten my doctorate while he was in the service. And when he came back, then I said, "All right honey, let's get busy and have this family." And we did.
MG: I think that you've really told us maybe indirectly what you feel is the
purpose of work, but maybe it would be of value to ask you again, directly. What do you feel is the purpose of work?
DW: Well, work is my life. It's the fulfillment of whatever abilities I
have. It gives me the opportunity to really apply this philosophy that I espoused of service to humankind, as well as development of my own abilities. I think whenever you serve, you always get even more than you give. And of course, it makes my livelihood. Even when I was married, it required the salaries of both of us to maintain the kind of living, standard of living, the opportunities for travel that we felt were necessary for people who had the interests and concerns we had. So working for me is not just a job. I always feel sorry for people who do not know the joy of labor. To me, I do. I love to teach, I love to preach, I love to do all these things that I'm doing. And I think that's the way you should approach your work. And sometimes I...
There was one point, I must admit, that I did not want to work. I really wanted to stop working very badly when I was getting ready to have my son. I really wanted to have a maternity leave, and I really wanted to enjoy my "lump of gold." Two things kept me from doing that, and that bothered me very much. I still regret that—I'll never get over it, I guess. But first, I was director of graduate studies at Tuskegee Institute, and at the time we started graduate studies, I was the only teacher with a doctorate. The dean had a doctorate, and the president had a doctorate— we were the only earned doctorates on that campus. I had twenty-two master's theses under my jurisdiction and responsibility at the time when I was delivering my son. So I had a meeting on one thesis the day before he was born, and another one in my hospital room the day after. So the college begged me not to take leave, because they needed my professional services, and I asked my husband about taking it, and he said, "What did you get your education for?" And I answered what I think is a very important answer, and I would still say it's true, "I got my education so I'll be a better mother." And I hope my education has made a difference in the kind of son I've been able to rear. I think I might have been able to do a few more things with him if I'd been able to be home with him. I'm very sorry that I wasn't able to do that. I tried to do the next best thing of making the best use of my time that I did have with him, and I am happy that he has done very well.
Have you tried to measure your career against some standard of achievement, and if so, what would that standard be?﻿11
My standards always have to be a measurement of the teacher whom I admire most as the greatest kind of teacher and professor. And so, what do you do? You think of the people you know in your own, my own experience, and there are some teachers whom I think are great teachers; one whom I admire and emulate was my teacher when I was twelve years old here in Cranford High. She was my algebra teacher, and the reason I admire her so is, she didn't fence me in. So many teachers I had had, instead of encouraging me to move as fast and as quickly and as completely and as independently as I could, always held me back with the rest of the class. Miss Estabrook was not that kind of teacher. She said to me, "Deborah, go as fast as you want to go, and just come to me when you need help." I love her to this day, because of that. I think that's an attribute that I try to emulate when I'm teaching.
I emulate my brother tremendously as a teacher. I emulate him in many, many of his attributes. Unfortunately, my brother died when he was so young—he didn't get to live as long as I wished—but even my short opportunity to watch him as a teacher, gave me to know that, first of all, he was so knowledgeable. A really great teacher must have information. You cannot teach what you do not know. And that information must not be just limited to your own particular area of expertise, but related areas, so that you can make the kind of relationships that are necessary for your learners. I got that from David. David had such a joie de vivre, and that was just so catching when you came into his presence. I know, and I feel very much this joy of life, this sense of self-worth, this joy of humankind is catching. It becomes a motivating force for any learner. And since motivation is the sine qua non of learning, it's important that my role as a motivator be incorporated into my teaching skills.
When I was in graduate—I guess undergraduate—I had some teachers that I admired that have affected my life and my goals and models in terms of this perfection standard that I have in mind. One woman was my geography teacher, Miss Ella Huntting. Miss Huntting was hated by most of the kids in college. It's amazing. And I loved her. But I guess I loved Miss Huntting, again, not only because I felt she was so knowledgeable—she really knew her subject—but because of her sternness and yet, her kindness. She was firm, but kind. To me that's one of the basic attributes of a good disciplinarian. And nobody needs to kid you—on all levels, one has to set limits and clearly define the operational goals of behavior. Miss Huntting, I felt, did that exceedingly well. But she, at the same time, encouraged you to grow. And she had personal interest in her students, even though on the surface she looked like a gruff old lady. But I'll never forget, one day, when I was in her room after everybody else had gone, she said, "Deborah, how are you getting along?" Because she knew I had five jobs at one time—when I was a sophomore in college I worked every minute I could. I was on the teams, but in between I was working in the cafeteria, was secretary for one of the teachers, I tutored, I taught piano lessons, I did everything I could. And she reached in her bosom—I can just see her this moment reaching in her bosom—and took out ten dollars and gave it to me. She knew I needed shoes, but she didn't want to embarrass me in front of anybody. But I didn't even know she had noticed. How could I forget anybody like this? This is a person who's firm, but kind—another attribute.﻿12
(cont.) Another teacher of mine that helped me to set my standards was a great educator whose name everybody knows, Dr. William Chandler Bagley. Most people know him because they think of him as the "great essentialist" in education. He was the opposite of John Dewey and William Heard Kilpatrick. I had both William Heard Kilpatrick and William Chandler Bagley at the same time when I was getting my master's degree at Columbia University—I was one of the youngest, if not the youngest, in my classes I was nineteen when I went to Columbia. And Dr. Bagley, whose philosophy I could not accept in terms of return to essentialism and basics, but whom again I admired tremendously because he looked at people not in terms of their color, their age, their sex, or any other superficial factor. He respected each student as an individual. And what made me really know may be illustrated by this example. It happened that one of my former teachers, my psychology teacher in undergraduate school was a student of his, getting her doctorate at the same time I was getting my master's, we were both in the outer office waiting to see him. I thought, of course, that he would take her before he would take me, since she was older than I, wiser than I, more experienced than I. He didn't see us in those lights at all. He said, "Come in, Miss Cannon." I was Miss Cannon—I hadn't married then. And that did something for me and my self-awareness and my self-confidence, my self-image, that was tremendously important. I know now how important it is that, as I work with people, to look at them not in terms of any other superficial factor but as a human being. And so my motto somehow has become, "A person is a person, no matter how small." And I got that feeling from Dr. Bagley. So that those are kind of my models, in terms of education.
There are a lot of other people—oh, I can't name all the people that have influenced me. There are too many to name. I ought to name a few more because they have helped me. When I went to Tuskegee, it was my first experience in working in an all-black situation and, like you, it was a new one for me. So I had to learn a great deal about differences in expectations, differences in background, of training, that many of my students might have. And so I had to turn to people like Miss Rebecca Davis, Mr. William Clark, Dr. Frederick Patterson, whom I admired most of all, because he gave me a chance when I was so young. But these are the kinds of people that gave me an understanding of the special kinds of techniques that are necessary if you are to work with culturally and educationally and economically disadvantaged individuals. I appreciate that tremendously. It also made me realize that, even though there's some specific differences, the likenesses of these young people to every other person are more numerous than their differences are. And some of the brightest minds I've ever had an opportunity to teach are those young people who've come from the backwoods of Alabama and Mississippi, Georgia, Texas, where you'd think they would be least likely to have intellectual acuity.
And one of my favorite students—favorite not because I had a pet, don't misunderstand me, but because he was so bright and I enjoyed watching the unfoldment of his mind—a young boy named Roosevelt Bell, who lived with his great-grandmother. He didn't know where his mother or his grandmother were, but his great-grandmother had taken him in. Roosevelt walked ten﻿13
(ccmt.) miles each way to get to Prairie Farms School—"from can't to can't"—got up when you can't see in the morning, and he couldn't see when he got back home. But that boy, all I had to do was to give him just enough stimulation and a bit of information, and off to the races he would go. And nothing made me so happy as to see him grow. Just a few years ago, when I went back to speak in Birmingham, Alabama, my telephone rang in my hotel room, and he said, "This is Roosevelt." I said, "Not my Roosevelt." I hadn't seen this young man in so long. Not only had he finished high school, gone to Morehouse College and finished in three years, but gotten a master's degree at University of Alabama and was director of the social work division of the medical school at University of Alabama a boy who, if you had known him when I had known him as a young lad of ten years old, in the backwoods... He slept on mattresses made of corn shucks. They ate whatever they could find. I spent a night in his home—I spent a night with every child I taught. I don't think you can teach people unless you know 'em. You don't know people unless you live with them and you get a feeling for what is important to them. So I say, all of these different people, both my students, my colleagues, and my teachers taught me a great deal.
My mother who, when I was born, was the principal of Rice's Memorial School in New Brunswick, New Jersey, was the master teacher. And in this house, in this room, I learned to study. I emulated my mother's ability as a teacher, because not only did she have the patience, but she also had provided the resources that were necessary for growing. I can't thank Mama enough for all she did for me. You know, in our house, our allowance was related to how well we spoke the English language. And in our kitchen, the names of the three children appeared, and every time we made a mistake in English, that check mark went against our names. This was very important and relevant—English is not something you just study in school. English is the method of communication in our society, and therefore, we recognized that what we did in school and what we did at home were related. And I hope that in my teaching I emulate this model as well. So that what we learn has an application. I see this happen to me all the time. I'm thinking about an assignment that I just gave my student teachers—I require them to write their philosophy of education, and then I use it as a means of evaluating their teaching. Because I think that what they say, what they believe, ought to bear some resemblance to what they actually do, and I guess my students are doing the same thing to me.
Dr. Wolfe, tell us a little bit now about your current projects.
Okay, I'd love to tell you. I hardly know where to start. I'll start with the Graduate Record Examination [GRE], mainly because I think they're so important and relevant to the future of our black students in higher education. The only reason I accepted that responsibility as a member of the Graduate Record Examination Writing Team is because I have for so many years complained about the cultural bias of those tests. I believe and felt, as most people have to admit,﻿14
(cont.) that they are standardized on middle class whites, with little reference to minorities, whether they be black, Puerto Rican, Indian, women, or any other kind of minority. But particularly because of the black students so often who have not in the past had the kind of opportunity for examinations, and since so many of the states depend upon accreditation and certification on the basis of one's success in the Graduate Record Examination, I thought it was exceedingly important that I take part in it, even though I find it one of the most difficult jobs that I've ever done. But I saw it as a really great opportunity to write most of my items on minorities, and, interestingly enough, , most of my items were accepted. You know, it's a very rigorous method we use for writing those tests. The team has to accept each item first, and you have to defend every question and support it with data. But when my learned colleagues, all of whom were men, took the examination, they flunked it. Then I had a chance to call attention to the fact that they were culturally deprived, even if they have been saying blacks have been culturally deprived, when they have to take tests that are made up only about white past experiences, and so forth. I think you will notice as you examine the tests, not only GRE's but the SAT's, the National Teachers Exam, and all the rest of them that I've been working on, I think you must notice that there has been a change in the nature of those examinations, and if there's just been a slight change, I feel that my labor has not been in vain.
I'm currently and continuing serving on our New Jersey State Board of Higher Education, and I put it high on the priority, because I am the only member of the board that has been on both the state 3oard of Higher Education, and the state Board of Education, which has responsibility for elementary through secondary, and as well as being on the Board of Higher Education. For I was on the board when we had a single board in New Jersey, and we had responsibility for all education—as I say, from the womb to the tomb. Twelve years ago when we divided the board by law, after a great deal of plodding by the higher education community, I told the governor I would move to the Board of Higher Education because at that time we needed, I thought, a black person, a black lawyer, on our state Board of Education. Our state Board of Education in New Jersey sits as most boards do, as a board of appeals for the local boards of education when they have difficulty with local citizens in their community and they have not been resolved on that level; then their next level of appeal is the state Board of Education before it goes to the formal courts.
More and more of our cases were in the field of desegregation, discrimination, so forth. Since our constitution which created the Board of Education also indicated quite clearly that we can only have one member from any county in the state, and I examined where the black lawyers were located in my state, I found they came from the same counties where we already had representatives such as mine—Union, Essex, Bergen, you know, Monmouth. These are the most densely populated counties in our state. So I recommended somebody from my county to take my place on the Board of Education, and I moved to the state Board of Higher Education, since I thought that we had so much to do in higher education in New Jersey.﻿15
DW: (cont.) Theoretically and philosophically, I do not agree with having two boards. I liked it better with a single board, because I believe very firmly that education is a continuous experience. We should not have artificial breaks. But being practical, I also know that we weren't able to do all that we should have done, because there was too much to be done if you had the responsibility for all the elementary schools, all the secondary schools, and all the colleges and universities. So I think that it has been a wise move that we separated. We, unlike any other state in the United States, have jurisdiction not only over the public institutions of higher learning, but we have some responsibilities and some very important relationships to the independent colleges and universities. So that it gives me the full sweep of opportunity to work with all higher education in our state, including our community colleges, our state colleges, our state university, our state college of medicine and dentistry, our state institute of technology, as well as the twenty-some independent colleges that .are in our state. I worked on the first master plan for higher education in New Jersey, and it's been interesting to see how we've been able to implement it; and now, after a ten-year period, we're doing another one. I again serve on that committee so that we can evaluate what we have done as we move forward and make new plans.
I also serve on the academic committee of our board, and since I'm the only academician on the board, I think that that is tremendously important. I know my colleagues in the profession are glad that I am on the board, even though I remember when I originally started, i.e., when I originally became a member of the state Board of Education, some people had the audacity to raise the question about my being on the board because I was an educator. But you see, the board of education in my definition is a citizen board of education, and since I'm third-generation New Jersey, and we have been paying taxes for a long time in this state, I fought for my right as a citizen to be a member of that board. I was really amazed when I was questioned by the chairman of the judiciary committee when I went onto that board, because he raised the question as to the legality of my residence, and I [laughs] said I doubted if anybody in this room can say what I say. "I live in the house in which I was born. My son graduated from the high school from which I graduated, and my sister and brother before me. My mother graduated from New Brunswick High School in 1901. My grandfather..." When I said my grandfather, he said, "Oh, never mind." Because I know that I have a long heritage here in this state.
Who do you think sparked his assertion?
Oh, I think the reason was, at that time when I went on the board, I was education chief of the Congress, and I was working in Washington, but as I told him, anybody that had any sense did not give up their legal residence when they worked in Washington. And at that time anyway, my son was going to school here in Cranford. This was my legal residence, I hadn't changed it, and people who work in Washington don't have to change their... Because I was working as a citizen of the United Stat es as education chief for the Congress. And I came home every﻿16
(cont.) weekend to see about my family. So I said I was here more often than the congressmen were here, and much more often than the senators. So I think I cleared my way very much.
Another activity that takes a great deal of my time and much of my interest is the United Nations. For the last ten years I have been a nongovernmental representative of the United Nations. You see, I would like to think of myself as a citizen of the world. I told you I teach this course in "School and Community," and I require them to do a community survey, and they always ask me to define community. I said, "Well, your community, i.e., the definition of community, is as big or as small as you are." And I like to think of myself not only being a citizen of Cranford, of the state of New Jersey, or the United States of America, but I like to think of myself as a citizen of the worM, and I have been very much involved. At first I represented for a number of years Church Women United which, you see, is the other part of anyhow; and then I represented the International Movement for Fraternal Union of all Races and People. I'm glad to have this international group to represent because it gives me consultative status to the United Nations. When they have U.N. conferences, world conferences, I have the right to speak, even though I am not a governmental representative, because I represent an organization which is worldwide, which in its membership is also worldwide in terms of the scope of races, creeds, color, et cetera.
So when we went to the International Women's Conference in Mexico City, I attended both the official conference of regular delegates to the United Nations, as well as the forum on which I served as a member of the committee for planning of that forum, and conducted one of the seminars. And it gives me that kind of freedom of movement. I have been very glad that I have been able to make the contact with the official delegates to the United Nations, and have worked with the secretary of the staff on many projects. Currently, I am chairman of the African Affairs Committee for all NGG's, all nongovernmental representatives. I have served as conference chairperson for two years; I have been the rapporteur for the NGO communities, and member of the executive committee. I find this one of the most challenging, exciting experiences in my life. The only thing I regret is, I don't have more time to build deeper and more lasting relationships. But I do feel that I have a speaking acquaintance with the program of the United Nations, its aspirations, goals. We have weekly briefings as to the United States' position in relation to issues, and I have weekly briefings at the U.N., as well as opportunity to attend all the meetings of committees, as well as General Assembly, and all of the other aspects of the United Nations.
It is my dear and sincere hope that I can revitalize America's interest in this very important agency, the only one we have in the world. It has a number of weaknesses, there is no doubt, but we don't have any substitute where all the nations of the world can dialogue. To me this is significantly important. I'm very worried about America's particular stand at this time, and their lack of willingness to﻿17
(cont.) support the program of the United Nations to the fullest extent. But I shall do all I can, and I'm down at the State Department a great deal in Washington working with those people who have responsibility for certain kinds of activities in relation to the United Nations. I work with the Congress in order to get them to pass the appropriations that are necessary for America's contributions to this, as well as working with...using it as a teaching device everything's got to be used as a teaching device for me—since I think part of the reason why we have the present attitude we have is because people don't really understand the United Nations' program, its functions, and their relationships to it. I think you know, we're currently involved in planning for the mid-decade conference for women, which is going to be in Copenhagen next summer. I plan to be there for that meeting, as I have been in other U.N. meetings. I attended the Habitat Conference which was held in Canada a few years ago; the one on environment, which was held in Scandinavia, in Denmark—no, not Denmark, it was Sweden. And we were down in Rumania for the one on food, and so forth. So that that is a whole area of great interest to me.
I'm the immediate past president of the National Alliance of Black School Educators, and as I've said, I continue my interest in that; I'm currently serving on that executive board and the chairman of the executive committee; and on the advisory committee for a project that we inaugurated during my administration, a project, again, which^ fascinates me; more than that, it's an indication of what I consider one of the major purposes of the National Alliance is to be: that is, our project around the traditionally predominantly—or I should say maybe, historically predominantly—black colleges, which as you know are having great difficulty in surviving at this time. We have a project which is addressing its attention to helping them to develop skills so that they can corral a diversified student population, and build the kind of faculties that attract people of various kinds, and help them in terms of "grantsmanship" [laughs], which has become a whole new area of educational expertise. You see, I have deep roots in the black colleges, since that's where I got my beginning as a college professor.
I wonder to this day whether I would have been at Queens College if I hadn't been at Tuskegee first. I'm not sure indeed at the time when I went to Queens in 1950—1 was the first black at Queens—that I would have gotten the job if I hadn't had a college experience before I went. So I still feel indebted to Tuskegee and the black colleges, which have made the opportunities available for many young blacks getting ahead in the professions. When I was the education chief, we wrote Title III of the Higher Education Act. I had in mind the traditionally predominantly black colleges, because I knew their economic stresses and strains. But of course, we cannot write a title for any public federal legislation that addresses attention to one segment of the population. So you know that title is called "Strengthening Smaller Colleges," and we have been able through Title III to help many colleges, white and black, throughout the United States. But at this time and point, unfortunately, black colleges seem to be getting the smaller﻿18
(cont.) end of the stick; each year they get less and less. So the National Alliance of Black School Educators is trying to rectify that through many different ways through this special project that is calling me to action.
Another area that I'm interested in and currently involved in is the whole black theology movement. But my major emphasis is on the black clergywoman who is becoming more numerous; still a very small group, but increasingly numerous, thank goodness, and visible. I feel, though, we could do even more if we were organized; I've had the opportunity to work with the students at Garrett Theological Seminary, which is the seminary connected with Northwestern University where they have a Department of Black Theology. And I was very interested to note how many women were a part of that group. The Interdenominational Center in Atlanta and our other major black theological center at Howard University are enrolling moare black women than they ever had before, as well as the traditionally white institutions, such as Union Theological Seminary, Yale Theological Seminary, and Harvard, and all the rest of them. So I hope that we can give strength to each other through some kind of unity of purpose and goals, and that will be my big thrust as I move forward.
I have been interested and active in my educational fraternity, as an organization, since I was nineteen. I already mentioned the man who inspired me so much, Dr. Bagley, who initiated me into Kappa Delta Pi, which is the first and oldest honor society in education. I was initiated at Columbia University in Kappa chapter, but I have been responsible for organizing our chapter at Queens College and serving as the counselor there, as well as being on the national board in several different capacities: as chairman of resolutions, as chairman of ritual, as member of the editorial staff of our journal, and many other positions. I mention this because Kappa Delta Pi on our campus has been the leader in the celebration of the International Year of Child. Last spring we had a big celebration of three thousand people, and we're having another one here in December. But I see the Kappa Delta Pi as a means through which and by which I can encourage students who show unusual ability and great promise an opportunity for more leadership, not on a campuswide level, but on a regional and statewide and national level. And so I see Kappa Delta Pi not only for my own enrichment, which it must be, but also for what it can do for the students with whom I work, and their opportunity to become broader. I also see it for pulling people together again on the basis of a common cause and purpose, without regard to race or creed or color, and it has been one of the best organizations for doing just that, achieving that goal. And I work through it in order to get more blacks involved on all levels, as well as other groups of people. At present I am secretary of the Educational Foundation.
I work also on another society in education—itfs really a service organization, Delta Kappa Gamma—and serve as the chairman of its World Fellowship committee. I like that, again, because as you can see, it fits nicely in with my U.N. activities. We have World Fellows﻿19
(cont.) from, now, twenty-six nations that we're supporting in universities in the United States currently; and it gives me an opportunity to help these people as they come to America not only to know our country better, and to become adjusted to the ways of living in our country, but simultaneously to open the vistas of understanding to the members of Delta Kappa Gamma as they have opportunity to interact with people from all over the world who are scholars.
I serve also as chairman of the Educational Foundation of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority. For eleven years I was the Grand Basileus of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, and it was at the close of my administration that we set up our foundation separate and apart from the organization itself, so that we, again a predominantly black women's organization, could feel some responsibility for helping other people attain their educational goals. This is a very challenging opportunity, for we give our fellowship not only to black women, but to men and women, because I believe so much in affirmative action, and I don't feel that I could ever be a party to nonaffirmative action behavior, and therefore our awards are advertised. That is unusual in some ways, because I'm also a member of the American Association of University Women, and we have gone to court to be sure that we don't have to give our fellowships and scholarships to men. So Zeta has taken a different stand, primarily because I feel that since we are predominantly black, we have experienced segregation and discrimination, and we do not want to apply it to anybody else.
And then finally, I guess, my continued work with the African Study Abroad program with the City University of New York, in which I am involved. I started that program some ten years ago as the first university in America that had such a program. I teach a course in black Africa, which is required before they can go and study abroad, because I have found more and more that cultural shock of both black and white Americans can be tremendous unless they are ready for the experience of living abroad. And I have been working with many^ universities in Africa, and many countries including Senegal, Sierra Leone, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Ghana, Nigeria in West Africa, and the three major countries in East Africa--I used to work in Uganda before we were expelled at Makere University College, and at the university in Nairobi, Kenya, and at the university in Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. So I see that as a growing and continuing interest not only for our students at the City University—because, interestingly enough, I also have taken other groups such as the American Association of University Women and the National Alliance of Black School Educators and the Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, and other groups of interested citizens for study trips abroad in Africa. I hope to continue to maintain that relationship and to grow in my understanding there.
Dr. Wolfe, you received your early formal education through high school in Cranford public schools. After high school, you studied at New Jersey State Teachers College in Jersey City, where you received a B.S. degree in education in 1937. You received an M.A. degree from Columbia University's Teachers College in 1938, and in 1945 you received your Ph.D.﻿20
MG: (cont.) also in education, from Columbia. In addition to this, you
have studied at Vassar College, at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, at the Union Theological Seminary, at the University of Pennsylvania, and elsewhere at the postdoctoral level. How would you characterize the value of your formal education?
DW: Well, I tell you, it has been very, very important to me, because it tends to systematize your educational experience. I told you, I had such a great opportunity in informal education here at home, but it never could take the place of the kind of formal experiences that the public schools have provided. I'm a great believer in public education, so I'm very happy that my elementary and secondary education took place in a public school, and I'm lucky indeed to have gone to a school such as we have in Cranford. We have traditionally had very good schools— this is an old community, it's an old suburban community where people value education, where a high percentage of the students who go to school here and graduate from high school go to college, so that it's that kind of community. I was glad that I had an opportunity to go with people of all kinds of races and creeds and color because it gave me an opportunity to know people of different backgrounds. In fact, just this morning, when I went to the post office, I saw one of my classmates — that's the advantage of living here in my home town, you know, you keep on seeing people you grew up with and who went to school with you, and we compare notes about our children and so forth. But it's that kind of community; and the kind of fellowships and friendships you make in school can be lasting ones.
My college career was important to me because it gave me my direction for my profession. I regret though, something very much was lacking in my college. There was not a single black man at my college. If I had to do it again, I wish I had gone to a college where there was more diversity. And especially there should have been more blacks, men and women—we were only five black women there. I think at that time in your life, you do need to have opportunity to know people, know young men.
This was at State Teachers College?
New Jersey... Yes. And so, that was one of the weaknesses, so I could not have what I call a comprehensive life at Jersey City State. But that is a societal problem almost, rather than a school problem, at this point.
My graduate work, I had a wonderful teacher, a wonderful person who was my major professor during my master's program, who did so much to help me and encourage me—I wonder why I didn't mention her before—Miss Mabel Carney. It was awfully unusual for a girl growing up as I did, in the suburbs of New York City, to get a master's degree in rural education, but I told you why I got interested, because of my work with migrants. But it was Miss Carney who made it possible for me to get my job at Tuskegee, because she recommended me to that job. I never would have had the audacity at twenty years old to write to Dr. Patterson﻿21
(cont.) and ask for a job at Tuskegee Institute. X just would know he wouldn't accept anybody of my age. But she was the one that introduced me to Tuskegee and to Dr. Patterson, and then pushed for me to get it. So that my formal education there was directed, and she gave close concern and supervision of my early years as the college person at Tuskegee, and in our growing development of the rural education department at Tuskegee Institute. And so I...in a lot of the ways, I feel I would have never been able to do what I did at Tuskegee if I hadn't had the formal kind of training and continued relationship there.
Well, I think a doctorate always helps anybody in terms of just clarifying their thinking. That's the main thing a doctorate does. It gives you a chance to spend a more concentrated period on an idea that has been germinating in your mind for a long time. And I did my doctorate on a study that was related to my work at Tuskegee, and to the work in higher education generally, but teacher education in particular. So that I, when I went to get my doctorate, I wasn't like a lot of people floundering as to what I was going to do, what was going to be my topic. My problem was just getting my course work done and all my examinations done, because I knew what I wanted to write. Once I got through all those hurdles, I could just get down to it and... That was a joy, a real joy, to be writing something that you really felt was going to have some meaning to you as you went back to work, and as you helped other people in the world, working in the rural South and working in teacher education and in black colleges in particular, I thought that was very helpful.
The discipline of writing a dissertation is so important to you, it seems to me, because it's on the basis of this that I feel that your^ major contribution, after you get your advanced degrees, is the continual contribution that you make through your writing. I'm not as^disciplined right now—I'm spending too much time speaking. I realize I've had so much speaking. But I used to use every Monday for my writing day, and I want to get back to that. I know that the discipline I got through writing a dissertation which you have to defend, so it has to be logically written, it has to be clearly stated so that anybody picks it up can read it, and it's just a marvelous training for you to do the kind of professional writing that one must do the rest of your life. So I can't say enough about the importance of a doctorate.
I want to say that my major professor during my doctorate was just the right person for me, in that regard. Dr. Florence Stratemeyer was my major advisor, and why I say she was so important for me is because she was very thorough. She read every single word and was very critical, and we could analyze it. I am very grateful for that. I say that, I know, because my brother had another person whose name I will not call, who said to him, "Oh, David, just bring anything, and I'll accept anything you write." But that is not what you need. You need the thoroughgoing evaluation and analysis.
I had another person on my committee that had that same attribute, and she came at it from another discipline, which was very good for me, because she was a psychologist—that's Ruth Strang—and she,too, had﻿(cont.) read it with a thoroughness and with a kind of interpretation which was helpful. I say that my whole committee, Dr. Ernest Osborne was the third member of the committee, and he had another great strength that helped me in this whole process of getting a doctorate because he was so human. The humanistic touch is so neccessary, you must have that touch in the struggles and the strains of the doctorate. So my formal education, yes, was very important and of course, as I told you earlier, even more so since I was young doing this. It gave me the opportunity... When you have your advanced degree, your peers will accept you on the basis of the demonstration of your competency, where they would be a bit more hesitant... You know, you're a young woman, and they look at you with a stance and with question as a young person. But if you've already demonstrated that you can jump all the hurdles—and in my case, hurdles that they had not even jumped—it gave me the kind of security I needed. So I think formal education is as it's supposed to be, a shortcut to experience. I know I might have been able to do all these things, but I would have taken a lot longer to do it. And then I did it by formalizing the experience with formal degrees.
Now, you've mentioned several teachers that were important to you, that influenced you from very early on. Through your college experience, are there any fellow students who stand out in your mind?
Oh, yes. I have to name... It's really starting backward, but... Well, you know her, too, Margaret Rowley. Margaret Nelson Rowley and I were getting our doctorates at the same time at Columbia. She's in history and I'm in education. We met each other because we lived in the same dormitory, Whittier Hall. I've never had a student that was as challenging to me and my intellect as Margaret. She was my sounding board as I was writing my dissertation, and it was good she came from a different discipline, because she could look at it with an objectivity that was very important, and so that she could see to what extent my ideas were clearly stated, because they had to be stated clearly for a person not in my field. But the constant dialogue and camaraderie that developed intellectually between us was very important. She influenced me a great deal, and shared with me so much the struggle that comes during this period in my development.
Earlier in my life, I have some other [fellow] students who were very important to me. Since I started with my graduate work, I'll go back now to my college level, and two or three who were my classmates or friends were important. One of them, Virginia Dickerson, is important to me because Virgie and I shared, took almost all the same curriculum throughout and had so many interests alike, as far as music and the arts, so she was my colleague in the arts, in singing and drama and the related areas. She sang for my wedding. Then I had some others that were more my colleagues in the athletic arena. One of the things that I discovered is that you made different sorts of friends according to the kind of activity in which you were engaged. I was the title holder of our tennis all through my college years, so of course, my partner in that honor, a very excellent and much better player than I, became very important to me, not only because she shared with me, but because she taught me the game and because we grew together. Then I think of﻿23
DW: (cont.) Felicetta Romano, one of my colleagues, who was my aspiring
partner, intellectually. I've always enjoyed intellectual pursuits and a good line that stimulates me and fascinates me. Felicetta Romano had the same kind of interests in study habits and willingness to go beyond the call of duty, you know, not just doing the minimum essentials in assignments, that made her close to me. Funny thing about Felicetta though, we don't have any contact with each other anymore, and that has worried me for a number of years. I have to mention one or two others that have maintained their relationship through the years, and that's Blodwen Trestle who was initiated with me into our honor society at Jersey City, and whom I see regularly whenever I am able to attend alumni affairs at the college, and who writes to me at Christmas, you know, all the kinds of things, the ways we keep up with each other over the years- I think this all very significant because one would think that because I went to a school that was predominantly white, that I would not have a lot of good friends who are nonblack. But my best - friends at college were all white, because they had interests like mine. I remember when I graduated, I was crying, and my sister said, "Why are you crying?" I said, "Because I'm leaving my best friends, and this has been one of the most important parts of my life." And I keep up with a number of my friends from Jersey City, likewise. Lois Alexander Gaillard went to college with me, and when I went to Tuskegee I helped her get a job there also. I was in her wedding and her son is my godchild. One of my friends from Jersey City was one of my maids when I became married, and in fact, I introduced her to the man who is now her husband, and we are very close friends, and her children call me "Aunt Debby." So, there have been some lasting relationships.
HG DW HG
What is her name?
Her name is Lorraine Upperman Butler.
I don't know if I got the name of your tennis player friend. Who was she?
DW: Betty Hoffman was my tennis partner. Even in high school, as I told
you, living here as I do in the town where I graduated from high school, it's not surprising that some of those friendships have maintained over the years.
One of those people is Margaret Haynes, who was in all my classes with me, who lives still here in Cranford, who, like me, has children and grandchildren. One of the reasons Margaret is so important to me, again, is her intellectual acuity. She is very bright, and we used to vie against each other, in terms of our activities.
The man I saw this morning, to whom I referred, Ira Dorian, was our mayor of our town later on in life, but when we both graduated from high school, he went to Princeton when I went to Jersey City,^and then he also went to law school, and he's practicing law here. He's president of our Cranford Historical Society, so our interest is maintained not only on a personal, but on a professional level and relationship. And they have been influential.﻿24
DW: (cont.) Some other friends, school friends, of course, and they are my friends at school and at church. The man who is now chairman of our deacon board, James Kelsey, was in school with me, was a close friend growing up, and now of course, he's very close to me since he's chairman of my deacon board. Another friend of that kind, that is both in church and school, Florrie Baldwin, whom I love very dearly and have known all these many years, and her sister Bernice Hudson Laurel. And I certainly could not talk about my early years and the influences without talking about the four Saunders sisters—Annabelle was the same age as me, and Louella was the same age as my sister; Etta was between Mary and me; and Charlotte was younger than I, but we were all very close, and continue to be. Two other families that have been close to my family, both at school and at home and church, and everywhere, are the Cox family, who are still here in Cranford, and live on High Street where my church is located. And Mrs. Durham and her family, who also live on High Street. She used to live around the corner on Woodlawn Avenue when I was a child, and she had children the same age as I, whom we went to school with. So there are just loads and loads of wonderful old friends here thait I have known over the years, who have influenced my life, eifcfoer in <church or in school or in the community activities. The most important friend in childhood and in my adult life is my cousin, Joseph Henry, now president of the Central Life Insurance Company in Tampa, Florida. There is only a seven-month difference in our ages and he grew up in this home with me. We did everything together. He is more like a brother than a cousin. His family and I are so close. All of my maternal cousins were very close to me and we are like one big happy family—the extended family of our African heritage. Do you want any more names than that?
MG: No, I think, though, that I want to ask you, even though I had it for later, would you say that over all, then, friendship has been very important in your life, and would you describe yourself more as a group person or as a loner?
W: This is an analysisi I don't Joiow what you're doing—doing an analysis. I'm a group person, there's no doubt about that; but I have to have self time, too. I find that because I am a group person, and because I do so many things—you notice all the organizations I belong to and take responsibility for, all the speaking that I do now, the teaching and everything-I find I have to have self time to restore my energies, both intellectual and physical. Because I give so fully when I m with groups that I wear myself out emotionally and intellectually. I _ notice it more as I get older than I used to. The reason I m having difficulty even in answering your question is, I never would have had a question all about this, never thought of myself as a loner. I ye begun to wonder if I am, since I am living alone now, and I really don t enjoy it. I haven't been able to overcome it. I'm not willing to just have anybody to live with me, and so that's why... And I, the older you get, the harder it is to find even a woman or a man that has enough interests in common with me so that I would be happy living with them. But that's a void in my life, very frankly. I thought I had it solved﻿25
(cont.) twice, but I don't. I don't think people would ever see me as a "loner" because I am a "people person" primarily.
Dr. Wolfe, you were born here in Cranford in December, December 22, 1916, just a few days before Christmas, the youngest child of three born to the Reverend David Wadsworth and Gertrude Moody Cannon—or rather, David Wadsworth Cannon and Gertrude Moody Cannon. I'd like to ask you something now about your parents. Let's start with your father. Where was your father born and when?
He was born in Concord, North Carolina. I'd have to figure out the year. I don't know the. year. I'll have to check that, I'm sorry. [It was April 8, 1878.]"'
All right.
He was a member of a family of fifteen children. He was the seventh of fifteen. His parents were born at the end of slavery, and as you noticed from my maiden name Cannon, we were related to the famous Cannon towel company—you know, Cannapolis, North Carolina—that s the group where my folks, my forebears gave their energies. So when I see a Cannon towel, I say it belongs to me, too. Papa was a most unusual man. I wish I had known my grandparents, because they must have been more unusual to have had this many children, and to be sure that all of them were educated. Because Papa, my father went to Biddle, which is now Johnson C. Smith, for high school, because at that .time there were no public high schools for black boys and girls, and he saw, that is, my grandfather saw to it, that all of his children...the boys went to Biddle, and the girls went to Barber Scotia. Theu Papa graduated from Biddle and went to Lincoln University, Pennsylvania, where he graduated in 1907. I think that, again, that is fascinating that he left home—because you know, Lincoln is one of our oldest and best institutions of higher learning. It is there that he became very interested in the ministry. Lincoln has always had a seminary, I think you know. Papa was a very great orator. One of the few things I inherited from Papa *ras his medal that he won for the speaking^contest when he was a sophomore at Lincoln, on June first, 1905. That s a prize possession of mine. I don't wear it often, but I wore it the day I stood where Papa stood, at Lincoln University, when they invited me to come speak at their chapel. I was so happy to h£.ve on that gold medal Papa had won many years previously. But he was known all over for his speaking ability.
He was a very big man, weighed 245 pounds when he graduated from college. He was a linesman on Lincoln's football team; was hurt many times during his days on football, and so much so that he never wanted my brother to play football. And of course, Papa came through college in the days before they had all of the padding and everything. It was all man. [laughter] He was left for dead a couple of times on the field. So he had a very rigorous experience, but he was a very good athlete, and a great singer.﻿26
(cont.) We all like to sing—I think you must know that, I've been talking about music indirectly so much. This house is one with music all over. All of us play, all of us sing, and we enjoy it so much, we used to give concerts together and so forth, and Papa was one of the performers. One of the few things I remember about Papa was his singing to me, taking me on his lap and singing to me, and I heard this great big voice, and I just imagine it when he sang in church. You could hear the church rock, almost. The fullness of his magnitude was greatly felt. He went from Lincoln to Princeton to study theology at the Princeton TheologicalSeminary. You notice that all of his study was at Presbyterian schools. He was a Presbyterian until he became a minister. I am so sorry I didn't get a chance to ask Papa why he became Baptist. I have a feeling—this is my own conjecture 'cause I have no way of knowing, and I never even got to ask. I never even thought to ask Mama. Of course, she passed. I have a feeling, knowing the Presbyterians, I know there are only sixty thousand Presbyterians right now. Did you realize that?
I know there are few.
So that I have a feeling that when he was ready for a church, there was no Presbyterian church for him to pastor. We've always had plenty of Baptists, since that's the most numerous churches among blacks, and that might have had something to do with it—I don't know, that's my idea. But anyway, his training was all with Presbyterian schools, and was very good training. He had such a great interest in education, and a determination that he was going to get the best education possible.
When Papa graduated, his first church was in Norwich, Connecticut, and that's where he took my mother on their honeymoon, and then he came from Norwich to New Jersey, first in Scotch Plains, which is a neighboring town to us here, and then here to Cranford, the First Baptist Church,^ Cranford. And he bought this house at that time because the church did not have a parsonage. But during his pastorate, he bought and paid for a parsonage for our church, so he said that no other minister would have to come into town and have to buy his own home. But you know, that was the greatest blessing in the world, because I'm glad I never lived in a parsonage, and I've always had my own home. You know, it s something different that you can say, "That's our house." It's hard enough to wear the people's hand-me-down clothes, as I did. Glad I didn t also have to live in their house, in a sort of way.
But they refer to Papa here as "the Episcopalian Baptist." I think the reason they did that was because he was highly intellectual and exceedingly gifted and articulate. But he also was not a fundamentalist theologically, having come from the kind of background that he had. He believed in a seven-day religion. Right here in this room, he brought people who did not know how to read and write, and Mama and Papa would sit them down, as we are sitting now, and teach them. When he told them to own their own homes, and they didn't know how to get a mortgage, he d bring them here and teach them whatever needed to be known, and how do﻿27
DW: (cont.) you get a mortgage, how do you get money to buy a house,
what do you need to know and what do you need to do. Our church was the center of social life. I learned all I know about dramatics right at First Baptist, because up at Cranford High, all they wanted me to be was the maid. I'm not a good maid type. But I could be any part in the plays at First Baptist. My mother and father, particularly my mother, trained us in public speaking and dramatics. But our church program was a seven-day program. We went on hikes up here in the mountains, and we did all kinds of activities including tennis and skating. We had a bus that belonged to the church that took us on trips. But it was a seven-day experience. It was really so wonderful, right on this table, you know, we had some more leaves that can extend this, and this was the first pingpong table in Cranford. [laughs] I mean that. The kids would come after prayer meeting on Wednesday night. Everybody at our church goes to prayer meeting for we believe it is as important as Sunday morning service for us. And so after prayer meeting, we'd come over to the Cannons to play pingpong, have games and refreshments. On Sunday afternoons, there was the same kind of thing. But that's the kind of religion that I was taught, a religion that was applicable to life. Some of the people are more fundamentalist, were critical of him because of his attitudes and my mother's beliefs. But I am very grateful, because they had that kind of outlook.
MG: What was your father's motivation in leaving the South?
DW: To get his education. And I think the reason he didn't go back is
because of where he got his jobs. He went back once. My father was a first lieutenant and chaplain in World War I. That was quite unusual, too, you know. World War I, we didn't have many black officers, but because of the nature of his education, he was commissioned. He ^ volunteered to be chaplain, that's when he left Cranford. See, that s why I keep saying to you, "I know him very well." But Papa served m the army and therefore had a new and different kind of outlook also on life.
MG: Did you ever get to see either one of your paternal grandparents?
DW: Oh, yes.
What were their names?
DW: Oh, my paternal. You said paternal? Oh, no, I didn't. My grandmother, my father's mother, came here once when I was two years old. I 11 have to get the Bible out to give you her name. Her name was Sarah Cannon, born 1856. My grandfather was John Cannon, born 1853. Both were born in North Carolina near Concord.
MG: Let's move now to your mother. Where was she born, when, and tell me something about her.
She was a great woman. She has influenced my life so immensely, nobody﻿28
DW: (cont.) will ever really understand it. She was born in New
Brunswick, New Jersey, December 14, 1884; 273 Delavan Street. The house is still there, and she was the oldest of ten children. And when I go to 273 Delavan Street, it brings great memories to me because my grandmother, Mrs. Lucy Paige Moody, was a great, great woman. My mother, as I said, was the oldest of ten children, and they're quite close together, i.e., born quite close together, and her father died when she was only sixteen years old. So she had much responsibility as the pldest child.
MG: What was her father's name?
DW: Jordan Moody. And he was the first black contractor in the state of
New Jersey. Every time I go over the railroad there in New Brunswick, I think of Grandpa, because he was the one that elevated that railroad, and it was on that railroad that he lost his life. And my uncle, who is the only one now living, Reverend Robert A. Moody, was only a baby when my grandfather was killed. But my grandmother reared her children, six of whom reached maturity, all of whom made very fine lives as adults. She never remarried because she didn't want anybody to hurt or be unkind to her children. Grandmother lived in New Brunswick until her later years, when she wasn't able to take care of the house and everything by herself, and she shared part time with my mother and part time with my uncle, whom I've already mentioned who lives in Hartford, Connecticut.
So Mother, from the very beginning, knew the hardships of labor because she had responsibilities as the oldest in the family, but she also had a great determination for education. You see, as I said, my grandfather was a very forward looking man in those times—this was before the turn of the century. He died in 1900. So you see, I'm talking about life in the nineteenth century, and for a man who was born at the end of slavery and whose own parents were slave. This was really something, it seems to me, to come to New Brunswick, New Jersey, and get a business started, and to do these kinds of things.
MG: Where was Grandfather Moody from?
Dw: He was born in Mecklenburg County, Virginia. That's Red Oak, Virginia. He, too, was one of many children. So Maria had great enthusiasm for education. My grandmother shared this desire for her children. My mother graduated from New Brunswick High School in 1901. She was the first black child to graduate New Brunswick High School. She then went to business college in New York. She wanted to go to college, but she had to get kinds of skills to go to work, so she had to delay her full college experience. But she typed and knew shorthand, and in fact, she later opened a business school here and taught other people these skills. This again, when you think about 1900, that's really unusual. She used to commute from New Brunswick to New York. I remember Mama talking about the subways when we were celebrating the 75th anniversary of the subways. I recalled that Mama was one of the first riders on﻿29
DW: (cont.) those subways. She used to commute from New Brunswick, New Jersey, over to New York, where she went to school, and that's where she later worked. She worked in an orphanage. She used to tell me about these different places that she worked as secretary and receptionist, and she did a number of other things. She became very interested in social work, and became a social worker in the days before you had to have a master's degree in social work. You know, she was one of the best known persons in social work here in New Jersey. And it was through her work with migratory laborers that I learned about migrants.
She also was not only a devout Christian, as you know, but also a devout temperance leader. She was one of the founders of the Women s Christian Temperance Union, and how many times I remember as a child, working with the Loyal Temperance Legion. Mama was director of alcohol education for the state of New Jersey, and went into all of the schools to give her demonstrations. Everybody used to laugh at Mama when she showed her demonstrations, telling about what smoking will do to your lungs. I can see her having those experiments showing what nicotine does to you. And it's the same demonstrations they're using right now over TV. You've seen these demonstrations about why you shouldn t smoke, what smoking does, and why you shouldn't drink. She was ahead of her time. And she organized the children into the Loyal Temperance Legion, and we all took the pledge: "On my honor, I will promise not to buy, drink, sell or give alcoholic liquors while I live, from all tobacco I will abstain, and never take God's name in vain."
And you know, I meet people now when I go to speak who come up to me and say, "Your mother got me to sign that pledge." All over. Oh, it s a wonderful feeling, because you see, Mama has been dead for some time, and she had not been working on that for years. But people never will forget her because she went into every school in this state, and most of the churches and everywhere. She was so committed. It's just beautiful. I'm a White Ribboner, and she was proud to be a White^ Ribboner. She studied it scientifically, and gave the^answers scientifically, because she didn't believe in just giving, "Don't do it because I say so." She was a scholar.
Then she became a teacher; as I told you, when I was born, she was principal of Rice's Memorial School, which was a private school, primarily for orphans and children who had difficulty at home, located in New Brunswick, New Jersey. So she used to have to commute from Cranford to New Brunswick. I remember when I was in the first grade, she found it a little difficult, so the whole family moved over there for a while, that is, over to New Brunswick and lived with my grandmother for a little while to make it easier for Ma. However, Mama didn't like that, so we came back home. When you have your own home, it's always nice to be back in your own home. And then she, for a long time, she just did this visiting schools, so that meant that she could be home. Most of the time she'd only be gone one month a year—when she went to South Jersey, she'd go down and spend the whole month, so that she could go into the schools there and then she'd come home. And my aunt, my mother's sister, would take care of us while she was gone.﻿30
MG: What was your aunt's name?
DW: My aunt's name was Mrs. Olive Moody Henry. It was her son, Joseph Henry, about whom I spoke earlier.
MG: Well now, did your---Go ahead, I'm sorry.
DW: I was going to talk about Mama's life in the church. You see, Mama was just as active in the church as my father, if not more so, and early on became a great disciple of...Dwight Moody. She used to go to the Moody Institute up in Northfield, Massachusetts; as long as I can remember, every summer, Mother used to go to these Moody Institutes. She studied teacher-training programs for Christian education, and she conducted the teacher-training program for our church, because they believe very much that nobody should be teaching Sunday school or doing anything for which they were not prepared, and Mother was responsible for the training. She was director of Christian education, even though she did not have a title. But that's what she was doing. She organized the young people's programs, and I told you about the kind of wide variety of activities that she directed: speaking contests and dramatic clubs, et cetera. We even had a tennis court behind our church—that's where I learned to play tennis—and did all the recreational activities. We used to have full-dress receptions, we'd teach 'em how to get dressed up in long dresses and full-dress clothes, so that we'd know the social graces that would help make our way in the world, no matter where we went...
The more I think about that, the more I realize how wonderful that was, because many people would never have gotten, had a chance to get that kind of training, because very few people got to go to college. Most of the black colleges put a great deal of stress on the social graces, I think you know, especially in the early periods of the twentieth century. But we got a lot of that right at our church, because Mama thought that was all a part of the Christian educational activities and program. And she was a gem. She had tutoring services for children and youth who needed help in the school, and that sort of thing. So she was way, way ahead of her time. And as I indicated, she studied theology at the Evangel Seminary, and she was so determined not to just do it halfway; that's why she took Greek and Hebrew and all these complex languages, which amazed me.
She loved travel, and my first trip to the Holy Land was a trip with my mother, my uncle, my sister, and I. We went to the World's Baptist Alliance when it met in London, 1955. My mother was then seventy years old, but we went almost all around the world, and my mother never got sick one minute. She was blessed with unusual physical stamina. That's the thing, she never was sick her whole life except for only one time, she had the flu—in my whole lifetime. She never had to be confined to the bed or anything until the last month of her life. We traveled all over the Holy Land, everywhere Jesus went, and it was just a thrill to see the Holy Land through my mother's eyes, 'cause she knew the Bible so well. And each place, when we were in Athens, and she went up to﻿31
DW: (cont.) Mars Hill, she could read it there in the Greek, "0, ye men
of Athens., who worship false gods," only she was reading it in Greek, you know. And it was just great. Here at seventy years old, a mind as alert as a twenty- or a thirty-year-old. And as we went into the garden of Gethsemane, my sister and I knelt and sang, "I come to the garden alone." Mama was there, you know, and as we traveled on the sea of Galilee, Mama could recall all the experiences of Jesus' life that took place around that setting between Capernaum and Tiberias. It was just the most wonderful experience to live the life of Jesus through my mother's knowledge of Him and His word. So she was a great influence to me in every way.
She was not only a walking concordance, but also the best speller I've ever known. I never had to use a dictionary, I'd just say, "Mama, how do you spell so-and-so?" You know, in her day, they had talked about the spelling bee, and Mama was the prize student that they used to send
around to represent the school for the spelling bees. She always kept that ability all of her life. Of course, with her secretarial skills, spelling is an important backup. But she never lost that. I told you about her great emphasis on English, and all these other things.
These books here are my parents' books. I'm going to take you across the hall where my books are located. I haven't thrown these out because I haven't had time to go through them, but some of them are very precious because some of them are first editions. But one of the things I'm planning to do now is have an evaluation of those encyclopedias. We've always had encyclopedias here. Mama thought that you couldn t study if you didn't have the materials to study with. We always had plenty of books, and even if we may not have bread, we'd have books because that was so important to my mother. So when she went back, she got her theology degree the year before I got my bachelor's degree. All three of us were going to school the same time—my sister, my mother, and I—and it was great. It was a sight, seeing us running for the train. We were running down to the train station, and Mama keeping pace with us, if sometimes ahead of us, getting the train to go to school. And it was a great joy to me to see Mama maintain that continual interest. Until the day she died, she was an avid reader, and we subscribed to all kinds of magazines, and she loved to talk—I mean, just conversationally as well as professionally. She's an excellent speaker.
As I told you, she was a generation too soon for the ministry, but she used to preach nonetheless. And she used to say, "I don't care what you call it, you call it a message or a talk, I don't care, but it's the same thing." I remember, I can hear Mama now, some of her texts— I've been meaning to tape some of her texts. "Launch out into the deep," was one of her favorite sermons that I remember her preaching. See, we had to take turns going with Mama on her speaking engagements, as we used to call it. She couldn't take all three of us. I had a sister and a brother, so one time it was David's time, then Mary's time, then my time—we all looked forward when it was our time to go with Mama to make her speeches.﻿32
DW: (cont.) Then she was president of the Baptist Women. When I was
born, she was president of the district, and I was only a month old when she took me to my first convention, so I've been convention going all my life. She took and put me on a pillow and laid me down while she presided over her meeting, and stopped to go nurse me when it was time to do it. But she didn't let anything get between her and her activities. So you see, when I talk about what I do, I get it very honestly from Mama and Papa, they were both so involved.
My father was one of the founders of the Middlesex District Convention, which my mother later became president of. And then she became first the secretary, recording secretary, and the corresponding secretary and vice-president, and then president of the state Baptist Women of New Jersey. She was an officer for fifty continuous years in the convention. And so, when you talk about New Jersey Baptist Women, my mother's name is synonymous with that, because she is a part of the growth of that great convention. For ten years during her administration, T served as the music director for the convention. But that was, again, not only because I liked music, but because Mama and I liked to do things together, and we believe in our family. Our motto is that a family sticks together, you know, and so we do. Mama then had these varied interests of religion and of education and social work.
But she was also a politician. Mama was one of those early women who fought for the amendment that we were talking about, to give women the right to vote. I remember her having little pamphlets. She had little pins that she gave out and everything. She was very much involved in that whole movement for women's suffrage. And later, she was very much a part of the Republican Party, and I remember when I was a little girl, she was going around getting votes for Kean and Edge—I didn't even know who Kean and Edge were very much, but hearing politics in my home was a normal kind of conversation. You see, the black church is more than a church. I think you know that. And it's the center of the total life of black community, and so our church has been a very vital and important source here in politics in this area, for a number of years, as most blacks in this area used to be Republican. And then we decided one year, we were not declaring ourselves. We were showing them the strength of the black vote. We're not a big group, but if you re united, you can be sought. So nobody voted on primary day, and we demanded from both parties certain things. That was one of the greatest strategies we ever used in Cranford.
MG: What time period was that?
That was in the thirties. Do you know, during the depression, when you needed that kind of mobility and so...
MG= That was also the time significant numbers of blacks turned to the Democratic Party.
DW: Democratic Party, that's right. And it was also, as a result of that, we got some of our first opportunity to get to teach and do some things﻿33
DW: (cont.) in Cranford. I wasn't even able to do much teaching in Cranford. I did my student teaching in Westfield and at the college in Jersey City. My sister had to do everything in Westfield also, because even though we'd been born and reared in this town, and I've said nice things about Cranford, but you see, it is always something when you come down to it, where we have to fight. But Mama was a fighter, and she was involved in the life of the community, and so many of the activities. And even though we don't like to think that, in those days, I think that we did have so few truly educated blacks, that there were certain ones that the whites could come to in terms of what...you know, who are the leaders among blacks.. And I have gotten to know my parents a great deal through some of the older citizens in town who knew my parents and respected them. And of course, I do so much. I think I'm a lucky girl.
MG: Apart from the period of time where your mother worked at Rice's Memorial, did she ever have any other income-producing employment outside the home?
DW: Yes, I told you, when she went into the school, she worked as the director of alcohol education. That gave her a modest income.
MG: That was a paid position?
DW: it wasn't a full-time job. It was a part-time job. I don't know how much Mama received. Sorry I don't know, but you know, comparable to the wages in those days.
MG: Where did your parents meet and when did they marry?
DW: My father, I told you, was a student at Princeton, and while he was there, he came to preach at Ebenezer Baptist Church in New Brunswick which my grandfather, Jordan Moody, and his brother, Clayburn Moody, and some other people started. And he met my mother at Ebenezer Baptist Church in New Brunswick, and after a courtship—evidently quite lengthy, a couple of years—they married June 30, 1909. Gee, that's seventy years ago, wasn't it? Isn't that something.
MG: Now I want to ask you some things about the home in which you grew up.
You've alluded to so many things already, but let me ask you this. What was the daily routine of life in your family?
DW: Well, that's an interesting question, 'cause we had a routine. You must have guessed it, didn't you? [laughs] Well, as you know, we all went to school, we had to get up and do our chores and get to school, because school was the first order of business. We all came home for lunch because we went to neighborhood schools, and even the high school is not that far that we couldn't get home for lunch. But supper was our main meal. That's our main family time, and I am so grateful. That was sharing time.. We never were in a hurry for supper. It took us two hours, that's dinner in which we shared what everybody had done during the day, and we shared ideas. I learned so much around the table. See, my brother was a good deal older than I am, he was in college when I was still in elementary school, and he'd come home, he'd tell all the﻿34
(cont.) things that he had learned at school, and I would sit there and just learn. It was just wonderful. They never made me leave the table, you know, like some people say, "You're too little," or, "You're too young to hear all this." David was a psychologist. Took all this abnormal psychology. I was so interested. It was so much fun to listen. And my sister's a great athlete and marvelous musician. Each of us has different talents.. My mother was very clever on this. When you have more than one child, so there won't be the kind of competition and jealousy of each other, she tried to emphasize what each of us could do for the family circle. And I'm very grateful... All of us play and all of us sing, but some of us are better than others. Mary's the best. She could sightread anything you could put in front of her. And then she was the best athlete, David was the smartest, and most verbal; could speak seven languages. Very, very bright.. Couldn't even take his IQ, 'cause every test, he answered every question. He was just amazing. So I think that's the reason he died so young. Too bright to live, you L::iow. And I was supposed to be the organizer, so that's my contribution. But in this house, dinner time, we just really enjoyed
our family and sharing ideas___I mean, ideas. Dinner time talk was
thought provoking. We never talked about people in this house. We think that's for the small mind. We are concerned about ideas.
Then we'd all adjourn to the living room, where I was almost tempted to do you today, but I knew you had work to do. We always had music following dinner. Then from seven to nine, there was not a sound in this house, because that was study hall time- Each of us had a place to study, not near each other; you get your materials for study, and that was study time. Mama would be available to answer our questions if we couldn't get it in an encyclopedia or in the books, or even recommend which books we needed and whatnot. When you say routine, it was truly that! It was so good for building up good study habits. And she really would be very helpful—she would not do your work for you, but she would help you in doing it. And of course, as David went on off to college, and Mary and I were here by ourselves, the routine continued. And it got me into very good habits. We always got out our clothes, what we were going to wear for tomorrow, the night before, so we'd have that ready, you know, so there would be no running around m the morning, "What am I going to wear to school this morning?" My mother was a great organizer and believed in discipline, not the rigid kind—we didn't have beatings like a lot of kids, we had punishments. I received a couple of beatings because at family time, dinner time, every night, we had femily prayer and devotions, and as children are wont to do, they might giggle. I'll never forget, my brother would always start it, and he knew I cannot laugh softly—I cannot laugh softly to ^ this day... I don't want anybody—when I'm supposed to be serious, don t make me smile or laugh because pretty soon, I burst out. Always would burst out, and that would be it. And then I'd hear Mama say, "Dear Lord, make my children more reverent." [laughs] It made me laugh harder—you know how children are. Then after she finished her praying, I had to go out to get a switch because that's what laughing for prayer demanded. That's the only time I remember getting a beating, when I did something like that.﻿35
MG: You always chose a little skinny light one? [laughter]
DW: No, if I did, she'd send me back for a more substantial one. But
she didn't have to do it too often because I soon learned. In fact, I only did that once to my son. I think sometimes, you know, I'm not against shock therapy—there's a time and a place for it—I really do. I think that a lot of parents are very afraid to discipline their kids. She never had trouble with us at church, no matter how long the service was, and I think children can learn to be disciplined. And so that, the fact that we had the fun of sharing and playing and all that before the studying, made it easier to study. We knew the reason for the study, and then... Not rewarded for grades for, I m sorry to say, we were expected to get good grades. In fact, the only thing I would be sorry about my mother is that she didn't^compliment us enough. I don't think...I don't remember her saying, "Oh, Deborah, I'm proud of vou. You did very well." In fact, when people would say,^ "Aren't you proud of your children?" She said, "No, I'm very grateful.
I think I've bent over backward the other way because I never got it, and maybe I do too much for my son, but I....and I hope I've found the golden mean, because I think there's legitimacy to some praise if your children do well. Because we did pretty well, you know? But she was just such a perfectionist, and she was such a good model herself. You know, you'd have to come through. And I am very, very grateful, and I would never have been able to rear my son if it hadn't been for my mother. I don't know what I'd have done without Mama, since my son, when I came back home, was so young, and I was working, and I...Mama was very influential in helping me with my son.
MG:
Now, you spoke of the roles that each of the children had within the family. Was there ever any variance in how your parents^perceived your role in the family and how you perceived it yourself?
DW: I don't know. I think my...the only possible difference m perception is that maybe my mother saw us as more unified than we actually were. I felt that my sister and brother were closer actually together xn spirit and activity, because they're closer together in age was one thing, so they had more in common. See, my sister's nearly five years older than I am, but my brother's only two years older than she, and so they were closer together all along, and I don't think I was even accepted, really. My mother thought she had her family, a boy and a girl, but here I came, so... I had to fend for myself a good deal and build up some friends. So I think that sometimes Mama didn t realize that Mary and I weren't as close as she perceived us to be. We have become much closer now, in our adulthood, than I feel we were actually in our childhood. Even though, the stick-to-it-iveness is very manifest, that my sister was the best fighter in the school, and everybody dared not touch me or they'd hear from her. She was always defending me, that kind of thing. She had a great sense of responsibility for her younger sister. But she often found herself caught up between my brother and me, both of whom are more aggressive than she in personality type.﻿36
MG: That's good. I wanted to get something about the relationship
between you and your siblings. Now, the eldest child was your brother who was named for your father?
DW: Yes.
MG: David Wadsworth Cannon, Jr. And as you mentioned, he had his Ph.D., he worked as a professor of psychology at Virginia State College...
DW: That's right.
MG: ...and he's no longer living. When did your brother die?
DW: Oh, he died on December 14, 1938. The date is so important, because it was my mother's birthday.. What an awful birthday present! And at Christmastime, to boot! So that was a very, very sad Christmas for us. He had not been ill, he had cerebral hemorrhage and died in a matter of three days, you know; before I even knew he was ill, he was dead. So it was a very shocking experience for us. But before you leave, I m going to give you a book of his poems. It was originally published in hardback, called Black Labor Chant, and I think this is particularly significant because, remember, this book was originally published before 1938. Now, most people weren't liking to call themselves black in the 1930s.
MG: Indeed not.
But in our family, as you see, we have not been afraid of it. David's book, Black Labor Chant, is named from the poem which he entitled by^ that same title, which he wrote for his first speaking choir at Virginia State College. It was an all-male choir, was marvelous. He revitalized verse speaking. Verse speaking is an old art form, but it had died down in America, and he developed a new kind of combination of all the art forms—not just poetry speaking, but it included drama, the music background, it had lighting effects, and so on. He took his group all over the United States. So the book was a book of poems that he had been writing over the years. It was published by the National Council of Religion in Higher Education, of which he was a member and a fellow. But that set was exhausted, so after my mother and father died, I decided to republish it, and in the book that I'm going to give you, which I have kept the same title, there is also a speech by my mother, which will give some idea of her ability. It's called "The Whence and the Wherefore of the Negro." It was delivered at the tricentenary of the coming of the black man to America—that' s 1919—and she delivered this speech. I think you'll be interested to see the level of her expertise in research work, and her whole presentation.
I also found when I was cleaning the cellar, three...some sermon outlines that my father preached, before I was born, over at the First Baptist Church, which I have also in there. So the book becomes a memorial to the three of them. But I took those sermon outlines that Papa delivered and developed sermons and preached them from the same pulpit. I don't﻿37
DW: (cont.) know what he said, but that's the wonderful thing about the Word. The text can always b.e._ ..and the outline can he used in any age. You know, the thing that makes a difference is the illustrations that you give.. I developed sermons around them, and preached them from the same pulpit that he preached them from.. So I think you'll get some appreciation for all of them through this book. David was an amazing young man because he went to teach in college when he was only twenty-two years old. Well, he went to college in Michigan, to Hillstiale College. It's a college where...very few blacks there. He went to college in 1927.
MG: When was he born?
DW: He was born April 18, 1910. And he did very, very well in school. He had a scholarship to Hillsdale. Hillsdale felt he was such a student that they recommended him as their candidate for the Rhodes scholarship. He did not get it, I'm sorry to say, but he did get a fellowship to the University of Michigan, where he got his master's degree in psychology, and went to teach at Virginia State when he was twenty-two. So at that time when he went to State, he was the youngest on the faculty—-1932. He was director of freshman orientation...oh, he just did all kinds of things. He got very involved in those short years he was there. Hard to believe it. Do you know, just last week—in fact, almost hardly a week passes—in your home town, in Seattle... Now, this is the thing. Remember I told you that plant was given to me by a family named Cox? Well, I said when I heard their name, "Oh, we have a Cox family in ^ Cranford." They were from Virginia. I said, "Where are you from?" He said, "I went to Virginia State." I said, "You went to Virginia State?" And lo and behold, we went on to talk, he knew my brother, and he went on and he just talked about David like he was alive now. You see, this is the thing, and hardly a week passes, no matter where I am, I don't meet somebody whose life he touched. And that to me, of course, is what eternal life is all about anyhow. And even though he lived only twenty-eight years, he's still living through all these different people whom he's touched in different ways.
MG DW MG DW MG DW MG
DW:
Well, tell me something about your sister Mary. She also had a Ph.D.
Yes. She's just last...two weeks ago, retired.
And her married name...,
...is McLean. Dr. Mary Cannon McLean.
When was she born?
She was born September 25...I'd rather not give the year.
Oh, sorry. She was born in the twentieth century, as your elder sister. Tell me something about her.
Mary is, was director of special education in the public schools of﻿38
(cont.) Springfield, Massachusetts, and she again was a pioneer in her field for... Now that you know public law—what is it—94-142, everybody knows about it as mainstreaming. But Mary was doing that long ago. She wrote a dissertation in 1948 to 1950 about this, and had been trying to sell the idea of helping children who are deviant be accepted in the mainstream of school life. She started as the kindergarten teacher, and then she became a special teacher, got her master's in special ed., and she just did marvelous things with children as a classroom teacher. At her retirement party, I just was so proud of her. The governor was there, the mayor was there declaring it Mary Cannon McLean Day because of her contribution. Many of her former students also were present singing her praises. Because when she became director of special education for the whole city system, they gave her an opportunity to help more young people, and also to help her colleagues to understand the philosophy of special education which ought to pervade the school system.
She has been a fellow of the Association of Exceptional Children, as they call them, and other organizations concerned with special education then a contributing member of those groups. She also has given a great deal of her time to the NAACP — that is her second major thrust. I m an active member of NAACP, but again in our family, we have also agreed that we won't be in the same general groups, [laughs] Even though, again, she's a member of my sorority, but she hasn't been as active in my sorority. She's been more active in NAACP, she's a vice-president of the New England region of NAACP, and of her local group, and chairman of life membership. In fact, she has been very good in getting life memberships. Everybody in our family is a life member of the NAACP, and I took out a life membership for my son through my sister, because she's just determined that everybody will be contributors to that very important organization.
Well, she's also been active in church, even though she is not a professional church person; she's a very active lay person in the church She now belongs to one of the oldest black churches in Springfield, Massachusetts, Saint John's Congregational Church. She helped to_ write the history of that church in its entirety, by that same title. She wrote two of the chapters of its early beginnings. She s always interested in that kind of search, search for roots. So she s the genealogist of our family, and she has been doing, over the years a kind of investigation of who we are, even as she did it for the church or whatever other groups that she belongs to.
As I indicated earlier, Mary is very musical, and luckily, my mother saw to it that she had piano lessons, harmony lessons, and all those kinds of lessons, early in life, and she was my piano teacher. In fact, all my music that I know, I owe to my sister—both vocal and piano. And we all sing as well as play. And Mary is also, as I told you, an excellent athlete. In her high school—even in elementary school—but in high school she was captain of the hockey team, the basketball team,﻿39
DW; (cont.) the track team, tennis—just every sport there is. She was excellent, just really an outstanding athlete in high school and in college. We all liked to roller skate, and we'd do those kinds of sports that are not organized sports. I believe in those very much. I think it's exceedingly important that you know how to have a good time, without having to have a team with you. I'm again happy that my mother was very good in helping, encouraging us to find leisure-time activities of this kind.. Mary has been particularly good in those whole areas. She has one son. Her husband is a chiropodist-podiatrist, and he is doing more surgical work in that area at the present time.
Now that she is retired, she will be a consultant in special education, and she couldn't come at a better time in the history of American education, because people all over the country are looking for people who will help them to meet the requirements of the federal legislation, to say nothing about the basic philosophy of utilization and development of each individual according to his or her best abilities. So I think Mary will do a very good job as a consultant because she has worked on all levels from kindergarten through high school, and having worked both as a teacher and as an administrator, I think she will be a great help to any school system or groups of people that might be interested. She has also served as guest lecturer at many colleges, so they, too, will be seeking her services in this regard. Somebody said yesterday, asking me about my family, Are we alike? I said, "We're alike and different." I think that's the way it should be. We have some common areas, of common concern—all of us, of course, coming up as we did as minister's children, vould be interested in religion; all of us are interested in education. Then there are certain different ways in which we express ourselves, and I think that that's all to the better.
MG: What's Dr. McLean's husband's first name?
Eldon G. McLean. And he was, he's from Trinidad. Port o' Spain, Trinidad, is his home.
MG: now, what were the patterns of association between your family and the larger community here in Cranford? Who did the Cannons socialize with especially? Where were they viewed in the...the sort of community?
[laughs] Social stratification.. Naughty girl! I feel that as preacher's children, we belonged to all the folks and that's one of the good advantages about being a "preacher's kid." That's really true. Everybody is your friend.
MG: But was that from your perception, or was it also from the outside?
Dw= No...well, I think it's yes and no, I should say. Because you're also the first family of the church, you have a...certain pressure as well as privileges. That is true, too. The minister and the minister's wife are the first family, and Mama would have certain kinds of responsibilities and associates. So that her associations were largely with other ministers and other ministers' wives. She was very active﻿40
(cont.) in the Ministers' Wives Association. We have an organization— there are regional ones, and then the state one, and the national—Mama was active on all levels. I didn't mention her relationship to the National Baptist, 'cause she was active all around. Large numbers of her friends, then, were among that group.
My sister and brother and I tended to have as our friends other college young people. I grew up in a time when not many people, not large numbers of people were going to college. When I was growing up as a youngster, the kids that went to school with me were my best friends, but I think there was that general feeling that I was Reverend Cannon's daughter. But then when I went on to college, they did not go to college by and large, and that's the saddest thing. Only one other girl my age, and my cousin, who was my age, and the one girl, there were only three of us were in college at the same time. Very few of them, I'm sorry to say, went to college. But I grew away from them a bit; even though I kept friendly with them, their interests were quite different from mine. Many of them got married earlier and just started having families quite early. And I'm afraid that even though I view myself very often as a person of the people, I think that very often there's a kind of respect for the additional educational experiences that I've had. It makes them less able and comfortable to feel like they are my associates in the fullest sense of the word. I think there was one factor that contributed even more to that. My minister, during my college and graduate years, was a very intellectual man. He received his doctorate from Drew University and had respect for education and cultural pursuits, made it as such a point in our church about calling me Doctor, which bothered me very much. I remember coming home, and he said, "Now don't call her Deborah. Call her Doctor. She worked hard to get this," and so forth. I didn't like it because I felt it separated me from the group. I have begun to understand a little bit more why he did it as I got older. I didn't understand it then. Some people are not wise enough to realize that there is a time and a place to be familiar—you understand what I mean—and I think that's what Dr. Allen was trying to say^ to them, that you ought to respect a person who has demonstrated certain perseverance. But it did something. I had to work very hard to keep them from being alienated, because up until that time, I think I had kept them spiritually close to me, and socially at certain times, at least, close to me.
Now that I am paatoring them, there's a mixed kind of feeling, and it's a great, it's a very interesting one, it seems to me, because many of the people in that church knew me when I was born. Some of the deacons were baptized by my father and knew when I was born. But they respect me as the minister now. But there's a dual kind of feeling, 'cause they say "Deborah," because they think of me as the youngest of the family, one that they knew growing up; but I have a very great feeling that they have great respect for me as their leader, nonetheless. So it's a kind of mixed bag.
I did an awful lot of entertaining in my home. I do a lot of cooking and inviting people to dinner—try to break down every hesitancy they might﻿41
DW: (cont.) have about the feeling—because I think that there is a need for feeling close enough to me so that they can confide in me. And yet I think there's... If I could find that golden mean where you could have some amount of respect, to know when I stand there in front of the altar over communion, this is not a frivolous time, and you know, it does make a difference. But I think there's such a warm and friendly feeling.
Just last night when I got back from my trip, I called to see about one of our former members who lives now in North Carolina who was ill, and I called his sister, and she said, "Don't forget, we love you." And that's the way, that's the feeling I get. Whether we are social buddies or not, I feel there's nobody in that church, in this community, whom I could not call on. When I went to vote this morning, a white woman, before I came in, she said, "You belong here." And then she said, "How do you..." Another lady said, "How do you know?" And the lady answered, "How do I know? I was just looking up her name; she's a Cannon." [laughs] So they've known me all my days. And that kind of thing, both white and black, I do feel there's a kind of mixed feeling, a very warm feeling, a sense of pride, because they feel they're a part of my achievement, too.
MG: How do you think your father would respond if her knew that you had been ordained formally into the ministry, and that you were a clergywoman in his church?
DW: Oh, I think he would be the happiest man in the world. I told you,
he was ahead of his time. Just think, when Papa went over to Princeton in 1907, how many black boys and girls were going to high school, let alone college or university? He was so far ahead, and he encouraged my mother in all the things that she did. But I have a feeling, just, my own feeling is that if he were alive he would be happy. Like I told you about how he encouraged people to own their homes all over Cranford so that we wouldn't have any forced segregation. All these things give me a feeling that Papa was a prophet as well as a priest. He would be one of the first to be supporting women in the ministry, because he would read the book as I do; it says "You're neither bond nor free, neither male nor female, all one in Christ Jesus." I believe that Papa would have read that that way, and encouraged his colleagues to follow suit.
MG: He was a liberated man. Oh, a liberated man.
MG: One last question about your parents. Your mother died in 1970, not so long ago. Your father died quite a bit earlier, in 1944?
DW: Forty-three.
MG: Forty-three. Now you were grown, you had married.﻿42
DW: That's right.
MG: What was. the impact, however, of his death upon the family?
DW: Not a great... Because by that time he had retired from the ministry, and all of us were grown and away from home. And Mama, because of the nature of her independence and her training, there wasn't as great an impact as it might had Mama been a more dependent kind of a mate. The loss of a father always—you know yourself—was never very pleasant, but there were no major shifts in behavior because, by that time. Mama was not working regularly either, and luckily they had their home, so there was none of the strain of, Where was I going to live, and who was going to take care of me? And Mama again is psychologically, let us say, a very, very strong woman, and she could make the kind.... Well, the fact that she had lost her son before she lost her husband, and that would have been, that was the hardest job. But even then, when David died at twenty-eight years old, I will always remember my mother saying, "For I know all things work together for good, to those who love the Lord." And because she was such a believer, and because her spiritual strength was strong, and if she could take David s death and ride the tide, she was able to take Papa's death when he was older, you know, and everything.
MG: Dr. Wolfe, to what extent were you aware of the local, national, and international political events as a young woman? Was there any event which had a significant effect on your intellectual development?
DW: Hmm. You bet. Of course, I was aware of it—I told you, I was in a family that was actively engaged in national and international activities, and having a brother who was a student leader in college and all, he had been very active, and told me about many experiences he'd had. But my biggest experience came when I was a senior in college, and I became a Lisle fellow. The Lisle fellowship is interdenominational, international, intercollegiate, interracial, the most worldwide kind of experience I had had directly. And it got its name from the place where it was held, in Lisle, New York. It was founded by Dr. and Mrs. DeWitt Baldwin, who had been missionaries to Burma. They came back and they felt that the only way we can have world peace is through world understanding, and the only way you understand people is to live with them and to work with them. And so they set up this fellowship, and it had young people from all over the world, and we came up to Lisle, New York—that's in the Finger Lakes area in New York—for a summer's program. We had classes in sociology and psychology, but the main thing that we did was, we had deputation teams, and we'd go out into communities and we'd do various things, different things in each community according to the nature of the community we were invited to. And we'd have to canvass our own abilities among ourselves, you know, and each week it was a different group.
And it made you become resourceful. But it made you do something else— you really forgot whether they were black or white, or Japanese or Chinese, because they were from all over. And you'd really realize﻿43
Ccont.) that you have to work together. And then as far as sleeping and living were concerned, my first roommate was a white girl from South Africa, and the first night she said to me, "You know, Deborah, I don't think we have anything in common. We're emotionally, physically, mentally different." I said to myself, "How am I going to get along sleeping in a room with a girl like this?" But they had deliberately put us there, because they knew she needed to have the experience of having contact with a black who was her peer. So I found out she liked music and poetry and so on, and I would just start saying some poetry like Countee Cullen's "Leaves," you know—nothing that had race, just beautiful poetry. She said, "Who wrote that?" Or, you know, Paul Laurence Dunbar's "Dawn," you know that beautiful poem? And she said, "Who wrote that?" And I said, "Oh, that's Paul Laurence Dunbar. He's a black man." Or, "That's Countee Cullen." Or Langston Hughes, or Arna Bontemps—you know, whoever it happened to be. She would respond, "I didn't know Negroes wrote poetry." So one day I would be playing the piano and she said,"Who wrote this?" I said, "Well, that's the 'Juba Dance,' by R. Nathaniel Dett--he's a black man." "Oh, I didn't know they could write this..." So I had to use the indirect approach with her.
And my second roommate was a white girl from Virginia who was an equally hard nut to crack. But by this kind of experience of living together, sharing together, we got to help each other. Now, for myself, I needed.. I hadn't had any direct contact with any Chinese or Japanese in my town— there was only one Japanese family, and they had a son who was older than I am, so I didn't have any Japanese children going to school with me; and there was one Chinese family, they didn't have any children. So I felt that I needed the experience of getting to know Orientals better, 'cause that was what I needed for my life. So Lisle provided the most rich experience for me, and it really led me to the thing that I said earlier about my feeling about being an international citizen, a citizen of the world. And I've kept up with...
You know, you would not believe this, but I'm still on that board of Lisle Fellowship. Because I felt that that was such an important experience in my life in helping me to see myself in the larger community And I keep up with a number of my fellow participants. For example, when I was in South America in 1967, I went to Chile. I had meant to write to my friend who had been a Lisler. I forgot to write to him to let him know I was coming, and I got into Santiago, and I thought, oh, it would be a matter of just looking up the name in the telephone book and calling him. His name is Ray Valenzuela, but little did I know that Ray Valenzuela is as common as John Smith in America, [laughs] there were so many... But anyway, to make the story short, I was lucky enough to find him. And it was so wonderful. All those years, we still kept up with each other, we knew each...you know, and felt like old friends. In fact, he had a special kind of relationship with me, because I always called him "the man that brought music back into our house." See, my brother died at Christmastime, and this was the first Christmas we hadn't sung around here. We were too sad to sing. And he came... A lot﻿44
DW: (cont.) of people forget to come to see you after the funeral, you know? There's always lots of people before, but you need people after when you're really trying to get yourself together. Ray was one of the ones that remembered to come. And that day he came to visit, he brought us a song—he got us singing again for the first time since David's death. And of course, he had a lovely tenor voice. We had a lot of fun. We still keep up with each other over all these years. Because the experiences we had that summer—one summer—it's hard to believe that one summer, the experiences that would be so deep. Because we were always analyzing—you see, you had the kind of group therapy that goes along with it, so you knew what you were doing and looking at, and so that helped it very much. It lasted my whole lifetime.
And along with that, you know, was the fact that my brother would bring people in from all over. My mother and father always liked people from all over, and my father thought, even though we have a
little CflUXCU.t he never thought about it being a little church, he'd think nobody was too good to come to First Baptist, and he'd always have those kinds of people. So I had a long-standing feeling about my international relations.
MG: Let me ask you some things now about your marriages and your son,
and some attitudes that your family, friends, and so on, may have had toward your career. You were married in 1938...
DW: No, '40.
MG: I'm sorry. In 1940 to Henry Roy Partridge, and you've told us about where you met him, what he did. How would you describe him, Mr. Partridge, as a person?
DW: Well, again, he was a man who was interested in intellectual pursuits as demonstrated by what he's done himself. He's quiet, perfectionist, and calm by nature. When he left Tuskegee, he became business manager of Florida A. and M. University, so he's a person who can assume responsibility of major magnitude. He retired from there, he went to the University of Minnesota. So he's able, oh, and he's imaginative. We had a business—we had the first bakery in Tuskegee, the Partridge Bakery. He wanted to go into business. I thought that since most of the women worked like I did, the bakery might be the best kind of thing to have, and it really was a very good idea, but he was determined if he was going to have it, that it was going to be first-class products. You know, we never used egg powder, we used real eggs, real milk. And it paid off because we did quite well, considering. But he designed the building himself. So here he is, a man who's not supposed to know architecture—that's not his field he studied in—and yet he's creative enough to build his own building and run his own business. I don't know what else to say about him, except that, a man who will never grow old. He looks just like he did in 1940.
MG: Now, your marriage to Mr. Partridge ended in 1950, and in 1959 you
married Estemore Alvis Wolfe. Could you say something about Mr. Wolfe?﻿45
DW: He was a teacher in the public schools of Detroit, and he was
secretary-treasurer of the Wright Mutual Insurance Company. I had met him when I was teaching at Tuskegee through his brother, who was one of my students. And so I casually knew him over a period of years. But he was a person that was very interested in organizations, and I would meet him at lots of meetings, various times, because he liked to travel a great deal. And then our acquaintance was relivened when he studied at Boston University under my friend whom I told you before, Dr. Rowley. And so he, like me, liked music very well; he sang in one of the finest choirs in Detroit, the Central Methodist Church Choir. So we found that we had a number of interests in common—our music, our religious activities, and professional activities of various kinds. He was always well groomed, and makes friends very easily, very gregarious, very opposite of Roy, my first husband, who was quieter and less socially oriented. Estemore liked company, much as I do, and we had a lot of company, did a lot of entertaining.
MG: You and Mr. Wolfe were divorced in 1966. When you refer to yourself
with your full and complete name and title, you use both your husbands' names as well as your maiden name. Why do you do that?
DW: Well, it's complicated. If I had my druthers, I would have just gone
back to Deborah Cannon. But by the time I had all of these other names, I had gotten to be known professionally. When I went to Tuskegee, I was a maiden, Deborah Cannon. I got married there, as I indicated, so the people at Tuskegee knew me for the longest period of time as Deborah Partridge. I started the graduate work at Tuskegee, I had been principal of the laboratory school, and my son was born at Tuskegee, and his name is Henry Roy Partridge, Jr. So that, from all of those reasons, Partridge is a very important name to me because it represents my relationship to my son as well as to my former husband. And in fact, I had quite a to-do about this, what I was going to do about my name.
When I was in Alabama, my official signature was D. Cannon Partridge, because I found, much to my disliking, that white people would never address you properly. They'd always call you by your given name. I was principal of this school that I told you about, Prairie Farms, and I learned it the hard way when a woman came into my office whom I had never seen and called me Deborah. Well, having been reared in Cranford, I had been principal, don't forget, of Lincoln School. And even though I was only nineteen years old, nobody ever came into Lincoln School without calling me Miss Cannon, because I was the principal. You'll recall, now we've changed a lot in the recent years, but at that period, there was a certain formality that went with the positions you held. It had nothing to do with what age you were. If I was able to be a principal, then I was deserving of all the respect that went with that office. That's the way we were. So I expected that, when I went to Alabama as principal of the laboratory school of Tuskegee Institute. When anybody came into my office as a principal, I expected to be addressed properly. I remember, when I told her my name was Miss Cannon, she was offended because...and she said something that I don't usually say, but I'll quote her, she said, "The damn nigger Yankee." And I﻿46
DW: (cont.) didn't realize how she felt because I hadn't had previous
experience. So I made up my mind that day, from thence forward, my official signature would be D. Cannon Partridge. And so I have kept Partridge in, because of those ten years that I was in Tuskegee, eight of those ten, I was a Partridge. And my professional development was largely under that name.
I received my doctorate when I was a Partridge. So that, that, too— that diploma reads "Partridge." So that's another reason for keeping it. But mainly for my son, and the reason I noticed it was so important for my son was, when the people in Tuskegee wanted to name the newest high school after me, they asked me, "What name should I use?" Well, I really wished I had said, "Deborah Cannon," because that's what I was when I went there. But by that time, I was Wolfe. Now, Mr. Wolfe did not want me to use Partridge in my name on the school because he said that was another man. So I obliged him and the school, as you notice, is called "Deborah Cannon Wolfe." But my son was very hurt, and he told me so; so when they decided to name a building after me at Trenton State College, that building is called "Deborah Partridge Wolfe." So I placated my son. So I decided that the easiest way, it doesn't make much difference. Some people know me then as Deborah. Very few people refer to me as Cannon, only the people who knew me a long time ago, 'cause I was quite young when I got married to Partridge—those people know me as either Deborah Partridge or Deborah Wolfe.
I didn't use the name Wolfe professionally when I first married Estemore, until I went to Washington as the education chief of Congress, and then I thought, well, since I'm taking a new job, I might as well use his name. And I did. So then, in Washington—if you read any of the materials that I wrote during my period, my most fertile period in legislation, it all has Wolfe on it—so I just thought that I had to stick with that. It's too late to change it now. It doesn't make any difference. I am the only Deborah Cannon Partridge Wolfe—no matter where I got those names or how I got them—that is my identity. It also tells the history of something about my life. And I have nothing to be regretful about. I have done nothing wrong. So I think it's a long name. I seldom use the whole name, but I don't want to give up Cannon, because that's who I really am. That's who made me and begat me, Mama and Papa. And then Partridge, as I say, was who I made, my son. And Wolfe, 'cause that's the last marriage.
MG: Now, your son was named for his father. He was born...
DW: April 23, 1947.
MG: Thank you, 1947. Tell me something about him.
DW: No, you're getting into dangerous territory! Ask a mother to tell about her son! He was born in Tuskegee, and I think that's good, too—right on the campus, at Tuskegee Institute Hospital. And as I told you, I didn't even have a maternity leave to have him. But he has brought me such joy, I could never tell you. He went to nursery school there. But﻿47
DW: (cont.) I believe very much—even though I'm very much an avid
believer in nursery school and early childhood education, and any other kind of education, 1 don't feel that children ought to be made to go to nursery school. So he had a quite fluid kind of schedule— if he didn't want to go, I didn't make him, because my feeling was that when he started kindergarten, he would have to go from then on. Luckily, I was able to have a live-in helper so that he didn't have to change personalities. I don't like a lot of baby sitters. I don't think it's fair to children to change personalities. So Lula Mae was there with us day and night, and it made it very helpful for him to become adjusted to one personality. My mother-in-law was with us most of the time, so that she too was another stable personality that was contantly present. Unfortunately, however, his father and I separated when he was only three, and I came back to New Jersey. But then my mother became the stable individual while I worked.
So Roy started school, kindergarten, in New Jersey, in Belmar, New Jersey— you see, my mother had remarried after my father's death, and Reverend Morris, my stepfather, was a minister in Belmar. You see, Mama had to have ministers—that's her central focal point—and I'm very grateful to Reverend Morris because he meant a great deal to me and to my mother. And also to my son, because he was the only grandfather Roy knew. And he was really a grandfather to him—he didn't have to be—there was no blood there, and that's what makes me appreciate him all the more. But he was so nice to Roy. I can see him—he was a great, big tall man— holding my little boy's hand and taking time with my son.
When my stepfather passed, we moved back to Cranford, and Roy continued his schooling in the very school I had gone to—Sherman School. And then they got a new school, and he was in fifth grade, and he was one of the few children that was on the podium to help dedicate the new school here. He was a member of the honor society, as I had been, and just like I had been, he was the only black one in it. Unfortunately, I don't know what I'm going to do with our young people and their determination to study hard. But he did well, and then he went to Oberlin, he was admitted to Oberlin College. In fact, he was accepted to all the colleges he applied to. He accepted Oberlin, and I think now he's very glad that he went to Oberlin. At points while he was there, I'm not sure he liked it altogether. But now, the way he talks about it, I think he's very glad because he got a very good foundation.
After Oberlin, he received a fellowship, he got a National Institute of Mental Health Fellowship, several fellowships for his graduate work, which he did at University of Michigan. He first got a master's degree in social work; then he got a master's in social psychology, and his doctorate is a double major in social psychology and social administration. During his period of graduate study, he taught at several colleges in order to supplement his fellowship money, including Siena Heights College, Adrian College, Marygrove College—all of them are private institutions in the state of Michigan. And then he became the director of -minority recruitment and development, and assistant admissions officer at Wayne State University, which he did three years until this fall, when he﻿48
DW: (cont.) became the assistant dean of students at Amherst College. So he has, in his short period of time, had quite an illustrious professional life.
I have not mentioned several of his community activities and pursuits because, as a part of his social work training, of course you know, he had internships and experiences in working with community agencies, et cetera. But he's also been active in professional groups and giving papers at many of the national groups. He was the chairman of, president of the black students' organization at University of Michigan in the School of Social Work, and also served as a counselor for the dean of students' office at the University of Michigan. In fact, one of the most fascinating activities and experiences he had was suicide intervention center, which he conducted. I couldn't believe my eyes and ears, how sensitively aware he was in terms of student needs who were in great serious emotional problems, and how he handled it so very effectively. So he's had a very, very wide...a good cross-section of experiences, both urban and suburban, large and small colleges.
While he was at Michigan, he got married to a young lady who also was having a similar kind of program, who now has received her master's in social work, and got another master's in political science, and her doctorate, too, is a double doctorate, and she's currently teaching at Cornell University. And to that union, I have my one and only grandson, Damani James Partridge, who now is six years old, second year in his violin training, [laughs] I couldn't believe it this summer when I visited to hear his concert, he showed me Ithaca College. He took me to his classes. First class was repertory class in one building and then, "Come on, Nana, to the second class," in another building, which was his individual lesson. Then we go to...showed me where we had lunch; then after lunch, we went to where he had his playing, where five hundred children had their small concerts every day. It was just amazing to see a little six-year older running around the campus with such expertness. But he's growing nicely, and I hope that he'll be happy as he pursues his life and follows in the footsteps of those who went before him.
MG: Now tell me, how did your husbands, how did your son feel about your professional, your public career?
DW: I'm not too sure. I think my first husband, I wasn't as involved,
completely involved in my public career during my life with Roy Partridge, Sr. At that point, the main things I was involved in was NAACP and the PTA. But I soon realized that my first line of responsibility was taking care of home and family.
MG: This was your determination or his?
DW: I think it was both. If I was going to live with him, this had better be my decision, and so I limited my out-of-school activities. Now, he couldn't say much about my school activities, because he knows that they were related to my job. But he never was against my participation﻿49
DW: (cont.) in those things that I chose to work in. But my greatest
expansion in terms of community activity took place, I believe, after my separation. During the period, however, I was president of the Alabama Parents and Teachers, which required a great deal of travel within the state, but I didn't require as much travel outside of the state and out of the country as my later pursuits tended to do. Now, my second husband was very different—he liked my participation, he gloried in my extra activities of all kinds, and whenever possible, tried to share in them. But he really got a great kick out of whatever it was that I was doing.
MG: And how about your son?
DW: I think my son has mixed feelings now, but now he knows it's my life, and I think when he was growing up, he never said it overtly, but I have a feeling that there were times that he wished I were home when I wasn't here. I noticed it particularly when I was working in Washington. I elected not to bring him down to Washington, because my job was of the nature where I worked around the clock around the year, and you never know when working on Capitol Hill, when you're going to get home at night, and when you're going to be able to do certain kinds of things, and I thought for his well-being, it would be better for him to stay in Cranford High School where I knew the teachers and they knew me, and where my mother was able to supervise him. Even though I called every night to check his homework over the phone, I know he wanted to come down to Washington with me. So he spent the summers with me, and he was the youngest clerk in the House of Representatives—I got him a job there. It was really a very good experience for him. And so he was working with me, and that helped a lot to bridge the gap and to ease the pain of my absence for such a long time. But I think that he might have been happier...
I used to take him wherever I possibly could take him, because for eleven years, I was grand basileus of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, which kept me all over the country, and everybody in Zeta knows Roy because I took him wherever I could, and I did that generally when I was speaking and everything else until he got to the age where he no longer wanted to be going with Mama. Now we are peers. I hope you notice that letter he wrote me, he signed it, "Your son and colleague." We're doing a number of things together. First of all, we've been on a number of programs— either I can be the presenter and he the moderator, or vice versa, or we do dialogues. And now we're setting up a consulting firm together. Our backgrounds and disciplines dovetail and complement each other, and my daughter-in-law brings another dimension, so that we're very excited about the possibilities. We were just talking about this last week. We've been thinking about the consulting firm over a period of time, but we're waiting now till he gets settled in his new job. But I think that this is going to be one of the greatest joys in my life, not only to have a son, but to have a colleague with whom and from whom I can get ideas. I think now that, because he has the maturity that he has, I think he's more willing for me to move freely. And of course, the only thing that he worries about is that I get involved, overly involved in so many﻿5Q
DW: (cont.) different things.
MG: Now you, in speaking about your son, explained how you were able to
resolve to a good measure some of the tensions that he may have felt between your public, your private life. As you were able to perceive any of these tensions with your husbands or within the family, how did you try to resolve them?
DW: I already explained that I limited my activities, in one case, so that... Another thing I always did with the both of them, I've done all the cooking and everything else like that. I have always thought that that kind of thing, taking care of the personal needs of my husband, is very important in maintaining a marriage. Being available for the activities that are important for him, because both of my husbands were professional people, and there were certain things that they would need me for. So that I would have to share... For example, Estemore was an insurance person. I didn't know much about insurance, so I started reading up about insurance, and attending the meetings with him, and entertaining his friends and that sort of thing. I think that helps to placate in a measure some of the problems. I don't think that my... real problems with either of my husbands had to do with this problem of social...my role in public or professional life. Only insofar as it might have been that I was being pushed to move forward and forward in terms of higher and higher opportunities, which sometimes did not include them.
MG: Dr. Wolfe, do you have any preference among the terms colored, Negro, and black?
DW: [laughs] Oh, I like to be called black. I grew up in the period, of course, that Negro was the accepted term, and I remember how I fought very hard to be sure my students always capitalized "n," especially since I teach at a white institution; they always seemed to forget that. I was glad when people were secure enough to call themselves black, because I always taught every black child I've ever taught Langston Hughes's "I am a Negro,/Black as the night is black,/Black as the depths of my Africa." And you know that, in my home, we've always had this picture of "The Negro," we call it, which again emphasizes it, and I just think black—and when you say white, which is...nobody's really any one of these colors. So this business of color is just a phony thing in the first place. Somebody was getting after me about trying...what terms I should use when I try and differentiate the different minorities, whether they should be called Hispanic or Latinos or native Americas or... I say, why don't you just call them white, red, yellow, brown and black? And any term you use is an artificial one, and the reason I like using black, though, it shows a kind of acceptance, and an ability to overcome that which they have tried to give us as negative. Just yesterday, one of my friends said something about "blacklisted" or "blackballed," something like that. I said, "Wait a minute, watch your English. Watch your language." I think that anything we can do to help them become sensitive of what has happened to black children because of the negative terms that have been used that relate to us, the better we will be in overcoming the sensitivities that many﻿51
DW: (cont.) feel, at my age and older, about using the term black. I
know that many of them say, "Not black, of course you're not black."
MG: That's not the point.
DW: That's not the point. And that's what I say. So that I think that,
as far as I'm concerned, I use black with great ease, I refer to myself in that way, and refer to people of my own ethnic origin in that way.
MG: What did your parents discuss with you regarding race when you were growing up?
DW: Oh, that has been one of the greatest strengths in my life. First of all, they were determined that we know who we are and what our background and heritage is, and so we always had all the books by and about blacks in Africa and the United States. We were concerned to know and document whatever we said about it. As I think I was telling you informally, when I first went to school, the children called me these ugly names, "Nigger, nigger, never die,/Black face and shiny eye,/ Crooked nose and crooked toes,/That's the way the nigger goes." That was my first real contact with the concept of black being anything but good. Because even though I had played all my life with white children, because I had no black neighbors... When my little friend, Carol Olafson, who lived two houses from me, looked at my hand and her hand, she said, "Oh, Deborah, your hand's different from me," Of course, my hand was different, but there was no value judgment, so it was not offensive. My sister's hand was different from mine. My mother's hand was different from mine. You know, we're all different colors. It had no emotional relationship at all. It was not until they start calling me these names that I began to reali ze that it was not something you were supposed to be.
So when I came home and talked to my parents about my experience at school, and you know how frightened you are the first day of school anyhow—four years old, going to kindergarten—my goodness, it's a traumatic experience. So it's no wonder at all that I was somewhat disturbed. But my father immediately, in his beautiful, smiling voice, said, "Oh, black is so honorable." You know, he never used the "black is beautiful" kind of thing, 'cause beauty in our family is only skin deep anyhow, and such a superficial kind of term. But he wanted us to know that, so what? So what? I'm black, and what difference does it make? I'm proud.
We have a great heritage. And I knew this because my parents began to teach me. We didn't used to get this information in school, going to white schools, as I did all my life. I may never have really learned all the Negro spirituals and their derivation, but I got to know them at home and at church and at Tuskegee. And not only the spirituals, because I think what's more important sometimes, too, is the original songs, written by black composers. Just as, "Juba Dance" by R. Nathaniel Dett and some of the others, really beautiful. We have all of our﻿52
DW: (cont.) poetry. Marian Anderson has eaten right here at this table. My father used to bring in all these great artists and so forth, so that I could identify with them. Mary McLeod Bethune was a friend of my mother's, and I remember myself when I was quite young, the last time I appeared on a program with her. Mrs. Bethune was in South Carolina for the Palmetto State Teachers Association—that's what the black association was called. And I will never forget how pleased I was to be sitting on the stage with this woman whom I'd been reared to revere. I remember how, when... Nannie Burroughs was a very good friend of my mother's. As you know, she must have been, since my mother was president of the Baptist Women and active in the National Baptist and you know, Nannie Burroughs was always associated with our convention, so she has been here in my home, and we've had such wonderful experiences. Charlotte Hawkins Brown was another friend of my mother. All of these women influenced me so greatly. If I were to make a list of black women who made me what I am today, the list would be legion. It's just beautiful. I feel so greatly privileged, to have had this kind of access to women like Dr. Zelma George, you know, who was another person whom...I'm glad she respected me, because I wrote the Economic Opportunity Act, and you know, she directed the Job Corps project we had in Cleveland. She was older than I, but I still felt like she was my peer, and this was the kind of thing that I had.
So my family all the way through, you know. We belonged to the NAACP and Urban League—all the black organizations are part of my life. Of course, we're in the black church, and the black church is the essence of black living, and the place where you get the leadership development. And, oh, people like the great black ministers—even though we have all of Charles Spurgeon's sermons, we also had every book that Benjamin Mays wrote, or Howard Thurman. These black theologians and metaphysicists have influenced my whole thought process in my life. And these great, great preachers my father used to have, and he'd sit around the table, and they'd talk and laugh, and have a grand discussion talking about the black theology. Young people talk about it like it's some new phenomenon—I am here to tell you, it happened to me a long time ago. And if you had any contact with it...
So you know it happened to you, too, that my parents readied me for the white world in which I was going to live. Both of them having come through white schools themselves, had been touched and bothered, but had stood stern and strong and tall in spite of it. So they were prepared to give us this kind of readiness. But you know what they also did, in order to do it, we learned what most black people have to learn— that you have to be twice as good to get as far. I think that's one reason why my mother was such a perfectionist and such a determiner that we do very well, so that we could compete on the open market. I know who I am, but also know the society of which I am a part. And Mama was realistic enough to say, "Honey, it's not going to be all roses, because you are a black girl. But don't forget, I'm right here to help you, and God is always close"—as she used to say, "closer than breathing." And that is the thing that has given me the support. 'Cause she also﻿53
DW: (cont.) did something else, and I think that it's very important about my feeling about race, I also had a missionary zeal to let other people know about us.
MG: That is, white people?
DW: White people. Because my feeling was, partially, that—I was naive enough to think that—part of their prejudice might stem from their ignorance. So that's another reason why I was very anxious to teach them.
MG: Let's go with that thought, because there seems to be, in so many blacks that we can know about, learn about—I've been thinking of DuBois and others—a kind of evolutionary process along this line, and an early assumption that racial problems in this country stem from ignorance, and that the way to overcome them is education. Did your thinking go beyond that point?
DW: I think that's only one step. I know better than that. You know, I
taught at N.Y.U. Human Relations Center for four years, and in Michigan. I've been all over, as a matter of fact. And you know that you can know a lot more than you do, unless...you don't really know it unless there's change in behavior, and behavior is more complicated than the thought processes. And so I believe you have to operate on many fronts simultaneously. I would think that education is one step. I think that direct contact and socialization is another. But I think that attitudinal change and behavior modification is very, very important. And then, I go another step. You know, I worked as a legislator, and I believe that you can legislate—I know you can change behavior by legislation. You may not change attitudes, but it may be the first step that makes the provision for you to change your attitudes because, if you provide the situation which is conducive for changing, then it makes it possible for these things to take place.
One of the laws that I helped to develop that I'm proudest about, of all the thirty-five laws that I herded through the Congress in setting up their hearings, and doing all the research, and doing all the writing of reports and everything else that has to be done, one of the ones that I am most proud of is my contribution to the Civil Rights Act. Many people may not recognize that three of those titles came from the Education and Labor Committee—Title IV, Title VI, and Title VII. Title IV is the title that created the Civil Rights Commission. When people said that they can't change their behavior, then we said, "We will set up a commission that will have the expertise to help you and show you how to go about it." Title VI withholds federal money if you do not comply. We have found that money talks in America. If you withhold federal funds, then they can learn. It's amazing how they can change outward manifestations, even if they haven't changed their attitude. And you do know that that is the law of the land, that it's all right; you don't get federal money, then, if you don't desegregate; if you show any discrimination in jobs, then funds can be withheld. And the Title VII is the Fair Employment Practices, which is set up for equal opportunity.﻿54
DW: (cont.) So that I feel those are significant. I believe we can
change attitudes by changing legislation by making laws which make you behave outwardly differently. And I have found, as we have seen, when you put people together, you do forget some of the superficial outward manifestations, and you provide an opportunity to get to know the person in a different light. So that I don't say that any one best strategy is the best.
Another thing that I was just talking about yesterday, with a group that I was working with, is that very often another technique that I use to overcome some of these problems is to work with coalitions. For example, I've been very active in the women's movement, and I know you have, and you know that if you close your eyes, you wouldn't know if you were in a women's group or a black group, because the same strategies of behavior that they're talking about for acceptance into the total stream of life were the ones that blacks have gone through. So black women and white women now are united because they're all women, and white women for the first time, many of whom were quite prejudiced about Negroes or blacks, begin to understand how it might have felt to be black when they begin to analyze how women are treated in our society. Now, women are not treated altogether as badly as we are, and you know that. But you know, some of the same behavior patterns exist in terms of the treatment of women.
For example, in my field of higher education, all one needs to do is look at the number of administrators. Who are the people that are promoted? White men first. Black men even are ahead of black women, and in some instances, ahead of white women—that is, because they're men. I did a study of the women in education, and it was clear that women meet discrimination. All you need to look, at the elementary school...a man stays a teacher in an elementary school shorter than women any day. All of them that are in elementary education, in a short period of time, become the principal or the assistant principal. That is not so with women, who may stay there, give their whole life to teaching first grade and second grade or third grade, even though they may have more of the attributes of real leadership in that. So I have been interested to see that I can utilize the strategies of coalition action to change the behavior and attitudes toward blacks, even as we work on changes of attitude toward women.
MG: Do you think that white women in the women's movement are more sensitive to the issues of racism than other whites?
DW: Now I do think so, because we have made them sensitive. They weren't at first. I don't think that that means that they've changed. All of them have not changed, but just last month, the State Department called us down to Washington to talk about the mid-decade meeting, and they knew they dare not plan a program without getting some consideration and realization of the diversity of the women in our society. But even after they did, even though the program was planned to give some opportunity for direct confrontation with it, all through the day,﻿55
DW: (cont.) throughout the discussion, the black women there were constantly reminding them. So I think that any woman who has worked in the women's movement at all has to have some sensitivity. Now the reason they may not, I'd say, is largely due to the fact that I've had difficulty getting as many black women into the women's movement as I would like. Many black women for years thought it was the white women's movement, and it was not something that affected them. We still don't have a wholesale commitment on the part of the black women to the women's movement, I don't believe. Because we're caught up in another problem, as you know, within our own subgroup, it seems to me, and some women especially, in their great desire to answer questions about the emasculation of the Negro male, are hesitant about being identified too closely with the women's movement, lest they lose their relationship with what we have been trying to develop of a closer interaction between all blacks, male and female. I notice that even more among younger black women than myself. Women my own age are not as caught up in the movement as they should be because they haven't kept pace with... pace as much as they should, and they're too preoccupied by the immediacies of their own problems. But I think that this is one of the hopes that we have of the women's movement and the derivations may be the side effects, so to speak.
MG: Well, I want to come back to ask you some more questions about women, but there were a few more things I wanted to cover on race. Now, as you were growing up, you were in close contact with whites in school and in the neighborhood, in the community. How did you regard them, and were you aware of how they regarded you?
DW: Well, yes, of course I was aware of how they regarded me, and I had mixed feelings. How did I regard them? I tried very hard to take everybody on face value, but there was always some hesitation on my part: Be careful lest I overexpose myself, for fear that they were not real. That became more the case as I got older. In my elementary school days, I don't remember very strong antiwhite feelings. My teachers were all white, and I had some doubts about some of them and their willingness to really understand me and to like me as a person. I'm glad to say, I had fewer of those in my elementary life than I did in my high school days, and so when I think back on elementary school, I only really remember two people whom I thought really disliked me just because I was black—two teachers. But at the same...as soon as I think of that, I think of two others that loved me very much. I don't know whether they liked me because I was black, or just liked me. But it helped me to overcome some of the feelings I had about those other two, if you understand what I mean—it kind of balanced off so I couldn't make a generalization. I just think of those two people I dislike and forget about...don't generalize on the basis of that completely.
But when I got to high school, as far as the teachers are concerned—I'm talking first about teachers, I'm not talking about my own peers—I felt more keenly that I had to fight harder because I was black, and I felt that so many of the teachers weren't even very interested in covering their dislike. I remember my Latin teacher with great displeasure﻿56
DW: (cont.) because he would do something like this: He would say, when
we were translating passages, and he called on me, said, "Oh no, that's too easy," and called on somebody else. Then he would say, "Oh, here's a good hard one—Miss Cannon." He would be overt. And some of my classmates were hurt for me because he was so overt in his behavior. And so I had several of those like that, whom I felt were very prejudiced, and they showed it very overtly.
On the college level, I had less overt manifestation. In fact, I had a happy college life in terms of my faculty. There may be one or two who didn't like me particularly, but I would just expect that generally. It's amazing, now that you've asked the question, I've never really worried about it very much. I am a student, and I love to study, and I think teachers tend to like those people who do like to study. And I think maybe that's part of the thing that I saw on a college level.
Now, in terms of my friendships with my own peers, again in my elementary school, I lived in a white neighborhood. You know, you play with your neighbors when you come out of school, and you tend to go to your neighborhood schools. So I had relatively good relationships, with the exception of a few families who were newcomers to America particularly, and lower-class whites. I had my biggest difficulty with those who were the most deprived themselves. And then, in high school, we tended to go with those who were studying the same things, and there tended to be the same kids in my class all the way through. I did not socialize with them outside of school as I got older. I recognized the difference as we went on and got older. In elementary school, I played with the kids after school, but as we got older, my whole social life was separate from those whom I went to school with, and I was sensitive about that. When we had a school party or dance, I took a black young man as my escort, and it never occurred to me, and never would I have thought to take anybody else. In fact, in those days, I don't believe in my elementary, secondary, or even in collegiate days, the white boys ever danced with me. So there was really separation as far as I'm concerned, from high school on, in terms of my relationship, even though I would say I had friends. I talked with the boys, and we had nice friendships. But there was nothing—never seriously considered in my high school days, dating a white boy or another nonblack person.
When I went to Lisle however, that's the changing point in my life, as I told you. I got interested in a Chinese boy and we were very good friends, and almost to the point of marrying at one time. I wondered and raised the question about what would happen to our children and how they would fit into the society, what problems they would have. I never did think that we would ever have any difficulty, the man and me, because we had so much in common in terms of our intellectual pursuits and our other interests. But that kind of thing is, when I look back over it, my friends were friends for a certain kind of activity, and then I had another group of friends for another kind of activity.
Even in my adult life, even though I have many white friends, and I've always had friends of all races and creed, I'm afraid that...I have felt﻿57
DW: (cont.) very keenly, there's a point where our relationship ends. I am sorry about that. I'm trying to get over it, and I must get over it, because I have a white daughter-in-law, and I had to come frontally to grips with this. I tried to discourage their marrying each other because of this, the problems that they might have and their children might have. But I'm very happy to think that, I really believe that my son's generation is a new generation, and much more emancipated than I was, and I'm hoping great things for them. I believe it can happen, and I'm gradually seeing some changes in my own feelings. My close relation and love of my daughter-in-law and her family have helped me a great deal. I am really becoming "color blind." I thought I was before, but now I know it.
MG: I want to ask you something about integration, what we're talking about now. Do you see any value in the preservation of any all-black institutions like churches, neighborhoods, schools, families, social organizations?
DW: Yes, I do. I'm not sure I've clarified all these aspects of this, but I know what the black churches meant to me, even though when I was in Detroit, I went to an integrated... supposedly integrated church. There was something that I missed, in terms of a lifestyle and certain behaviors that are significantly related to my own subgroup membership. I don't think that we have truly an integrated society, and I think you... we still can see, within each subgroup, some continual behavior patterns which are unique to that subgroup. It is not always easy to spell out what these are. It's partly a feeling tone, but it's more than that. It's a commonality of experiences we have shared that makes it easier for communication to take place. And so, even though I grew up in New Jersey, when I meet a black person from Missouri, California, Ohio, there are some commonalities that we share immediately that I miss in other groups, when they're integrated. It's hard for me to answer this, because I do preach a gospel of "one blood God made all to dwell on the face of the earth," and that's why I know I must get over any feelings that I might have, because it's not right that I should feel this way. But you don't do all things that are right.
In terms of the black college again, the black college has preserved for us some of that unique behavior pattern, lifestyles, cultural traits, whatever you want to call them. You see, when I went to Tuskegee, I learned and got a new appreciation of Negro spirituals as plantation melodies. Every time I sat in that chapel looking up at those stained-glass windows dedicated to the spirituals, I had to feel a sense of belonging, that is unique to me as a black woman. As I shared with those who had gone before me, including the founder of that institution, whom I think has been the most misunderstood and maligned educator—my next book is going to be about Booker Washington. I don't believe people have every really described as I see him, as I feel he was, having taught at the institution he founded. But I feel there are some real unique aspects to the black colleges that have provided opportunity that no other schools have.﻿58
DW: (cont.) As I see the educational opportunity programs in many of the institutions of higher learning right now, they are getting an experience that we got many years ago when we were teaching in black colleges, when students came in prepared for their experiences. And yet, we took what we had, and started with the learner where he or she was, and developed him so he could compete on the open market. I feel that that is a unique contribution that the black colleges have made. We have been the preservers of our heritage, and we have been the motivators for those who would never have had an opportunity had it not been for these schools. I think they therefore have developed unique skills that are important to be preserved, in their institutions, as they exist.
Many young people who are insecure as they come to a black college, leave there with a sense of self-worth they would never obtain in a college like the one I teach at. There is just not that kind of concern for them as individuals, and there's not that relationship to them and their past experience so that they can help them to move from where they are to where they're going. And I feel very strongly that, this of course, again, it provides an opportunity for real leadership of those who are highly educated. Pins, we can name blacks who are presidents of nonblack colleges. I said to you my son was a dean at Amherst, and as soon as I say it, the eyes are raised because there are not too many of them, and they're getting fewer rather than more. I feel we must keep our historically black colleges, they must be open to other people, because I again say, they can't be all black any more than I want white schools to be all white. When I'm using that term, "predominantly," I'm using it the same way we're saying predominantly white, and until such time as we are really going to be integrated in this society, really given our fair share on all levels, in all areas, we will need to keep some distinctively different institutions.
I think this attitude is necessary, not only in education. I have a life subscription to Ebony magazine. I wouldn't miss reading Ebony and Jet and Amsterdam News, Afro-American, Chicago Defender—these because we know that our society does not yet treat our news in the way it ought to. Even when you're talking to a mixed group. In fact, I go all over the country speaking for educational associations that are predominantly white, but because I am black, they will not handle the news in the same way, and you know this. And so I think, until such time as we can get full and fair treatment, I'm in favor of keeping these separate but equal.
MG: To what extent, Dr. Wolfe, has race, do you think, been a factor in shaping your life?
DW: Oh, it's been a very positive factor. Even though my opponents would use it as a negative factor, it has made me search myself and push myself so that I could excel. I've known I had to compete on the open market, and I have had to do it in spite of handicap. And what might﻿59
DW: (cont.) well have been a great setback, it turned out, I feel, to be a great asset. And in my later life, it's been even more so, since we have been able to legislate in terms of affirmative action, I think that it has made possible openings that may not have come. I do believe that, on the other hand, it has kept me from having some of the greatest joys I might have had. If I were freer to operate in this society, I might still be married, or I might have married differently.
I think that our society has been so mean, so hard on black men, that they do not have the sense of security that they need to have, and it makes it very hard for black men to have secure women as wives. One of the things that I was most concerned about as a mother was hoping that I could rear a son that's sufficiently secure that he's not threatened by a secure woman. Because in my generation, I do believe that so many of our black men were denied opportunities to the fullest extent of their abilities, and because their wives had to work, whether they wanted to or not, and therefore they could not, in the American sense, be the full head of household. We have suffered. I blame that on racism, because when black men have not been paid as well, they have not been given the opportunity for education and the kind of job promotions, and development in the fields as they should be, and this has had repercussions not only on the men, but all the people whom they touch—their lovers, their wives, their families completely. So racism in America has had a yes-or-no effect upon me. It has made me more resourceful, but at the same time, it has caused me to become very aggressive. I've had to always be on guard, lest I would be denied, and I feel that that is an unfair treatment of the individual.
MG: What in your opinion is women's work?
DW: [laughs] There's no such thing. What do you mean, women's work? That
sounds like an old-fashioned lady to me. Well, I think if you're going... I mean, I don't know what you mean, because...
MG: No, I want to know what your definition...
DW: My definition is, women's work is anything that she can do and wants to do, and is able to do. In terms of the home, I think that we used to have women who were responsible for jobs in the house, the men responsible for jobs outside the house. If you're going to work outside of the house, if you were going to have to make a living, I think that marriage is a joint responsibility, and whoever is the best cook ought to cook, and whoever's the best cleaner ought to clean, and if you're going to share, share and share alike according to the agreements and abilities that you have. I just really cannot accept the concept of women's work or men's work. I do think there's certain things that our physical bodies will not allow us to do, and from that standpoint, that's the only hesitation that I have, or limitation I would give. For example, we don't tend to be as strong as men, so there are certain things I would ask a man to help me do. But it's because of the physical strength rather than the concept that this is a man's work because it may be that I... For example, "Help me bring the ladder from the cellar"—I used to﻿60
DW: (cont.) bring it all by myself, now I don't bring the big ladder up all by myself any more, but I'll get on up there, and I papered that bathroom—I didn't finish it yet—but I can do anything, I figure, that any man can do if I have the skills. And some women can do it, and it just thrills me to see how, when a youngster is devoid of this concept that certain things are men and certain things are women, they don't know they're not supposed to do, and I am in favor of that kind of concept.
MG: What's your opinion of the term "Ms."?
DW: I like it. I like it very much. Well, men have always had the right to not identify whether they're married or not. You say "Mister," you don't know whether he's married or single. Why do we have to be exposing whether we're married or single or not? I love Ms. That's what I use for everybody, and I hope they like it. Some women, I understand, don't like it at all, and if they don't like it, I'll respect their wishes and use Mrs. or Miss if they want to. But I prefer Ms., and I think it's a more equalizing term than any other one that we have.
MG: Now, we've already talked earlier in discussing race about certain
aspects of the women's movement. How, in your opinion, is the women's movement relevant or irrelevant to black people and black women in particular?
DW: Oh, good. I have a whole paper I wrote on that. Because, as I've said before, I've had more difficulty in getting black women involved in the movement. They feel that it's not their movement. They very often refer to it as a white middle-class movement. I feel that any time that you deal with the generalizing freedom and making it possible for all, you're helping everybody, without regard for race, sex, or any other factor. And I therefore believe that the women's movement ought to be as important to black women as it is to white women. I feel further that it's one of the most unifying opportunities. I see black women and white women who've never had any interaction before recognizing the commonalities that they share. And as they build these kinds of bridges, if we can build bridges among the women, then it would be easier to build it over the whole society. I think that women ought to recognize, that is, black women ought to recognize that, even though most of us say it quite glibly, our founding fathers did not include us, black men or women, or white women, in those freedoms, certain inalienable rights, and I think that we ought to be quite explicit, that we are now included. In the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendment, these were for black men, but not black women—we were still not included. And I feel that black women have a share, a portion. We have, we are the ones that have a double whammy, a problem anyhow. We were not only black, but we were used by whites, and they have some concepts, some preconceived notions about black women. I think that wherever we can override those concepts and show the commonalities we share the better it is.
MG: Do you think that white women have been victimized in this country?﻿Ik
61
DW: Oh, to some extent, surely. When I talked about job opportunities, I have no doubt that women have not had the same opportunities for the same jobs at the same rates as men. I think that this has influenced their aspiration levels considerably, so that many of our white women are not using their intellectual abilities or even their educational background to the fullest extent, because of the traditional concept of what the women's role is. They have been just as hesitant as black women, in many instances, to push forward because of their own relationship with their males. I think that white women have been victimized until very recently. We have to change some laws about credit, you know. Women, no matter what, whether black or white women— I mean, if you weren't married, you couldn't get certain credit. So they've suffered some problems. I think that we don't notice theirs as much because they have so many other privileges, and there are so many more of them who are privileged. But if you know many unmarried white women, I think unmarried white women very often have some of the same problems that unmarried black women have had...and very little difference in their regard by men.
MG: To what extent has being a woman affected your career?
DW: Well, I think, again, I have a feeling that I might have been a minister first and a teacher second, if I hadn't been a woman. I've always enjoyed my church life and experiences there, but I knew that it would not have been wise to have started in that field, because it didn't seem, at the time when I was making my choices, that that ought to be my first choice. Even though I never ceased to pursue it, as you see. Being a woman... I've often asked God in fact, "Why did You make me like this?" I have what our society very often calls masculine traits, because I'm aggressive—an aggressive female catches heck in our society. I fight for what I believe, and I don't know that... Until I finally decided that I wasn't going to worry whether I had a husband or not, I couldn't be my best and full self, because I was always consciously aware that being a woman in our society meant behaving a certain way, and doing certain things.
MG: Now, you've mentioned aggression several times, in terms of female
behavior. Do you feel that the same definition of aggression applies equally the same to male and to female behavior?
DW: No. It's a positive trait, among men, but it's considered a negative
trait when you're talking about women, and that's what I'm saying. That's why being a female has really been difficult.
MG: The actions are the same? Would you say?
DW: May or may not be. It's according to the security of the female. Some females operate in terms of their aggression quite similarly, especially professionally. All one needs to do, if you're familiar with the academic community, I can see very little difference between the aggressive female and the aggressive male in an academic arena. I would think that﻿62
DW: (cont.) there are some differences in some other areas. If you're in the political arena, you can't survive unless you use some of the same tactics. I don't see how you can... You can't. There are not one set of tactics for women and another set of tactics for men. So that I think, to a large extent, the area of operation determines whether they're the same or different. Now socially, an aggressive female acts differently than an aggressive male, because she's been socialized, and so that she's subtle in her aggression, very often, where a male will not feel the need to be subtle.
MG: For the remaining topics that we've not covered—that is, your memberships, offices, awards, honors, hobbies, travel—I'd like to ask you, since at least for memberships and awards and honors, we can read a listing of them here, what these activities have meant to you.
DW: They're tremendously important to me, because they have been my training ground. I've already Indicated that the schools did not provide, by and large, the opportunity for leadership development to the fullest extent. I did have some leadership opportunities as a college student because I was president of the student body and president of the history club, and some of the other things. But by and large, I have had my greatest growth development and leadership, particularly, through my participation in activities of these kinds. I have been given the opportunity to be the national president of three different organizations, all of which gave me opportunity to meet many other people on the national level. They have provided real friendship for me.
It amazes me how great, how wonderful it is, when I go to any town or city in this country, I have a whole list of friends I have made through my participation in these various organizations. It has provided opportunity for me to travel and to know and see this country and to know the world. Just think, in the AAUW, for four years I was national education chairperson, two years I was the national legislative chairman; I've been in every state of the United States for AAUW. I met a whole different kind of woman in AAUW than I did when I was traveling for Zeta Phi Beta sorority, or when I was traveling for AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science].
Or, for example, I'm on the Commission for Youth and Child Advocacy of the American Association of School Administrators—each of these are different kinds of emphases. Every group that I belong to, interestingly enough... There's a few cross-memberships, but most of them give me an opportunity and access to a wide range of different kinds of people. The people who join AAUW are very different from the people who join the National Council of Negro Women, and because 1 have national responsibility in both of these, I know those kinds of people. Certainly, when I'm talking to the school administrators—those are all the superintendents of schools—and I talk to them as my peers, because as president of the National Alliance of Black School Educators, I invited the comparable officers of AASA [American Association of School Administrators] to meet with us, and when I meet with them and travel with them over the﻿63
f: (cont.) country, I am regarded as a peer. This year I gave the
Distinguished Lecture and was honored by them. When I meet with the superintendents and assistant superintendents, they're mainly men. So that's another whole group of people. I've been very active with the American Association for the Advancement of Science and other science groups. That's another whole segment of our population. So for me, this gives me an opportunity to know a wide range of people. In the civil rights organizations, I have had a chance not only to meet people, but to develop different strategies, and it's been a very, very fine learning experience for me all the way through. The professional groups have provided an opportunity for me to publish my professional material as well as to meet with them. I call this activity my in-service education. When you get your doctorate, you don't have any more formal degrees to get, so the best way to keep in contact with the growing body of knowledge which is extensive, is the participation in professional organizations, and to me that is tremendously important. Yes, a lot of people think that maybe I spread myself too thinly.
I got involved, for example, in the National Alliance for Safer Cities because I was representing the American Association of University Women in that organization. But it becomes very important to me because I work in New York City, one of the cities which is most concerned with these issues. But I also am concerned about it because it has an educational component, because the LEAA*, the legislation which makes it possible, the improvement of our legal and our police forces and all our judicial systems, is an important aspect for getting guidance to our black youngsters and other youngsters, young people in terms of moving forward. In fact, every organization adds a dimension to my learning and understanding—e.g., the Association of Business and Professional Women, since I am a business and professional woman, I like to know other people who have comparable concerns and interests. But also have a chance to integrate some of these organizations.
A lot of these organizations I've gotten involved in because they haven't had any black women in them. I was the first black national officer of American Association of University Women, even though that's one of the oldest women's organizations. So you sometimes do things, not for yourself, but for your whole race, you know? The same thing might be said of some of these other organizations, they have never worked with blacks that were their peers, so that I feel, well, there's an opportunity for me to extend their knowledge at a sacrifice, sometimes, for myself. But I figure, wherever we can build that kind of opportunity and understanding, the better it is. So I do choose which ones I'm going to work with, but I'll see that they're related to my ongoing concerns and interests, and all of them can be used in my teaching and my preaching, which are my major focal points.
And I am just thinking about some of the organizations to which I belong— I'm secretary of the National Association for Children and Youth, and of course, just the title of it indicates that it must be very closely
Law Enforcement Assistance Administration﻿64
DW: (cont.) related to my job as a trainer of teachers, because in that organization, all the national organizations that have concern about children and youth come together, and we get some ideas about different strategies that we can use. Certainly my black groups make me constantly aware of my responsibility to my own group and I love my own group, so that is another thing. Now, I, like this project—oral history of black women—all these projects I get involved in, I do it not only for my own enlightenment, but for the general enlightenment of the American public. And I constantly have to stop and take stock and see which ones should I drop off and where should I put my major emphases at this particular time. I think all of us have to watch that lest we do become too involved. I belong to some local and state groups because I never want my people here to think that I'm more concerned about what's happening nationally and internationally and forgetting my own home, you know? And each time I feel that I'm a better person because of the opportunity that I had for mv participation.
MG: Do you have any hobbies?
DW: Oh, yes. I like to play and to sing. Of course, music is my greatest therapy as well as hobby. I like to sew—I make a lot of my own clothes. Don't do as many as I used to, 'cause my old sewing partner left me. But I enjoy sewing, and I like sports, I love to skate and bike and play tennis. And I like to go see games. I like to see all the games. I like hockey. I used to be a field hockey player myself, and I like to watch ice hockey and basketball and baseball, football— all the sports. I like to keep up with them. And, oh, I like to dance, and I love concerts, and I love the theater. I'm in the right place for that, because we surely have the best outlets, in New York, so I do a lot of that.
MG: Dr. Wolfe, in your opinion, does age expand or contract one's intellectual world?
DW: I think it expands, as long as you're well. In fact, I just said to a youngster yesterday, "You know, sometimes I look at young people and say, 'I wish I was young,' but then if I was young, I wouldn't be as wise." I wouldn't have the opportunity to make the kind of judgments that I can make because of the experiences that I've had. So as long as you have the growing mind... Now a lot of people as they get older, really get old, [laughs] in terms of...stop growing. But getting old, to me, doesn't mean necessarily that you're going to stop growing, and I don't feel that you can... I feel I have no right in a classroom if I'm not growing, because I'm constantly a student, and I learn from everybody. I haven't met anybody from whom I can't learn something. And this is the attitude I have, and I think that the more people you've met, the more opportunities you've had, the richer you are. Just think how expansive and how wonderful life can be. And then you see the relationships much more clearly. If you're limited in your understanding of various fields, you can't really begin to put those things together and see that. I just think I haven't even begun to develop the kind of knowledge and wisdom that I want. Every time I talk to people like﻿65
DW: (cont.) Benjamin Mays or Howard Thurman, I realize I'm just a babe-in-arms, really, in terms of the kind of depth of understanding of interrelationships of all human knowledge, and this is the kind of thing that I think all of us are struggling for, to know as much as we can, and keep abreast.
I'm a futurist, you see. I'm always talking about the twenty-first century, and I think that's where our eyes must be, toward the world that we cannot visit,'hot even in our dreams, since life goes not backward nor tarries with yesterday."* And I'm concerned and interested in seeing that what I'm thinking today will be the foundation for a new kind of world for to»orrow. I know that I can't really be a part of that world tomorrow unless X understand what's happening all along the way. I'm always amazed at how many people are not well read, who don't keep up with what's happening, who don't recognize changes and new knowledge and new -discoveries. And I learn with my students, and I learn from my students, and because of my students.
I see one of the highest joys in my life, in terms of my students, was that I taught Neil Armstrong, and I feel like that, since I had that experience, I have gone on the moon myself, because I knew the man. I know what he was like, know what kind of aspirations and goals he had. I remember how I asted him ^When I was teaching at Dartmouth College when he was there as a participant in a workshop on science in the new decade, what he wanted from the experience. He had already gotten his doctorate, he had his 5000 flying hours, he knew what he had to do in order to have his long-range goal, and he excited me as a person who was a man of vision and concern about where he was going and had really well conceived notions and directions and goals. I asked him to write my son a letter, because I wanted my son to know these kinds of people, and these are the role models I hope to push, by calling them to his attention. And you know, he wrote that letter on a computer, and he said to Roy, "This is the machine of the future." This is before he went to the moon, you know. But he could see what kinds of things we're dependent upon. Just think how his life was dependent on that kind of machinery! And the whole attitude that he had.
So that, I don't think age needs to make you less vibrant and alive and growing and concerned. In fact, on the contrary, it can make you even more exciting, if you have along with it the physical and emotional and mental health that is necessary to keep pace with space. Because, one of the things that's most exciting about the future, the present and the future world, one thing we know is going to be certain is change. But the rapidity of change is so great that for many people who are not agile in mind and body and spirit, they cannot make those necessary adjustments. But just saying that you're old does not necessarily follow that this would be the case. I'd like to hope that I'm a better teacher today than I was twenty years ago. I would hope I am. There's some things that I did twenty years ago that I did better twenty years ago than I can do now, but there are a whole lot of things that I can do now that I couldn't do twenty years ago because of this growth in understanding and, J hope,some wisdom, if not much wisdom.
*
Kahlil Gibran, The Prophet (New York: Knopf, 1923).﻿66
MG: Does age result in the conscious reordering of priorities?
DW: I think there has to be, because one of the realities of age that we cannot deny, generally speaking, is the difference in the physical body, and the recognition that there's less time before you. So that you begin to see what among the many interests and ideas and goals and purposes, which are the most important, in view of one's present situation. Of course, I don't think that's unique to old age—it shouldn't be, because as I say to my students, "Once you write a philosophy, if you don't change it, shame on you." Life is dynamic, and all of it ought to be constantly reordering and reevaluating. But I think it's even more mandatory as you get older, so that you are sure that you have accomplished all that you wanted to accomplish.
MG: What would you say is most important to you now?
3¥: In my future? Well, I think proving myself as a minister, since
that's a relatively recent area of exploration, and I have some books I have to write. I have not written nearly as much as I wish, and I feel like I must get this done. One book, as I've told you already, will be on Booker Washington. I am just determined to write it. Another one, on my own family and my own background and what I've learned as I've grown and developed, and how my movement from an all-white world to an all-black world, back to a mixed world, all these impinging forces and how they've affected me, and what they mean to me. And then I do want to do, as I told you, that one thing with organizing black women in theology or in the ministry. At least those things. I really am still struggling with myself because I still tend to have many sides.
MG: At this point, looking back over your life, what gives you the most satisfaction?
DW: My son.
MG: That's my last question. Is there anything that we've left out, that we've not discussed?
DW: I wanted to talk about my travel and what it had meant to me.
MG: All right. Fine.
DW: It has been so significant in my understanding. I am sorry it comes so late, because I feel it to be very important, [laughter]
The reason I want to talk about travel is because I think I have been very lucky, and I have done the kind of travel that a lot of people don't do. A lot of people always say they have to wait till they have money, and I have never felt that way. Because I feel that there's no substitution for travel, for direct experience in on-the-ground, with people of a wide variety, of places and kinds. I have traveled around the world six times, and what I gave my son when he graduated from college was a trip around the world. Because I felt that this would be important to him﻿67
DW: (cont.) as he planned his future, as he looked at himself and a world
that's going to be very different by the time he's my age. A world that I hope will indeed be one world, in spirit. And what he did there on that trip, he had been a triple major at Oberlin in anthropology, sociology, and psychology, and he had made a study between, a comparison between an American Indian tribe and an African tribe, and what we did on our trip is to make a study of black-nonblack relations. And I think that's very important because, you know, in the census they're always talking about white-nonwhite, well I wanted to view the world from our perspective; Who am I? I'm black. Who are we? And how do we relate to others? And most of the people are nonwhite, so when I say black and nonblack, you see, we begin to associate and affiliate and relate to the larger population. Here in America, I've grown up with the concepts of being a minority, when in truth we are a majority in the world population. I'm a majority. And I wanted my son to have that feeling. And yoti and he—he's about your coloring—are the most universal color in the world. I guess you know that already, don't you? It's so beautiful. We met each other in California. He flew from Ohio, and I fl ew from here, and went from there to Hawaii. And you know, when you go to Hawaii, immediately you're at home. You look like everybody there, the major people are Polynesian and Orientals.
MG: That's right.
DW: They were there before all the mainlanders came. You go to the South
Seas islands, same thing. From there, we went to New Zealand, the Maoris are just another Polynesian group. And Roy fitted in so beautifully, it was just so great. And here, I was so glad to hear the Maoris talking about the whites as "pockita," who are the outsiders. We went up to Austral ia, talked to the aborigines. One of the things that bothered me, and it interested me greatly, we visited an aborigine family, and in a reserve—you know, there are only two aborigines that ever graduated from college, and on this reserve, this was the first young man that was ever graduated from high school—and the first question they asked me was, "How does it feel to be black in America?" And I told him. And when I told him that little line that they said to me, he said, "Did they say that to you?" And I said, "Yes, why?" He said, "They said that to me." That was the first time I realized that whites have taken the very same... Not just the attitude, but the very same words everywhere they met nonwhites. They called 'em nigger. In America, I thought we were the only ones that had ever been called nigger. But that's not so.
We went on up, you know, to New Guinea, where they look more like me, and on up to Indonesia, we went to Indonesia, and we went to Singapore and Thailand, and all over India. And you know, they're all different colors, especially down in Madras—I looked just like the ones in Madras, you know? And then we went on to East and West Africa, and it was very important to me to see the world through my young son's eyes—a young man...
I remember a party that one of my friends in Auckland, New Zealand, gave.﻿68
DW: (cont.) There was a guest who was a professor at Oxford University.
He brought up a topic, and the only person in the room that could talk with him about whatever that topic was—I don't even know what it is now—was my son. How proud I felt because he had the same liberal kind of education that this man had had. And knowledge is universal. It has no color line. And it's so wonderful and so important that you see it. When I was in South America, you know most of the people in South America look like us. We wouldn't get that impression as you read the books we study in our school.
MG: You would think, in this country, that you were an absolute minority.
DW: That's right.
MG: And it's white people who are a minority.
DW: But they're an absolute minority. And that's why travel has meant so much. I've been all over—in every continent in the world—and I've talked to people all over the world, and I hope I feel therefore at home with people all over the world. I would just say that that is one of the most important activities that anybody should engage in. And I would hope nobody would ever stop traveling just because they think they don't have money.
I was with the first group of Americans that went to visit the schools of the People's Republic of China, and I felt very much at home with the people there. And I was with the first group of educators that went to the Soviet Union, way back in 1958 I went—that's twenty-one years ago! It's the first group. I remember as I visited, I visited five of the republics. And when you're in Russia, when you hear about Russia and the United States again, you always talk about the Russian republic. They very seldom talk about all that Asiatic part of the Soviet Union where they are brown like you and me. And when I talked to those young people, the Uzbek, down in Tashkent, and I found out this young man who was an Intourist guide, the only reason he got the job was because they didn't know Uzbek. If they had known Uzbek, they wouldn't have even put him on that job, just like he was experiencing in the Soviet Union, the very thing that you and I experience in the United States.
One of the things that we find, the universality of some of the problems that we face all over the world because of coloring of skin. So that, travel to me has brought me closer to my friends and neighbors all over the world. When I was in Peru, I felt so at home with those Indians because they're so much like me, and in all parts... When I was in Brazil, a country I love very much, there they have preserved more of the African folklore and methods and ways of behavior than any other country of our western hemisphere.
When I got to Africa, I feel so much at home because I've been initiated into three tribes. In Liberia, I'm a Basa and my name is "Kenoshono," which means "First Lady." And I want you to know, they gave me all the rights and privileges. I belong to the secret society, and took off all﻿69
DW: (cont.) my western clothes, and they gave me all the instructions that they give to their young people when they come of age. When I was in Ghana, my name is "Yazentwa," and I'm very proud of that name because Yazentwa was the name given to me by Asanathe—you know, who is the king of all the Ashantis, and he gave me that name, and I treasure it greatly. It's so much like the name my mother gave me, Deborah. I love my name because of what it stands for. When Mama said she gave me that name because, she said, "She shall lead her people as Deborah of old." And when the Asanathe gave me the name, Yazentwa, he said, "You are like Yazentwa." Yazentwa, if you know the history of the Ashantis, is the woman that kept the golden stool from ever getting into the hands of white people. And I am highly honored that the Asanathe would honor me with the name. In Nigeria, I'm Yoruba, and my name is "Omawile," which means, "Child Come Home." I'm particularly pleased about that because, as my father used to sit me up on his knee, and tell me stories and sins to me when I was a little girl, one of the few things T remember is, he told me that our ancestors indeed were Yoruban, and I hope some day that I will be able to trace those roots back to the particular village in Nigeria where, more than likely, they came. They could have come, as you know, from any part of that near part of west Africa.
I'll never forget what happened in 1884 when the Europeans sat down there in Berlin and automatically, without discrimination to the languages and the customs of my ancestors, divided up the continent of Africa. But my travels have made it possible for me to understand this, because my travels have taken me into the bush as well as into the cities, all over Africa, including South Africa. Even when my friends thought I shouldn't go into South Africa, I'm glad I went to South Africa, because I had friends among black South Africans who needed to know that black Americans are concerned about them. I feel very close to the people of the world because I have been in their homes and eaten at their table. They have sung my songs, but the song that I take, the book I give everybody, everywhere I go, is the songs, the Negro spirituals, the only folk music of America. And it's so much fun to realize that, no matter what language they speak, that is a universal language, because that music score is read the same way whether you're in Japan, like when I was with those little darling children there in a nursery school, whether I'm in China, whether I'm in Russia, whether I'm in Finland, whether I'm in Nigeria, or Holland, or wherever it may be. And when you get people to sing with you and dance with you, you begin to make possible the opportunity to talk with you. I love all people.﻿DEBORAH CANNON PARTRIDGE WOLFE
