Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson: Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson: Cheryl Gilkes:
Mary Thompson:
Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson: Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson: Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson:
Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson:
Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson:
Cheryl Gilkes: Mary Thompson:
You were born in... 1902...
November 30, 1902.
...in Henderson, North Carolina.
What do you remember about growing up in Henderson?
I don't remember too much about that.
'cause___ Well, we came to Cambridge
when I was six, so I don't remember £ great deal about Henderson.
Were you an only child?
Yes, but I wasn't spoiled.
You weren't?
No.
Do you remember your grandparents?
I knew my father's mother and father and I was named after both grandmothers.
Both of them were named Mary?
No, and I'm not going to tell you the middle name.
Oh, you're keeping that to yourself.
Oh yes, that was one and only, my mother's, I'll tell you. My father' mother was named Mary, and my mother mother was named Penecy, so that was what they put on me.
Both those names.
Um hmm.﻿2
CG: MT: CG:
CG: MT:
CG: MT:
CG: MT:
CG: MT:
CG: MT:
MT: CG:
MT:
And your maiden name was Crutchfield. Right.
Right. What do you remember about your family background, your family legends that you grew up with, background history?
MT: Oh, I think mother...I think there were thirteen children in my mother's family, and I think she was the oldest of the thirteen.
What was her maiden name?
Hatch. And I guess I knew most of her brothers and sisters, but I've forgotten their children, their names. Some of them still live in the South. My Aunt Martha's*youngsters live in Goldsboro, but I don't remember all those kids.
When you were growing up, did you go back to Henderson during the summers?
No, I didn't. I have been back once or twice; as we were coming from Florida, we stopped.
Do you remember why your mother left, your parents?
My father came up to work. His brother lived in Cambridge; he came up and then he sent for us.
I see.
And then my mother sent for her sister and two brothers. I guess that's all that came up from there to work. I have an idea that there are those who are still in the South.
But you just haven't seen them, or you haven't talked to them.
Oh, one girl in Goldsboro had been up to visit us, and I hear from her once in a while. But her mother is dead. My mother had one sister who lived in Summit, New Jersey, who came up to visit us, but she has since died. I don't remember much about the family.
CG: When you moved up to Cambridge, what made the biggest impact on you? Do you remember moving here, your reactions?
No, I can't remember that far back.
Oh, okay. What was growing up in Cambridge like? You mentioned that you belonged to the Union Baptist Church...
Yes. I grew up in the Union Baptist Church, but we went to Saint Paul's also once in a while, because my mother was friendly with the minister's wife down there; so we went to both. I think at that time I used to take piano lessons, but didn't have any talent, really, and when they had their little concerts, we would play this one little song we knew.
Martha Wellington﻿3
CG: MT:
CG MT CG MT
CG mt
CG
mt
Yes. I remember that.
This is funny. I hadn't thought of that for years. Think of all the money they wasted. Mr. Ernest O'Banyoun was my piano teacher.
O'Banyoun was your piano teacher? I remember Mr. O'Banyoun.
Yes. And he really tried, but I was not a good pupil.
But you learned enough to play at church teas.
Yes, I learned that. They bought me a piano, and that was something, you know. I didn't have any talent.
CG: Do you remember what your father was doing for a living, what kind of job he had?
MT: He was a brick mason. He used to do the plaster and the brick work. I hadn't thought of that either for a long time.
CG: What else do you remember about Union Baptist Church?
MT: Oh, I used to teach Sunday school there, and I used to be in the youth
group, the BYPU,* and for a number of years I was chairman of the Women's Day program.
CG: Tell me about Women's Day. It's an interesting thing about black churches, that you have Women's Day.
MT: You'd get some sort of an outstanding speaker and let the women take charge of the program that day, read the Scriptures, have some music, usually a soloist, but the women took charge of the program. And they used to raise lots of money, that was the important part.
Yes. So you chaired the Women's Day committee for a while. Yes, a couple of times I was chairman.
Do you remember any of the speakers that you brought up for Women's Day.
That's been such a long time. I hadn't thought of that for years, either. Usually it was somebody who was active in the Baptist movement. I think one time we had Charlotte Hawkins Brown; I am sure we had her. But I can't remember who else we had.
CG: She was also a member of the church, wasn't she?
Her mother and father were members of the church. She grew up in Union Baptist, and all of her relatives belonged to the church, their families and all that. Practically everybody in the church was from Henderson, North Carolina, at that time.
*
Baptist Young People's Union﻿4
CG: I see. Were the ministers also with the church from Henderson?
I don't know. Reverend Harrell was there, I don't know where he came from. Reverend Harrell was the first minister I remember. I think his daughter played the organ—Leah. And then one of them was in the choir.
CG: Is she the Leah that married Mr. Williams?
MT:
CG
CG MT
That's right. And Mamie Bishop sang in the choir, and Elmer sang in the choir—that was their son.
Yes, I remember some of those people.
MT: You knew them?
CG: Yes. Mrs. Williams used to let me play the organ after church on Sundays, she was the organist.
CG: What do you remember about school? Where did you go to school in Cambridge, and what do you remember?
MT: I went to Roberts Elementary... first the Boardman School. They used to
have the Boardman School right across from where the Newtowne Court housing project is. And we had one black teacher there. Her name was Goldie Lane; her father was a physician in Cambridge. And then I think it was either two, three or four grades, and then you went up to Roberts School, which is on the corner of Harvard and Broadway. And then from there you went to Cambridge High and Latin. The Roberts School is where they'd^send the kids from class to Forsyth for their dental checkups. They didn't have the clinics in the schools that they did when I worked there.
That's where I got the idea I wanted to be a dentist. Because I saw the girls all dressed up in white, but everybody else wanted me to be a nurse, a teacher, or anything else besides that. There was a deacon of a church, Nelson Birch, who couldn't understand why I wouldn't want to be a nurse.
CG: Who encouraged you to continue wanting to be a dentist? Or did anyone encourage you?
^ My mother. After I came back with the bright idea that this is what I wanted,	my mother said, "You can do it if you want to." So this is
what I did. But some of the people at Union who were going to be my first patients never came at all in the forty years that I practiced. But I didn't mind that. She was a terrific gal.
Your mother, this is. Yes.
CG-' You mentioned that she didn't have much schooling, but that she was a very impressive woman.﻿5
MT: oh, she was terrific. I mean she could write her name, but she couldn't write a letter, really. But when it came to business she was really on the ball.
CG: Did she work also?
MT:
CG: MT:
CG:
CG:
CG:
Sometimes she did day work and then in the latter years, she would take
state wards. We had, I think, maybe four at one time and three at
another. The first one we had, we just had the one then... At that
time I think they paid them two dollars and a half a week for taking
care of them. My father gave the girl fifty cents a week for spending money
out of the things he would get, $2.50 a week. That girl married in our
house.
Oh. Was she like a sister to you, in a sense?
Yes. I was in high school by this time. She would wear my jewelry and put on everything, powder and all that. And we used to see each other. She's not too well, but she lives in Roxbury now. My father would give her back fifty cents. I got a dollar a week for spending money, and she'd get fifty cents. We used to have four boys for a long time, and oh, they were a handful. But she would bathe two and I would bathe two, and they hadn't been very well cared for, so we would rub them down with olive oil so their skins were nice and soft.
Were all of these children black?
MT: Yes, they were black boys. In fact one of them still calls me, and when my mother died, he came over to the funeral with his wife and baby. He called me not too long ago down here. His wife has died now, and his daughter writes and all that. The last group we had was three girls, and on Mother's Day, one of those girls came down, and she is a mother of six kids now. She lives in West Medford. She has a very nice husband...
What's the most impressive event that you remember about your mother when you were a child?
MT: I don't know. My mother talked incessantly, and you'd say, my goodness why does she want to tell me that over again, and she'd say, "Well, I hope the last time it will take effect." And sometimes if you'd try to explain something to her, she'd put her finger up and shake it at you, and that meant, no more, don't talk anymore. So then a couple of days later she would be talking,and I'd say, "Well, Mother, I tried to explain that and you wouldn't let me tell you." But when she did that, that meant don't answer me back. I was married and grown up by this time,and she was still shaking her finger at me...
Don't answer back.
^T: And another thing she used to say to me is, "Keep your mouth shut and do what you want to. You don't have to talk so much; just keep your mouth shut and go ahead and do what you're going to do." Other people can remember things that Mother said more clearly than I can. My cousin went to visit﻿6
MT: (cont.) a woman somewhere down here on the Cape, and she said that the woman remembers her so vividly, and that Mother said to her that there would be a lot of bloodshed before we could really get things settled. I don't remember that at all.
CG:
CG:
MT:
CG:
CG:
CG:
But she understood that.
MT: And when we came down here, she'd say "This city has to build this way
because down toward Yarmouth it was as full as it could be." And this is what has happened. All this development on the west end of Hyannis. For twenty-five years there were no houses over here at all, and for a number of years, that house over there was the only house on the road, so if anybody came here, you knew they were coming to us. But then the developer came. Mother said this was going to happen. And from that house down to the very end, there was a vacant lot. Mother'd say, "I'd like to buy that, and put up a hotel for men and one for women." And Ralph used to tease her and say, "That wouldn't work," but now there's a whole development there.
So in a way, she was always understanding trends that were coming in the future, trends and events, people and experiences...
We built this house over here, and she'd say, "You know, to enlarge the kitchen, we'd just have to push the wall back." I didn't know what she was talking about, push the wall back, and she explained it to the fellow next door, and he's a carpenter. So after it was done, I could see what she was talking about. I think Bill Alexander was down here after it was done, and he said, "Now your mother wants to do something..." And I said, "Bill, I don't want to even hear what's she's thinking." She's always had another project...
Full of ideas.
MT: And when we went up in September, she would start buying stuff to bring down here the next time we came down.
She sounds like she was a planner and a doer. Very active.
MT: Right up to the last minute. We had gone to Africa for the Nigerian
independence celebration in 1960, and I had filled a freezer full of food and left her some money and stuff. But I had also left a list of names, if this happens, do this and do that and do this. Mrs. Clark...I don't know whether you know Alvin Clark in Cambridge, lives on Walden Street. His mother used to come down every summer with my mother, and so I said to her, "Now if my mother needs you, will you come?" And she said yes. So when we got back from Africa, they had called Tom's daughter, and Mother had had a strokei so when I got home Mrs. Clark was sitting there. 1 had gotten another woman to stay with her, but Mrs. Clark was there. You should know Mary Clark and Alvin...
I probably do, and I just can't match the names with the face.﻿7
MT:
CG:
MT: CG: MT:
CG: MT:
CG: MT:
CG:
MT:
And there was George and Roland. Roland is the dentist; he lives in Hempstead, New York, now. He married Gloria Bosfield from West Medford.
I'll ask my mother. I think she would know some of those people who I don't remember.
But Mrs. Clark was a grand old gal.
What are some of the strongest memories you have of your father?
I think...he'd come in at nine o'clock, and he'd take the lamp with the clock. "Do you know what time it is?" At nine o'clock!
So he worked long days.
Yes , but you weren't supposed to be out at nine o'clock. This was for me. He'd say to me, "Do you know what time this is?" Out until nine o'clock, that was late. And he used to tell my mother; she thought I was the queen.
So he was worried that you'd get spoiled.
Yes. But she didn't believe in spoiling. She said I want everybody to love you, because I don't know whether I'll be with you all the time, and I wouldn't want anybody to mistreat you. So she didn't let me get away with too much.
Do you remember any especially influential teachers at school, especially well-remembered teachers? Important events at school?
Let's see. I think in grammar school we had a Miss Quirk and a Miss Kenny, I think her name was. The only reason I remember Miss Kenny was that there was a little song that went, "There's a way in the world to start the day, a way in the world that's God's own way, so whether you work or whether you play, you must have something to win." And that stuck with me all through the years. And Miss Quirk was such a nice gal. And there was a Miss Daly at my school. But of course, you see, when I went back with the public health department, some of them were still in the school where the office was; so this was nice.
And then, of course, when I went up to the Peabody School, my office was right next door to a Miss Curry, and she was wonderful. If some of the kids yelled, she'd say, "If you'd take care of your teeth, that wouldn't happen." And I think I'd just been there a short while when I was co-chairman of the drive for the Negro College Fund, and Miss Curry and another teacher, I've forgotten her name now, gave me a donation, and I didn't ask for it, for the Fund. And then she came to me as a patient, and I hadn't met her until I had gone up there to work.
Mr. D'Arcy, who was principal then, was one of my good boosters. There were people from Agassiz School, where you have all the Harvard professors' kids, who were "picky." I had taken out some kid's teeth the week before,﻿8
MT: (cont.) and the mother came up to ask why I had done that. So I sat the kid in the chair and took the mirror. Lucky for me, just the tips of her permanent teeth were poking through. So I said to her mother, "Look at this. Now I can't tell you why I did that, but this is why, because the permanent teeth were all ready to come in." And if they went up to Mr. D'Arcy to complain, he'd say, "Dr. Wright knows what she's doing." So after a while they just left me alone.
CG: What year did you graduate from high school or what year did you... Okay, you finished Cambridge High and Latin, and you took the classical course there?
MT CG
MT
CG: MT:
CG MT
CG MT CG MT
Took the college course there.
What did they require of you in those days when you went to high school?
The same things, English, Latin and algebra, yes I think so, geometry, history, the regular courses...
Was the high school encouraging when you wanted to go to school? I mean, did you have to do it on your own, or was there help from your high school? To help you apply for college, when it came time to apply for college?
Were they helpful? Not particularly. No, I don't think it really mattered to them.
Where did you go to college after you got out of...
I went to Tufts.
Oh, you did your undergraduate work at Tufts?
MT: At Tufts, at that time you just went from high school to the Dental School But they had a number of academic courses you took, French and chemistry and all the fundamentals there.
How many years did it take? Four, I think, four or five.
What was it like going to Tufts in those days, what do you remember about..
Well, I enjoyed going to Tufts, but some people who had gone before me had kind of scared me, because there were a number of fellows that were not supposed to be so very nice to blacks. But I was the only black girl in the school, and I think there were four whites in my class, so that they really couldn't do too much against me. And the boys were nice, so that I didn't have any trouble. A couple of the professors that they said were prejudiced... When it came time for our state boards, one fellow had us, the girls, at his house and sharpened our hand instruments. He was named Dr. Farren, and I said to him, "You know, if you'd just poke your head in the door, I think we could do better." The next day we were going to put in some gold foil fillings, and just before I started, or as I started,﻿9
(cont.) he came in the door and did this, and the old gold flowed in. Usually you had trouble; 'cause usually you get the first piece in and then something happened and it fell out. Gold is hard stuff if you don't get that first piece anchored. So it was nice.
Then there was another boy who was in my section, his name was Jack Berman, a Jewish fellow. He was older than the rest of us, and he evidently had money also, because he bought all the latest tools. And he was always really near me, because my name began with C and he was B, and he'd say, "Use anything of mine you want..." He belonged to a fraternity, and the Jewish fellows in that fraternity were trying to figure the percentage of fellows who passed different things, so they would meet one night and study this, and he'd say to me, "The boys said that for so many years, they've asked this and this and this on the exam; Mary, be sure you know this and this and this." So they were terrific. And there was one colored fellow in my class, and then one fellow that was in the medical school somewhere else, and he knew the histology stuff backwards. So they would study with us, and the slides, they would mix them all up and see if you could describe them, or identify what you were seeing.
CG: MT:
So you had good relations with the other students, and you were able to work together.
I think the only thing that they didn't ask me, the only thing I ran into— and it really didn't matter because I had already pledged AKA —they had a dental sorority, and they didn't ask me to join, but I already had pledged AKA, so it didn't matter to me.
How did you happen to pledge AKA?
MT:
CG: MT:
Well, there was a black teacher who taught at this first little school I told you about, Boardman—but she wasn't there when I went to school... Nadine Goodman, who lives down in Norwell. I think she founded the chapter here in Boston.
This is the undergraduate chapter.
Yes, Epsilon. She was the one who got me in...that's how I happened to
come.
How did you support yourself in school?
MT: I worked. Sometimes I worked after school, and then I worked during the summers. I used to work down here waiting tables during the summer, and one winter I worked at a little restaurant on Beacon Street called Salmagundi .	I would go to school from nine till five, and then I would go down to Beacon Street.	I worked in the kitchen there, washed up the pots and pans and the dishes, and then scoured the table and shined the brass faucets, washed the dish towels. I didn't do this alone; there were two other people with me; and we scrubbed the floor and left it all ready for the next day. I think they just served lunch and dinner down
*
Alpha Kappa Alpha﻿10
MT: (cont.) there. And at that time, I didn't have too much time to study, so that when the exams came, maybe a week before, my mother would fill in for me and I would cram for the exams. I think I only did that one year.
CG: MT:
CG mt CG
mt
CG: mt:
CG:
cg: mt:
When did you have time to study?
Oh, it was something. Why, you get up early in the morning or you try to study on the way to school, and invariably somebody would get on the streecar that wanted to talk from Cambridge to the school. The school was where Northeastern is now, at the corner of Forsyth. And sometimes I didn't have carfare, so I would walk.
All the way from Cambridge.
Yes, you'd cut through the Fenway...it took me forty minutes flat. I've walked that...I know.
I could tell every board that was going to flap in that Harvard bridge — It was a wooden bridge at that time, you know, it was so old...
The Massachusetts Avenue bridge there... yes.
There were some boards that would flap like a clapper, so you'd just go through, down over the bridge, over Beacon Street and cut across. Sometimes if you had...now that I think of it, sometimes they gave me a dollar a week for that, but the carfare was a dollar, so if you wanted to eat, you walked.
I see. Your parents gave you a dollar a week for carfare? What were the wages like in those days? This job that you had in the kitchen at the restaurant?
MT: I don't remember how much I got paid really, but it couldn't have^been
very much, because even now with $2.30 or whatever it is, it wasn't very much. 'Cause when you consider that the women doing tables got about $3.00 or something for a day... You know doing, I guess, laundry and all that other stuff, they only got about $3.00. But still it amazes me to think how they had money for the tuition, and although it was much less than it is now, with the wages they got, I wonder how they got it together.
Cr •
Your parents.
MT: Yeah. But I think it was about $300 for the tuition, and look how much it is today.
Thousands, it's thousands.
I used to say to Dr. Jessie, and she'd say to me, "We couldn't do it today, we couldn't go." I think the tuition at the medical and dental schools is six or eight thousand dollars, nine thousand...﻿11
CG: MT: CG:
mt:
cg: mt:
CG:
mt CG mt
CG mt CG
Mt CG mt
CG
mt
CG
Unless you have wealthy parents, you have to borrow heavily today. I tell you this is wicked, so you start off with a debt.
What do you remember about who some of your sorors were, and what they were doing when you pledged AKA? What kind of people did you meet through the sorority?
Well, I think most of them were teachers, so that they had a little more money and a little more free time than the rest of us. 'Cause I pledged when I was in school, and I think there was one girl who was a lawyer and... Most of them were teachers.
Did sorors help each other out in times of...
Not really. No, I can remember Bertha Wormley was at Simmons and Ann Tanneyhill was at Simmons, and I sometimes would walk from Tufts over to Simmons for lunch because the cafeteria was cheaper there, and I would eat lunch with them. I guess everybody was about in the same boat, they had no money to help out; even those who were teaching had other responsibilities of their own.
What year was it when you went to Tufts, by the way, do you remember the year?
'25, I guess.
Do you remember much about the political life at that time?
No, not really. This was the beginning of trying to get... I used to belong to the student union. We were trying to go into places where they didn't want [us] to and all that, but it was just a mild sort of a... I guess it was a building up of the stuff that happened later.
What kind of discrimination was there then?
They just didn't want blacks in there.
In which different places, where?
Well, some of the restaurants and eating places.
Did they have signs or did they tell you at the door?
No, no, they just...I don't remember, or if they gave you small portions or some stuff like that.
They'd make you feel unwelcome.
They can do that without saying a word.
Yes. Were you active in any other kinds of community activities?﻿12
MT:
CG: MT:
CG:
MT CG MT CG MT CG
MT CG MT
MT:
Yeah, we did some stuff in Cambridge, and I have forgotten what the name of the organization was, but we were active in getting Lanham Act funds for school lunches in the public schools. I remember we went up to city hall, to one of the meetings of the school committee. It was a bitter cold night, but there was two white women and two of us black, so they told us we should be home where the working mothers were. It was a bitter cold night. I've forgotten the woman's name...
This was the school committee who told you you should...
Yes. We were trying to get Lanham Act funds for this school committee. And then I was in this medical, dental and pharmaceutical thing, but I had forgotten all about that for a long time, and what else did I do?
Was this medical, dental, pharmaceutical organization, was that primarily black students...
All black.
Different students from the different schools around.
They were not a student organization, it was a professional thing...
So people in the area were professionally organized among themselves?
Yes, we had a lot of doctors in Boston then and a number of dentists.
How did you finally start to... What year did you graduate from Tufts, do you remember?
1930.
Oh, so you remember the depression. Oh, I do, yes. I remember.
CG: The depression started the year before you graduated from school. What do you remember about it, what are your reflections on it? What did you see, you know, living in Cambridge in a black community, and how did it affect you?
Well, a lot of people got the surplus commodity of food, and some people just didn't know what to do with this, you know, beside that. And then things were very high, and I think you thought you were going to make a lot of money when you got out of school. It was very slow, but there too, Mother would say, if you made six dollars this week, she said, "You had a good week." So you said, "Either she's a good liar or she's trying to keep my courage up." Then you go up to your room and you'd cover pieces of paper with figures, how long it was going to take you to get out of debt, you know, 'cause everything's piling up,because when you get out, you've got all the bills to pay. But finally things begin to happen and you can see it more clearly.﻿13
CG: HT:
CG MT CG
HT:
CG: MT:
CG: HT:
Where did you have your first practice?
In Cambridge, in my house there, so at least you didn't have to pay office rent and all that. And if I was out, Mother was there to answer the telephone.
Now what street were you living on then? Windsor.
Windsor Street. But you had to get your equipment and your dental chair and all those things.
And instruments. Of course, you had bought some of the instruments your second year in dental school, because you had to have your instruments to work with. And then, of course, you didn't have any of the tools to extract, so you had to buy those all at once, and so gradually it got better. And besides that, my mother's mother had died,and she went down South to bury her, but she brought back her sister's daughter, who was only about five, to live with us. So by the time I was out of college, we sent her down to Palmer Memorial Institute.
You sent your sister's daughter...
No, my aunt's daughter down to Palmer Memorial Institute, so that besides all the other bills, you had all this tuition stuff to pay. But I think I had borrowed some money from a student loan fund,and something else I had borrowed, I've forgotten what. But the day came when I was supposed to pay, and I didn't have the money, so I went to the lawyer's office, and I said, "I don't have the money." I was crying, so the guy I owed was walking around the circle,and the lawyer was walking around in the other circle, so they said, "Make your own terms, never mind."
Nobody had any money at that time, so I left there and I went to the^ woman who had charge of the student loan fund. So I said, crying, I don't have the money." I told her about my having this cousin down at Palmer, so she said, "Mary, I'm so happy that you feel like that about your bills, but you know there's no reason to get your mother and husband and everybody else upset because you can't pay your bills. If you'd told us about sending the child to Charlotte Hawkins Brown, we could have given her a scholarship, because that's one of the schools we help support."
When I came home from that experience, I don't think I have cried since because I couldn't pay a bill. All I say now is, "I don't have it, and I'll give it to you when I get it."
Oh, so you were married by this time.
Yes, I got married in 1930.
*
^resident of Palmer Memorial Institute﻿14
CG: The year you graduated from dental school.
MT: Got married in October. I think we had a fire in Windsor Street. I don't know what happened, but we had three rooms upstairs, and we had just taken fire insurance out, and my mother had her fire insurance through the years. So that when we got money from the fire insurance, we must have got only about a hundred dollars worth because they took out for depreciation. But anyway, we took the money from that and we paid up a lot of bills, and then after that we got the back porch painted...
CG: What other kinds of things... You mentioned besides having your private practice, you worked in the schools. When did you start working in the schools, and how did that come about?
MT: '47, I think. But when I first started working for the public health, it
wasn't as a dentist, it was as the dental assistant, because^every time they had the exam for school dentists, they would put "male only." Because somebody there in the department knew I would like to do this in the department, so then...
Cr •
So instead of saying black, they said male.
MT: For the school dentist. It must have been before '47, it must have been '40 or something. So anyway, I took the exam and I got a hundred. So when I went up to city hall to talk to the board, they gave me the whole song and dance, and then after school opened, they put me right down there at Roberts School near the house, which is good 'cause I could just run up there.
They had one woman who was in charge of it, although when they put it on the exam,they said "male only" for the dentists, but this was the dental assistant, so she would come every two weeks or every week. At first it was every week, and then one week she asked me if I had anything to report, so I said no. And after she had left, I said to the dentist I was working with, "Did they expect us to fight?" So he looked at me, he was a well guy, one of the nicest persons I've ever known, and he said, Yes. I said, "You know the way I think about that is, I'll do anything you ask me to do while I'm here; I'll do anything I'm big enough to do when I go to my own office."
Then I stayed there, I think, seven years as his assistant, and then I married Tom in '48 and he wanted to take me to Florida, so I took a leave of absence. I started to resign, but the principal, Mr. Curry, said, "Why don't you just take a leave of absence?" So I took a leave of absence, and in the meantime they had posted an exam and it didn't say 'male only, so I took it. There were three openings...I didn't know this at the time, but I still got a hundred on the exam... But there were three openings, so they didn't do anything more.﻿15
MT:
CG: MT:
CG:
MT:
MT: CG: MT:
CG: MT: CG:
MT: CG:
(cont.) And then they sent me up to the Peabody School, and of course the guy up there was supposed to be so hard to work for, the principal. Dr. Sanders was at Roberts School then, so he said, "Go up and speak to the principal before you go to the office." So I went in and I said, "I'm the new dentist," and then I went on down, because I think Dr. Turpin had had it for a little while and he didn't do that, he didn't go up to make himself known. So I stayed there until I retired; so it was twenty-four years altogether.
Then it was before that that you had the children's clinic in the house?
Oh, yes. That's why I gave it up, because I couldn't have kids all morning and then have them at my office in the day.
How did the children's clinic—I saw some of the material here—how did
the children's clinic come about? How did you manage to get that accomplished
This was with the help of Miss Wilhelmina Crosson. CG: Ah. She was in Boston then; she wasn't down at Sidelia?
No, she was teaching in a school in Boston. How did you all happen to get together?
Well, we had been friends all along, you see, and then when I told her what I wanted to do, she had charge of the Cox Fund and could get the money to help out. This is what she helped me with a great deal; we got the office furniture and some of the supplies...
What was it that you had been seeing that made you bring the idea up to her?
I had been to a concert in New York, "From Swing to Opera," or something like this. It came out then.
One of the interesting things about the clinic was you were not only concerned about children, but also expectant mothers. What kinds of events made you focus that clearly on the problem?
I had been taking courses all along, you see, even when I got out. If you have good care, the kids come out better, you see.
Right. So the courses you were taking were more general medical courses than...
MT: No. Children's dentistry... For a while too, I worked down at the Boston Dispensary one day a week when I first started to practice. That's where I really learned to extract teeth. I volunteered my services one day a week, and I did this for a long time. Some of the fellows,who were in the center,I knew at Tufts, and they would say, "This is the way you do it, Mary, put it here and shake and do that." so that by the time I had really opened my office, I could really do that, extractions, you know, fairly good.﻿16
CG MT CG MT CG MT
CG:
MT:
CG: MT:
CG: MT:
CG:
What kind of patients did you have at the Boston Dispensary? All kinds. You know, this is down there on Bennett Street. I don't know the Boston Dispensary. Do you know where Tufts Medical Center is? Around near Dover Street? Near Chinatown?
Off of School [Street], yes. But then it was in the back of what they used to call the Floating Hospital. This is where it was, and some of the fellows from Tufts were doctors on the staff there, so I met down there, went there, I think, Monday mornings. It was good practice, because at school you didn't get enough practice. One person would do the injection, another guy would do this, et cetera. But here you did it all. So I went m one day, and the girl who was the dental nurse, she'd tell me they'd hear the people say, "Get the colored girl; she won't hurt you."
Oh, the patients knew that? So you were known as sort of a painless dentist? How did you manage that?
That wasn't really true, that wasn't true. That hurts anyway. It wasn't like today. Those instruments today are terrific.
Did you have patients that were from other countries, immigrant patients?
Down at the Dispensary. And, of course, where we lived in Cambridge, we had Polish and Italian.
What was it like being among all these different groups of people?
No different, really. And the kids at school were, you know, doing their pictures and all this sort of thing...and a lot of them are my friends today. There's one girl who brought her kids, and then the mother and father, see, would come afterwards. I went to a dinner at the Somerset Hotel once for Mrs. Clements, who was the Mother of the Year at that time, and I sat with this fellow who was the head of the Friends Service Committee and we talked. Marjorie was in the hospital at that time, so he visited Marjone the next day and told her about me. So she brought her kids—she had three boys and a girl—and she came. Her kids are married now; three of them are married, but the youngest, the boy, is not. I still see Marjorie; she lives in Harrisville, New Hampshire, but she has a friend in Harwich; when she comes down to Harwich, she comes here. I went to visit her in Harrisville , and the boy, who is at home, came. He was somewhere else, but he came home because I was there. And the others called while I was there to say hello. Their daughter came to Tom's funeral. And we had been to each of those children's weddings. So I mean it was twenty or thirty years of friendships that we had built up from those beginnings.
Were the bulk of your patients who came to the children's clinic black, or were they all the different groups?﻿17
MT:
CG: mt: CG:
mt:
CG:
mt:
CG mt CG
mt:
CG:
mt CG Mt CG:
mt:
They were from different groups. Then at the end of the year I would have some speaker speak, and we would have some refreshments,in June or something. We had a very bright young dentist who was from Shreveport, Louisiana, who was here working at Forsyth, for our first speaker. His name was Vernon Powell. He has since died, but he was a brain; oh, he was nice.
Oh, so it was a real community activity, in that sense, you had... Yes.
Who else supported you besides Wilhelmina Crosson? Who were some of the other people who helped support the clinic and...
Well, some of the money came from the "From Swing to Opera" concert, you see...
Now was this gala benefit, this was to get it off the ground and get the supplies going, because you didn't get that much income from it, did you?
No. No, I think they charged them ten cents, you know, for whatever you did for them, so it really didn't pay. It was just really a community effort, and then the Cox Fund would send you either -$200 or $250 a month or something like that.
How did you link up with the Cox Fund? Through Wilhelmina Crosson.
When you went into the schools, did somebody else take over the clinic, or did the clinic just close down?
No, the clinic closed down. It was in my house. I devoted just one day a week to them, but it got so that if some kid had a toothache, they'd come anytime.
What other community activities were you involved in during this period? Let's see, you got married in 1930 and that marriage didn't last.
Nine years.
Nine years, so you got divorced in 1939. Yes.
What other kinds of community activities...Were you still active in the AKA at this point?
After fifty years they gave us a medal in July, in New York. Mrs. Mitchell, Dr. Jessie Garnett, Bertha Wormley, Mabel Beck and myself; there were five of us who got the fifty-year medals. And then I did the college fund thing.﻿18
CG: Tell me about the college fund.
MT= That was in '51; I can't remember much about that either.
CG: You don't remember how you linked up with the college fund?
MT: Well, I had been going to the college fund... Bruce Robinson had been the cochairman the year before, he was a friend of mine, so I guess they were looking around for names after that. So then I was chosen, and I think Lucy*followed me or Bertha followed me. I don't know whether it was Lucy first and then Bertha, or Bertha, then Lucy, as cochairmen.
CG: In the process of working with the fund, did you have occasion to travel to any of the schools that the fund supported?
MT- No, no. This was just a fund raising for here. We went around to various
little meetings here to do this, and they had a luncheon, and they'd take up pledges and all that sort of stuff.
CG:
CG:
When did you get involved with the NAACP?
Well, I think we've always joined; I think we've always had just a small membership. But then sometime, I don't know when it was, Tom went to a meeting out in Newton, I think, and we decided we would both join, I mean get the life membership. So we did that, and then I went to dinner in '74, and Kivie Kaplan, who has since died, had come up with this golden heritage, that's a thousand dollars, so I decided I'd do that.
CG: Do you remember much about the movement to build the NAACP, because you would have been coming out of school then?
I don't remember. We'd been to a number of the banquets and all that sort of stuff, and then out in Natick, Tom and I were some of the charter members of that organization. He, more than I, was instrumental in helping to form the South Middlesex chapter out there.
Do you remember much about other movements that were going on, say, do you have any memories of the Garvey movement or any of the discussion that went on in the community?
I knew that this was a Back-to-Africa movement, but I didn't know much about that.
CG: When did you move to Natick?
MT: .53.
CG: What prompted you to move to the suburbs?
Well, after I married Tom, every time we went out on Christmas or Thanksgiving, the telephone rang, the doorbell rang. Sometimes it was midnight and somebody had a toothache, so he said, "Darn it, you don't get any rest, so I'm going to do something about that." So Bertha's husband used
*Lucy Miller Mitchell﻿19
MT: (cont.) to sing in the Framingham Choral Society, and one of the guys that sang, and his wife who also sang in this, was being transferred from Natick to some place else—I think it was Jersey—and so they were going to sell their house. So Tom said, "Okay, this is it," and we bought their house. And of course, then I wasn't there because the policemen used to call me, "There's some man up here with a toothache." Or else they'd come at nine, ten o'clock, and sometimes we'd just pull in and somebody was there, so... Every holiday you could look for it, because not many people have their office in their home, so they expect to find you there. So then when I moved out, I wasn't there.
CG- I wanted to ask you...in those days, how did you manage to find husbands that liked to have a career woman for a wife? [laughter]
^T: I'm not so sure that any of them like it too much. You know that?
What kind of problems did you face in trying to have a career and a...
MT: I was already in school, so really there wasn't much they could do...
except that,now, my first husband's brother's wife also graduated from Tufts. But he didn't want her to practice, and she never did, or didn't practice but a very short time. And if she had, it could have helped them over a whole lot of rough spots, because back then when he went up to his job and his card wasn't in the rack, the work was no more. I think he worked for Ford. Whereas if she was doing some practice, she could've helped out, but he didn't want it, so she didn't do it. Their son is the new bishop in the Episcopal church, Harold Wright. He married a Yancy girl from Everett, but they're divorced now. But she didn't practice. Jessie was the first black woman from Tufts; Jeannette was the second one, and I was the third.
CG* What was Jeannette's last name?
MT: Banks.
CG:
So you already had a career, so it wasn't that much they could do about it.
I think Tom was a very proud man. He thought AKA was great; in fact, his daughter went with me on a project. I knew his first wife. I had been down to Mississippi one year, I think, about four years in the summer, and his daughter was a psychiatric social worker, but she was in school then, and she wanted to go, so her mother said that if I went, she could go. So she went, and she went as my assistant.
CG: Now how did you get involved with that project and the Mississippi project, and what was it like for you, what was the experience like?
Well, the Mississippi project was one of those AKA sponsored. I just said I'd like to go. Dr. Dorothy Ferebee was the head of it then. They had never had a dentist, but they had a medical doctor, Dr. Ferebee, and they had some nurses. So I went down and...
CG* And these were all members of AKA?﻿20
MT: Yes. And it started out as a teaching project at first, because, I don't know who it was, somebody had gone to California and was talking about the poor conditions, and this woman who had been born in Mississippi said she didn't believe it. So she went back, and then brought the idea to the sorority. So she got this group together, and they went down a couple of years before I went, and I went with them about four years. But then the war came, and with gasoline rationing and all that, they had to cut it out. But I think by this time, it had been written up in National Geographic and a number of other publications. So Tufts College took it over, but they had difficulty because they didn't want any white doctors in that area. They built the hospital down there in Mound Bayou.
CG: who didn't want the white doctors?
MT:
CG MT CG
I don't know, maybe the government or something didn't want the white doctors, so they got doctors from Meharry to go. Tufts had a project in Mississippi and one at Columbia Point, and they were going to compare the two; that's how I happened to go. A couple of girls that I met down there are friendships that lasted through the years.
What were your most vivid memories of Mississippi, what struck you most? The poverty. What was it like?
Terrible. There were shacks and all that, a mess of rutty, muddy roads.
But I did hear from a woman who was living there, and her little boys. I heard from her until maybe two or three years ago, when she died. I said to Tom, "Gee, it's funny Mrs. Jones didn't contact me this year," because I used to send her a couple of bucks every year, and her boy, when one time we came up, had written he wanted a coat. And I said, "Well, I can't buy it here. You go up to Cleveland and pick it out, and then I'll send you the money."
So he did that; so for years we would write back and forth. And then when I first met her, her little boy came to the car, and we were on our way to the clinic that day, and he said, "My mother said will you come there." So I went; she was in bed and she said, "I have TB. I think my little boy has TB too." Along the side of the room were vegetables the child had canned. She had told the kid what to do, and he did it. So Tom, whose daughter was with me, sent down a carton of clothes from New York, and I picked out things that I thought would fit the kids, and I took them over to them. The next day when we came from the field where we had been working, they were all dressed up in these things. I continued to hear from them. Then she got better and later went to Tampa, where Tom's mother lived. Finally I gave her his mother's address, and she would go by to see her and write letters to us from Tom's mother and all that. So then when I didn't hear from her, I said, "Gee, that's funny," and then the son called me later that she had died.﻿21
MT: (cont.) But then in Natick, Tom used to take a little old lady out to
Lexington, and every once in a while she'd give him five or ten dollars and say, "Give this to Mary and tell her to do with it what she wants." Well, Gertrude Cuthbert had been to Mound Bayou, and I had asked her to look up Mrs. Jones but I only had the box number. But she couldn't contact her. I don't know what happened, so I sent Mrs. Jones the ten dollars to give to Mr. Black, who was the head of the cooperative farm. When he wrote to Gertrude, he said, "I knew the woman all along; I just didn't know her name." This woman kept asking him, "Don't you know the woman dentist in Boston?" But I didn't know him; he didn't know me. But when she gave him the money, he says, "She passes my house all the time.
CG:
CG:
CG: MT:
MT; CG:
mt
CG
How many patients did you see? Did you see patients from the entire county?
^T: Well, we went to different counties, and we would go to school or to the church. Sometimes we didn't have a table, so we'd take the door off and pad it with newspapers, and then put a sheet over it and lay out the medicines. Sometimes we would just be outdoors, but you met lots of people from all over. And the men would talk to various girls and say, "Abraham gave us our freedom, but you gals gave us a new kind of freedom,' and I won't tell the white folks what they say.
Did you have problems with the whites in the area?
No, we didn't have any. I think all that stuff was before we got there. We had some little pamphlets we'd just hand out to tell where we would be at a certain time, so we went to different spots all around. Well, one thing, when I went back, they had a brand new post office.
Have the living conditions changed a lot since you were there? Well, they still have those huts and all.
And people were working in cotton, sharecropping?
Yes. I went to the cooperative farm, where they share their stuff, and then they can it and all that. This is what Kay Doherty works for.
I see. Now was the cooperative farm part of the AKA project, or was this a separate...
No, that's been developed since then. I see.
I got a note from Kay. She's remarried, and the last couple of years she had the plan where you take the things to her to pack and process for sending to Mississippi. But this year, when she wasn't going to be able to use it, she said she'd got another place for it. I saw the note, but I thought it was one of those I had read, so I answered it and told her I was glad... Congratulations to Ron. And now that she's getting another place, I was trying to get some things together for her. I have enough in my closet to spin out...﻿22
CG: So you're still sending clothes to Mound Bayou?
MT: Yes, and dolls and crayons and toothbrushes and all that.
CG: What do you think, who were the people... You know, you've had enough view of life in this country to have seen a lot of leaders come and go. Who did you most admire, in terms of people who did things to change black people's lives?
MT: I think Roy Wilkins. No matter what they say about his being, you know, an Uncle Tom, I think he's done a tremendous job. I think that.
CG: I see. I also remember that you organized...didn't you organize a fair housing committee out in Natick?
MT: We worked with the fair housing, yes.
CG: How did that come about and what was that like?
MT: Well, there was a fellow who worked at Natick Laboratories, I think, Abe King, and he worked with another fellow, I've forgotten his name now; he had moved away. They kept saying, "Why do you keep, you know, moving back and forth?" And the man didn't realize that the guy couldn't get a house out there. So then this is how we really started.	I think there were
about, there couldn't have been more than fifty or sixty Negro families when we moved out to Natick, and now there are lots of them.
CG: How did the South Middlesex branch of the NAACP get organized? You were part of the organizers for that.
MT: Tom was connected with that more. I think there must have been a crisis, I'm not too sure on that, and they called a couple of meetings and they organized. They had some good leadership out there.
CG: What do you think are some of the most significant things that they have done?
Well, they've had a couple of educational seminars, and they've given their awards, and then they've done the usual fighting for people's rights. The strange thing is, so many people don't join or don't know about it until they get into difficulty, and then that's the first place they start. See, many people just don't want any part of anything like that until they need 'em.
CG: So do you think the general criticism of blacks, in terms of their support of organizations, that they only react in a crisis, is a valid one?
MT: Yes, don't you? I wish they could just see that you have to work with what you have. Like in a church, there's somebody else's family friend, they don't have a good voice, they have to still work around him, on whatever they do___ It takes a lot of living to see both sides.
CG: Tell me about the awards that you've received. You've received lots of awards from different places.﻿23
MT: CG:
MT: CG:
MT CG MT CG HT
CG: MT:
CG: HT: CG: MT: CG: MT: CG: MT:
Well, the Press Club was the first one, and I think that was because of the clinic. And then...well, maybe this was the first...
No, I think the Press Club was, because the AKA would have been...oh, they were around the same time, weren't they, the children's clinic and the Mississippi project?
What time was the Press Club? I guess that's somewhere.
I have it here somewhere. Well, in 1938, the Press Club of Boston awarded you that certificate for having made "an outstanding contribution to the welfare and progress of her community by establishing in her office a dental clinic for underprivileged children of the nieghborhood. She's one of the few women to enter the dental profession, and one of three women of her race to practice dentistry in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts." How did you feel about that award when you got it?
1 was flabbergasted.
Really?
You know, writers and stuff, you know... Was it a women's group or a men's group?
No, both women and men. They either wrote for the paper or they wrote for something; I was surprised, I was. Did you know Eugene Gordon? Your family would know Eugene Gordon. He was married to a Mrs. Kelly, you remember Mrs. Kelly, who was the social worker in Cambridge?
No, I don't remember her.
She used to live on Copley Street. Maybe she still does. Her husband was Eugene Gordon. He married a white woman and lives in New York. I don't know what happened, you'd think they were an ideal couple if you saw them. That was a surprise. I think Dr. Jessie Garnett was in on that too.
You mean she received an award from them also?
No, I think she was the instigator of my getting it. We were good friends.
Now, you received the award, the cup here, from Alpha Kappa Alpha...
That was in Detroit.
At the national convention...
Yes.
Do you go to your AKA national conventions every year?
No, no, not every year, but I went to the last one. This is when they gave us the fifty-year award. I don't go every year. I was regional director one time for that sorority, in '39 or '40, I believe. But that's a lot of work to be done, you know, and a lot of traveling.﻿24
CG: What were some of the other things that Alpha Kappa Alpha did while you've been active, that you've participated in?
MT: oh, locally?
CG: Locally, nationally, in other words I want to know, why is Alpha Kappa Alpha so important?
MT: oh, I don't know. I just think they do a good job. Besides that, I think that you form friendships that last all through the years, in most cases. Of course, there are a few people you don't care if you don't know, but most of them... Now this girl that's coming tomorrow. I met her on a train going to Kansas City and we have been friends through the years, and Jessie and Bertha and Lucy... I think perhaps you would like them anyway, but there just seems a closer bond; we share some of the same things.
CG: Getting back to the first question, you mentioned the things that you
did locally. What were some of the things that you did locally that...
Oh, we had some different projects,where you tried to encourage the youngsters to go to school, and we had kind of guidance programs. We used to have a garden party, for I don't know how many years, in the summer, and people looked forward to that. But we had a tendency, also, to get tired of doing things, and we'd say, "Oh, let's do something different," and this is what happens.
CG: What were some of the things that you did as regional director?
Well, we organized sort of a Basilei conference, where all the presidents met and discussed their programs or problems and what have you. Now they do this sort of as a leadership program.
CG: How have things changed since you first started your work? You mean in the dental profession?
GG: Both in the dental business and in the community.
Mt: Well, I think things are better in both categories. In the dental field, I think the kids are better trained today than they were when I came along.
CG:
You mean the way you get trained is better?
MT: Yest and the research that they're doing, the research, the materials
you'use, and the drugs that they use, and the instruments. I think this is a great improvement. Sometimes, though, I feel that they have lost the human touchy I don't think they're as sympathetic with their patients; they don't spend as much time with their patients as we did. I think they're thinking about the almighty dollar. Of course, there were a few people who did that way back then too, but I think you found some people who would have time to spend with you, to explain what they were doing, and all that. And there are some today, but I think most of them, it's technique today;﻿25
MT: (cont.) you have the chair manners and all that sort of stuff. This is my own opinion; I'm not certain that I'm right on that, but I think the world is better today. But I think I'd hate to be a youngster today; I don't think I could stand all the pressures that they have.
CG = I wanted to ask you this because you had mentioned before some of the work
you did in doing dentures, and there were special problems that black people had with their dentures... the dentistry, the profession...
MT: Colors and stuff, yes. They've come a long ways with this business, and the type of material that they make the teeth out of and all that sort of stuff. They still have trouble making lowers fit, however.
CG:
How did you solve the problem for your black patients, you know, the dentures and...
mT: What you did, you tried to use materials that were more natural to their
complexion and the color of their gums. But you had to do this in selected areas, because some people didn't like that either.
CG = You mean some of the patients didn't like that? They didn't want to have colored teeth?
No, no, they didn't want to have, you know, darker gums. And of course, some people want small white teeth, regardless of the type or the color or the size of their teeth. When they want them replaced, they want small white ones. You had to take into consideration the bone loss and all the rest of the stuff that you had to make up with denture material. But
I think this is___they just see a picture and they want to look like it.
Sometimes they brought me pictures when they were much younger, and wanted me to reproduce what they had when they were very much younger.
CG= Really?
MT= Yes. Do this, and turn the tooth this way or that way, some little irregularity they had, or some space they had... They didn't just take what you gave them. But I don't know whether they've conquered that, those lower dentures staying, some of them do it in spite of, and some don't in spite of. But I think that the kids are brighter, their opportunities are greater, and they don't know anything about the hard times that the rest of us had. They think they're just starting from now; they don't know that we laid the groundwork for them.
CG: In what ways do you think you laid groundwork for them? Well, we opened doors that they didn't have before.
CG= You're talking about especially now black dental students?
Yes black kids. A lot of women in general. If one makes it, it makes it easier for the next, you know.
CG= How was it being one of the first three, how did you feel about that?﻿26
MT: i don't think I knew about it then.
CG: Really?
MT: No. I knew the other two people, and Jessie was very helpful to me, you know. She'd say, "Well listen, somebody comes in here, you don't have the thing that you need to put in, for the material, put in a temporary filling until you can get what you need." She's always been a very helpful person.
CG: So she extended help to you, to help you come through, and then you in turn did it for the other students.
MT: Yes, but the next black girl that came through was twenty-two years after I finished.
CG:
MT:
Twenty-two years.
Yes, and she was from Monrovia. Some of the people in the office still remembered me, and they said to her, you ought to meet Mary, and so that s how we met and we became good friends. She lives in Africa now, but two of her children are in school over here. She's just been here and is coming back in a month's time, because someone called me just the other day, because we were going to get together when she comes back. And I saw her when we went there, she was just opening her office. That was in 1960 when she opened her office. But she has a small rubber plantation and they had some sort of a store. She married a fellow from Bern, Switzerland. He worked for Firestone.
CG: Ah, the rubber people.
But of course he lost his job when he married her.
CG: oh.
MT= But they've done well. I think they have three daughters. Her uncle was the ambassador from Monrovia. After I met Marie, then I met her uncle and his wife, and they had three children, and then her mother came; they've all been down here when we used to just come summers. And her uncle was down here to see me last year. He was in the country, so he came on down to see me. The uncle's son went to Babson, which was in Wellesley, so we used to have him over, he used to come any time. Then I used to go over to his school, help him to put up the curtains. And I went and bought the rug for him, picked out the rug for his room,and the bedspread and all the things he needed, so he thought that our house was his second home.
CG: That was another thing that I was interested in. You've never had any children of your own?
No.
CG: How many children have you helped in some way or another, or students have you helped?﻿27
MT: Oh, I don't know how many, but I mean, we've always had a house full of people. If we thought we could help, we did.
CG: Can you remember some of the more memorable students that you've been acquainted with, where you've had children and students in your home?
MT: oh I don't know... Peter was a particularly nice boy. And Richard Bright was a particularly nice boy.
CG= Richard who?
Bright, from Monrovia. We've had so many people come through; if they needed somewhere to stay, we kept them. We had a friend in Sherborn, and we had been there for, I guess, about ten or twelve years for Thanksgiving, and whoever was visiting our house, we'd take them with us for Thanksgiving dinner. Richard and another boy who was there from Monrovia went with us one time. We took Bill, who was working on his doctorate at Brandeis, and we took a girl who had lost her husband, and we took Peter and George Soso; anybody who was visiting us could go.
And now they come down and get me at Thanksgiving. I go up to their house, maybe the Sunday before, and I stay until the Sunday after, and they bring me home. When my mother died, they adopted Tom and me as their mother and father. So when I go to visit them, and somebody comes in, Harriet" will say, "Have you met my mother?" And they'll say no, and she'll introduce us. And when they're gone, I say to her, "Harriet, they don't know you've got a black mother," and we both just fall out laughing. If you're at the store, she does the same thing. She was the one who was responsible for the article in the Framingham paper, because she does the advertising, or she did. She's now in Quincy, and they come down here and Harriet will say, "Isn't there anything you want Frank to do?" The day before Mother's Day he planted my tomatoes (I've got some tomato plants out there), and then he'll plant my flowers, and he'll do whatever I need to have done. But they don't like the crowds during the summer, so they'll be back when they think the crowds are over. I send them a birthday card, and he'll put it in the living room ,and then he'll take it in the dining room, he'll move it all around the house, and his daughter will say, "My goodness, when are you going to throw that away?"
CG- So you know, with your career and, you know, you really did have quite a family, quite a number of people in your...
MT: There was a fellow who lives just a couple of...right across the street from us. He was a shut-in, so my neighbor, Kay Corsa, used to feed him every night. I said to her, "Okay, I can help you do that," so I would feed him on Friday night, because that was when she went to the hairdresser's, and on Sunday her husband took her to dinner. Well, as long as Tom could walk across there, he would take it for me, but when he got ill, I would take it myself. If anybody was visiting me, black or white, I would send them over with Gus's dinner, and I'd call him up and say, "Gus, I'm sending my daughter (or my son) over with your dinner." So finally he'd say to me,
^Harriet Fisher﻿28
MT: (cont.) "How many children do you have?" [laughter]
Sometimes when I'd take it over to him, he'd be, oh, down in the dumps, because he couldn't get out, but he could sit in the window and see my house. So he'd be down in the dumps, and he would say, "Well, I don't think I'll eat it now," and I'd say, "Oh, come on Gus, you eat your dinner." So he'd sit there and he'd start, and by the time I'd left him, he was smiling or laughing. And one of the neighbors would perhaps be working in his yard, and he'd say, "Well, just what did you say to her?" Gus said, "You wouldn't understand." But he'd say, you know, "I don't have anybody," and I said, "Well Gus, you can't pick your relatives, but you can pick your friends, and sometimes your friends are much better than your relatives
And he was talking about having to go to a nursing home, and I said, "As long as we can help you, you'll never go to a rest home, so let's don't have any more of that." So then he'd feel better and I'd go on home. So he really died not having to go to a rest home, but the neighbors thought Well, if we didn't feed him and take care of him, because sometimes I would do his laundry for him, then he'd have to go, if he didn't have somebody who would feed him every day. When she went on vacation, I fed him every day. If I went on vacation, then she'd feed him. And for Thanksgiving, if some woman, who was supposed to have power of attorney, didn't invite him to dinner, then Harriet would give me a Thanksgiving dinner to bring to him when I came back.
CG: It's almost as if in both your professional life and in your personal life, you've always been a good neighbor.
Yes. Well, we were the only blacks around that neighborhood, so we really had... And my next door neighbor was wonderful. When I had to go to the hospital, then she fed Tom every night. And if he couldn't get to the hospital, he'd call me and tell me, "Well, Kay did this for me today, and Kay gave me this to do." When I had both my operations, she'd come in every night and put the little patch on my eye, you're supposed to wear when you go to bed, so that the covers wouldn't hit it. But she'd come over and fix it every night for me. And they still call me and come down. This husband and wife...one wants to tell me something, and the other one wants to tell me, and they are both just jabbering away. And if I go up there, I call 'em and they take me to dinner somewhere up there. I promised to go and stay with them but she works, she does private duty, so we haven't gotten the time when she's going to be at home.
CG= How do you think things have changed for black people in general, in the community...
I think they're better. Of course, we have a lot of people still at the bottom of the ladder, but you have a lot of people who are better off financially and better educated and all. It's a slow process, but I think we're improving. I think we'll make it; I don't know whether I'll live to see it, but I think we'll get there.
What do you think are the most important ingredients for producing change? What makes for good change?﻿29
MT: I think we need motivation. We have to believe we can do it, that's all. Somehow, I just wish that some of the young people wouldn't look down on the ones who are below them. I think they ought to be willing to help, but I suppose this is human nature...
CG: You mean the way they look down on poorer people? Yes. But I guess this is human nature.
CG: You've mentioned before we were talking, that a friend of yours was dealing with some of the newer people who are moving into either the Vineyard or Oak Bluffs ,and everybody wants to know, what do you do for a living?
MT: No, I think this was somebody who we both had known, and I think she was just being snobby.
CG: Do you find more of that nowadays than there traditionally has been, or less?
MT:
CG:
MT: CG:
MT:
CG:
MT:
I don't know if it's more or less. It annoys me more, because I think people ought to know better. Some people are content with being the only black, feeling they are better than other people, and I don't think this really helps any. I think when the chips are down, most likely people see that you are black, they don't see you...they make their opinions before they know you, so that you might be the brightest person there is, but I don't think they give you a chance. No, I think we have our snobs too. And this is too bad.
Do you have any reflections on the skin color caste system within the black community, the way it was practiced years ago, and how is that different now?
I don't know that it's...I think some people still have it, don't you?
I'm not sure. What was it like for you growing up? Did it ever affect you?
Not really. But I still think there is a lot of it. I don't think there's as much here in Massachusetts as there is in some other parts of the country. But there's a lot of people who comment a great deal on coloring hair. So what? Beauty's only skin deep.
This is one of the things that people have trouble learning. How has being a woman, and being specifically a black woman, affected some of the options that you've had, in terms of things that you've done? You've talked about becoming a dentist and sort of pathbreaking and doing some of the other things, but what's special about being black and a woman? How has that been special for you in this society?
I don't really know. I don't think I've ever thought of it a great deal. I think being a woman was more important, I mean entered into it more, than just being black and being a woman. You get certain prejudices if you're black; you get certain prejudices if you're a woman; maybe double if you're a woman and black but... I went to a doctor down here, he's from Tufts,﻿30
MT: (cont.) so he said, "Gee, you must have had a hard time being a woman and
being black," and I said, " Yes, but I made it." But he didn't give me any discount for being a professional person, and I think it was fifty-some dollars for his examination. I think he was out twenty-five years, and I was out about thirty years or more, thirty-five. And of course, the boys in school would say, "Oh you ought to learn to cook or something else, instead of being in school," you know, but that was just supposedly a joke.
CG:
ht-
CG HT CG
CG:
CG:
MT:
CG:
They would joke about it, but..
MT: They thought, you know, "What are you doing this for?" You see, I want to do it.
CG= You said that the fellows at Tufts were fairly cooperative anyway.
Oh yes, they were nice to me.
What do you think of women's liberation?
We've always been liberated.
In what way, in what way?
MT: Black women have always been liberated, haven't they? They've run most of their homes and all the rest of the stuff. The thing I think mostly, that we should have equal pay for equal work; the rest of the stuff is for the birds, I think.
Which things, I'd really like.
MT= Any of the rest of what they think about it...I don't know, what else.
The main thing is, I think, for equal work, if they're going to work and do the job, they should get paid. But as far...I don't know very much about the women's liberation.
You said black women have always been liberated. Were the women that you grew up with...you mentioned that your mother had really good ambitions for you, good ideals and the women in her family tended to be somewhat independent. . .
Right.
CG: And were the women in the community in general that way?
MT: I think most of them were. I think they had to maneuver and stretch
whatever little moneys there were coming in. Whatever they had was because they spent it carefully and they planned and all that. Yes, I think the women...I don't know what else they stand for. If the guy's going to open the door for you, that's beautiful. The others want to be very independent and open it for themselves, that's all right too.
But you'd prefer to have the option of —﻿31
MT: Let me choose whether I want it. The other day I was so busy getting out that Peeks didn't have a chance to get around. He said, "Look Mary, I was going to open the door for you." This happens when you live alone, you're so used to doing things for yourself that you just don't think about somebody coming around and opening a door, so I said, "All right, after this I'll sit still."
CG: Another thing I'm curious about, because this comes up a lot for modern
people, and I think especially for educated black women, black women who've trained for professional degrees, this is a problem that comes up a lot now, in terms of finding someone to marry. You had mentioned, you know, your husband, and he was not a dentist like you. How did you two happen to get together and how did you manage to stay together, because a lot of young people have trouble marrying people who are either not in the same profession or who are not making more money than they are.
MT: Well, I think you have to work at this, really. I mean if you want it to work. And you can't be throwing it in his face all the time, that I make more money than you have. I mean you can't even infer it in any way, words or actions. Tom was a very nice person and he loved me very much, which makes a big difference, and he was a proud guy, so...
CG: When you say proud, he was proud of you.
MT: Yes. And he was a nice person, too, besides that. He was particularly nice to my mother. After he had retired from the post office, he found a little job out in Framingham with the dentists and the manufacturing company, and this built up a little Social Security. But he got home earlier than I did, 3:30 or something like that, so he and my mother would go out for a ride almost every day, and they'd come home just before I got home for dinner. Now, neither one of them liked to cook, so of course I had to cook the dinner when I came home, or else I'd planned it in the weekend, so that I could get it together very quickly. But she didn't want us to get married.
CG: Who, your mother?
MT: No, she said to him, "She's doing all right here; you're doing all right in New York. Why don't you let well enough alone?" But once I made up my mind we were going to get married, she really liked him. And then, I guess, she felt that well, if something happens to me, then you will be left by yourself, so we had a good relationship. But I think it is difficult, I mean even without the career angle, the period of adjustment is difficult, but...I had practiced a number of years, you see, when I married Tom. But I never flaunted, you know, I made this much this week or that much this week, and if we decided to buy something, well, we bought it together.
CG:
So what advice would you give to young black women nowadays?﻿32
Ml: 'Course, this is the thing that really annoys me, is that usually when the guy has the higher job, he goes out and marries himself a white gal. That leaves a lot of us without any...I don't know what to say to that one.
CG: Do you think part of the problem could come from the society, that has always preached to the majority of women that you should stay home and stay behind your husband? And men grow up expecting that, where we as black women have not been raised that way?
MT: That might be an answer, but I don't...because most of us have had to work. I guess most of the white women are working too now, so I don't know what the answer is.
CG:
Do you think maybe, possibly one of the problems with women's liberation is that they're searching around for ways to solve problems that black women solved a long time ago?
MT: Maybe. They have a couple of noisy ones, black women in that organization. I've forgotten their name, they showed her on television the other day. Flo Kellery?
CG: Kennedy.
MT: Kennedy.
CG: I asked you about what ingredients made for significant change, and given
the problems of the seventies and the problems that still... You mentioned the problems of the economics, the problems of still being on the bottom. You know, if somebody said to you, you can write the blueprint for change, how would you go about changing it, how would you go about writing that blueprint?
MT:
CG: MT:
CG: MT:
Well, I think it's a slow process, but you've got to be educated first , and given the opportunity to use it afterwards.
So you feel education's still one of our most important problems...
Oh, I don't think you can do anything without it. Yes, you've got to have something. There's too many people out there wanting the same thing, and you got to be prepared. You've got to do it!
What would you consider your most important achievements, reflecting back.., how many years did you practice now?
About forty.
CG:
Forty. And you look back on all of the things that you did, with the NAACP and Alpha Kappa Alpha. What was the thing that you feel most proud about?
^T: i think I enjoyed the work on the Mississippi Health Project the most.
When you think you've really helped some people that needed it. And that was a big sacrifice, because that was daring the depression days, when you gave up whatever little money you could -make at that time to work for nothing﻿33
MT: (cont.) for them down there. Yes, I think of all the things I did, I enjoyed that more. I enjoyed my work also, because if I had to do over again, I'd do the same thing.
CG:
Even nowadays, with all the new ways, new things that are happening, you'd do it the same way, with the same kind of care?
MT: I'd take dentistry again. I think I would specialize either with children
or with older people, geriatrics, either way. But I'd still like dentistry.
CG: I'm really curious about this. You mentioned having gone to Nigeria for independence. Where have you traveled and what have been your most... first of all, where are the different places you've gone to?
MT: We went to Africa in 1960. We stopped first in Ghana, and then we went to Monrovia and then to Lagos, for the independence celebration. We came back through Europe, we went to Zurich, to Italy, Paris and London, and then we came home.
CG: What was your initial reaction when you got to Ghana?
MT: Well, we were fortunate. We had met a Dr. Sigh and his wife, who had been at Harvard and we stayed with them, so that we were able to see a lot of the countryside. Then I knew a girl from Westboro, who was working in Ghana, and she took us around. And then, of course, we saw all the slave markets; that was very interesting. We went to the University of Ghana and I think that was it. And then of course in Monrovia, we stayed with the Brights. They have a rubber plantation, and they took us out to the place on the plantation, where we saw the men gathering rubber, and we went to the Firestone place and to the hospital. But the independence celebration was gorgeous.
CG: What was that like? You're the first person I've ever talked to that was at an independence celebration.
MT: It was like a carnival, really, and they had various functions all around. I have a cousin who lives in Nigeria; she's married to a Nigerian fellow. They met at Purdue. He's something with the Department of Roads and Construction, and she at that time was Dr. Azikiwe's secretary, so we got all these gold invitations. We met Princess Victoria, who came over instead of the Queen. And when Dr. Azikiwe said to the princess, "I'd like you to meet some people from America," and she shook hands with Tom, he put his hand in his pocket and said, "I can't use this hand any more." But it was very nice.
CG:	In 1960, you met Princess...
MT:	Alexandria.
CG:	From England?
MT:	Yes.﻿34
CG: Oh, the Duchess of, what's her name, Kent or...
MT: They had a garden party and all this, you know. It was quite nice. We went to a university in Ennsuka, which is a little town near Lagos, because of a fellow named Blyden who was going to be the dean or something of this university; his kids had gone to Peabody School. Last year he was recalled as the ambassador from Sierra Leone to Moscow, but he's back in this country now. He married a girl from Worcester, and they have either six or eight kids, so we used to see him frequently. Then when we came back and my mother died, we had people, instead of giving money for flowers, make a donation to his school in Africa, so they gave a few scholarships. I think they got three or four hundred dollars for this type of thing. And then, of course, they had uprisings and stuff so he had to leave; he was big political stuff.
But when we first moved to Natick, we used to have, what I used to call fireside chats. If the day was good we had them outdoors, and the first one we had, it rained, and Ed Blyden was the speaker for the first one. So we took the furniture out of the living room, everybody sat on the floor all around, and he spoke. Well, we had it for a number of years. We thought that what it would do was to get the families to know each other, but it actually didn't work out like I wanted to. I mean, a few people became friendly. I had both white and black people, but particularly, I wanted the black ones to know each other. But I think sometimes when the blacks move out into a suburb, they move out because they want to get rid of the ghetto and they don't want to become friends. Anyway, it didn't work like that, so we kept it up for a number of years, and some of my white friends in Natick still say, "Gee, I'll never forget the wonderful times we had out there." The last time I was in Natick, this girl had us to dinner and she kept talking about it. And one time we brought her and her husband and a group of them in to hear King talk at the little church in Cambridge that's right at the square, as you go up Western Avenue...
CG: Oh, First Baptist Church of Cambridge?
MT; yes. And she says, "Oh, I'll never forget that." So they come down frequently to see me, too. And if I go to Natick, I call. I can't see everybody, so I usually call them. This one girl who, if I call her first, she monopolizes me and I can't see the rest of them, so I don t usually call her until I've called everybody else.
CG: How long did you carry on the fireside chats, how long did that...
MT: oh, we must have had them at least five or six years. And then Tom organized the junior choir at the Baptist church, and he only had one little black kid in his choir. Then at the end of the season, when they had the vacation, we'd have a cookout at our house for his kids. But I was the one who did the work, of course, and he played with the kids. Some of the mothers came and all that, too. I had to cook the food and do all that planning for it. There was one woman who used to play the piano and help him with the kids. She has just moved to Texas, and she would help him keep order. Her husband had been transferred from Natick down to Texas,﻿35
MT: (cont.) so they sent me the church [notice] that they were going to have a reception for them at church, and I couldn't get up there. There's a florist out there who I had been using for years, but hadn't seen since, oh, shortly before Tom died, so I wrote her a note to send Gina two orchids. I said, "Send Gina an orchid corsage." So Gina wrote me a note and said, "Oh, that was so pretty, I wore it at church and everybody wanted to know where did you get it," and all that stuff, and how she hated to leave; they had been in Natick fifteen years. We had lived there twenty-five years. She was a southerner, but she was a wonderful gal. She'd say to the kids, "Did you hear Mr. Thompson? Sit down and stop that noise."
So one time, Tom wanted to give her an orchid, way back when, just for helping him out. I said, "That doesn't make sense. Why don't we have them down to the Cape?" So we had her, her husband and her three kids down, so they enjoyed that. Her little boy graduated from high school, so I had sent him « check with a little card, and he wrote a nice note saying, how did you know I was graduating, and told me what he'd bought with the money and where he was going to school and all that.
CG: Over the five or six years that you had the fireside chats, who were some of the people who came to speak?
MT: Neighbors and the people from church. I had Lieutenant Wright one time
to be the speaker, and Bruce Robinson another time and, as I said, Blyden spoke...
CG: Now is he any relation, is he a descendant of Edward Wilmont Blyden, the man who went to Africa in the missionary movement?
MT: Yes.
CG: Oh, he is.
MT: He's a smart cookie. He's really bright.
CG: You said he was one of the people who helped you get your passport pictures together?
MT: He kept urging me, "You don't have much time, go and get those pictures."
CG: What was your reaction when you got there, when you got to the African continent, to the different peoples? Did you get a chance to see any of the native life at all?
MT5 Yes, we lived in the homes of...in Bright's and at Blyden's...
CG: Now the Bright family, one of their members was a president of Liberia.
^T: He was the ambassador from Liberia to the United States. We knew them,
and then they had rented the cottage down here for awhile. Then when they went up, I think their house wasn't ready wherever they were going, so they stayed at our house in Cambridge. One of their daughters is a pharmacist, and the other one is married to an African boy that's a physician. He's doing something in plastic surgery, so he's over in this country. I think he lives on 16th Street, and I saw them, they have two kids.﻿36
CG: What was your most memorable...besides the independence celebration, what was the most significant memory you have of visiting Africa?
MT: Oh, I guess it was the night of the celebration, when they took the English flag down, and the Nigerian flag went up. Some of those people standing stood there and cried; it was a very dramatic moment. That was wonderful and then they sang the Nigerian national anthem. Oh, Tom used to sing that with glee.
CG: Ahh.
MT: See. Then Dr. Jessie and Tom and I went to Hawaii together. We did the four islands, and all of the island of Hawaii. Gertrude's husband knew a fellow who lived in Hawaii, and do you know Muriel Turk? Her brother lives there and he's married to a Japanese girl, and a woman from down here, her daughter lives there, so that we had those contacts. And then a boy from Natick was at Pearl Harbor, and his mother and father went to the Baptist church there, so he came and got us at the hotel and took us over there to Pearl Harbor. I think at first he was a little bit edgy about how his wife was going to accept this, but she was wonderful; she had come from Connecticut somewhere, so she was used to black people. She fixed dinner for us, and he took us out around the island, and the baby fell in love with Jessie, and we had a good time. Then Clara's daughter had us to dinner or breakfast or something, and then we saw Ed Senna, who was the head of the Y there, and we went to the Japanese girl's house. You take off your shoes at the door, but we didn't know that, and Senna didn't tell us before we got there, so I said to him afterwards, "Why didn't you tell us?" He says, "I forgot it." So they took us out to eat, too. We had a very nice time. And then I went to Spain with another girl. This is after Tom died; I think it was a year ago September, we went to Majorca.
CG: I was going to ask you, what was your reaction to Europe? You said when
you went in 1960, you went to Zurich, Switzerland, Italy, Paris and London, and then later on you went to Majorca, off of Spain.
MT: We went to Hawaii first, before I went to Spain; that's since Tom has died.
CG: I see. So you went to Hawaii with Tom. Did you get a chance to see any of the different groups of people in Hawaii and how they interacted? What did you think, coming from the mainland going out to Hawaii, what did you think of the looks of people...
MT: They were beautiful, but they had a lot of...the place was crowded, you
know. I think that was the first time we had seen a double-decked, covered mall. This is very commercial.
CG: But what did you think of Europe?
MT: Well, we enjoyed it, because when we went to Rome, we sat in the Colosseum and all the old places, and we went to the Vatican. This was when John was there, you see, so we enjoyed that. And in Paris we had a boat ride,﻿37
MT: (cont.) and had our dinner on the Seine. And in London we went to the
Tower, with all the jewels and all that, and we went through the Buckingham Palace, and they were playing "When the Saints Go Marching In." Oh, it was great. And then in Zurich, it was beautiful; it was so clean there, and their food is excellent. But there they look at you kind of strange because they don't see too many blacks.
CG: I was wondering, did you have any strange occurrences happen because people weren't used to you?
MT: No. The fellow in Natick, the main tourist company that Tom was friendly with, Mr. Sanders... He evidently had been to most of the places, the hotels and stuff that he had put us up in, so that it was very nice. Also, the first time we went to Jamaica, I went with the Rod and Gun Club, but the next time Mr. Sanders of the tourist guide made the arrangements for us.
CG: Which islands in the West Indies have you visited?
MT: Just Barbados and Jamaica, and we went to Nassau. I went on a cruise to Nassau with Tom, but I haven't been back since he died.
CG: What was your impression of Jamaica?
MT: i loved Jamaica. Everybody was so friendly; I loved it. That's why we went back the second time. He went both times with me to Jamaica. We met this Mrs. Robb, whose husband was a policeman, and we enjoyed it. Richard Walker was there on the Rod and Gun Club, but they've been back since; they hired a villa or something with his brother-in-law.
CG: How did you like Barbados?
MT: i didn't.
CG: You didn't. What was it about Barbados that you didn't like?
MT: They were arrogant. If you were young or white, you got served fast, but otherwise you'd wait.
CG: These were the blacks on Barbados who treated you this way?
MTj Who were serving. They have a distinct class system over there. But these were the waiters and stuff that, if you made a lot of noise, you got service. There was a Jewish woman who complained about everything. Of course, she'd been there twelve years or so, so everybody knew her. But I didn't like it... It's a very beautiful island, though, it's a gorgeous island.
CG:
The people in Jamaica didn't behave that way.
^T: No, they bent over backwards to make things comfortable for you. Just a difference in people, I guess.﻿38
CG: And also Nassau. Was Nassau...
MT: Yes,, Nassau was very interesting. The first time we went, we were on this cruise, on this boat, we just had a short time to go around; but the last time we stayed. After Tom had died, I went over with Dr. Jessie again and we had a very nice time. See, I was fatter there then.
CG: How did you come to get a house on the Cape, number one?
MT: Oh. One time when I came back from Mississippi, I brought a girl with me from Philadelphia. I think we were renting a place then, and a girl who lives down here had us for dinner or a cookout. So when she went back to Philadelphia, she said to some friends of hers, how lovely this girl's house was. It's a cape [house], but she has a lot of antique stuff in there, and so this couple wrote to her, and they came and stayed two weeks. And then they went home, and his brother and his wife came and stayed two weeks. She had bought two lots on this road, so she said to me, "Mary, I can't pay you for sending me the people, but I've decided I will let you have the lots for what I paid for them." And at that time, this was '37 or '38 or '39, somewhere, she had paid twenty-five dollars for them. But there was a friend of mine down here with me, so she said to me, "You should let me have one." So bighearted Mary again, instead of saying no, I said yes. But that girl had rented Jenny's house, and had gone away and had left a little balance of two or three dollars or something, I've forgotten, a little balance. So the next year I had written to this girl and said, '1 want to build, so we have to finish paying Jenny so I can get it."
So when I came up from Mississippi that year, she gave me a check for Jenny. Jenny said no, she took all this time to pay it, she can't have it. So then I couldn't take it from her either, because the girl would have thought that this was just a trick, so I didn't get the two lots. I could have had the two, you see. So anyway, I took the one and then I bought these others, but when the guy found out that people were going to buy them, he went up on the price, of course.
So anyway, this is how I started out down here, but I had rented two or three places up until then. One place, every time it rained we had to move the bed, because the roof leaked. Another was just a converted garage. Another one, you had to rent it in May in order to get it at all, and then the next year they had rented it for the year round, so we couldn't get it. Then one time I had one and it was up on posts, and they had rented it to some men for the winter, but there was no insulation, so they had put corrugated paper on it so that it was sturdy and all that. So you had stuff all underneath the house, and I said to them, "Will you clean it up?" Of course, he got mad and wouldn't let me have it again. So, anyway, this is how I happened to get my own.
CG: Because it seems like your house here has been sort of a center for
establishing all sorts of friendships and contacts. Do you want to talk about that a little, 'cause you seem to have met some fascinating, interesting people just having this house here.﻿39
MT: Well, I used to rent that one, you see, so that they'd stay a week or two
weeks or something of that sort. In fact, the people that just left, sometimes they would stay in here; I would stay up in the attic, wherever, and they would rent the house. So this is how they bought it, because this girl from Framingham came down with somebody and said they heard us say, Mary's going to sell it. So then when I came back the next week, they followed me into the bedroom and said, "Are you going to sell it? Why don't you let us have it?" But I hadn't planned to sell it. And another couple who had a cottage over on Orr Avenue, they came thirteen summers also, and they liked it so well they bought a lot over there and they built a house, so this is...
CG: Your entertaining people who came down is just so much, you know...especially where AKA is concerned, they talked about your having a place for the people in AKA.
MT: When I just used to have that house, sometimes—there were three bedrooms
with twin beds. We used to have two people in each twin bed. And sometimes if I was up in Boston and I met somebody who was visiting, I said, "Go ahead down; just tell my mother I sent you." Poor Mama didn't know who was coming. They said, "Mary sent me," and it was okay. The next word after my mother said hello, was, "My Mary said..." I learned very quickly I had to tell her the truth, 'cause she was going to repeat it.
CG: Who have been some of the most fascinating people that you have ever met, all of these summers and all of these...
MT: Oh, I don't know. There's a girl in New York whose name is Estelle Osborne; now she can put on anything and look dressed up. And then I had a friend who lived in Jamaica. Her name was Leathe Hemachandra. She was married to an Indian. She was an English teacher. When we just had the one house, she'd build a fire and she'd read poetry to us. What I didn't tell you... When Loretta met Ted at the Penn Station and went home, Leathe died the next week. But there was this book of Indian poetry that we had read that week that we were together, and I saw where she put the book. I went back to the funeral and that was the book I stole from her. I saw where she had put it, so I took it. And she had come every year when we had the house. She and my mother got to be real good friends. Yes, I've met a lot of interesting people.
CG: I think you read a lot, don't you?
MT: I guess I can't read too much now, because I have to keep moving a book, my eyes aren't too good.
CG: What books have you read, especially those... Well, what books have you read in general that have been most memorable, that have really...
MT: Well, I think The Prophet is my very favorite.
CG: By Kahlil Gibran, the poet.﻿40
MT: Yes. But I haven't read much recently because I can't see. The Cuthberts gave me the Readers Digest in big type, but even that sometimes runs in.
CG: Reader's Digest in large print, yes. I didn't know they even had a big print edition.
MT: Yes, and they did the Bible in the big print, too. I'm going to get that some day soon. But that annoys me because you have to keep moving the book; or else I close one eye, but I'm not complaining.
CG: No.
MT: I should take up 'iraille so I would know what I'm doing, but then they all say, "Oh, don't do that yet," but I think it's a good idea.
CG: Do you think you may eventually lose your eyesight?
MT: I don't know, I mean it's getting dimmer, but the doctor doesn't seem to think that it's going... Maybe I'll go to sleep before then.
CG: One of the things they wanted to know, and I'm curious about... You mentioned before, some of these things I know I'm making you repeat, but they're interesting, in terms of your hobbies, you said when you were married you did most of the cooking...
MT: yes.
CG: ...but you loved to cook.
MT: I love it, yes.
CG: So it never felt like a burden.
MT: No. Tom said the recipes didn't get dry on the newspaper before we had
them on the table. I still collect recipes; I was going to try this strawberry pie for you, but everybody's on a diet, this makes me mad. I love to cook and I knit and I crochet and I'd like to do some...
CG: Batiking?
MT: No, this is embroidery with yarn.
CG: Oh, the bargello.
MT: Yes, the girl across the street is going to show me that. And I wanted to do needlepoint, but that's too fine for my eyes.	I'm going to do
some decoupage, and I used to do some ceramics with Delia Taylor, but I wasn't too good at it. Those pieces here are hers. When I go to visit her I come back loaded; she doesn't know it half of the time. Her husband says to take it, she doesn't know, she won't care. When she was here, she said, "Mary," and I said, "Yes, those are yours. Your husband gave them to me." They gave this, this is by a friend of ours, a teacher in Saint Louis, Leon Hicks, and we had bought her that and he gave me that.﻿41
CG: So you've met a lot of really talented people in...
MT: Yes, Leon is very lovely. Delia thinks I'm her mother or something.
She is the artist, and of course they have a house like Grand Central Station. So when I go to Charleston, she never says, "Dr. Mary Thompson;" she says, "Oh, this is Dr. Mary." And they say, "Oh yes , we've heard about you," and her husband is just the same. I go if she's home or if she's away. I didn't go for Christmas, and so I said, "No, I'm not coming for Christmas because I'm going to California in February, and I just can't afford doing all this," so I said, "but if you need me, I'll come." So just before the art festival she called and said, "You said if I needed you, so I need you." I went down to the inaugural ball of Jay Rockefeller..
CG: Oh, down in West Virginia?
MT: To go with her husband. And after I hung up the receiver I said, "Gee, you need your head exasiined." All those women down there, and I gotta go down there to go with him 'cause she was going to the art festival. So I went down. He was as bad as she is. He takes me all around, everywhere; we're going one place, but we gotta stop several places before we can go where we're going. So then when I came back from California, I stopped in Saint Louis, and then I stopped in Charleston, and then came on home. So when I was down there for the inauguration, he gave me all this stuff to bring home. That little statue, I went down to the college where she teaches, and one of her students had made it and then didn't pick it up, so she said, "Mary, take it, you've stolen everything else, so take that too."
CG: Did you bring the African statues back from...
MT: No, David brought those to me, I think, from Bermuda. But I have some... Mr. Bright brought me some brass stuff. I've got some stuff upstairs from Africa we brought back. But this is the stuff they make in Benin.
CG: Oh yes, the brass. Oh, that is pretty.
MT: I've got more junk here, and let me show you something. Here's something somebody gave me in 1910, from the five and ten...
CG: With your name on it...and one of your AKA colors.
MT: Can you imagine that?
CG: And you've had that ever since. That's incredible. 1910?
MT: It's almost an antique. Sixty-five years isn't it?
CG: 1910 would be...it's sixty-seven years. I was curious, that was one of
the things I was going to ask you, what did you think in the 1960s of all of the different groups that were going around talking about Africa? You know, you had been in 1960, you'd been there early, before our people had really discovered Africa, and you have friends who are Africans and so you didn't have a stereotyped image of, you know...﻿42
MX: Well, my cousin — and her husband is really a nice guy. CG: So you have people in your family who have married Africans. MX: Right.
CG
CG:
MX:
So what was your reaction in the sixties when the students started running around wearing African clothing, what did you think?
MX: But they don't dress like that in Africa.
¥es. What were some of the differences you noticed?
MX: Xhey really don't have the Afro hairdo like we do here. Some of them have braids, of course, but they don't wear all this bush like... Xheir hair is really cut quite short.
CG: So in a way you were sort of amused by all of the...
Yes, they didn't have all that business. But when Osili Ifenangi came over once for some sort of a conference...
CG: Osili?
MX: Osili his name is. A family, Osili. He had on a light blue gown, real African thing, and we took him up to the Red Coach to eat, and boy, he really stopped the show, he's a handsome dude. I think they're in this country now, but I don't know whether they're going to be able to come down here or not. One kid's at Penn, and the other is out in Washington. One daughter came over to Purdue and got married, and they were very unhappy about that because she married before she completed her work. But that's where the mother and father met, at Purdue. Josephine, now she's only four hours away from her doctorate, but he doesn't want to wait for her, so she's not going to do it. She's a smart cookie, though, she's going to keep this marriage happy; 'cause a lot of the American women had difficulty adapting to the African ways.
CG: In what ways?
MX: Well, they have a lot of family ties, they look out for all these...the family business. But if you want to be number one with your husband you accept the male authority.
CG: But in a way, you've always done that, you've been with your family and with people who aren't family.
MX: Yes, but I mean not with an African husband, you don't do that.
CG: Right. No, I mean taking care of family ties and really helping people...
MT: Yes, you can do this if you want to.﻿43
CG: But in a sense you can't really be a professional woman in your own right if you're married to an African husband...
MT: I guess it all depends on the guy; if he doesn't want to work for his
doctorate he doesn't have to. The Brights' daughter is a pharmacist, she has either two or three drug stores, but I think that marriage broke up and she married an African guy.
CG: How did you come to be called Dr. Mary? I noticed that when people write, they write Dr. Mary.
MT: Delia's first child was Andrea.
CG: Now Delia is...
MT: Delia Taylor. Delia Brown Taylor. Well, Andrea was just starting to talk and she said, "Mary," so Delia says, "Im sorry, you can't do that, you'd better put something in front of that, so you call her Dr. Mary." So this is how it happened and everybody else has picked it up.
CG: I mean it shows up in your awards and, you know, the writing in the newspaper..
MT: But everybody calls me that, and Andrea, she didn't even remember the incident, because she was so little, but she only heard 'em say "Maryi"; and when we started, Delia said, "Oh no, you can't do that." Then one time Delia had her down here, and Mabel Ravaleon had Paul down here, and Paul was a little bit older than Andrea, not much, maybe a year. So Paul wanted something, but he thought I would give it to Andrea first, so he said, "You ask her." So I heard him say, "You ask her," so I guess I finally gave it to him. But a little later on I took him downtown, and Andrea did something, showed off for me, so I came back and I said to Delia, "She showed off for me." Delia says, "Don't tell me, you have it, you didn't correct it, shame on you." You were supposed to correct her when she did these things.
Now Andrea has two children and is expecting her third one, but she was the one who started the "Dr. Mary" and they never say anything but, "This is Dr. Mary." So when the couple that was here, coming up last week, one of them said to Delia, "What kind of cigarettes does Dr. Mary smoke?" So Delia says, "Don't take her any, she smokes too much." And her husband says, "You know, I'm worried about her living up there by herself." They would like me to come to Charleston and stay with them. And I say, heck, I want to stay as long as I can. I don't want to be a burden on anybody. But as often as she can...she calls me at least twice a month, and they talk like they're next door.
CG: You really do value your independence, don't you?
MT: Well, I'm really not anybody's responsibility. So time comes I have to do it, I will do it.
CG: One of the things you didn't mention, in terms of the things that you've done in the community, was your Y work.﻿44
MT: Yes, I've worked in the Y. Where did you find that?
CG: Oh...
MT: I can't remember all that stuff.
CG: I know. That's why I'm glad you got out the newspaper clippings, because they're all there. You worked with the public relations committee of the YWCA.
MT: For a number of years.
CG: Why did you feel the Y was important, what is so important about the Y?
MT: It was one of the things I enjoyed doing. This was up in Central Square.
CG: Right.
MT: Miss Dawn, Miss Webber, an old lady who had a yarn shop up there. I'd
forgotten about that. I'm sure I'll think of other things after you're gone.
CG: Oh, I can always come back. Did you ever go to any of the Y conferences, any of the other things...
MT: I was just a member of this committee.
CG: Committee, and you worked basically to build up the Y in the community, so you're partly responsible for the Y that we have in Cambridge now.
MT: I don't know how much I can really take credit for that, but I used to go up there frequently. You know one of those things when you think you're indispensible, you know, you have to belong to everything, I don't feel like that any more.
CG: How did you learn that?
MT: Well, this took a little doing, but I find this out, they can get along without you.
CG: Did you ever have periods in your life when you were just going to meetings, meetings, meetings nonstop? Do you remember what a typical day would be like?
MT: Well, you finish at the office and then you dash out to one meeting, sometimes two meetings a night, and all that, but you can't do that any more.
CG: When you had your practice full time, and you were full time in the community, how long a day would it be?
MT: Oh, that would be forever, you know. But of course every day wasn't like that. And you were younger then, don't forget. When I think of all the things in my head I would like to do now, but my body won't move, then I remember this, you see. Or if somebody else wants to do it, I think this is all right, you go ahead...﻿45
CG: You encourage them.
MT: Um hmm. But I can't do it any more.
CG: What has been your biggest problem in terms of becoming a senior citizen?
MT: Well, I think sometimes the loneliness that you have.	I think if I
could manage to get out at night without interfering with somebody to take you... 'Cause every time I go out at night with somebody, I'm amazed at all the lights, and all the activity that I really miss. But most of the time I'm just content to sit here, especially when it gets more toward winter when it begins to get dark, then I always head for home, 'cause the lights in the cars bother me.
CG: When they shine in your face and... MT: Yes...
CG: What's been the biggest joy about becoming a senior citizen?
MT: You can do as you please, and don't do if you don't want to. And yet I guess I never really had planned on being totally alone, and this, I think, is something that you have to learn to cope with. When you're alone, you have to say, "Well, look at all the other people in the world that are alone," and at least you're able to get your own meals. When you get up in the morning, you say, "Well gee, this is great, I can get up under my own power," but so many people are ill and can't even move. And of course you can do as you want to. I guess too that you are really not pressed for dollars, which helps to take some of the sting off of it. If you really want to do something stupid, you do it. You might take a trip if you want to. Yankee*gave me an idea, when anybody wants you to come, you just say, "Well, all right, you send for me." So I think I'll try that and see how far it goes. [laughter]
CG:	You were also a member of the National Council of Negro Women.
MT:	No, I wasn't.
CG:	You weren't? Oh.
MT:	No, that was a mistake, where did you get that?
CG:	The newspaper.
MT:	No, I wasn't. Can't see this, though.
CG:	'Cause I know Alpha Kappa Alpha is affiliated as an organization.
MT:	Yes, but this was when it first started.
CG:	And you weren't an independent affiliate?
*Yankee Peeks﻿46
MT: No, somebody tried to get me to start the organization in Boston, but I didn't do that.
CG: Do you remember when that was organized and what it...
MT: No, I don't remember exactly, but I know that Gladys Holmes was one of the leaders, but Gladys somehow, they didn't rally around her, and somebody said to somebody, "Why don't you try to get Mary, she could get it started." But I didn't do that. I belonged to the women's dental group, it's a national, American Society of Women Dentists I belonged to, but I didn't...
CG: I didn't even know there was one. How old is the organization?
MT: Heck, I don't know how old that is, but they didn't used to take in black people...
CG: How did you manage... Were you all part of the group that broke down the barrier of this group?
MT: No, they wrote to me to join, but I guess it was some time when evidently somebody was putting pressure on to bring in the black people, because I notice they have a couple of women from Howard in there.
CG: Do you remember what year it was that you joined them?
MT: I don't remember. But it must be ten or twelve years ago.
CG: So it was that recently that they did not have black members?
MT: It may be a little longer than that, but I'm not sure because this Jewish gal that I told you, Anna Mintz, has retired, and went to Israel, and then she was always... We have a group of women dentists in Boston, Massachusetts Women's Dental Society, and I was one of the charter people in that. But when I got this thing, I talked to Ann, she said, "Go ahead and join the thing," and I said, "Well, if they haven't wanted black women all this time..." She said, "But go ahead and join it, this is a good idea anyway," so I did. But now I'm on the retired list and you don't have to pay the dues any more.
CG: Oh, good. You mentioned before, you know, in terms of breaking down
barriers, the problem at Boston City Hospital, getting black nurses into Boston City Hospital.
MT: Dr. Worthy did that. He fought like everything to get them in there.
CG: Did you help in that effort?
MT: No, but the organization, this medical, dental and pharmaceutical society was behind him in that.
CG: I see.
MT: I only wish he could see all the black ones in there now.﻿47
CG: Was Mayor Curley mayor then?
MT: I don't know who was mayor. But it was a long, hard fight because all the nurses, you had to have two people...
CG: In other words, the black women had to be admitted in pairs?
MT: Yes, so that they could be roommates together. In some places, I know in Connecticut, Betty tells me that they said, "Oh, there'll never be any black ones in here," and now they're peppered with them.
CG: A lot. So there was a lot of discrimination in nursing itself, and that was another...
MT: I guess it's been in every field, because I think when I started out in...
-G: bkay, you were saying that when you started dental school there were five black fellows?
MT: Yes, and when we graduated, there was only one.
CG: Oh, so it actually went down?
MT: One boy graduated with me. In the freshman class there were five of us.
CG: If you had not lived in Cambridge, would you have had trouble living at Tufts, were there still problems with dormitories and those kinds of discrimination there?
MT: They didn't have any dorms, you see, in the dental and medical school. It was over there on Huntington Avenue.
CG: Oh, I see.
MT: So that this was a day thing you went to.
CG: Oh, so you didn't have the problems with lodging. Because I know some women who came to Boston to go to school would have to go live at the Women's Service Club fat 464 Massachusetts Avenue, "464"] or the League of Women for Community Service [at 558 Massachusetts Avenue, "558"] in order to have a place to stay while they were going to school. Did you ever attend affairs at the League, or...
MT: Five fifty-eight. I used to be on the board there. CG: Oh, now you see that's another thing.
MT: I forgot that. But I didn't remember that until last week when Billy
Deniston said to me, you know she dropped out. I had even forgotten I was there just for a short time.
CG:
Now, 558 is the Women's Service Club, right?﻿48
MT: Five fifty-eight. Right.
CG: Well, how did you happen to join that group?
MT: I've forgotten who talked me into this. I don't know how I did that.
We used to have a lot of our functions there, because this was before the hotels and all the things, and we used to...
CG: When you say we used to have a lot of our functions there, you mean the other groups that you belonged to?
MT: AKA had a lot of tea parties there, art exhibitions and what have you.
She told me about somebody having a card party, and they wanted to have it in the library, and of course that library is a beautiful old thing, and the furniture you couldn't replace. She hadn't asked anybody's permission, so they told her she couldn't have it there, and I've forgotten who it was, that she was telling me about. You could have it downstairs or in the boardroom, but whoever the person was is young and she couldn't understand why she couldn't have it in the library, but some of that furniture is gorgeous in that room.
CG: Could you tell me a little bit about that group...
MT: It's been such a long time, I'd almost forgotten about that. I know this medical dental society used to meet there also.
CG: At the Women's Service Club.
MT: Yes, AKA met there, and then we would have other parties there. I think there was a student union, we had once, met at the Shaw House, but this was before the new building was made on Hammond Street. I don't know whether that's there any more.
CG: There's a Shaw House in Cambridge.
MT: No, this was in Boston, but I think they've moved up in Roxbury some place now.
CG: Now the Elliot Gould Shaw House, you mean?
MT: The Robert Gould Shaw House.
CG: Oh Robert, Elliot Gould, Robert Gould.
MT: But anyway we used to meet, it was on Hammond Street. It was a small place, so we would have our student union parties there. This was part of the underground, it was connected with the underground... They have a pamphlet out (Billy gave one to Peeks the other day) and I think you can get that from 558. A whole series of things, but Mable Beck was on that board too now.
CG: In the Women's Service Club or...
MT: Five fifty-eight.﻿49
CG: Oh, wait a minute, I keep saying Women's Service Club...
MT: That's 464.
CG: So we're talking about the League of Women for Community Service,
not the Women's Service Club, right. That mansion, I think I've been there once.
MT: It's beautiful inside, but all around it, it's beginning to go down.
That's just really too bad, it used to be a very nice place. But there's a whole book on that, because Billy gave Peeks one of them. He's writing another book about something, I've forgotten what. I have one of his books here.
CG: Now Billy...
MT: Billy Deniston. I'm sure Mabel is on that board, Mabel Beck. But I wasn't with the other...National Council of Negro Women.
CG: Did you ever have a chance to hear Mrs. Bethune speak, do you remember?
MT: She spoke at an AKA convention in '39, I think at some meeting we had.
CG: Nineteen thirty-nine.
MT: I don't know whether it was '39 or not, but anyway she spoke at one. She was a good friend of Lucy's.*
CG: Yes. What was your impression of her?
MT: She was a dynamic gal. Yes, she was wonderful, and Lucy appeared on "This Is Your Life" with her, Mrs. Bethune, when they did "This Is Your Life" on television.
CG: Really? I never knew that.
MT: She didn't tell you that?
CG: No, she didn't.
MT: She forgot that, you might tell her she forgot something, and she's supposed to be able to remember.
CG: Yes. Have you ever been on television?
MT: No, I don't think so. As my cousin says, "I disremember."
CG: Disremember. Yes. [laughter] Do you see more or do you see,iil». say, the younger generation coming along now, do you see less... Because talking to you, there was a whole network of women who were very active in pushing for change, for getting educational advice out. In fact, you mentioned going to a conference where, you said, you were the oldest one there, but yet people did not seem to know how to give advice. Do you see that is becoming a problem?
*Lucy Miller Mitchell﻿50
MT: Well, I don't know that I could say that from just that one conference,
but they seem so bound up in their own little ideas. To me it seems that they didn't know exactly the right answers; this was white as well as black. You know, if your job is finding scholarships for minorities, looks like you would know all the avenues and everywhere, or else be trying to find them. I don't think they did, but I don't know, of course I don't have as much contact with young people as I did before, but it doesn't seem...
CG: How many different scholarships did you help raise money for?
MT: Well, there was one to Wheaton; there was a scholarship available, and
they told me if I got the girl, they'd see that she got the scholarship. But then when I got the girl, they didn't want to give her the scholarship, because her father was a lawyer, and they thought that he should be able to send her himself. But they didn't know his circumstances really, and he had another daughter too that was almost ready for college so that... They were giving her a hard time, but they finally gave her the scholarship, and she did an excellent job. And then I think, maybe not a direct scholarship, but through Wilhelmina Crosson and this fund, I was able to get some money for some of the kids 1 knew that needed a little extra help.
CG: You mean your relationship with the Cox Fund through the clinic?
MT: Yes, but Wilhelmina and Mr. Bullock had real say, so some of these kids really needed money, and I would talk Wilhelmina into helping these kids that I knew needed some.
CG: Do you ever get involved with the Aristo Club at all.
MT: I used to attend all their functions. But I was a struggling dentist, and they thought I didn't have enough money to join their affair. But I knew most of them.
CG: And let's see, you also, in terms of scholarship money, helped establish a scholarship in Nigeria. You don't remember any more; I have a feeling there are some more scholarships there that you just aren't remembering,
MT: Well, when Tom died, in lieu of flowers, we gave the money to the South
Middlesex branch of the NAACP. I thought that was better than flowers, so they have had some educational conference with that money; I think it was about four to five hundred dollars in that. And some of them, you know, you didn't help with scholarships, but maybe you bought a pair of shoes or something of that sort.
There's one kid in Washington who used to live with us.	I still to this
day don't know why, because their mother didn't live but maybe two blocks down the street from us... But my mother would say to me, "Yvonne*needs shoes," and maybe I needed shoes. But Yvonne needs a coat, so I'd say, "Yvonne, meet me downtown." So she'd meet me and we'd go in and buy a pair of shoes. She used to say, "Oh, I've got a hole in my stocking," and I'd say, "So what, they've seen holes in stockings before." But then when it came to the coat, that was a big item, so I'd say to Wilhelmina, "Do you
*Yvonne Bradley﻿MT: (cont.) think the Cox Fund could buy her a coat?" So they would buy a coat for Yvonne. But she is the one gal who really remembers me. Now she'll call me maybe once a month or twice a month or whenever she wants to. But she lives in Washington and has just retired. So shortly after Tom died, she had written a note saying I'll maybe see you at Christmas, laurett^ and her husband were at my house, because when she had come all the time Tom was sick, she says, "I won't come when he goes because you'll have too many people around you, but I'll come afterwards." So she said, "I have to go to Washington; why don't you come on and go with us? Come to New York, and then we'll go." So while they were there, Yvonne called; so I said, "I might see you before Christmas." She said, "Oh, that'll be fine." So I went.
She had a pile of clothes on her living room floor getting ready for the Goodwill. I said, "You better let me look at those." There was a beautiful winter suit there, and a whole lot of stuff, and she had gotten fat so she couldn't wear them, so I put the suit on and it fitted me. So then after that fitted me, she went to the closet and she filled a whole suitcase full of stuff. So Lauretta finished her conference downtown in Washington, and she said, "Well, we'll get a motel somewhere near you." Yvonne says, "Nothing doing, you'll come and stay here." So she shifted me around, and they had the room I had. So finally Lauretta said to me, "You can't go to Boston on the bus with that; if you'd stay until Tuesday, I'm going to take you home." So I said okay. So they drove me home. But every now and then Yvonne will send me—I've got a suitcase upstairs now—send me a suitcase full of clothes, and they're beautiful ones, by Greyhound. I'll go down to the Greyhound bus and get it. Coats and blouses and pantsuits, I think she sent either three or four pantsuits, so I really don't have to buy anything unless I really want to.
CG: In a sense it's because you just behaved toward these neighbors, these friends, these close people as family, and just did it...
MT: Maybe that's it.
CG: ...you just treated them like your children, because when you say to
someone, "Meet me in town," that sounds like my friends' mothers would say to them, or my mother would say, "Meet me in town," you know, when it came time for school clothes shopping. It was just what you did there.
MT: If she calls me, and I say, "Well, I'm going to California, you got anything I need, or I'm going somewhere, she says, "Oh well, I'll see. You wouldn't believe how fat I am now." I said, "Oh my goodness. I really need to get rid of some of the stuff now." She says, "I don't really care what you do with it, you know, you keep it to do as you wish." But I call Ella, and if she wants some of it, all right, and if not, I'll give it to Kay Doherty when she gets ready for her Mississippi thing.
CG: What do you think it is about your upbringing that makes you pay attention
to details the way you did, you know, things like shoes you need as a student, things like that?
MT: My mother would say to me, "She needs shoes."
*Lauretta B. Meyers﻿52
CG: I see. So...
MT: My mother said, "Yvonne needs shoes," and I would say, "I need 'em too," or something like that, but I'd go ahead and get Yvonne some shoes. And she really idolized Mother. She thought she was great, and I would say the same thing to her when my mother lived, and she would bristle, she wouldn't take it. But now she loves me as much as she did my mother. I can't understand that; you know she would get all mad with me if I said the very same thing that Mother said to her. She's a nice girl. Let me show you some more pictures of her and my dog.
CG;	Now this is your mother, right?
MT:	Yes, this was done before the knotty pine wall was there, that was in '48.
CG:	She's a beautiful lady.
MT:	And this one we used for Christmas cards.
CG;	And this is you.
MT:	Yes, and this is the dog; see his nose is up in the air like mine.
CG:	What's his name?
MT:	His name is Rover; we kept him sixteen years, but we finally had to put him to sleep, and both Tom and I cried.
CG: And this is___
MT: This house before we had any shrubbery. And this is the other house, I think, yes this is the other house.
CG: Oh, and is this the house next door?
MT: Yes, this is the way it looked when we had it. And this is the kid with six kids, and she's tiny.
CG: She has six children now?
MT: Um hmm. They were down to see me Mother's Day. But I haven't___
CG: These are all when your mother was still alive?
MT: Yes, these were the last state wards we had, and we were married on her birthday.
CG: Oh, so this is one of the state wards, this is the one you were talking about that lived with you.
MT: This is a friend's little boy. And I think the next one, if you can see it, is Tom's grandson, the oldest.﻿53
CG: This one right here?
MT: Yes.
CG: He is adorable. How old is he now? And that's Rover again.
MT: That's Rover. He was a beautiful dog. My mother finally said, "Now
look, this dog is sick, you've got to do something about this," but we didn't want to.
CG: Yes, it's hard, I know what it's like; my dog just had its eighth birthday, and every year he gets a little grayer under the chin...
MT: We had another one; his name was King. We had to go up one time, and we couldn't find King, so we went on. Finally Olga, the girl who lives down here, said, "King is here." She called us about seven. And I think hy seven-thirty Tom was on his way down to pick up King. So I said, "Why don't you take your pajamas and you could stay all night?" About one o'clock he and King came strutting in.
CG: I have one other really big question, and if you want, I can save it for tomorrow to give you a chance to reflect...
MT: What's that?
CG: To ask you about your reflections on the church and its importance,
'cause you talked about your own experiences, and I wanted you to reflect on the church in general.
MT: Well, what do I know about the church in general...
CG: Well, you were active and you used the church in a sense when you moved,
you know; that was the way you made a lot of the friends that you made out in Natick.
MT: Yes. I don't know but what we were the first black family they had.
CG: In the church there?
MT: Yes. Now they have another one.
CG: In their particular church?
MT: Um hmm. They might have more. They did have another one, but I think they quit and went back to a black church.
CG: Plus they just organized, I think last year or the year before last, they organized a black church in Framingham.
MT: Yes, they say it's going well, too. There was a girl at sorority meeting in June who lives in Natick, who moved there recently among the new developments, and she joined the black church too. They were in the process﻿54
MT: (cont.) of organizing it when we were there, but they never asked us;
we never got any of the notices. I guess they thought Tom was too much involved in this church, because he was a deacon there and all the rest of the stuff.
CG: If you want to reflect on that one for a while, I can ask you that one tomorrow.
MT: I'm only wondering how much...
CG: Time?
MT: No, whether somebody will be here to interrupt, us tomorrow. Well, I've got to make us some potato salad, or shall I make you, just heat the greens and the ham, and heat the potatoes?
CG: That's a big choice. Well, I can come help.
MT: I mean, which do you want? Because this is all I got to do. The ham is all cooked...
CG: I think I'd like the potato salad and be able to watch you make it, because I can't make potato salad.
MT: You can't make it?
CG: No.
CG: One of the last questions I wanted to ask you was about your views of the role of the church and its importance.
MT: How it had affected my life or what I thought?
CG: How it affected your life and what you thought from your own experience.
MT: I think that the church has played a very important part because, I mean, from the very beginning your mother and father took you to church. You didn't know anything different; so you still do the same thing today. And I admired a great many of the old people that were in church. I remember Mrs. Grace Williams who helped to rear her grandchildren, and a Mrs. Small who had a beautiful voice. I think she just had one son; she may have had more, but he had a big family and she helped to rear those children. You know it was the type of church that you practically knew everyone in there, so that Union Baptist has meant a great deal to me. When my mother died, we took her body back to the church for the funeral. And for a number of years we went back and forth to the services until we joined the Baptist church in Natick.﻿55
CG: That's right. You did commute to Union.
MT: And since I've been down here, I joined the First Baptist Church down in Hyannis. But I'm afraid I'm resting on my laurels down here, [laughter]
CG: You mentioned that Union had provided you your chance to try out as a public speaker.
MT: Well, I think they put you in charge of programs and you were chairman of this, or you belonged to the women's groups and all of that sort of stuff, but this is what you actually did, and I think this gave you some forms of leadership. In this I think they helped a great many children. And in turn our little organizations helped the children who came after us.
CG: So in a sense the continuity of the community is really kept through these church activities.
MT: Right. I think it gave you a sense of wanting to do something for somebody. And many of those friends I still have. I don't see them very often, but when I do, they show the children's pictures, and they want to tell me what they've been doing. I remember once, coming from some place on the plane, the pilot asked us if we knew the Rollinses. Betty Miller was a grandchild of Mrs. Grace Williams, and her husband was the grandson of the Mr. and Mrs. Henry Worthen who belonged to Union Baptist Church that we had known in Henderson, North Carolina. They live in Hingham now. Betty, I think she teaches at Simmons. I saw her at Gladdie's testimonial and she___
CG: Is her last name Miller or Rollins?
MT: It's Rollins.
CG: Oh, okay.
MT: Her maiden name was Miller. She went to Japan to teach for either one or two years, and I think she sent me a string of pearls from Japan and a jade ring. I gave the jade ring to Yvonne, and I think the pearls to Lauretta. When I went to Jamaica, I bought another string of pearls.
CG: So a lot of the things that you did yourself later on, in terms of
helping other people, you saw done in the church too, by your mother and others...
MT: Yes, by older women in the church, and men too. Doesn't seem to rub off so much now on the...
CG: Is that one of the changes that you've noticed in terms of the younger people helping others?
MT: Um hmm. But I think that, as you saw today, they're coming back, and it's great.﻿56
CG: Before we finish the interview, I'd like to just sort of come back to
your mother for a minute, because she seems to have been just a tremendous...
MT: Oh, she was a tremendous gal. She helped all along the way, I mean every, there was never a defeatist attitude, it was always you can do this. She was wonderful, and no matter how she felt, you ask her, "How do you feel?" and she says, "Well, I'm fine," so that there was never any complaining. I think when I went to bed at night I left her up, and when I got up in the morning she was already up.
CG: She was an early riser and had a long day and stuck to her ideals.
MT: Yes, and I think the thing I missed most after she was gone... When I would leave the school in the morning from Natick, I used to stop at the end of the driveway, and look and wave goodbye. After she was gone, it was the hardest thing not to stop and wave, but finally you got over that. And she used to like to work in the yard, and sometimes I would call her from the office and get no answer, and I said, "Oh my goodness, there's something happened." You'd get home, and you could see where she had weeded or done something out in the yard. So I said, "That's why I couldn't get you today," and she'd say, "Oh, I was just doing a little bit." The spring after she died and the summer, our yard was all weeds because Tom didn't like to work out there, and I didn't know a weed from a flower. I wish you could see the yard now, because I'm learning to take care of it and plant it and water it and all that, which I didn't do. Sometimes she would say, "If you think of it, please water the flowers," and I never thought of it. When I got down, I'd say, "Oh, I forgot it." So of course the flowers she left during the summer died. Yes, she was a tremendous gal and some of the things she did that I thought were horrible, I find myself doing.
CG: Really, like what?
MT: Well, sometimes just speaking your mind out, and remembering to pick up papers in the yard. She used to say, "Well, we have no street cleaners down here," and she would pick up in the street, and making such a fuss over a little thing. Now I find myself picking up, because there's no one else to do it. Ralph laughed at me, because sometimes when they're here and I go to the car with them, I would stand there and wipe off the side of the car, and they'd say, "All right Mrs. Crutchfield." They'd also say, "She may be dead, but she's still living in you."
CG: But you say she was always a person who spoke her mind?
MT: Usually, and as you get older... The girl who was here said that only two classes of people tell the truth, children under twelve and people over seventy. So I guess you think you have a license to say what you want to. I often think of that, so I say, "Well heck, I don't need to say that," so I try to curb myself.
CG: But it sometimes is hard not to, right?﻿57
MT: Yes. Like I told Yankee, they think I'm a moron, to insist on being independent. So when she wanted to do something for me, she says, "I don't think you're a moron." But I think it's hard. They're concerned, and yet they can't understand that you still want to be independent, and this is a narrow line, you see. You know they love you, and yet you have to say, "Well, I have to make my own decisions when you're not here, so if you depend on people all the time, you wouldn't know what to do in a crisis." But I think they've gotten the message. I think the plate helped.
CG: Yes, "This is my house and I'll do as I darn please."
MT: Yes,. I think the plate helped.
CG: One more question and then I'll stop. You worked hard, you worked very, very hard, you got your practice established and you worked hard in the schools. What's your sort of general attitude toward work?
MT: Well, I think this was just normal, I mean this was what you were expected to do. I don't think it hurts anybody to work hard; in fact, I think I would be working now if I could see better, and, of course, if I had more energy. I have the ideas and I start, but then after I work a little while, I get very tired, then I sit down. No, I've never been one for an easy life, but I never had it. And I don't think work hurts anybody. I think it's your attitude toward it, whether you like the things you're doing, and I always did. As I told you before, if I had it to do over again I'd be a dentist again. With all its heartaches and its hard work.
CG: You didn't mention any heartaches about being a dentist, what were some of those?
MT:
Well you worked hard, sometimes you didn't get paid, this was during the denression...
depression
CG: Oh, that's right, yes.
MT: People would come in and... Way back then you took out teeth for fifty
cents, and maybe they had it and maybe they didn't. This was before welfare paid for it; the welfare didn't have Medicare and Medicaid and all that stuff. Very few people were on welfare at that time, or if they did, nobody knew it. And I guess it wasn't enough to pay for the extra things. They could go to the city hospital or something else and have their teeth out, but sometimes the toothache would come at a time when it was at night or the clinics weren't open. A lot of the fellows who hung around the corner at Main and Windsor or some place would bring somebody in. "This poor lady has a toothache." You'd take it out and, "I'll pay you when I get it." And many of the guys who were not working or working part time, they would do that. Or if they had some work to do, they would come and get it done, but the person at that time maybe didn't have any money, so you did it anyway. And so if I only had the money that was owed to me, I really could live on Easy Street, take a trip around the world or something.
CG: But even with all of that, you'd still do it again?﻿58
MT: Yes, because I think it built up some... Everybody in our neighborhood liked me, and even those old rough, tough men, if I passed, they'd stop whatever they were talking about until I passed, so that you had their respect too. One Polish man I had, some friend of his said, "Do you think she can pull teeth?" He said, "She's strong as a bull." That was a compliment.
CG: You mean some people didn't actually believe you had the strength to take them out?
MT: Yes.
CG: Oh no.
MT: And of course this was a time when not many women were in practice, but I had this sign on, "Mary". A lot of people didn't want me to do that; they wanted to put your initials on there, and T said, "I want them to know I'm a woman before they come in, so that if they don't want me, they don't come." They came, just the same. Some people said, "Oh, you can't have your office in this neighborhood or in your house because you'll soon exhaust all the people," but I had people who came from Medford and Roxbury and North Cambridge and all around. Made you feel kind of good, because they passed a number of others that they could have gone to.
CG: Yes. Where did people want you to have your office, who thought you couldn't...
MT: In the	square, you see.
CG: Oh, in	Central Square...
MT: Yes.
CG: I see.
MT: But of	course when you first start, you had to think of the mortgage payment on the house plus the office rent, and if you had it in your
house,	the one mortgage payment paid for the whole business.
CG: Do you think if you hadn't had your practice in your neighborhood right where you lived, would you have had as much respect in the neighborhood as you did?
MT: Well, I think perhaps I would, because at that time when I walked up
Central Square, or my mother, you knew most of the people in Cambridge. A few years ago we went back to the funeral of Mary Smith who was a cousin of mine, but I didn't see anybody at Central Square that I knew. But I used to, you know, hello, hello, how are you? And my mother went up to Central Square frequently.
CG: Was this Mary Smith the pianist?
MT: Yes.﻿59
CG: Ahh. I didn't realize she was your cousin.
MT: She was a Crutchfield first. Her brother was Madison Crutchfield, who has the cleaning business and real estate up on Western Avenue. Three brothers—or were there two brothers—Madison and Theodore. No, two brothers; I think there was another child who died before I knew them. When we came up from the South, we lived at their house for a short time before we got a place of our own. And she was called "Big Mary" and I was supposed to be "Little Mary", but I was soon fatter and bigger than she was.
CG: I keep saying one more question, but this is definitely the last question. A lot of people who read about black life sometimes come away with the notion that the black women's sororities are nothing but social groups, and you love your sorority and the sorority loves you. What would you say to younger women about joining a sorority? What makes it important and how should they treat their sorority?
MT: Well, I think the most important thing is just some friendships that last through the years. The next thing is that, not only AKA, but the rest of them, have definite social programs that help everybody, help the poor people, and it's just a matter of your choice. And then it's your choice not to join if you don't want to, because there was a time I thought that oh, you've gone wrong if you don't join AKA, but of course I've grown up since then. Delia, my friend in West Virginia, I sponsored her into AKA, her oldest daughter is AKA, and her youngest daughter went Delta, so Delia was very upset and she said, "Oh my God, what am I going to tell Dr. Mary?" So when she called me, and I said, "Look Delia, I don't care what sorority she joins; just let her get her marks and get out of school." And the child and I are, I think, almost as close as she is with her mother. She treats me like I'm her grandmother, so you know I've come to the point where it actually doesn't matter. If this is a thing you want to do, all right; if you don't want to, don't join. I think that people who say that it's a social thing...I think maybe in the beginning it was, and yet I don't ever think that it was totally that. It was a matter of getting together for common interests, but I made many friends that I have had through the years, not that I wouldn't have made the same friends, but it seems to make the bond even stronger.
CT: You mentioned that Mrs. Mitchell was a member, a fifty-year member with you, and Dr...
MT: Garnett.
CG: Jessie Garnett.
MT: Dr. Jessie Garnett was the woman who was a charter member of the undergraduate chapter, and she's a fifty-year member; Mabel Beck is a fifty-year member and...
CG: And you met Mrs. Beck through AKA after she came to Boston?﻿60
MT: Yes.
CG: So the sorority also brought together women who were coming into the city who were professional woman and...
MT: Right. My friend in Florida now had come to an AKA convention in '39,
and she married here then, and she came over to our house, and we had been friends all through the years, and I'm her son's godmother. She's the one I went to Spain with, so this type of thing.
CG: In a way the sororities and fraternities helped to keep the black community together in a sense, especially for professional people in different cities and different states.
MT: Yes, in a sense, this was before you could... Some of the white fraternities would take in black members, and of course now that they do that, then people have a greater choice to choose what they want to do. Yes, I've enjoyed my membership in that. When you go to the meetings, you meet people from here to California. They have a chapter in Africa, in Monrovia, and I think they have one or two white members, but they're not too many.
CG: I didn't realize they had a chapter in Monrovia.
MT: Yes, but this woman had been to Howard, she did some work at Howard, I think she got a degree at Howard, so when she went back she formed a chapter there. So I thoroughly enjoyed it. One time we had this room papered with ivy leaf paper, somebody gave me ivy leaf paper for Christmas. I think I kept it on for maybe ten or twelve years. I mean, it doesn't mean just the Ivy Cottage.
CG: I noticed in the bedroom the pink and green wallpaper.
MT: Um hmm, one pink and one green. And these lamps my mother bought in...
Remember when the Enterprise was in Cambridge? You know where this drugstore is, as you turn the corner on the lefthand side near, it used to be Manhattan market, I don't know what they call it now, Supreme or something___
CG: Vaguely.
MT: Whatever the market is down there, but there was like a department store, and she picked those lamps up—it must be twenty-five or thirty years ago—in that store. I have some little lamps upstairs that sit on the bureau with ivy leaf seal. I think I picked the tray up (the one that thing is sitting on) down here in a shop. That was before this house was built, and we were down in Falmouth, and I saw it in a shop window. The shop was closed, so we went back the next day to buy it. That was only five dollars way back then, and I got the other bowl and stuff up there too, up on the shelf.
CG:
So now I see why in the newspaper article they talked about your [house, the] Ivy Cottage, as being a meeting place for AKA.﻿61
MT: Then one time we had, like a leadership meeting down here. I don't know
whether I was the president that year of the chapter or not, but we mapped out our whole program for the year. We had one weekend down here, and went through the whole year, and I think that was one of the better years when we had planned out what we were going to be doing. And Mrs. Mitchell's husband came, but he didn't want to come, really, and then Mr. Toney had a Sandwich business down here; so he took Joe around and showed him, and Joe had a good time. And then Mr. Toney had the whole group to breakfast one Sunday morning. We really had a good time, and I think I only had the one house then, I'm sure. Some stayed with me and some stayed other places, but we met to discuss whatever the program was going to be for the year. Joe and Lucy used to come down to the beach, and he would say to Lucy, "I'm not going to eat my lunch here in the sun; let's go to Mary's," and they would come. But we used to have, you know, on the weekends, it was just crowded, the cars were all parked everywhere, and Ralph used to say it looks like a used-car lot. I miss some of that, but I couldn't stand that now either.
CG: Right.
MT: So as it is, when I have a week in between, that gives me a chance to rest
up for the other four coming. The day after they've gone, I don't do anything and then I begin... I think I did the laundry, but then I said, "Well, I'll get ready for the next time." That's all, thank you.
CG: Thank you.﻿MARY S. THOMPSON, D.D.S. Index
Alexander, Bill 6
Alpha Kappa Alpha (AKA) 9, 11, 17, 19, 21, 23-24, 32, 39, 45, 48, 59, 60-61 American Society of Women Dentists 46 Aristo Club 50
Banks, Jeannette 19
Beck, Mabel 17, 48, 49, 59
Berman, Jack 9
Bethune, Mary McLeod 49
Birch, Nelson 4
Bishop, Mamie 4
Blyden, Edward 34, 35
Boardman School 4, 9
Boston City Hospital 46
Boston Dispensary 15-16
Bradley, Yvonne 50-51, 52
Bright, Richard family 33, 35, 41, 43
Bright, Richard 27, 41
Brown, Charlotte Hawkins 3, 13
Bullock, Matthew 50
Cambridge High and Latin School 4, 8
Clark, Alvin 6
Clark, Mary 6-7
Corsa, Kay 27, 28
Cox Fund 15, 17, 50, 51
Crosson, Wilhelmina 15, 17, 50
Crutchfield, Lydia Hatch (mother) 1, 2, 4-6, 7, 12-13, 31, 51-52, 56
Crutchfield, Madison 59
Crutchfield, Mary 1 Crutchfield, Theodore 59
Crutchfield, William (father) 1, 7
Curry, Miss 7
Curry, Mr. 14
Cuthbert, Gertrude 21, 36, 40 D'Arcy, Mr. 7-8
Dennison, Lilly (Billy) 47, 48, 49 Doherty, Kay 21, 51
Ennsuka, Nigeria 34
Farren, Bernard N. 8 Ferebee, Dorothy 19 Fisher, Harriet 27, 28
Garnett, Jessie 10, 17, 19, 23, 24, 26, 36, 38, 59 Ghana 33-34 Goodman, Nadine 9
Harrell, Leah see Leah Harrell Williams
Harrell, Reverend 4
Hatch, Penecy 1
Hemachandra, Leathe 39
Hicks, Leon 40, 41 Holmes, Gladys 46﻿ii
Jones, Mrs., and family 20-21
Kaplan, Kivie 18 King, Abe 22
Lane, Goldie 4 Lanham Act 12
League of Women for Community Service ("558") 47-49
Massachusetts Women's Dental Society 46 Meharry Medical College 20 Meyers, Lauretta B. 51 Mintz, Anne 46
Mississippi Health Project 19-20, 32 Mitchell, Joseph 61
Mitchell, Lucy Miller 17, 18, 24, 49, 59, 61 Monrovia 60
Mound Bayou, Mississippi 20-22 NAACP 18, 22, 32, 50
National Council of Negro Women 45, 49 Negro College Fund 7
O'Banyoun, Ernest 3 Osborne, Estelle 39 Osili, Ifenangi 42
Palmer Memorial Institute 13 Peabody School 15 Peeks, Edward 48, 49 Peeks, Yankee 45, 57 Powell, Vernon 17 Press Club of Boston 23
Robbins, Betty Miller 55 Robert Gould Shaw House 48 Roberts Elementary School 7, 14, 15 Robinson, Bruce 18, 35
Saint Paul's A.M.E. Church, Cambridge 2 Sanders, Dr. 15 Senna, Ed 36 Sigh, Dr. 33
Smith, Mary Crutchfield 58, 59
Tanneyhill, Ann 11
Taylor, Andrea 43
Taylor, Delia Brown 40-41, 43, 59
Thompson, Oscar M. (Tom) 14, 16, 18, 19, 20-21, 22, 27, 28, 31, 33
34, 35, 36, 38, 50, 54
Tufts College 20
Tufts University Dental School 8-9 Turpin, Dr. 15﻿iii
Union Baptist Church, Cambridge 2, 3, 54-55
Walker, Richard 37 Wellington, Martha 2 Wheaton College scholarship 50 Wilkins, Roy 22 Williams, Grace 54, 55 Williams, Leah Harrell 4 Women's Day 3
Women's Service Club (464") 47-49 Wormley, Bertha 11, 17, 18, 24 Worthen, Mr. and Mrs. Henry 55 Worthy, Dr. 46 Wright, Harold 19
Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) 43-44﻿Cheryl Louise Townsend Gilkes received her B.A. and M.A. degrees and her Ph.D. in Sociology from Northeastern University. While a graduate student, she taught sociology courses at Northeastern University, Tufts University, and Boston State College. She is currently on the faculty of the Department of Sociology at Boston
University.﻿﻿
