
Livingston:

OK, would you like to start by

giving me your name and where 


and when you were born. 

Saklad: I was, my name is Sarah Mazick Saklad.

I was born in Providence 


in January 20th, 1908. 

Livingston:

And could you tell me something about your parents, and if 


you had any siblings. 

Saklad:

I am the middle one, middle child of three.

and a younger sister.

With an older brother 


My parents were Russian immigrants.

this country I think at the turn of the century.
Went to Classical, and went to Brown.

And came to 


I grew up in Providence. 


I started with the class of 1929 but 


finished with the class of 1928. 

Livingston:

And could you tell me, you said you were the middle child, 


a little about your brother and sister-- how old they were. 

Saklad:

Well my brother is a ,year and one half older.

My sister is three

and one half years younger.
Livingston:
Saklad:

And what are their names?

My brother is Morris Mazick, M-A-Z-I-C-K.

Striar, S-T-R-I-A-Ro

She lives in Bangor Maine.

My sister is Doris
And her son was Brown,

class of 1954.
Livingston:

Could you tell me something about now you spent your early

years, what kind of games you played, how you spent your time.
Saklad:

(Laughter) Its hard to remember.

what we did, kids played.
storms in the winter.

I don't remember very much about

I remember the, we used to have more of snow

And thought nothing of it.

No one ever thought of,

of not walking to school no matter how deep the snow was.
summer we, you know, we played kids' gameso
a great deal when I was in high school.
The first three pages are

And, and in

And, and I, I know I read

My father died when I was a

transcribed verbatim.

Saklad oral history-p 2
sophomore in high school, and I had, I worked that summer.

And worked

part-time after school,I guess the rest of my high school days and, and
through a good deal of, of my years at Brown.
Livingston:
Saklad:

What kind of work did you do?

I did everything under the sun , (Laughter).

school I, I think I worked Saturdays in, in the

Ah ... in, in high

department stores. And-­

oh I was a, I was, when I was, after my, the summer after my father died
at the end, the end of May. And it, he'd only been sick a week. And he
was, he was only 49.

And it was kind of shocking for awhile, but I did

something very unusual that summer.
in Providence.

At 15--there was a telephone strike

And you had to be 17 to, to get the job.

was 15 (laughter), I told them I was 17.

So I, well I

I worked all summer.

And it

was really a tremendous help because for the next, for the first term of
my junior year in high school I, I had a four hour half time job as a
telephone operator.

And then they, they did away with the system.

So

I had, so thats when I went, I worked Saturdays. And then when I was, in
college I think I, I think I had gotten some books from the library and
learned to do some

bobkkeeping.

I had all kinds of odd jobs in between,

in between classes, and on weekends.
Livingston:

What did your parents do?

Saklad: My father--the last, well as far back as I can remember, ever
since I was very very young had a shop where he bought junk from other
people, from peddlers.

And then, ah, separated the different things

and resold them.
Livingston:
Saklad:

And what was his name?

Max.

:05 	Livingston:

And did you work in the store with him?

Saklad: Oh, when I was a kid, yes.

I was (laughter) ,even when I was very

young still in before I, I used to help him with--I guess we were both

Saklad oral history-p 3
mathematicians.

So I used to do some mathematical things for him.

Then

when I was in high sohool I, until he, the two years I was in high school
before he died I used to help out with doing things like that.
Livingston:

Did you, what did your mother do, did she start working

after he died?
Saklad:

No, she, she was always home, alone.

And though she was awfully

depressed about it for quite a while, was very m...l.ch disturbed that I wanted
to go to medical school.

My going away made her a lot more interested

especially in what was going on.

She'd, she'd hear of something going

on in Baltimore and she always made a note to tell me that she knew about
it.

But, I hadn't been away from home, and ah, she thought it was too

much work, it was too hard.

But I think it was, my being away was good

for her because she became much more
Li~ngston:

outgoing then she had been.

What did your brother and sister do, did they ...

Saklad: Neither went to college--my sister got married when she was not
quite twenty.

My brother didn't go to college.

home he took, he went to work.
at Brown.

He took, when he was at

and took a number of extension courses

And ah, he was, he was in business, in, in Somerville.

He

lived in Somerville, then lived in Newton until a year or so ago.

He

lives in Brookline now.

H~s

not very well.

My sister has lived in Bangor

Maine since she was almost-·51 years.
Livingston:

What were the attitudes in your family about going to school,

and higher education?
Saklad:

Oh, that was, that was terribly important ••. Going to school

was, was, getting education was the one priority.

And, ah, my, my

brother went to Classical High School too, but my sister wasn't, she
wasn't interested in studying.
had a good time

l

gdt a job.

Glannings is downtown?

She went to Hope High School, and ah,

Have you been down, do you know where

Its in the Westminister Mall, and that store

Saklad oral history-p 4
preceeded Brown.

I think it was founded in 1766, or 1764--1 forget.

Anyway it was around the same time that Brown was started. It started
out as they called it the Glannings Dry Good store.

It was sort of a

department store only they didn't have many men's things or men's shirts,
but it had everything else that one would find in a department store. I
think she got a job in the office there just as she got out of high school.
And was married before she was twenty.
:10 	Livingston:

How did people view your wanting to go to medical school when

you were still in high school?
Saklad:

I was all set to go to medical school by the end of my

year in high school.

At Classical that wasn't such a strange thing

because a couple of my classmates--one of them wanted to go to medical
school, but I think her parents weren't anxious--they were disturbed
because it meant four years of college and four years of school and
much earning power.
arthiology.

~hen

not

She and her boyfriend both went to school of

She was very bright.

intelligent, but not up to her.

He was a very nice boy and quite
They went, but there weren't many women

going to medical school back then.
Dean Morriss of course was very supportive.

She was born and grew

up in Baltimore and had a brother who was a doctor. He'd gone to Hopkins.
And she was very supportive.
Livingston:

Just a little bit more about your years in high. school.

What made you decide at that age that you wanted to go to college and
to medical school?
Saklad: Well I had been in the hospital when I was ten with a knee injury.
And I got annoyed with the nurses because I had some difficulty.
they said, "Oh, there is nothing the matter with you."

And

I said to her,

"When I grow up I'm not going to be a nurse, 1 9 m going to be a doctor
and give orders 9 "

(laughter). I think the idea was sort of born by the

time I got home.

I wasn't able to walk very well.

I had the cast on

Saklad oral history-p 5
for awhile.
school.

But I didnit think too much about it until I got to high

I think all through high :school I was set.

Livingston:
Saklad:

And your plans didn't change at all after your father died?

No.

Livingston:

What do you remember about World War I and the years just beforE

Saklad:I remember the day of the armistice very distinctly.

But I remember

learning to knit. I think I was in the fifth grade, in 1917-18.

And

the big thing among the schools was knitting white cotton squares as
washcloths for the soldiers.

I remember knitting one, but thats about it.

But thats when I learned to knit.
November the eleventh, 1918.
us.

I remember very clearly, even now,

My father took us downtown, the three of

There were mobs down, tremendous crush of people.

down there celebrating.

We were there.

celluloid ' buckle on the backbelt.
That was a distinct memory.
Livingston:

Everybody was

I had a new black coat with a

I came home without the buckle (laughter).

I don't remember much else about it.

Do you remember the war years; besides the knitting?

Saklad: There was a severe flu epidemic.
and I were ill at the time.

I remember my mother, my sister

That was in the very beginning of 1918.

I was home for about ten days and when I went back to school the supervisor
of the fifth grade asked me what was the matter.
was sick in bed with the flu.
an

I didn't know, I

She said, "You look awful."

extraordinarily healthy person, child.

I was always

She sent me home and told

me to stay home for a week and not come back, rest and eat, and so forth.
There was a great deal of anxiety in the population because of the flu
epidemic.

The mortality was horrendous in 1918.

in some of 1919, I don't remember that so much.

In guess it went on
But I remember people

talking about it.
:15 Livingston:

So they talked almost more about the flu epidemic at that time?

Saklad oral history-p 6
Saklad:

Yes.

I don't remember too much about the war.

Its difficult

to differentiate between what I knew then and what I have read since.
Livingston:

Do remember how people felt when the United States decided

to get into the war?
Saklad:

No, but I remember one particular incident.

of 1916.

I remember my family talking with the

for Wilson.
Hughes?

No.

It was the election

neighbors~

- They voted

They hoped Wilson would get in because if Hughes was elected-­
Yes--that there would surely be a war.

with Wilson we wouldn't get into it.

But they felt that

He was elected November

1916.

And he declared war on Germany, I think it was April eighth 1917. April
sixth or April eight.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Do you remember that?

I remember dates automatically.

And I get teased about it a

great deal.
Livingston:
Saklad~

No.

neighbors.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Was your father active at all in politics?
But I remember this discussion my parents had with the
Its one of the things that stands out.
Anyone from your neighborhood go to the war?

Where I lived at the time--now its very closely built up--but

it was very sparse.

Do you know where Providence College is?

the north end of Providence.

I remember when the College was built.

was very sparsely built at the time
the following years.
anyone.
ours.

Well its in

1916-1918.

It was built up in

So we didn't have many neighbors.

I didn't know

Well our neighbors had very young children--contemporaries of
I didn't know anyone who actually went to war--who was involved

actively in the First World War.
Livingston:

Do you remember passage of the Nineteenth Amendment when

women got the right to vote?

It

Saklad oral history-p
Saklad:

Faintly.

7

But then again I don't know how much I remember and

how much we read about it in school.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Did your mother decide to vote after that?

She voted.

Livingston:

She voted regularly.

What do you remember about the roaring twenties and F. Scott

Fitzgerald, and what kind of impact did they have on you?
Saklad:

I don't think it had very much.

Fitzgerald and the jazz age.
on me.

I remember reading F. Scott

But I don't think it had any actual effect

I was busy going to high school.

In Classical High School my

particular class was a small class--I enjoyed it tremendously.

My mother

used to tease me because when I'd come home and she'd say "What happened
in school today?" I said, "Oh, we laughed like anything."
throw it up to me years later.

Thats all I could tell her about it.

wasn't anything like high school today.
in.

She used to
It

Radio was just beginning to come

I remember when my brother built the first crystal set, because

there was nothing--no TV at all.

You used your own resources and your

friends a lot rather than pay much attention to other things.
When I was in college that was the 'flapper age.

I remember one of

the girls In the class, maybe she was a year behind me, who was going to
the prom and she said her mother made her a dress out of a yard of cloth.
I don't remember too much about it.
:20 	Livingston:

Do you remember if the mores changed at all when you were

j;n ', high school?

Saklad:

I don't think so.

I don't remember much about that.

I think

it changed when I was in college, but I don't remember much about high
school.
Livingston:
Saklad:
college.

How do you think it changed in college?

I think the restriction~omen students changed while I was in
And smoking came in" when I was in college.

Girls began to smoke.

Saklad oral history-p 8
Since I was, what they used to call a "city girl" I lived at home.
don't know how much was permitted in the dorms at the time.

I

There was

a place called Brennan's on Brown Street I think where they would go for
tea or whatever and they could smoke there.
well-known meeting place in the twenties.

I think Brennan's was a
How much longer it existed

after 1930 I don't know, because I wasn't around very much for about ten
years.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Was it a place for men and women to meet?

I think so.

Its funny, I don't remember too much about that.

I spent a lot of time--I practically lived in the laboratory my last
year.

Well, my last year thats where I spent a lot of time and quite

a bit the year before.

When I wasn't in the laboratory, I wasn't in class,

I was working at all kinds of odd jobs.

Even though my tuition my first

year at Brown was $300.00, the next year was $350.00 but women's
were very meager.
was $100.00.

scholarship~

Out of $300.00 the most you could get for that year

And the next year I think it got to be $150.00.Somehow

or other you had to find ways of meeting the difference.

If you took

lab courses you had all kinds of extras.
Livingston:
:25 	 Saklad:

Did you decide to go to Brown because it was close?

Many of us in school at the time didn't think of--very few went

elsewhere in the twenties.

I know some of the boys, the

ones from Classica:

some 	went to Harvard, some didn't stay at Harvard (laughter) and switched
and came to Brown.

Of course I know a couple of my classmates who were

very bright--if you had a "B" average at Classical you could go to Brown
or Harvard, or I guess Princeton or Yate without SAT's, because the
school was nationally recognized.as an outstanding college prep place.
Many of my high school classmates went to Brown.
problem it was much easier.
home.

If you had a financial

Brown was excellent and you could live at

We used to have a trolleycar system.

I would get off at The

Saklad oral history-p 9
First Baptist Church and walk up Thomas Street and Angell Street.
Livingston:
aid.

You mentioned that for women it was hard to get financial

Was it as difficult for the men?

Saklad:

No, because a good student at Brown in the twenties could get

a full tuition scholarship.
women.

There was very little money available for

There was a Rhode Island Society formed, I think at the turn

of the century, for the cOllegiate education of women.

They would lend

you a certain amount of money and you didn't have to pay interest I think
for five years.

And then it was something like, I've forgotten, two or

three percent.

I bailed out my college tuition in 1937, which was what,

L-? ine years after I got out.

Things got worse afterwards.

The Depression was from 1929-1939.

Its very difficult to

get

young people to have any idea of what it was like.
Livingston:
Saklad:

You were just coming out of college then?

No I was in medical school in 1928.

Hoover was elected in the fall of 1928.
me particularly.

~was

The market crashed in 1929.

Those first years didn't effect

in school and I worked summers.

when Roosevelt closed the banks.

I was an intern

The doctors were awfully upset

I

because

if YOUpidn't have any cash on you (laugher) you were just out of luck.
I was lucky because I didn't have any money so I didn't have to worry
about it, (Laughter).

There was some consolation in that.

Time Magazine

had a long article on Roosevelt--did you see it by any chance?

I tore

it out and I sent it to my daughter to read because it was quite graphic
about how things were.

You have to read it at least ten times to absorb

how difficult things were.
Livingston:
Saklad:

But people survived.

How did it change your life?

It didn't have much effect on my life because thats when I was

an intern and I wasn't getting any money, but I was living in the hospital.
Currently a first year intern at the Rhode Island Hospital is getting

Saklad oral history-p 10
$18,000. a year.

My first year I didn't get anything, zero.

The first

year I was a resident in psychiatry I earned $75.00 a month.

You lived

in the hospital and you were fed.
we got along.

We didn't expect a great deal.

And

Even my last year in training, I was a Harvard Fellow

at Massachusetts General Hospital and got $1000.00.
:30 	Livingston:

Did the type of people who were coming to the hospital change

during the depression?
Saklad:

You got a lot more people.

never consider that sort of thing.

People went on welfare who would
It was difficult.

Doctors were getting

a couple of dollars per visit, three dollars per house call, that sort
of thing.

They were glad to get paid.

Livingston:
Saklad:

How did people pay for their health-care?

There wasn't any insurance plan I don't think until after the

Second World War.
Livingston:

So if someone was sick and didn't have the money to pay

during the Depression-Saklad:

You didn't pay.

One of the elderly doctors I know said to me

he used to get chickens and eggs.

H~s

been practicing in East Providence

for over 50 years and he started out during the Depression, or the very
beginning of it.

He loves to tell the story of how he was paid in eggs ',

and chickens, and fruits and vegtables.

Tha~s

how he got by.

I wasn't

here--we were on the West Coast over two years during the Second World
War so I don't know when actually Blue Cross/Blue Shield was started.
I know it was in existence in 1946.
Livingston:

I'd like to hear a little about your medical schooling, but

before that if we could just go back and talk a little about your edu­
cation at the Women's College at Brown?
Saklad:

I decided that since I had to go to medical school for four years.

that I wanted to get through in three.
Dean Morriss.

And I (laughs) told the Dean.

At that time, 1925. 1926, 1927 we had five courses to

Saklad oral history-p 11
take each semester.
Livingston:
Saklad:

And so I decided I could take seven my second year. 


Each semester? 


Yes.

And she didn't think it was such a good idea.

"You had done so well the first year, don't spoil it."
way.

She said, 


But I did it any­ 


And I think the summer after that I found out that I needed another 


year of French.

I couldn't sqeeze it in, so I went to one of the French 


professors and he gave me an assignment to read over the summer.
gave me an exam in September.
that was enough.
freshman year.

He 


And that was one semester credit, and 


You had to have two years of German and I took German 

Then that second year I had one semester of German lit. 


and one semester of scientific German and we read some biology and chemistry
books in German.

I think I took a half credit course in Greek grammer. 


-:- 35 	 I had four years of Latin, three years of Greek, and two years of French
in high school.

When I got to Brown you had to have one year of Latin

and one year of Greek.

A classmate of mine at Classical had an older

sister who was at Brown and she had studied Greek, and she said, "Oh, the
professor was just wonderful."

So I had a year of Greek.

three of- us the first semester and about six the second.
Gifferent professors, but they were just wonderful.

There were
There were two

And then I took this

course, I think it must have been second semester of second year.

Then

my last year was a very complicated program because I hadn't had any
inorganic chemistry and I had to have organic chemistry and the chairman
of the department didn't think I ought to do it.

He said, "You can't

take organic chemistry if you haven't had the other.
Dean Morriss and told her I just had to have it.
me try it anyway.

And so I went to

So she told him to let

I wanted to take a nice light course.

This professor

I had freshman year in Greek taught a Greek drama Qn English which was
an excellent course and everybody loved it and loved him.
at the same time as organic chemistry.

But it came

So I took Greek drama in Greek

Saklad oral history- p 12
with him and a couple of students who were majoring in Greek.

One of

them was a classmate of mine in high school and one was getting her
master's degree in Classics.

That was rugged.

It was very interesting,

but it took more time than all my chemistry and physiology put together.
I imagine there still are a lot of prsmed students at Brown. There
were a,lot of students then.

There were some prescribed pre-med courses.

You had to have physics and three years of chemistry and oh, at least
a couple years of biology.It wasn't until the last thirty years or so
that there has been an emphasis on humanities, as long as you had some
chemistry, some organic chemistry and biology you didn't even have to
have a minimum.
Livingston:

But then it was more or less prescribed.

Did you have problems as a woman wanting to take all these

science courses?
Saklad:

No, no they let me take it.

They were all on the Hill.

Thats

what we used to call going on the Brown campus--going on the Hill.
were allover there.

They

They let you take--there were no restrictions.

The problem I had was that I had no chemistry in high school so I couldn't
get that in freshman year so I got in sophomore year. You had to have
inorganic and organic and I gather you still do I guess to go to medical
school.

So that was a problem.

But, you know, they let me do it, and

I did 	ok.
:40 	Livingston:
Saklad:

Were there many other women in the program you were in?

Not in my class, I think I was the only one who was interested

in medicine.

There were two I think in the year after me.

And I don't

know of any others until later.
Livingston:

How did the men and women you went to school with react to

your wanting to be in medicine when you were really the only one?
Saklad:

I don't think they reacted particularly.

I don't think anyone

ever said to me, "Why do you want to do it?"
Livingston:

Were you usually the only woman in a lot of your science courses

SaMlad oral history-p 13
Saklad:

No.

I think there was only one other girl in organic chemistry.

She was in the class of 1930 as I remember.

But when I took physics my

sophomore year there were about a half dozen--some of the math majors were
taking it.

This was elementary physics.

they called it.

In college I don't know what

It was a very large class of men and I think 6 or 7

women--most of them were seniors, I was a sophomore. That was when we
used to have to wear a hat to go over on the Hill.

And then at the middle

of sophomorevear they changed the rules and so that was wonderful.
Livingston:
Saklad:

~ that.

Was there anything else you had to wear whenever you went--

If you went downtown you had to wear gloves.

You probably heard

You had to wear gloves downtown, especially you know I think for

the dorm girls--you had to be a lady.

That was very--you dressed properly

and acted properly.
Livingston:
Saklad:

What other rules do you remember they had at school then?

I think you were permitted to smoke my junior year.

the Alumnae Hall was finished in the spring in 1928.

You know

We had the first

prom in Alumnae Hall and it was really very beautiful.when it was new.
Somehow I remember there was a room where girls could smoke.

There was

fewer restrictions on smoking by 1928.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Do you remember having to go to Chapel?

Oh yes!

You went to Chapel five mornings a week.

attendance, you were allowed only a few cuts.

They took

Seniors wore cap and gown

to Chapel.
Livingston: How did the students feel about that?
Saklad: Some of them objected, but you know it was just one of those
things.

Thats what you do.

We used to have a speaker--thBre :are a couple

of people I remember very well who spoke.

One was Mark Twain's daughter.

I guess Miss Margaret Morriss had known her.
because she was an actress.

Anyway, she was stunning,

I'm trying to think of her name, but I can't

Saklad oral history-p 14
right now.

And then one other woman I remember very clearly was the

engineer--you remember "Cheaper by the Dozen"--she was the mother and,
I can't remember her name.

At that time she only had eleven children.

She was a pretty outstanding engineer.

She did some very interesting

studies--efficiency--and I think she was responsible for instituting
a program in factori'es where you worked two hours and you had a fifteen
minute break.
that.

There were few errors made, fewer accidents when you did

She was a very interesting woman and very amusing to listen to.

They were two people I still remember distinctly in Chapel.

I remember

the dorm girls coming to Chapel very often with elastic to pull up their
pajamas or garters, or something under the cap and gown--they put them­
selves together half asleep to make it because you were disciplined if
you cut too many Chapels.
Livingston:

Of course some of them thought that was ridiculouE

What was the relationship between the women who were dorm

:45 girls and the ones who were city girls?
End of side one
Saklad:

We lived sort of in a different world I think than the dorm

girls because they had a closer relationship to one another.

When we

first entered our freshman year we were assigned to a senior.

And my

senior had another freshman who lived in the dorm.

And then I had a

couple of other very close friends --they were actually in the class I
started with, 1929--who lived in the dorm.

It wasn't quite the closeness

that I'm sure they developed with a roommate, or someone else on their
floor.

There was a club room in Pembroke Hall where the city girls used to

get together.
Livingston:

What was the relationship like between the faculty and the

students?
Saklad:

It depended

~ ' lot

on the individual.

that you could get pretty close to.

There were some faculty

I remember--well he was just an

Saklad oral history-p 15
instructor in chemistry when I took freshman chemistry.

He was someone

you could go and talk to.
Livingston:
Saklad:

And who was that?

His name was Norris Rakestraw.

He came from Nebraska and was the

nephew . of Senator Norris of Nebraska at the time.

And Dr. Walter Wilson,

for whom you know the lab is named, was a very young instructor I think
in physiology. He wasn't invofled either in teaching the course I took
or in the lab.

But he was very much interested in pre-med students and

when you'd spend hours around the laboratory he'd be around.

He was

very helpful, you could sit around and talk about medical school and
problems.

lowe him a great deal.

We were just sitting around the lab

and he said, "You youngsters who want to go to medical school--have to have
someone," this must have been early in the spring that last year, "If
you really want to get in someplace one of the best things to do is to
get someone art the College who really knows you to write a personal letter
to someone on the admissions committee."

And I went back and told Dean

MQrriss that Doc Wilson says, "This is what you do."
"How about you writing me a letter?"
who was associate professor of

So I said . (Laughs),

And it turned out that this woman

psychiatry

at Hopkins was on the

admissions committee and she had been a student of Dean Morriss when
Dean Morriss was a professor of history at Mount Holyoke.
write to Esther Richard."

: 50 	 Livingston:
Saklad:

She said, "I'll

So she did and I got in.

7

What was your relationship like with Dean Morriss?

Well she was, she was very nice to me. Even though

ahead and took too much work, she was very helpful.

I went

And she was responsible

for my going to medical school because I didn't have any money.

And she

said she wanted me to come over and we were talking about something.
And then she said, "What are you going to do?"

And I said, "Well I'd

like to go to medical school but I don't have any money."
"Where do you want to go?"

v

She said,

I said, "I want to go to J"ohns Hopkins."

Saklad oral history-p

16

She says, "Why don't you apply, and see what happens."
day in May I got a letter saying that I was admitted.

So I think one
I went to her

and told her that my mother could dig up the twenty-five dollar deposit
to send but how about all the rest of the money?

"I have to live there."

She said, "Well I have a friend--who' 11 let you have the money for four
years."

She gave me her name and said "You call her and go over and
She was a 70 year old lady.

see her."

two maiden ladies, Quaker ladies.
she knew them.

She and her older sister were

Dean Morriss was a Quaker, thats how

And they probably did this for other--students that

she thought--were (words here are unintelligible).
enough because I still had to work to eat.

There wasn't quite

But I never would have been
~

able to do it without them.

"

.1 came back to live here, my husband is an anesthesiologist.

She (Dean Morriss) had episodes of illness.
times and he gave her anesthesia.
He used to like to tease her.
to be ninety.

She was operated on several

And we got to be very good friends.

She was a remarkable woman.

She lived

I remember when she had her eighty-fifth birthday.

I

was out, and wrote to her and sent her something for her birthday.

After

I got home she called me and she said, "Sarah to you think I'm going to
live forever?"

She was getting tired I think.

She told my husband that

she wasn't very good on the periphery because she didn't see well, she
didn't hear well, and she had arthritic knees so she didn't walk well.
But she was intellectually unimpaired to the very end--which was amazing.
We used to see her two, three times a year.
Livingston:
Saklad:

And ... she was very nice.

What did other students think of her?

Not everybody was, I have several classmates who say, "I don1t

know what you," you know, "I don't understand why you seemed so close
to her.

I think she was . .. "

They didn't Care for her.

I think a lot

of it had to do with, it was an entirely interpersonal thing.

She was ...

Saklad oral history-p 17
very kind and, well to me of course I owe her a tremendous amount.

When

she died her niece said to me "Aunt Margaret always said you were so
good to her."

:55 	know,

But the niece didn't know what she did for me~

she left me a little something--a token.

And you

Her niece gave me this

1 i ttle package and said, "Aunt Margaret always said you were so'!..- both

her nieces went to Brown.

They didn't know.

I don't think she ever

said anything about what she did, and I'm sure other, other--I wasn't
the only one that she did this for ... I think she went out of her way .
to .•. help--students she thought really needed help.

I don't know of any­

one else that--she never said anything, I never said anything.
This is a story very few people outside my immediate family know.

But

we got to be very good friends.
I got to know Dean Lewis, Nancy Duke Lewis who succeeded her
when I was on the scholarship committee for five years.

But it wasn't

the same kind of a relationship.
Livingston:
Saklad:

What do you remember about her?

She was a very warm, very bright woman.

I have no idea what

it was like to be a stUdent there.

But I felt that she was understanding

of what a good education should be.

I think she stimUlated the faculty

to changing some ways of teaching that were more stimulating and made
you think a lot more.

I remember we were away for over two years during

the war, my husband was in the army and we came back in 1946.

I remember

going to a meeting--it was either Pembroke Club or my class in the fall
of 1946 and being startled to see

me~

walking through Alumnae Hall.

Men

didn't have any classes at Pembroke until --Brown was a very different
place after the war.

Many of the faculty loved it.

They had extremely

moti vat~d students who had grown up tremendously in th;e years that they
were in the service.

They came back and they were stimulating to the

younger students who saw these people really going after an education.

Saklad oral history-p 18
I remember some of the professors talking about how wonderful it is to
teach this group.

But I remember being so startled to see men students

running through Alumnae Hall.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Were they allowed in the dorms when you were there?

Only I think in the living room.

Livingston:
Saklad:

What was the social life like?

There were a lot of things going on.

part in Sock

The girls did not take

& Buskin that came either during the war or before, but they

had their own dramatic society.

They had plays.

Mask which was a big thing and we had May Day.

We had the

SoIhUmo~e

I have a snap shot that

goes back to May of 1927 of the girl who was May Queen, they used to vote
for the May Queen.

There were several candidates, how that came about

I don't remember. We voted for the one that was (unintellible wordsl.
:60 	There was ~oPDomore Mask and games and things.

They still had it in

1947 or 1948 because I went with a friend at the field house--they had
it there.

And there was a Junior Prom and a Senior Prom and they used

to have tea dances,they had them in the dorm. I don't remember how often
they were but I know they had them in the spring, but if they had them
other times I don't know.
Livingston:

Do you remember any other traditions that were peculiar to

the Women's School?
Saklad:

I can't think of any off hand.

Livingston:

What do you remember about the decision to change the name

of the school
Saklad:

from the Women's College at Brown to Pembroke?

That happened the summer after I got outo

summer of 1928.

That happened In the

In September of that year when school started, Brown

opened I think a week or so before I left for medical school, and it was
then officially Pembroke.

I don't know much about it.

But I remember

when the gIrls at Pembroke in the council meeting, it must have been

Saklad oral history-p 19
twenty years or so ago.

Do you know the date that it became all Brown?

I think it was in the 1960's.

But before that they used to have the

Alumnae Council and alumnae from allover would meet for two or three
days in November

and discuss the current problems at Brown--at Pembroke.

I remember once that we got together in a very small little group, there
were a few alumnae and a couple of students who were juniors.
were talking

about-~"you

They

know what we think we should have is equal

number of women students with men."

That really stunned us because

the Pembroke classes were always so much smaller than the men's classes,
always.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Do you remember approximate numbers when you were here?

Yes. We graduated 112, I think.

And that was pretty normal in the 1920's.

j

Gwas between 112 and 115.
I remember one year when

Alberta Brown was head of admissions, this was when Nancy Duke Lewis was
Dean, they always admit more than they can take care of because there is
always so many students who go elsewhere, and she was horrified to find
that many more decided to come to Pembroke than they had expected and
there wasn't any room.

They had a terrible time in the dorms finding

places for them to live for awhile that first semester until, well there
:65

are always apparently some drop-outs. This must have been in the late
1950's or early 1960's when these two girls said, "You know we're hoping
to see 50% women at Brown."

We thought that was a fantastic idea, and

it came to pass.
Livingston:

So was there much debate then your senior year about the

change that would happen?
Saklad:

No.

Livingston:

If there was I was completely unaware of it.
Did you graduate with the men or was there a separate

ceremony?
Saklad:

Oh no.

There was only one graduation.

They had a small class

and we all got into the First Baptist Church and there was room for families

Saklad oral history,-p20
My commencement was quite memorable because of Charles Evans Hughes who

He was given an honorary degree, ar

was Chief Justice and a Brown Graduate.

William Keen who was a surgeon in the Civil War and had an honorary degree
from Oxford so he wore a bright red gown.

He was a little man with a

little white beard and he was very old then and was at the commencement.
Livingston:

You mentioned you went to Johns Hopkins, could you talk a

little bit about that?
Saklad:

Johns Hopkins was unique as a medical school because it was,

I think the first school where you had to have a bachelor's degree for
admission, or one of the first one, but I'm pretty sure it was the first.
It had a special reason for women because when they were about to open
the school in about 1899 the B&O Railroad where most of their money came
from was having problems and they were short about $400,000 or $500,000.
Elizabeth Garrett who came from a prominent and well-to-do family from
Baltimore came to the powers that be and said, "I will give you the
money you need if you will admit women on the same terms as men."

They

looked aghast at.her and said, "We'll accept them on equivalent terms."
And she said, "Oh no, if you want the money you have to acc ept the terms."
So they tried to raise the money, and couldn't.

So she organized a

group of women, among them I remember was M. Carey Thomas who later
became the President of Bryn Mawr, and they organized women's groqB all
over the country and raised the money.

And she came up with I think close

to $400,000 of her own. Thats why they've always taken women on the
same terms as men and it was the first school to do that.

There was a

medical school in Philadelphia that was just all women, but many of the
schools didn't take women.

In my class we started out with 7 out of 72

and then we got another girl in the beginning of the third year.

In

the first few years there were very small classes, there were few women
from the very beginning.

Then about 1900 and for a few years 1900, 1905,

Saklad oral history-p21
1906 there were quite a lot of women.
10%.

Of course the classes now are much bigger and I don't know the

proportion of women to men.
directory that has it.
:70

And then it got to average about

I could look it up because I have a 1979

One of the women in the first class, I think

there were three, lived here in Rhode Island.

I met her in 1930, she

was a classmate of a friend of mine's mother from Vassar.

I don't know

how much she practiced here, but she was a very elderly woman then.
lived in Centredale or Scituate.

She

And there was another Doctor Pardee

who worked in the TB sanitarium in South County I think.

I met her just

once.
Livingston:
Saklad.

No.

Livingston:
Saklad:

How about in your residency?

When I first came to Chapin. I was the first girl intern.

Livingston:
Saklad:

Did you find that you were treated differently at all?

And thats located where?

Oh, its not here anymore, its up near Providence College.

It

was the first contagi8us disease hospital, and it was an internationally
famous place, Doctor Chapin had started that.

There were only one or

two doctors who treated me like an orderly, (laughs).
them were very nice.

But the rest of

After I'd been there a month they asked me to

extend my--I was supposed to be there for three months and stayed nine.
Except for one or two doctors who I worked with in the out-patients, the
rest of them were very nice.

I came in for some teasing.

But at school

there was no descrimination.

Other places that I had been, I was in a

state hospital in Connecticut, here and at Massechusetts General--the
girl who was in the class ahead of me in medical school was the first
female resident at Mass General and she had worked there as a technician
before she went to medical school--but the department of Psychiatry was
different.

Women had been in psychiatry and were accepted more easily.

In internal medicine, well that was a little more difficult, but in

Saklad oral history-p 22
psychiatry and pediatrics were the two easiest to work in.

It was

interesting, the two years I was at Mass. General more women came into
the department of medicine.

When I was visiting there after the war one

of the doctors told me that, it was very interesting there.
never took women until 1946.
first class.

Harvard

There was a girl from Pembroke in that

During the war Massechusetts General Hospital had to take

more and more women, they were short of men.

I think when the war was

over they had a party and the men were startled to see how many women
had gotten into the hospital in their time of need.
Livingston: What happened, you said you were the first woman intern at
Chapin, why do you think they accepted you when they did?
Saklad:

They needed someone.

Someone had stood them up and I was

availabl~

Thats the only reason I can think of.
Livingston: Was there trouble in terms of your staying there at night--

Saklad:
now.

No.

I lived with a woman orderly, or aides as you'd call them

And I lived there.

I got along very well there.

sort of looked askance at me at the beginning.

I think they

I think I had something

wrong with my ear or something and I saw this doctor.

He was on the

staff and he said, I happened to be in town, "You know they need some­
one would you be interested?"

I knew about the hospital, I used to play

:75 	 tennis there, summers when I was in college.
who was the head of it quite well.
medicine but someone up and left.

And I had known the man

He wasn't interested in women in
In those days, especially in January,

February and March, they needed someone badly,so he said, "Why don't you
go up and see him;"

So they took me.

After I'd been there I think

about three weeks, the assistant superintendent says, "How would you
like to stay on for a while?"

So I did.

It was in the days before there

were any antibiotics and there were a great deal of infectious diseases.

Saklad oral history-p 23
It was very interesting and very stimulating.
Livingston:
Saklad:

You learned a lot. 


What made you decide to go into psychiatry? 


I was interested in medical school because Hopkins was one of 


the very first medical schools to have a well-developed department of 

psychiatry.

It had outstanding people.

You started on psychiatry the 


first day you went to medical school and we got a lot of it the first 

couple of years, much more than any other school did at the time. And 

many of the other schools didn't start
1940's and 1950's.

first two year programs until the 


During the third year of medical school you decide­


every other month depending on what youre in.
well thats the thing to be in;
be in.

If you're in medicine, 


if you're in surgery, thats the thing to 


I think you change your mind, literally and this happens to most 


medical students in their third year--everything becomes so exciting when 

you start working with patients.
year.

We got more psychiatry in our fourth 


It was a choice between that and obstetrics and GYN--but that 


was much more difficult for gals.

I know when I work

and come up and meet the girl residents in surgery, I
Livingston:
Saklad:

the hospital here
get quite excited.

Has the field changed a lot?

Oh, yes. For women--especially in the last ten years.

You know

I knew Doctor Peters who was the superintendent of the Rhode Island
Hospital for many years, and he would never ha¥e a women intern.

In

fact Doctor Ellen Stone who was a Johns Hopkins graduate of the class
of 1901, or 1903, or there abouts, her father was a close friend of
Doctor Peters and he didn't approve of her going to medical school anyway.
And she approached him for an internship and he said, "Not in my hospital."
Livingston:

Throughout college and your medical schooling did you always

consider having both a career and a marriage?

Did that pose a problem at

all?
Saklad: No, I don't think I thought very much about it in medical school.
It didn't pose a problem for me because in psychiatry you're not tied

Saklad oral history-p24
down to a schedule as much.

There are certain fields of medicine that

are much easier for a women to combine marriage--a family and a profession
:80

than others.
different.

If you're in obstetrics and yourE\at beck and call its
And you can see patients In your free time, in fact I think

they have some part-time residencies in psychiatry in some areas--theyQ ve
had one in New York for at least a dozen years or more where you can
split it. I remember some years ago Doctor Hamosky who was the chief of
medicine at Rhode Island had a women who was married and she had a couple
of children and she worked one month and stayed home one month.
year internship lasted two years.

I haven't asked him lately if he has

had any kind like that since, (laughs).
Livingston:
Saklad:

Her one

But he was willing to do that.

When were you married?

In 1939, just as I finished my psychiatric training.

I took

my board exams when I was nine months pregnant, (laughs).
Livingston:
8aklad:

How did you meet your husband?

He lived at Chapin.

When I met him, when I was an intern, he

was working--this is very interesting, this is during the depression.
There were a lot of what they called sick poor people and the city used
to pay local physicians $1.00 for an office visit, and $2.00 for a house­
call for a night for sick poor.

But there were so many sick poor that

they decided to have a full-time ptrysiCian~ork for the city and he would
see the sick poor.

And when there were more than he could see then they

would have a few other physicians see them.
then.

And that's what he was doing

He got out of medical school the year before me and he had an

internship, and he had some training--there's a hospital at Walt Lake,
it used to be a TB hospital

SO

Doctor Ritchen asked him if he'd do this.

He lived at Chapin, thats where I met him.

He did that for a while

u~til

1937 when he started in anesthesia and he took some special training in
anesthesia in New York.

But I knew him for five and one-half years

Saklad oral history-p

25

before we were married.

In 1939 I'd had five years of psychiatry as

well as a couple of years of general medicine. I had all the credits I
needed so I decided to take the board exam before I got involved with
a family.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Three.

Livingston:
Saklad:

And how many children did you have?

How was it raising them while being a psychiatrist?

Well I had an appointment at the psychiatric unit in Chapin as

soon as I came back.

After my first-born my mother was living near the

hospital and I used to drop her off (laughs) and go to the clinic and
them pick her up afterwards.

I didn't do any then from 1944-1946 I lived

in Oakland, California and I didn't do any psychiatry.
was born out there and they were two years apart.

The third one

And when I came back

here I had a hospital appointment and I did some consulting work seeing
patients when I had time.

When the youngest went to school all day, which

they start when they're in first grade, then it was a lot easier. I
could do more and gradually as they got older I got busy.
Livingston:
Saklad:

Where were you working?

I was on active service at Chapin for three months, I had a

consulting appointment at Miriam Hospital. I didn't do much at Rhode
Island until 1950.

They had a rule there if you were appointed you had

to spend three whole mornings a week at the

out-patient department and

:85 	 I had a commitment to Chapin and I couldn't do it.

So I never applied

there until 1950 when the pediatric department wanted a psychiatric
consultant.

The chief of psychiatry at Rhode Island Hospital asked me

if I would do that.

So I was on the staff from 1950, and then active

there for 18 years as a consultant to the pediatric department and spent
a lot of time there.

Things were different for me because I didn't have

to be concerned about supporting myself or the family, so what I did

Saklad oral history--p 26
was only the things I liked to do.
Livingston:
Saklad:

And when did you retire?

Well I became a consultant there in 1968 and I gradually weaned

my--after 1969 I only had one patient who I would see once in a while
until she moved out of town.

I'm still a consultant at Rhode Island. Since

they have new full-time people there) the last three years I've been going
back there.

I go to conferences on Friday morning and for the past few

months live been doing some supervising
Livingston:

of therapy.

How do you thing education and psychiatry have changed over

the years?
Saklad:

Psychiatry as a whole has changed.

Until 1954 or 1955 there

were no medications that you could give to a psychiatric patient.

The

treatment of especially very disturbed patients became very different
since 1954.

The population of state hospitals at that time--Rhode Island

State Hospital had 3200 patients and now has 600.
Livingston:

How did education change do you think, since you've been

in Providence and maybe you've been able to watch Brown closer than other
people who went to school there.
Saklad:

You mean the education at Brown?

Livingston:
Saklad:

Both at Brown and in general if you've seen changes.

I think the college education is better than it was.

its better in-depth.

I think

I don't think they take as many courses, but I

think, at least its my impression that they try to make them more stimu­
lating.
Livingston:
Saklad:

This is for women--

No. I think its changed for everyone.

I think, not only for

women, I think the university college education as a whole, in the top
schools.

At Brown I think thats

Livingston:

so.

I suspect its so at other universitie:

What did you think of the merger?

Saklad oral hBtory-p 27
Saklad:

It didn't bother me at all.

I have some very good friends who

were after me, who were Pembrokers and were very much disturbed by it.
I think coeducation is good.

They said, "Didn't it bother you?" And

I say, "It wasn't Pembroke in my day.
good.

I went to Brown."

I think its

I remember being overjoyed when I found out women were involved

in Sock and Buskin, and women were involved in a lot more things.

And

I don't know about now, but a few years ago they had a girl who was
editor of the Herald--and I raise a flag to that.

I think when I was

in college the girls as a whole were probably a little bit brighter
than the boys.

And its probably still so.

I remember one of the professors

told me when they were electing girls and boys for Phi Beta Kappa
in 1928 I guess it was, the average of the girls was so much higher than
the boys, _they really had a problem I think.

They were quite stooped about

it, because, I don't remember what class it was 1928 or 1929, the women
j

:90 were really very bright and it bothered them a lot that the girls were
so much brighter than the boys.
who saw it differently.

I forgot now who told me, it was a man

