
Dick Chase: [00:00] The following is an interview with Mrs. Esther Snell. Mrs.
Snell graduated from Pembroke College in 1934 with a degree in botany. She also worked at
Brown University from the time of her graduation until her retirement in 1975. During her career
as a botanist she has published many papers and a book on fungi in collaboration with her late
husband. The interview is part of the Pembroke Archives Project to collect oral histories of
Pembroke College. The interview took place at Mrs. Snell’s home in Providence, Rhode Island
on November 26, 1982. My name is Dick Chase.
(break in audio)
DC: OK, we’ll start with some biographical background, best way to start. You came to
Pembroke from Reading, Pennsylvania.
Esther Amelia Snell: That’s correct.
DC: Is that where you grew up?
EAS: I was born and brought up right in the city.
DC: OK, what was it like growing up there, in Pennsylvania? What kind of a town was it?

1

EAS: It’s a smallish town, 110,000 or something, it’s never changed much, it’s gone down a
little. As far as I’m concerned, it was a lot of fun. [01:00] I never had any bad (laughs)
experiences. Of course, when I grew up things didn’t happen the way they do now. You know,
we didn’t think about going home early or never being out alone or anything like that. But you
know when I was born, so that you know, it was a different, a completely different era than
we’re living in now. It’s Pennsylvania Dutch area, I guess you know that. My parents were
Pennsylvania Dutch background. My father’s people came to this country from Germany, before
the revolution. But I didn’t know that that was anything. I can immediately switch right into
Pembroke because when I came, two things, nobody except two teachers and a second cousin of
mine had ever heard of Brown University, when it did it was Brown’s College, which of course,
it never was, as you know it was – it was the first thing they called it was Brown University. And
I was no more than here [02:00] as a freshman living in Miller Dorm. I found I had a
Pennsylvania Dutch accent, which I wasn’t aware of, you see, having always lived there. And
then everybody teased me unmercifully and my family was a very quiet family, I wasn’t used to
teasing, but I got used to it pretty quick.
And then the funny thing was, when I went home at Christmas, the first time I went
home, because those days, that was a long ride from here to there, train or whatever, I got home
and people looked at me and said, “Oh my god, she’s gone high hat, she sounds awfully
Yankee,” (laughs) this was discrimination. I won’t yell at her. (laughs)
DC: Where did you go to high school?
EAS: Reading.
DC: Reading? Reading public?
EAS: At the Girls High School.
DC: Girls High School.

2

EAS: I was graduated in January, that was the way schools were run down there those days. By
the next September, boys and girls were together. I don’t know what you call that, it was just
Reading High School, but I went to the Reading [03:00] Girls High School.
DC: OK. What did you do in high school? What was the course load in high school? What type
of courses did they make you take?
EAS: I don’t remember how many. I started out in a business course. My mother didn’t want me
to go anywhere to school beyond, this was I guess pretty common in those days for girls and she
had never been able to go to school very much. (clears throat) My father had gone to Moore and
he wanted to go as far as possible, but when I went to high school he did not know quite what he
wanted me to do and I had no especial inclination. (dog sounds) But when I, I hope that doesn’t
record. When I was halfway (laughs) through I think these two women teachers that I mention,
who were both Pembroke graduates, or it was then the Women’s College in Brown University, I
think they worked on my father, but I never really knew this, to get me to come here and they
and this second cousin of mine were the ones who encouraged me because [04:00] she was a
Syracuse graduate but she knew about Brown and she thought it was a very good place. So that’s
how it happened. And then it meant that I, having taken a business course for two years, I could
not get all the courses in that I needed there by February, when I was graduated from high
school. So what I did was take more courses the second semester of the year, whatever, ’27, ’26,
’27, so that I had enough to apply here and was accepted with no problems.
DC: OK. Why did you decide to go to college?
EAS: My father wanted me.to go to college. And I really didn’t want to go into business. I
thought when I came here I wanted to be an English teacher. You see, these two women who
were influencing me were both English teachers and I admired them greatly and they were good
teachers, without question. And I thought I wanted to do that but my first semester here I had a
very young teacher, I think he was a Harvard graduate, [05:00] we won’t talk down Harvard, but,
and I know a lot of Harvard people I like, but I couldn’t stand the college. He was snippy, he was
fresh, he was not a good teacher and this threw me immediately. And then the other thing which
3

is sort of the way my life has been run, I didn’t know this until within the last six or seven years,
but the man I married seven years ago was the first teacher I ever saw on the Brown campus and
had a course with, because he taught botany. And I took the botany course and this is also an odd
circumstance, the woman who was dean of Pembroke in those days was Margaret Shove
Morriss, of course, better known as Peggy Push, you’ve probably heard of this. And I had my
whole course made out, the card, when I came, which I was told to do and I was stupid, I obeyed,
so I did it. And she never said [06:00] a word, why was I taking botany? She pushed almost
everybody into the general biology course when they first, all the women, when they first came
here. But she never said this to me, so again, it was a foregone, preordained or whatever, that I
took botany my first year and I was immediately interested.
I had known nothing about identifying or the workings of plants, the fungi, algae,
anything like that, never had it. I had good science courses in high school, but not that line. So I
got into his course and then I wanted to take more courses, but this was in the Depression in
1929, which I’m thinking about again, now, because money was pretty tight when you’re on a
fixed income. And the next year I told him I couldn’t come back to college because I didn’t have
any money. And he said, “If you can type and/or take shorthand [07:00] I can get you a job,” and
I said, “Well, I can take a course in the summertime,” he said, “That’s all that’s needed,” so I
took a course, just typing and shorthand and I almost never used the shorthand, although I still
remember a few characters, and I started working for him then. Doing typing. And it was the
research that I then went into with him and we worked and published together for 50 odd years.
So there, that’s a sort of a summary (laughs) of which I can expand at any length, anyplace.
(laughs)
DC: We’ll go a little deeper eventually.
EAS: Yeah, well, it doesn’t matter, I’m joking.
DC: Did any of your friends go to college?
EAS: Not my college classmates. Some of them, I mean, my high school classmates. Some of
them did. But you see, from that day on I lived here, except summers and the ones, one of my
4

closest, best friends still is a high school classmate. She comes up two [08:00] or three times a
year or if I can I go down to Reading. She did not go to college. She had a good job and she
earned a lot more money than I ever earned, but some of them went but not many. You see the, is
it going? All the women in those days did not go to college that much. If they did they went to be
teachers so they went to what were called “teachers colleges” in those days. (dog whines?]
Getting a little chorus in the background. I don’t even know how many of my high school
classmates went to college. There were a few, but not very many.
DC: How did you apply to Pembroke? What was the application process back then? Did you say,
“I want to go”?
EAS: I guess we broke orders, I have no recollection in the world.
DC: Because right now it’s very elaborate.
EAS: I know. I did take exams. I don’t think they were called SAT, but I remember they were
horrible, they made you a nervous wreck. I passed them [09:00] but I don’t remember anymore
than that. I have no recollection.
DC: Now back to what I asked you earlier, in going through yearbooks, you, in trying to follow
your undergraduate career, you start as a freshman in 1927, but you don’t graduate until 1934.
And you’re switched around between classes. Why is that?
EAS: Well, that’s because of Meniere’s syndrome, that I developed in the spring of 1928 and I
say “developed” because I think nobody knows yet, well, they do know a little bit about mine. If
you want me to cut out any of these details, just say so or you can cut on the tape. I had a lot of
work, I lot of examinations and at the time there was nobody in this city, including a
psychologist who was well known across the country, who knew what caused this violent
dizziness, which I still get. (clears throat) In fact, [10:00] the one inside my body now is,
(inaudible)-ritis and arthritis and everything only because I’ve always tipped to one side.
Eventually, and this is only like 15 or so years ago, they did x-rays and they show there is a
5

defect, a deformity or something in the middle ear, I guess. And also in one part of the brain.
And that, it cannot be corrected. I lost my train, what was I going to say there? Oh dear. Well,
the rest I told you, except it wasn’t on here.
The reason, all the doctors knew then that I seemed extremely nervous and extremely
tired. And I was. You fight dizziness almost every minute of your life and it is tiring. Because
you don’t know if you’re going to stand up or not. So they put me in the hospital for a while at
home and then that was the man that was the neurologist who said [11:00] the only thing he
knew to do was to have me take fewer courses, so I wouldn’t be under that tremendous pressure
all the time in college and I was because I didn’t get the best grades in the world, but I was a
conscientious person, I think I still am, but that meant that I was tired a lot of the time.
Therefore, taking only three courses a year or a semester instead of the five, to make them all up
for the total length of the four years, I had to stay here until 1934 when I got my bachelor’s
degree.
DC: OK. You graduated with a degree in botany, as you said before, what does that encompass
and why did you choose botany to – (laughs)
EAS: I guess I chose botany for three reasons. I liked the man very much who later became my
husband, but that was 50 years later. I didn’t know anything about that then. I liked the topic.
Never having known about it before, I enjoyed it immensely and also [12:00] he got me work in
that line. Then I went on and took my graduate degree in the same thing, in fungi, although I was
going to take it in forest pathology, because we had a, there was a woman who worked at Brown,
in those days we had a forest pathology lab that is a USDA forest pathology lab in the building
where I worked. That was Maxcy Hall in those days, I mean where we were stationed. And she
had me interested, I was interested in pathology quite a lot and I did my master’s degree on a
pathological topic in pathology, (a little bit of grammar…). (laughs) But then that lab moved to
New Haven and I didn’t want to move because then this was beginning to be my home, as it has
been now, most of the time since 1927, so I stayed here. And that was just about the time I, you
know, so it was when I got my master’s degree. And then I had already been doing [13:00]
(break in audio) and eventually did publish and all the rest.

6

DC: Did you get your master’s degree here?
EAS: Mm-hmm. I’ve never been to any other college. I’ve never been to any other campus for
any length of time. I did a little summer work in Michigan a few summers but it was up near the
upper end of the Southern Peninsula, not on the campus of Ann Arbor.
DC: So after you graduated from undergraduate you went right into graduate school.
EAS: Didn’t get it till ’36. Because I had to work. I mean, so I couldn’t take coursework steadily,
so it took me to two years to get my master’s.
DC: OK. Now you lived at Pembroke and stayed at Miller Dorm.
EAS: Mm-hmm.
DC: What was living there like? What were the house rules then, type of stuff? I assume they
were a little more strict back then than they are now.
EAS: Well, they were strict only within limits, because most people didn’t pay any attention in
those days. (laughter) [14:00] It was strict. You had to be in every night at 10 o’clock. Except
one night a week you could be out I think till 12:00, maybe 1:00, if it was some big deal like a
Christmas dance or something. And that you signed out in a book and the housemother checked
on that book and if you weren’t in, I don’t remember the penalties because I was the stupid kind,
I always got in on time. (laughs) But I’m afraid that’s the story of my life. I did things that way.
But that was one thing. I don’t remember anything else particularly strict in the dormitory. (dog
howling) I did some typing for the blind. In the middle my other dog barked and I had to erase
the whole thing. (laughs) There one, I think lights were supposed to be out by 10 o’clock,
nobody paid any attention that, I believe, and I don’t think the house mother ever enforced it.
And the other thing was [15:00] of course, there was no smoking, heavens, these days.
DC: At all?
7

EAS: Not allowed.
DC: Not allowed.
EAS: It happened. I didn’t smoke and I’m grateful I didn’t, I’ve smoked since, but not a great
deal, because I’ve been involved with Cancer Society a great deal and I’m sure glad that I didn’t
smoke much. But the girl next to me, do you want names?
DC: Sure.
EAS: I mean, she, did you, have you ever heard of Sid Perelman? A Brown man who was a wellknown writer of comedy and he wrote scripts for movies and so on in California. Well, the girl
who lived next to me who was then known as Lorraine Weinstein and later changed her name to
Laura West and her brother, I think was Nathaniel West and he was a writer also. Lorraine was a
charming young woman and I know she met Sid Perelman, as when she was an undergraduate, I
never saw him in my life by I knew they were going together. Well, she smoked. [16:00] She
was the first woman I had ever known to smoke. And I don’t know how she got away with it, she
lived in the room next to me when I was a freshman, we were on the top floor of Miller. Her
door was always closed. But if you knocked it was always, “Come in,” you know, she was a
lovely person. But when you got in you were nearly knocked over with this smell of the
cigarettes and the smoke. Her window was open year in and year out. How she lived, it was so
freezing cold in there, but that was one of the big restrictions, you were not supposed to smoke.
I think drinking was not at all common, although I heard of classmates who got drunk but
I never saw it. I don’t mean that I never saw anybody take a drink, but not as common or as free
as it is now. The other restrictions were to me pertained to clothing, which I still think is
interesting. I know a lot of people your age or younger don’t even believe that it happened, but
we all know that [17:00] it did. You see, Pembroke was a campus to itself. Maybe you’ve heard
this. You had all your classes there, except if you took laboratory classes. See, I was able to go to
the men’s campus because I took everything laboratory. You had to wear hats and gloves and a
regular suit, almost as though you were going to business. If you were a woman going to the
8

men’s campus. And a friend of mine, whom I just talked to on the phone yesterday, a classmate,
we took a lot of courses together on the campus and we were, to get to Maxcy Hall from
Pembroke we were supposed to walk around the outside of the Brown campus to the nearest
entrance to the building. Now this would have meant that we would have had to go all the way
down Prospect to George and in the back way, you know, and you had 10 minutes between
classes.
Well, this was almost impossible. Well, she and I (laughs) never went the long way and
we got away with it. I don’t know how many women ever did [18:00], it was practically
impossible to get there. But we also had to wear all this clothing. Now in the warm weather you
didn’t have to wear the gloves and the hat, but that was only in the warm weather. Otherwise you
wore gloves, hat, of course, long stockings, nobody ever wore socks or knee-highs or anything
like that and decent shoes. You never went poorly dressed. That was one thing.
The other thing, well, we had gym, which of course, was on the Pembroke campus. You
couldn’t have gone into Brown. There was no swimming. I don’t know where the swimming was
those days. Oh, I guess they did have permission to go to Lyman, which was the swimming pool
for the men then. Ah, see, I couldn’t swim because of this ear condition and I can’t now because
I can’t lie flat or the other way, because then I get dizzier. So I don’t remember all that. But to go
to the gym in the Pembroke Gym, you know where that is?
DC: Yeah.
EAS: Well. (laughs) Believe it or not, [19:00] we wore old-fashioned brown bloomers.
Everything was brown. They were serge or heavy wool material, they go from here to here. And
you wore long brown cotton stockings all the way above, you never saw an inch of bare skin. We
wore a top that I liked, it was comfortable. I don’t know, there’s a name for it, what you would
wear today, it was a shirt with shorts all in one piece, and you wore that under your bloomers. It
was comfortable because it never pulled out and that’s uncomfortable for me when things get
partly loose and partly in. They had sleeves to here and then we had to wear old-fashioned,
sleeveless, woolen v-neck sweaters, I want to call them, there’s a word but I can’t think. And of
course, sneaks. But you see, we were really covered those days. Women were not going around

9

with few clothing. That, I guess those were the only odd things now that I (laughs) can
remember. [20:00]
DC: OK, where is Miller Hall now on the campus?
EAS: Well, you know where Andrews Hall is on Owen Street? Well, go through Andrews and
it’s the one on your left. If you’re going towards the middle campus, the other is Metcalf.
DC: Could you describe a typical day there for you?
EAS: No (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) (laughter) I got up, I ate breakfast, I went to classes, I
came home, I ate, I went to bed. (laughs) I studied.
DC: OK, where would, did you eat there?
EAS: In the dormatory in those days. We had a dining room, which was very nice. I enjoyed that.
You see, I’d never eaten much with groups of people because in those days people, unless you
lived in New York or had a lot of money you didn’t go out that much to eat. Restaurants were
not the way they are now. And I enjoyed eating in the dining room. The only thing I, took me a
while to get used to, there were I think eight of us at a table, I can’t remember quite – [21:00]
and one night every week the house mother sat with us and she used to make me terribly
nervous, because I wasn’t so sure that my manners were so good. And they were pretty fussy
about table manners, which now I like, but those days it made me very nervous. The dining room
was pleasant, it was comfortable and I thought the food was good. I guess I’m a little odd that
way. I think food on planes is good today. Most people don’t, but I enjoy it. I don’t have to cook
it. And I get meat, fruit and vegetables and what more, I don’t care anymore. So I don’t, actually
a day in my life at Pembroke (laughs) I don’t remember much. I mean it was just, it seemed
ordinary to me.
DC: How many classes would you have?

10

EAS: Well, three to four hours, it would depend somewhat on if you had a laboratory.
Laboratories were three hours in length, most of them, so that meant you’d have a whole
afternoon, from 2:00 to 5:00 or 1:00 to 4:00. So you couldn’t get in too many more classes in one
day. [22:00] I haven’t thought of that in years. (laughs) That’s true, what I just said, but I’m
amazed I remembered. Gee. (laughs)
DC: What did you do when you did not have class during the day?
EAS: What does anybody do? Sit around and yak. (laughter) Talk. We had trolley cars in those
days in the city and one used to go up Brown Street and the same one, I remember the route, I
told somebody this just the other day, I think we got on the car on Brown Street when it was
going towards the city, but you could go up the boulevard, you know that.
DC: (inaudible)
EAS: Where the jogging track, is he a Brown man?
DC: No, he’s the (inaudible).
EAS: Oh, I see, OK. And we used to do that on Sunday afternoons, some of us, it was fun and it
was a lovely ride. Because the boulevard was always pretty. In fact, I think it was prettier then
than it is now, because that jogging path doesn’t add much. I wish the city could do something
about it but I [23:00] understand why they can’t. But that was one of the big things. And then
two other things, I didn’t do this much, but there used to be a little restaurant which was sort of a
coffee shop type. I don’t know whether they ever served liquor, I don’t remember, at the corner
of Angell and Thayer, near the tunnel side. I forget the name of it. The friend I was talking to
yesterday, she lives in Darien now, she would remember and I can’t think of it. That was a
coffee-eating place, but I don’t know that you got full meals, I don’t remember. Lots of people
spent their whole evenings in there. I didn’t. And then after a while, what did they call that little
restaurant in the basement of Alumnae Hall, maybe there’s still one there.

11

DC: There’s still one there, called The Gate
EAS: All right. I’m not sure it was called The Gate then, but it might have been. Yes. You could
spend your evenings in there and I don’t remember, I did sometimes [24:00] and then, oh, one of
the biggest risky things that we did in the evenings, you’re bringing all these out – you’re a good
interviewer (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) (laughter) you know this? You’ve done a lot of it?
DC: No.
EAS: The only one who ever interviewed me any better I think is Jay Berry, who did this book
and he is practically, oh, I forget the word, a professional. Oh, this is, we used to wear pajamas in
those days, I hate pajamas now. I don’t like anything tight around my waist anymore, but then I
gained more weight. Wear pajamas and the big risqué thing was to roll up the pajama’s legs,
because you see, girls didn’t wear any kind pants in the street those days. But the elastic or
something (inaudible) my circulation, put a coat on and go down to the drug store about 9:30 at
night, so we’d be back before 10:00. That was the biggest risqué thing I’d desire to do. [25:00]
Except once with this friend I talked to yesterday. She’d had a fight with her boyfriend, to whom
she’s been married 49 years now, the same one. She said to me one day, “Do you want to go
rowing on the 10-mile,” do we still have a 10-mile river, somewhere around here?)
DC: I believe so, yeah.
EAS: I don’t even know where it is or where I was then. I can’t swim, I told her this, she said, “It
won’t matter.” Well, I didn’t even know that it was illegal for me to go, I’ve forgotten now why
it was illegal, it was a Saturday afternoon. She and I went with two boys. (laughs) And I tell my,
the women from my class this, they don’t believe I ever did it and I did. The boy who was doing
the rowing on the canoe yet, and I can’t swim and (inaudible) (laughs), he was rowing backward
and I was looking somewhere else and a branch hit us, knocked him over and both of us went
under. [26:00]
Well, it didn’t matter except I ruined my watch and never dared tell my parents and
eventually I was able to get it repaired, it worked for a while. Of course, the clothing is what I
12

have on and I was illegally out of the dormitory, so I didn’t know how I’d ever get back. It just
happened that where we went down there was a bunch of Pembrokers on the bank having a,
sandwiches or whatever, they were out there for the day. Well, they had to undress me and put
me in a blanket until everything got dried off and I got back over there, I don’t know how I ever
made it, without looking rumpled because you didn’t have permanent press clothing in those
days and I know what I wore. I remember the dress very well. But it was kind of weird that
nobody ever knew until now. Now (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) –
DC: Now everybody knows.
EAS: Now everybody knows.
DC: It’s out.
EAS: Oh, boy.
DC: OK. Do you remember what classes you took? What type of classes? What were the
requirements?–
EAS: I couldn’t, if I remember, I took Biology 1 with [27:00] Magel Wilder which was a, sort of
a fiasco. I don’t mean it, that sounds mean, I should qualify that. She was a good teacher, except
when she came to human sex it was unbelievable. Because she was an old maid and I knew more
than she did about the whole thing. And I could have explained it better and it didn’t make me
nervous, and oh, she was, I hope this gets taken out of here, because I shouldn’t talk about her. It
was the way women were in those days, it was nothing against her and she was a very good
teacher. She was a very good biologist. I think she was an officer in the department and she was
also one of the very few women teachers on the campus, Pembroke or Brown. There were no
women teachers at Brown then. I took that course and I enjoyed it except I told someone just
recently, oh yesterday I was talking with a new current Ph.D. not from Brown, a girl.
And the only thing that bothered me in the whole course was when we [28:00] did the
anatomy of a fetal pig and I had to slip that poor little thing’s eye open it, it was this gorgeous,
13

innocent (inaudible) looking at me, I almost cried. I didn’t mind the work. That didn’t bother me.
It was the emotional aspect. Anyway, I took the biology, I took psychology with Leonard
Carmichael, who later I think went to the Smithsonian and he was head of one of the big
foundations in Washington, he was president of Tufts College and I enjoyed that. See, I enjoyed
sciences and I didn’t know that when I came here, because I was interested in a lot of science,
mostly biological. I later took some other biology courses and I took bacteriology, I took – oh
dear, (laughs) to keep, what is the word to keep you from getting diseases –
DC: Immunology?
EAS: Immunology, thank you. God (inaudible) [29:00] My husband used to say, “We’ve
forgotten a lot that other people never knew,” and I guess it’s true, but it makes me mad when I
can’t remember these words that I want, because I know them. I took French with a French
woman whose husband also taught here. I had that English course. I took math and flunked it
once. Had to take it again. I took American History and flunked it much to my disgust because I
had it three years in high school and I knew my American History. Well, I took it with a man
whom I didn’t know then was later fired because he was not doing his job properly. He favored
certain people, whether they knew the the work or not. And other, he wrote on, we sent cards in
for grades then, do you do this now? A course card before the regular sheets come through from
the recorder or whoever does this now, it doesn’t matter. We sent cards in so we got the grades
sooner, then it would [30:00] come from the university. They put the work on the professors, but
they didn’t seem to mind. I can remember helping Laura do it many years.
He wrote on my card, “You have a passing grade but I prefer not to pass you.” You see I
could have, if I had shown that to the deans I could have had him fired then and there, but see, I
was a very innocent, quiet child. That’s the way my parents had brought me up. He’s an
authority so who are you to question? Today I’d certainly question, your age or my age. But I
didn’t and I heard later, one of my close friends, in fact she was my maid of honor at my
wedding, he did the identical same thing to her and neither of us had even told each other. That
made me take American History over again and then I was so disgusted with the whole thing I
did the minimum work. Because I really didn’t care and if I was going to get a poor grade when I
had worked, what was the use? You know. So I took that. I, at the minute you’d have to [31:00]
14

get me into more detailed. I don’t remember because I took so much botany, including my
ecology, forest pathology, plant pathology and the advanced courses and, oh, I took music with
Arlan Coolidge, who you don’t know probably.
DC: No.
EAS: He’s just retired, I guess a few years longer than I, but I had him his first year out of
whatever, wherever he went to get his degree, I don’t remember that. I took two or three music
course, because I’m still crazy about music and I loved it then. I used to sing, oh, not
professionally, but I sang in faith choirs, so I took music, I have to think a long time about what
other courses I took, you know, I’ve had my 51st reunion, so it’s a while back (laughter) you’re
asking.
DC: That’s OK. Now you took some of your courses at Brown.
EAS: All of them.
DC: All of them, all of your courses.
EAS: That’s the only college I ever went to. Is that what you mean?
DC: I mean, no, from Pembroke, Brown, [32:00] how many did you take at the men’s college?
EAS: Oh, all my science courses. I guess all the others were on the Pembroke campus. Oh, yes, I
took some education courses and I took one archaeology course, so that makes me remember
because I took those in Pembroke Hall and I’d forgotten that. Music was in Alumnae Hall at
which I sang at the dedication of, Alumnae Hall, that was the fall of 1927 that was built. And
music was in there, it was a large course and to get whatever he used for, I guess we used records
those days, he needed the sound magnification, whatever, I can’t say the word. So that was in
Alumnae Hall. I took education, archeology and music on the Pembroke campus. I would, my
recollection is that I took everything else on the Brown campus, when my psychology was on the
15

second floor [33:00] of Manning, which of course, is now a chapel, where my husband’s
memorial service was. But I – I think that’s great. I think I, that was the separation, but again, I
haven’t thought of that in years. You see, I worked on the Brown campus all my life so now I’ve
forgotten the Pembroke campus, that I ever did much there.
DC: Was there a distinct separation between the two schools?
EAS: Yes. I may not remember the technical part, but Pembroke had its own dean. Until not too
many years ago. Nancy Duke Lewis, of course, she was the last dean. No. Rosemary Pierrel,
whatever her name is now, she’s in psychology and I know her a little. She was the last dean. But
Pembroke had its own dean. See, first it was the Women’s College in Brown University, that’s
what it was when I came. Then it became Pembroke, I don’t remember what year when I was in.
DC: [34:00] Was that a big deal, the name changing?
EAS: Oh, it was quite well publicized. I think that nobody minded those days, there must be
records in this, I mean, the opinion of people, it didn’t mean a thing to me one way or the other, I
didn’t care. I think undergraduates didn’t in those days, maybe today they would. They have
more opinions I think than we had. I don’t know what year that changed. And then of course,
here, what is it, 10 years ago now, that it became actually part of the university. I hadn’t the
slightest objection to that, although people in my class still hate that and I know many of the
older women graduates hated it, they didn’t like that idea at all. I thought it was beneficial
financially, because you did away with at least one dean and you did away with other small
offices, which saved salary money. And it could all be handled by someone on the Brown
campus. [35:00] But I don’t know if that, if I answered what you asked me there.
DC: Yes.
EAS: I got sort of sidetracked which I do too easily.

16

DC: Awesome. They were related topics. What were, did many girls take courses at Brown, too?
Was there a strong academic interaction?
EAS: Everybody who went there – well, it was – the only way I think there might have been
some who wanted it because of the boys in their classes, but basically it was if you took science
courses you had to go to the Brown campus because there were no laboratories on the Pembroke
campus. In fact, there aren’t now.
DC: Were there any shared professors? Did any Brown professors teach (overlapping dialogue;
inaudible) –
EAS: There, in a sense, I’m sure other people did this, but I know only about my husband did.
He gave the elementary botany course and some of the advanced from 8:00 to 9:00 on the Brown
campus and from 9:00 to 10:00 on the Pembroke campus three times a week. This was very
difficult. That was the, as far as I know, that was the only way that there was a [36:00] sharing.
(dog howls, she laughs) If that shows on here it’s going to be funny. He did, in the advanced
courses, some of them, because there were a smaller number of people, he would give them as a
mixed course on the campus in the Maxsy Hall, he had those courses. But I think basically nearly
all the professors had to do that. Go from one campus to the other and do double work, really.
DC: OK. Were the Pembroke classes different from those at Brown? Do you think there was a
difference what the men learned about about one subject -EAS: You mean the topic?
DC: Yeah, the topic. Well, or just if men learned one topic in say art or something and the
women learned the same subject, do you think there was a difference between the women and--?
EAS: Well, as far as I know there wasn’t, but I couldn’t prove any of that. If my husband were
here he would know. Certainly in his courses there weren’t. I know it was a complete [37:00]
repetition of this same material. He used the same notes for each… for one class as for the other.
17

I’m assuming the other people did it-- why would there have been? I mean, the information is the
same, I think either for men or for women. Now again, you see in elementary biology I don’t
know. We had a woman teacher, only for the women. And whether the men who taught the
elementary class to the men gave a different topic or a different slant, I have no way of knowing.
If this, if the husband of this friend of mine I told you yesterday, he could tell you because he
took the men’s course, but I don’t know beyond that. I would say that there was no difference.
But –
DC: What extracurricular activities did you take then?
EAS: You mean except for talking till midnight? (laughter)
DC: (laughs) – Except for talking, yes, you know, or organized…
EAS: Well, about the only thing, that’s in the yearbook somewhere, I think the only thing I did
was sing in the glee club and the choir and things [38:00] like that. You see, the fact that this
began, my ear problem began at the end of my freshman year, did not allow me to have the
energy, as I don’t have to this day, to do the extra things. Things like this, I can sit and talk,
whether good or bad, I mean that is one of the things I do. I – I remember a few times we went
on sleigh rides, great, huge sleds with horses, three horses, at least, but that was once in the
winter, or twice in the winter. I don’t know what else we did. We went to the movies. Oh, we
went to the theater downtown when we had live theater, this is years, of course, before Trinity.
The name of the theater, I’d forgotten, and that was fun. We could get 50 cent tickets and we
used to climb the, what did you call it? Peanut Heaven? Was that, do you remember, did you
ever do that?
DC: No.
EAS: I think that’s right. I wish I could remember the name of the theaters, somebody could tell
you this because it’s a start. [39:00] No, it was in that area, but it was long before Loew’s was
built. I used to remember the names of the actors I saw, they were a great group of actors and
18

actresses who later went into the movies. I can’t think of the name and it doesn’t matter. That we
did. We would go on a Saturday afternoon because it was cheap. Pembroke and Brown,
whatever way it was named then, got these 50 cent tickets, but you had to walk up a huge flight
of stairs to the top of this theater and I can remember being absolutely terrified. You were on an
angle about like that. Look into the stage. You were very high up and you took your lunch. You
had to go that early for a 2:00 show, so that you could get a seat and they were just flat seats, no
partitions. It was unbelievably tiring to me because I’m never comfortable on anything except
something with a back and arms and [40:00] you didn’t have that. And the other thing was it was
so mobbed that I can remember being carried up the steps with the press of the people, your feet
never touched the floor, (DC laughs) it was really something. You wouldn’t catch – [dog crying]
I can’t shut her up because I don’t know how. But that, I don’t remember too much that we did.
As I said, we went on the trolley rides. We went shopping. We ate downtown now and then
when any of us had any money. And then, as I said, it was Depression, none of us had much
money. I don’t remember doing too many other, we must have but I don’t remember. If the
other classmates were here they’d say, “Well, don’t you remember doing this?” but I don’t now.
[40:44] - End Track 1
Track 2
DC: [00:00] OK. Are there any faculty who, besides your husband, obviously, that you
remember quite fondly?
EAS: I liked Arlan Coolidge immensely. He was a good lecturer, interesting, of course, the
music, his topic interested me most. Alfred Herrmann, he was a man, he taught German,
obviously. Oh, I did take German as well as French, I forgot that. German is, in spite of my
German background, it isn’t an easy topic for me. I’m not much of a linguist anyway, although I
can still read pretty much French and I can, some German, but Alfred Herrmann tried his best to
teach me German. I think maybe I got a B in his course, but it, it wasn’t my strongest point. I
knew I would need it because of science, because those days so much science material was
written in German. [01:00] I don’t remember Herrmann so much except that I liked him
immensely and a group of us used to sit, babysit for his daughter. And about two years ago, less
19

than two now, he was written up in the Brown Monthly, at 93 he was hale and hearty. And that
year he and his daughter came to her fortieth reunion, I nearly dropped dead. This child I babysat
with was having her fortieth reunion. You know, I promptly aged another 10 years. And he came
and I saw them a great deal.
In fact they came here and he sat down here and like that, my other little dog was right up
and tight against him. And my cleaning lady said and I think she was right, “I’ll bet he missed
Mr. Snell so much that just to lie against a man,” because my dog adored my husband. He was
my dog before we were married, but after we were married he was my [02:00] husband’s. So
Alfred Herrmann is one, and we have a lot of correspondence now, they live in New Jersey. He’s
one I remember well. And Arlan Coolidge, whom I see now and then. I liked Leonard
Carmichael as a professor. He taught well, he was, he was quite dramatic, but it went along with
psychology, I thought. I have to think. I have a friend who’s a friend of mine now, Mildred
[Carlin Brunswick?] who taught me math, but I don’t remember her as a teacher. (laughs) I
remember her because I know her now. Who else did I like? I didn’t like the president, the first
president, Barbara, ah – Faunce, I didn’t like him as a president, he was a stubborn bastard but
we won’t, we won’t put that on the tape. Who the heck else did I have? I liked Magel Wilder.
She was odd in her teaching [03:00] of the sex aspect of biology, but she was a good teacher,
very clear. And I liked her.
And later, oh, I took entomology with her later. It got to, I don’t know, I never will know
whether she did this because she didn’t know the topic well, or whether she was giving me an
opportunity to see whether I could teach or not. We got to the termites and I had been doing
some work on them with my husband, he wasn’t my husband then, of course, but he, he was the
only person around these states who knew anything about termites and their control. So every
time he went on a job I went, too, so that I learned, then I did the lecturing on the termites when I
took her course in entomology. And she was a very pleasant person. I liked the man [Kenmore
Kerfoot Smith?] KK Smith, who taught me archeology. It was the only course in my life I ever
went to sleep in and it was very embarrassing, [04:00] that was in Pembroke. And I sat, his
lecture desk was about here and I was sitting here. I had lunch at 12:00 and his class at 1:00 and
to this day I’m sleepy after I eat and that day I didn’t even know I’d fell asleep. I woke up and he
was trying to suppress a grin. (laughter) I liked him immensely. In fact, he almost turned my
mind from botany to archeology. He was a good professor. That’s almost all I can think of.
20

See, there weren’t very many women because there weren’t women teaching.
DC: How about Margaret Shove Morriss? What do you remember of her? What were your
opinions of her? Did you know her well other than –
EAS: After she got older and was no longer dean I knew her better than I did before. Because
when she, the last year she lived I used to visit her when I also [05:00] visited the old fellows
whom I mentioned. Because they were in the same nursing home down in West Bay Manor. I
guess it was Shore Manor, West Shore Road, I forget. I could go there but I forget the name of
the place. And she was like Bessie Rudd, who was in the gym, she taught gym. She didn’t want
me to graduate because I couldn’t swim. I finally had to, she said nobody was going to get out of
Pembroke College without being able to swim. Well, I finally got something or other from my
doctor at home who said I might drown if I tried to swim and got dizzy under water, what would
have happened? So she let me go.
But I got to know her much, she was a, a very rough, brusque, big woman in those days
and real big when she said, “Or else,” and I didn’t go with this. But after she was retired she was
a dear, sweet person and I liked her immensely. And it’s about the same with Margaret Morriss. I
didn’t hate her, but I was a little scared of her because she was a woman who sat up straight and
you know [06:00] she was boss. And my high school principal had been like that and I was
always terrified of her, so I didn’t go along with that. But I didn’t hate her. I don’t remember any
particular incident with her, with any of them, in fact.
DC: Can you describe chapel? How would you describe chapel?
EAS: A fiasco. (laughter) I had to go so I went. I cut as much as I could. I don’t go to church
now. Well, if there were announcements and things, that was OK, but when William Herbert
Perry Faunce came, I’d rather never have been there because he, he sort of preached. He was a,
well, because he was a preacher, they all were up until what,Wriston? The first and the first one,
I guess, who wasn’t. And he had some ministerial attitude. I liked Wriston and Keeney the best
of any presidents [07:00] I think we ever had. I think they were the most brilliant and I think they

21

were really brilliant people. So I liked Wriston, even if he did pontificate a little bit now and
then. I’ve lost the question. What did you ask me? (laughs)
DC: What was chapel like?
EAS: Oh, chapel.
DC: What went on in chapel, usually?
EAS: It lasted about 20 minutes and not much went on. My recollection is that we sang one
hymn, maybe two. I believe there was a short prayer, mostly there were announcements of one
sort or another. I think sometimes there was a speaker and sometimes if it was a longer session
there would have been a speaker who talked a longer period of time, but who they were, I have
no idea in the world now. I really don’t remember much about chapel and I’m not sorry (laughs)
I don’t.
DC: Amelia Earhart spoke at the chapel (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) –
EAS: I saw her, I don’t remember her speaking. I was as close to her as I am to you. And that
was in chapel, [08:00] it was in Alumnae Hall, of course, I don’t remember whether they have
chapel now and if it’s in Alumnae Hall.
DC: No, they don’t have it now.
EAS: They don’t at Brown on the men’s campus, either. You see, I don’t know that. I remember
seeing her, yes. She was a very pleasant woman, very pleasant. I don’t remember a thing about
what she said. I once heard and I don’t think it was in chapel, oh dear, with the [oldest?] who just
died a few years ago at about 99, Pablo Casals. I didn’t remember until years later that it was he.
I knew nothing about that instrument at the time and he didn’t, I won’t say it didn’t make an
impression on me, I remember his playing, but I didn’t know he was somebody that important.

22

But I don’t think it was chapel, I think it must have been at a later day program, 4 o’clock or 7
o’clock or something. I don’t know who else came to chapel that I would remember. [09:00]
DC: How often was chapel?
EAS: Three times a week.
DC: And how many cuts were you allowed?
EAS: I think three for the semester. I think it was equivalent to the hours per week, that’s my
recollection. It was the same thing for class cuts. We had three a semester because if you had a
three-hour class, boy, those things are –
DC: Now to move on to something a little different. You started at Pembroke before the
Depression actually hit–
EAS: Nineteen-twenty-seven.
DC: And how do you think the Depression affected Pembroke?
EAS: Not the people in it. I don’t think I could tell you that exactly, except that I do know, from
what I’ve heard since, I wasn’t aware of it at the time, that professors, or maybe not until about
1930 or ’31, took tremendous cuts in salary. And whether, what that did to Pembroke itself,
[10:00] I don’t think I have any idea. You see, by then, I think the reason is that I was so
tremendously involved in my own financial situation, which was pretty bad, well I thought, oh, I
must get back to my working as an undergraduate, (inaudible) right now, is that OK?
DC: Sure, that’s fine.
EAS: Well, what made me think of it was that eventually during the Depression I was being paid
by Brown University $30 a month and on that I had to pay my rent and food. You forgot about
23

clothing. You just didn’t buy clothing. If you had all the things and a girl could make them over,
I used to make evening dresses over into blouses or occasionally you could cut them and use the
skirt, if it wasn’t too partyish looking. But $30 a month made me think of the fact that when I
first worked at Brown and I can’t tell you the years of this because I have no records and Walt
and I used to talk about it but neither of us could remember. [11:00] You see again, after I
started, I went, after I’d been out, I was out a year and I never did remember, I think that was the
year ’28-’29. Then I came back and had to quit again in the middle of another year and go home,
all those months. So everything is mixed up and I don’t know when I got paid these things, but I
think it was when I first started to work as an undergraduate at Brown in the Botany Department,
I was not allowed to put in a timesheet for my own money because I was a woman on a man’s
campus. I had to put my time on a boy’s timesheet, the boy who worked in the department, he
was paid and he paid me. Which seems pretty ugly because it’s so damned underhanded. I don’t
know how I would have lived if I couldn’t have done that.
The other thing I did is I know many people who did, I don’t know them now but I knew
then, many people did the same thing. Because money was just so impossible, you, [12:00]
because you’ve read a lot about the Depression, I’m sure your father is too young to remember,
but maybe your grandfather – (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) he does?
DC: He’s 67 years old.
EAS: Oh, really? Well, I did at several points, all my cooking in the laboratories at Brown
University, that was pure luck if you were an English major or something that, you didn’t have
that advantage. Because there were all the hot plates with the gas. There was a refrigerator in our
department because we did culture work and you had to have controlled temperatures and all of
that. I ate many, many, many a can of corned beef hash. Now I can’t eat it because of the salt. I
don’t dislike it. I did that, there were boys, I don’t think any girls ever did this, who slept on the
campus and didn’t actually have an address until there was some law put forth on the books that
you had to have a permanent address. That again was to save money. [13:00] And if you were in
the Biology Department, the reason they could do it was because all the animals they were
working on needed attention all night. (laughs) Pretty flimsy excuse but it worked. And the same
with me for money. And for cooking. I had oatmeal nearly every morning of my life because it
24

was easy to get in the laboratory. There was hot water in the faucets and there was a gas burner,
so ate oatmeal. That has to do with the money and the fact that women were not allowed,
allowed to do much on campus. You did it, but it wasn’t legal. I thought somebody was by the
window, they went to her door. Anyway, I’ve forgotten now what your first question was and I
got away from it by saying that.
DC: Oh, no, that’s okay.
EAS: Incidentally, this business of being, I don’t know how much of this you will ever want to
quote, [14:00] it’s all true. I think all my life I was discriminated against on the men’s campus. It
came to the point and I don’t know whether I should go into all of this, where I was going to be
fired when I was 60 years old. And I still think it was only discrimination against a woman. I
cannot prove that because the way I fought it was to talk to a woman who was then on the
corporation and she asked me a lot of questions and one of her questions, well, it wasn’t exactly
questions, statement – “Well, obviously you’re not being fired because of lack of doing good
work,” because there my publications or extent now and the work I did with my husband, I did
half of the biggest book we ever published and all those things. That hadn’t been published then
but it, you know, I was working on it. And I don’t know what she said and [15:00] I said, “Well,
it comes down to this one thing. If I’m fired I’m going right straight to Washington because I
know they don’t have anything against me. There is nothing legal that they can do,” and I would
have been the first case, this woman a few years back went to Federal Court.
Eventually I was interviewed with somebody from, I don’t know if it was Health,
Education & Welfare then, maybe something like that, I’ve forgotten, this doesn’t have to go into
the records, but it’s just amusing. A very nice black man and I would guess he was fortyish and a
very nice much younger white woman came to interview me and they asked me a few questions.
The woman did the most of the talking and I remember she said to me, “Well, don’t you think
that it would be a very smart idea to go back to college now and get your Ph.D.?” and I said,
“No, I don’t,” and the black man nearly died laughing. (laughs) [16:00] I guess he thought
somehow she was going to con me into saying, yes, I thought it was a good idea and she sort of
jumped and she said, “You don’t? But why?” and I said, “Because I think in all the years that

25

I’ve been publishing and (inaudible) (laughs) published, working and publishing I think it’s
equivalent to a Ph.D.” She didn’t ask me any more about that, which was smart.
Just (laughs) I wasn’t going to do it. I think, well, I would rather have gone to
Washington to fight the case if they were going to do that. At 60 years old why should I start into
do something like that? To me it would have been an utter waste of energy. But I, there’s a lot
more to that whole story, but that’s, I think I know the person who instigated it, although I was
never told exactly. The only, the end of that whole thing is that from that day until the day I
retired in 1965 [17:00] I never got a raise. And I think that was their way of paying me back. For
many years I was very bitter about that. I have gotten over it now, completely. And I think it was
unfair but I don’t feel bad about it. But I think the main reason is that my husband was probably
as devoted a Brown man as there ever was in the history of this University. It wasn’t that he
didn’t see things wrong and things that he would have changed and tried to, but basically he was
so loyal that as, well see, I was a year retired when we got married. And everything he wanted to
do and was interested in was Brown and I love the place dearly. It was just that one thing was
pretty hard to take. When you’ve worked from 1934 to 1974 and you know, thought you were
getting a dirty deal at the end of it – my daughter-in-law, incidentally, has felt that she got a dirty
deal. She will have nothing to do with Brown to this day. [18:00] And she’s retired over a year
now. But that is in a nutshell my working career at Brown, that is from that point of view and not
my research and those things.
DC: OK, now back to the Depression again. Did students have to drop out? Did many students
have to do that?
EAS: Oh, I’m pretty sure, I’m pretty sure many did.
DC: Do you think this affected the type of student who went to Pembroke, I mean could only,
like the rich, only the people who could afford it could go?
EAS: Well, I suppose. I don’t know that for a fact. I suppose it would be true. But I think it
would have been true of any of the few women’s colleges in that whole era because of money.
And most of them I think were on a par with Pembroke for tuition costs and things like that. I
26

really don’t know. You see again, it was a period of my life and I think other women, [19:00]
when you were so completely involved in just living one day to the next, that you didn’t talk to
too many people about it. You did what you could to keep your work going and feed yourself
and house yourself and you didn’t ask for money.
DC: Was there a typical student at Pembroke? Or was there a stereotype student, do you know?
EAS: I don’t--(inaudible)
DC: Is it very diverse?
EAS: I don’t think it is today.
DC: No, there isn’t today. I was just wondering –
EAS: Oh, I don’t think (inaudible). There were the grinds and there were the people who never
cracked a book, but I don’t think there was, not to my way of thinking.
DC: Do you think anything would have been different at Pembroke if there hadn’t been a
Depression? I mean, this is very ambiguous, I know. (laughs)
EAS: It’s pretty hard to say. It’s like saying if you had your life to live over what would you do
different and I don’t know, I probably wouldn’t do anything, because [20:00] I think a lot of
these things are foreordained. I think my whole life was foreordained, the way it looks now, and
happily. I really don’t know how to answer that. It’s something I never thought about. (laughs)
DC: OK. More general topics. Why did you go to a women’s college? Rather than, there were
some coed colleges then.
EAS: Were there?

27

DC: Yes, there were. (laughs)
EAS: I didn’t know that.
DC: Vanderbilt and Oberlin, both were coed.
EAS: Oh, was it then? I didn’t know that. I have a friend who went to Smith but that was always
women. Or Radcliffe.
DC: Would you have, if there was an opportunity to go to a coed college, do you think that
would have been better?
EAS: I don’t know. I went, I came here. There was a choice and I kind of, I haven’t been able for
weeks to think of the college in Pennsylvania that was the other choice and I believe [21:00] that
also was coeducational, it must have been, because basically it was men but I would have been
able to enter it. But the reason, and my father did the actual choosing, and my father had not been
to college either, but he had had more education than my mother and as I said, he listened to
these two women talk to him, I’m pretty sure that’s what happened, and the basic reason (laughs)
boy, this is anything but educational, my mother and I did not get along. My father wanted me as
far away from my mother as possible so I came here. Now how’s that for lack of a good reason?
(laughter) That’s the reason. I know that. My mother came with me when I came here, she came
up with me on the train. She saw me settled into the dormitory. She went downtown. She bought
beautiful draperies and bedcovers and these had them all made in the shop and all that, which
startled me. She didn’t help me buy one single [22:00] stitch of clothing. And my father went,
and did everything.., I think she was terrified of losing her only baby. And now I understand that,
but when you’re 18 it’s pretty damned hard to think. But that is the basic reason.
The only choice was between Brown and this college in middle Pennsylvania and I
haven’t been able to think of the name for weeks. And I’m also sure that that must have been
coeducational because it’s still in existence and it was not just a women’s college. I think the fact
that men or women had no bearing. I don’t think my father ever thought about that.

28

DC: Really?
EAS: I don’t think so. Well, I never heard it.
DC: So at the time (inaudible) – do you feel that like today, that there’s almost every college is
coed. There are maybe one or two women’s colleges left. Do you think that’s logical?
EAS: It’s fine with me.
DC: It’s fine with you. [23:00] (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) Do you think there are some
advantages to having a women’s college?
EAS: Not that I can see. You have to live with men and women all your life and why should it be
different in college? Many of my women friends don’t agree with me, but that’s beside the point.
We agree to don’t talk about it or we argue – (inaudible). (laughs) See, as I said, I was glad when
Pembroke was actually a part of Brown. I think basically that things run smoother. And
incidentally, and this is not necessarily for publication, I am by no means a complete woman’s
leader. That doesn’t mean that I don’t believe in the one big basic, equal pay for equal work. But
after that, forget all the stupid silly things,at least to me, a lot of them are stupid and silly that
they do. If you’re worth anything, it’s your worth as a human being, never mind which sex.
DC: Now you got married long after you graduated.
EAS: That’s right. I was graduated actually in ’34 and I was married in ’75. [24:00] So that was
a few years after. (laughter)
DC: Why didn’t, or were you thinking before about getting married when you graduated? Or did
marriage enter –
EAS: No. It’s funny. (inaudible) I was interested in what I was doing. And I thoroughly enjoyed
what I did all my working life. I really enjoyed it. I think it was hard work, but I guess anything
29

that you’re interested in, want to get something accomplished, it’s hard work. But it was also a
great deal of fun because you see, a lot of – well there again, to go back, the first part, I was
working mainly for a living because I had to have money to live. So I got this job as an
undergraduate doing typing, basically. I did assist somewhat in laboratories, again, in my
husband’s. I might have assisted George Church once for a few courses. I don’t remember.
[25:00] Have you heard of him? He’s retired also, he lives up here in Doyle. From our
department, from the Botany Department, but, and he became chairman after Wally retired.
And then it got to the point where I was doing all of the financial work for the department
because in those days they, the financial offices were nowhere set up the way they are now. It
developed over the years that I was there, but mostly I was just struggling for an existence. And I
never did get anything of a sizeable salary. So it was pretty much of a struggle. But then I loved
the research, but see, I had to do that in the evening or Sundays and I worked many Saturdays
and Sundays and many, many, many evenings. Also all the time I was getting my master’s
degree I typed other people’s theses, to build up my living expense for money. And then
eventually it got so I wanted to do more and more [26:00] research, rather than keeping the
books, which was literally what I was doing. Although I know there were years when I was
handling about $200,000 worth of income and outgo just in one department. I can’t remember
the details of that, that was years back. But then every time I could I would do the research.
Well, it got so we were publishing more and more together and then after, I don’t know
what year this would have been around, maybe in the ’50s we were able to get grants. And that
meant that I was able to do the fieldwork on the fungi that we had been working on but only
from herbarium specimens or from published material. So that meant I never took a vacation. I
took extra days here and there throughout the year, but the time to collect mushrooms is from
spring through fall and that’s the time most people take a vacation, but I couldn’t or I couldn’t
have gotten my specimens. [27:00] So I did that work and then I have no idea what year, I know
there are records of this but I don’t know where and I don’t remember. It finally became, I was
not departmental secretary anymore. I was associate, a research associate in the department. That
meant that then I worked only on fungi. But all those years, you see, I was just making a living
and enjoying what I was doing, even if it didn’t pay me much.
DC: How did you get the job at Brown after you graduated? Just continued –
30

EAS: Just continued onfrom what I turned in work, yeah. I just worked there.
DC: OK. All right. How would you feel if you didn’t go to college? What do you think might
have happened to you? [28:00] (laughs)
EAS: How could you answer that?
DC: I don’t know. (laughter)
EAS: How would you feel this minute if you didn’t go to college? (laughs) I have no idea. This
is really not answering that. I think I was very lucky to go, because not many women did.
DC: Yeah. That’s why I asked.
EAS: For whatever it’s worth, I think maybe I was the first woman in my college in the state, but
I can’t prove that quite. I could if I tried, there might have been someone at URI, which wasn’t
URI then.
DC: It was Rhode Island State.
EAS: That’s right. But anyway, well, I started to say something more. Oh, I said I was lucky.
This sounds almost like bragging and it isn’t. I do feel that having done all of this and maybe this
is because of college, whatever potential I had for being [29:00] a fairly good human being was
brought out by the work that I was able to do. So whether, what in God’s Heaven would I have if
I hadn’t gone to college. I would have worked in a store someplace, which is what I did summers
a lot when I was an undergraduate. Worked at the soda counter, I worked at the cold cuts
counter. And I enjoyed it. The people were kind of fun. But I don’t know beyond that.
(inaudible)
DC: That’s it. Thank you very much.
31

EAS: Oh my goodness.
DC: It’s all over.
EAS: It was pleasant. (inaudible) (laughs)
- END -

32

