
Carol Fennimore: Okay. Today is the 25th of February, 1986. My name is Carol Fennimore, and
I’m interviewing Mrs. Judith Weiss Cohen, class of ’44. Correct?

Judith Weiss Cohen: Yes.

CF: Okay. Do you come from this area?
JWC: I’ve lived here since I was about 10 years old, try to remember. About 10 years old.
Maybe as old as 13.

CF: And did you come, did you come from a large family?

JWC: Three children, I was the oldest.

CF: And was education a very big part of your family?

JWC: My father went to work when he was nine years old, he dropped out of school when he
was 13 and worked full-time. He worked his way up in the textile industry, he graduated from
high school, and he had three small children, and a very demanding job, it was not [01:00] high
school equivalency, it was complete high school courses. My mother dropped out of high school
because nobody told her, as an immigrant child, or her family, that she should graduate from
high school. And she was just put in a business course that ended after two years. She has
1

regretted that her entire life. Very brilliant, and she should have gone on to school. They were
very much interested in education, and when I said I wanted – I don’t know who said it first, that
I should go to Pembroke, whether I said it or they said it. My father had very little money, their
friends could not understand how they could even consider having me go to college, or wanting a
girl, why would a girl go to college? Secondly, why would a girl with no money go to college?
So, it was very high priority. And they backed me all the way.

CF: So, it was always [02:00] implied, once you decided that you were going to college, that you
would attend Pembroke. Did you consider other universities?
JWC: Well I did – I wanted to go away to college, and I knew very little about the other colleges.
I mean, Vassar, Wellesley, I don’t remember the other ones, they were all lumped together, I
didn’t know any – I just, I didn’t even know about the coed schools. I mean, just the women’s
colleges that I heard of. And we talked about it a great deal, and we decided that even if I got a
full scholarship, it would have to be a full scholarship for tuition and a full scholarship for room
and board, that it would still cost probably more than it would cost to go to Pembroke. I didn’t
(inaudible) clothes.
CF: Transportation to visit –
JWC: (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) underwear, all sorts of things that – not that I even had
underwear, but I mean, you need all sorts of things when you’re living in a dormitory. And it was
$10 to apply to each one of those colleges. And we decided that it wasn’t worth spending [03:00]
the money to apply, in case I didn’t – because I could only go if I got a full scholarship.

CF: So, you received full financial aid then?

JWC: No, no.

CF: Did you get a scholarship?

2

JWC: It was $400 when I started. I had earned 100, my father had saved 100, he was able to
borrow 100, and I didn’t know until August, when I got a $100 scholarship that I could go. And I
wasn’t going to go any place else. URI at that time was strictly home economics.

CF: For women?

JWC: For women.

CF: For women.

JWC: I was not a scientist at all, I think some people did take science courses. Rhode Island
College was probably less demanding than my high school. So I had decided that if I couldn’t go
to Pembroke I would stay out and work a year, and then, so it was Pembroke or nothing, you
know.
CF: So, of course, you didn’t live on [04:00] the campus then.

JWC: No, no. But by my last semester I had more scholarship money and I had earned more
money, my father was earning a little bit more, so my last semester I lived at college, which I
loved, up in Metcalf.

CF: So, what can you tell me from your first year at Brown? Did you go in knowing what
courses you wanted to take? What course of study did you wish to take, or did you take a
sampling that first year?

JWC: No, I wanted to be a writer, and I just planned all along to major in English. I had decided
I wasn’t going to take any sciences, that’s my regret of my life. You could choose, instead of, as
a science, you could choose psychology, and psychology didn’t have a lab. So, I didn’t take a
lab. I didn’t, so I had psychology. So I really regret never having taken a lab course, I think that
would have been a good discipline for me. And, you know, to have some more understanding of
science. I didn’t take math, [05:00] you could choose philosophy or math.
3

CF: You took the philosophy?

JWC: That has, that costs me money right now, because I could make more money if I had 15
credits of math and statistics, and I didn’t have college math, so you know, that was eight credits
right there. By the time I found this out, I was well in my fifties and commuting. I did take, I
took one statistics course as a correspondence course, and did all the assignments on the bus,
riding back and forth. But I couldn’t take any more, it was just too hard. So that’s a regret I’ve
always had. And I hated the philosophy courses terribly. It was about the worst – it was the worst
course I ever took in college. So that was a mistake.
CF: So, there was no advising as to – I thought there was a core curriculum. No?
JWC: No. Well there was, but [06:00] I guess that’s the way – it had a different way. You could
choose your way out of it. So, I took, you know, a lot of English, I took political science, and
economics, and art history, music. I didn’t take much history, didn’t take any sociology. I only
took four courses a year. So I did like the psychology course very much, I got a lot out of it. I
just, you know, I just wish I had taken another science course. That’s about the courses. The
advising was very minimal, and you really were steered away, not necessarily in the advising,
but women were steered away from math and science.
CF: Right. There was no emphasis on you should take math and science because you’ll have this
–

JWC: No, absolutely not.
CF: – later on in jobs.
JWC: Very few of my friends took – my friends did the same [kind of?] thing I did. [07:00] I had
close friends.

4

CF: So, let’s see. So you didn’t live on campus. Did you enjoy being a city girl?
JWC: Well, I decided, I just made a decision that since I couldn’t live on campus, I was going to
live as if I were on campus. And I sought out people from out of town, I decided I wasn’t going
to be friends just with my high school friends, that I would make new friends, I would, you
know, try to take part in as many activities as I could, so that I could live as close to the
dormitory life as possible.

CF: What type of extracurricular activities did you enjoy?

JWC: Well, I was on the Pembroke Record, which was the newspaper, I think I got up to be
assistant editor, I was assistant editor of Brun Mael, the yearbook. What else did I do? I was
class – chairman of the class [08:00] ring committee, Ivy Chain, all those kinds of things. But I
was working all the way. And my first two years, the work was really just earning-money-work.
Did you ever hear of the NY? The National Youth Organization?

CF: No.
JWC: Well, it was the New Deal’s version of the Youth Corps, Neighborhood Youth Corps,
which I was involved in later on as an administrator. And it was, you know, started by Roosevelt,
and it was a program where the federal government paid your salary at places, at colleges, the
college found you the work. The first six months, I worked in the sub-basement of the John Hay
Library doing card cataloging. (laughter) And oh, [09:00] I was still also working at the
department store where I had worked the summer, you know, worked – was earning the money
to get ready for school. I worked there Saturdays in the summer. And then, I got a job, which
was really my extracurricular activity, I dropped the Record, the Pembroke Record, I didn’t
become editor. I got a job working for the Brown News Bureau. And also, for the Providence
Journal, yeah, for I would say two years, they were – they had a lot more local news than they
have now. And I got a story about Pembroke in the Journal every day for two years. Some days,
very little tiny stories, you know, somebody was elected, something. And I also, and I did press
releases for the Brown News Bureau, and I also was a stringer on three newspapers, the Hartford
5

Currant, the Newark Daily Newsletter, remember the other one. And would write [10:00] stories
about students from those areas at Pembroke. So, that was, you know, it was a wonderful parttime work, because it was doing just what I wanted to do. So I didn’t do as much in the formal
extracurricular activities after that, after I got that.
CF: Now during the war years, didn’t some of the papers kind of consolidated to –

JWC: Yes.
CF: – for example, Pembroke Record joined with the Brown Daily Herald.

JWC: Pembroke, they joined with the Brown Herald, and the agreement the Pembroke women
didn’t want to give up their identity. It was a big fight about it, and they – the compromise was
that Pembroker became the editor. So I had a little gang at that time, because one of my, you
know, really close friends, we had both been assistant editors together, she became the editor. So
that was – I was (overlapping dialogue; inaudible).
CF: You know it’s interesting that they relinquished their power to a woman, a female editor.

JWC: Yeah, right. It was. [11:00]
CF: So, but at that time you weren’t associated with the newspapers?
JWC: With the paper, no, because I had the other jobs and I didn’t have time. And in a way, it
would have been a conflict.

CF: Did you work for the Providence Journal during the summers as well?
JWC: Well, by then I wasn’t going, I was going to school summers.
CF: Okay, right. Were you on the – well I guess it was called the accelerated program?
6

JWC: Yes. Yeah, I went two summers. So I actually graduated in October ’43.
CF: Oh, so you were a fall graduate of ’43. Okay. And you started in 1940?

JWC: Forty. So I graduated before I was 20, I was 19. (laughter)

CF: How did you feel at that time, you graduating at the young age of 20?
JWC: Well, I – it didn’t – I felt just as mature as anybody else. At that point, I probably wasn’t,
but I felt I was.
CF: And how do you feel about that now? Do you miss any (inaudible) do you feel that’s –

JWC: No, I got a lot accomplished in a short period of years. [12:00]

CF: Do you have any particular memories about, for examples, the deans?

JWC: Oh, I loved Dean Morriss. She was wonderful. She was very good to me. She was, she
talked to me, and we had a very nice relationship. I had a lot to do with her, since I was the –
working for the News Bureau, and for the Journal, I would see her a lot. And she was very, very
encouraging. I remember something that she told me, she said no matter what I did, you know,
she had a very high position for a woman, and she said she always regretted not being married.
Which I’ve often thought of. But she encouraged me a lot in my career goals. And she had me
set up a conference, the armed forces wanted to do some recruiting on campus and she let me set
up that conference, she wrote me a beautiful letter. Yeah, we had –

CF: Wow. When was this? What year was this that you set up the conference?

JWC: Forty-three.

7

CF: And was this recruiting the women [13:00] in the college, or the men?
JWC: The women. And I eventually did join the armed forces, probably in that – it was an
inspiration.
CF: It’s interesting. So, did she provide the contact for –

JWC: For the conference.
CF: – whoever wished to have the conference, they got from her to contact you?

JWC: Yes. Yes. So that was, you know, that was something for a student to do. So we had, we
just had a wonderful relationship. I didn’t know, I guess I knew Dean Willis a little bit when I
came back for graduate school. But I wouldn’t have, you know, she wasn’t there in college. I did
not like Bessie Rudd. Can we talk – is that the kind of thing you want to hear?

CF: Sure. Now is this the physical education teacher?

JWC: Yes, yes. Yes. (laughter)

CF: Can you tell me some particular experiences?
JWC: Well –
CF: Just the physical education didn’t take your fancy?

JWC: Well, it was for the benefit of people who were gifted physically. It was not for your
average, everyday klutz. And the funny thing is [14:00] that I have turned into a jock, I go to
Boston early every morning so I can exercise, and I hike, and I swim, and I do all kinds of things.
But –

8

CF: But at that time, you weren’t really –

JWC: She brought out the worst instead of the best. I always remember, for one thing, lying on
the floor in the gym, Lyman gym – not Lyman, the other, the Pembroke gym, Sayles gym. No
mats, I mean that would never be dreamt of. Lying on the floor, I was very, very thin. And she
would lift up my leg, I’d be in agony, my bones hurt lying on that floor. And she – this woman
would come over and lift my leg up in the air, and say, “Relax.” And I mean, I could no more
relax than, you know, move. She also told me that I was the worst tennis player that she had had
in her entirety of teaching. When I saw her afterwards, I told her I was enlisting in [15:00] the
WACs. And she said I would never get in. I was not physically fit. (laughter) And out of 50
people who took the physical exam the day I took it, only 3 of us got in.

CF: Wow.
JWC: So she did this to a lot of people, she just totally made you feel if you weren’t, you know,
really gifted at playing a game, the thing they played all the time which I despise is field hockey.
And my favorite story is, I still don’t know what they play field hockey with, because whatever it
is, a puck or a ball, I never got close enough to it to see it.

CF: So this would be playing on Pembroke Field?

JWC: Yes, yes.
CF: So, that’s quite interesting.
JWC: I liked Dean Mooar, in the admissions office. We weren’t as close as I was with Dean
Morriss, but I have, you know, a very nice recollection [16:00] of her.
CF: And of course, she would know your situation entirely, since it was, you didn’t know until
the last minute really whether you were going or not –

9

JWC: I’m sure she knew about that.

CF: Yeah, sure. Any particular anecdotes about Margaret Shove? It seems that you knew her
quite well.
JWC: Yeah, I can’t remember anecdotes. I can probably, someday I’ll go through my papers and,
you know, I’ll give – I’ll donate some things to the archives. The thing I can’t find, and I know I
have someplace, is all the clippings that I used to turn into the Journal, because I had to turn
them in and they paid me by the inch. So, they’re somewhere in this house, or this house.
CF: This is the inch that they published, not the inches that you –

JWC: Yeah, that was the inch that they published, you got paid by. As I said, I remember about
that conference, I remember her telling me about her feeling about being married. [17:00] I came
across something, I was doing a history of my class in slides, and I was looking through some
things, and I came across a beautiful speech that she gave when we were freshmen, freshman
week, and talking about the Depression, and the poverty. I didn’t remember it at that time, and it
didn’t sink in. I mean, so that I would remember it later. But it must have been one of the reasons
why I thought so much of her.
CF: How did – what does gracious living mean to you?
JWC: Gracious living? It’s sitting around, drinking tea, and holding a teacup properly in the
lounges, so the dormitories. But, you know, when you say it in that context, that’s what I think
of.
CF: That’s what you think of? [18:00] And how did the war affect your school? I mean besides
the fact that was accelerated, but do you have any memories of probably special conservation
measures they took at the school?

10

JWC: Well, we had a lot of things that we did. We had an organization called P.A.W.S.
[Pembroke Auxiliary War Service] and I remember, I wrote a big story about it for the
Providence Journal. It was in the rotogravure section. I was, I could, I wasn’t an officer, because
I was working back then. But, you know, everybody, we did all sorts of things. I took all my
mother’s silver wedding gifts that she never used, and I gave them away for scrap metal. I
worked every – the last semester, or maybe year, I went to the Rhode Island Hospital every
Sunday morning and served lunch in the wards. Because they were short of nurses. [19:00] I
couldn’t do any nursing, that’s not my kind of thing. But I could do that, and did it every Sunday,
got up early, and went over there. Everybody I knew, we all did things like that. The war had a
tremendous effect on me. Starting before, you know, starting even before ’40, because I started
knowing people who had come over from Hitler Germany, you know, refugees. People didn’t
talk much about what had happened to them but you were, you know, you wondered what
happened to them. So that was sort of…a pall was over us. What would happen? Especially
being Jewish, you wondered, you know, what would happen to us? So, it did have a tremendous
effect. Then it had an effect on people we knew, the men I knew…I was very pessimistic.
December 7th, 1941, I wasn’t surprised. [20:00] I expected us to be at war. But I had a date with
somebody who was a young man, who was sneaking up to Canada to fly planes for the British on
vacation. Something like that. And he was very upset. I mean he, you know, for him that was a
very final day. I mean, he knew something was going to happen, the way I did. But December 7th
was much more of a final day to him, that it meant that he would be going off into the Army.
Then of course, we started getting the soldiers on campus, and that’s how I met my husband. He
was in the meteorology program. He came in, let's see…he graduated in November, he came in
about March of ’43. So that, you know, it just was the overriding concern [21:00] of our lives
really, the war.
CF: How did you meet your husband, if you don’t mind me asking? Meteorologist…English?
JWC: Yeah. It was a blind date. It was a blind date, somebody – his roommate was going out
with someone I knew, and it was a long, funny story that I don’t want to get involved in, but
suggested that we meet each other. And we went out, we had a good time, and then what we did
is meet at the John Hay Library. He could only go out Saturday nights, so we’d go out Saturday
11

nights. But he went to the library every Tuesday and Thursday from 7:00 to 9:00. So I made sure
I was in the library every Tuesday and Thursday from 7:00 to 9:00. That was – I was living in a
dorm, and then he’d walk me back to the dormitory, we’d study together and he’d walk me back
to the dormitory.

CF: Did you find having a house mother kind of different than being able to go home?

JWC: What a funny story [22:00] about a house mother, people were very naïve in those days.
The first, I don’t know if it was the first date we had, or the second Saturday night, but we just
couldn’t tear ourselves apart at twelve o’clock, so I said well, let’s go to my house, I’ll stay over,
I’ll go home. You know, perfectly innocent. And so we went to the house mother, I can probably
find something, but I can’t remember her name. And I said, I’d like to go stay overnight at my
house instead of coming home tonight. So she said, “Who?” Well, will you be all right? Are you
alone?” And she saw this young man standing there, so I said, “Oh no, no.” So she said, "Will
this young man be with you?" And I said, “Yes,” so she said, "It’s all right then." (laughter) So,
he took me home. So that’s what house mothers were like. (laughter) He didn’t really [23:00]
expect anything to happen.

CF: Yeah. So, when you graduated…would you like to move on to graduation?

JWC: Yeah, however you want to do it.

CF: Okay. So, after you graduated, you graduated in October.

JW: Yes.

CF: And then did you enlist right away?

JWC: No, I went to New York the next day. And I stayed to look for a job, I wanted a job at a
New York newspaper. And of course, I couldn’t get one. New York Times and Post and so forth,
couldn’t get one of those jobs. And I ended up getting a job on a newspaper that was being
12

printed for servicewomen. And it was a weekly newspaper, and I was the editor of it, and I wrote
stories and so forth. And I worked at that for about four months, lived in New York, and worked
on the paper. And then I decided that if I was doing that kind of work in armed forces, myself,
I’d like [24:00] to be in – be where everybody else was. And so I joined the WACs, and they
were recruiting at that time, they were saying pick what you wanted, and I picked public
relations. Which took a while, I didn’t get into it right away. But then I worked in an Army
newspaper in New York, so.
CF: So you remained in New York then, once you –

JWC: Well I went to basic training in Georgia for six weeks, and I was stationed in, I could pick
where I was – you could pick where you were stationed, and pick your job. The job, I had to do a
lot of applying and pushing and so forth. First they put me in an ordinance office, but I
eventually got the job and the location. So I was there about two years. And then I came back on
the GI Bill. By that time, we had gotten engaged, (inaudible) overseas. And he wasn’t due back
yet. So on the GI Bill, I came back and started my master’s, getting my master’s degree. I never
thought of graduate school. I mean, graduating from [25:00] Pembroke. That was another thing
that wasn’t talked about. Which I – very few of my close friends, none of my close friends, and
very few people I knew went on to graduate school. For one thing, probably nobody could afford
it. But I thought this was too good an opportunity to pass up, to be able to go free. So, I got a
master’s degree, and he had to finish, he hadn’t finished his undergraduate degree. So we went to
school together, we lived in Brown Town.
CF: I’ve heard of that.
JWC: That’s where the Jewish Community Center is now, on Elm Grove Avenue, and that was
Army barracks that they made into apartments. We lived there, and we’d go to school –
CF: Was the stadium there, or were you living across from –

13

JWC: No, the stadium was there, but this was across from the stadium, yeah. The funny thing is
that I later had a job at the Jewish Community Center, this is just a couple of years ago. And one
day I was sitting and working and suddenly said, this office is exactly where my [26:00]
apartment was. And I was (inaudible). (laughter)

CF: So you lived in Brown Town.

JWC: I lived in Brown Town.

CF: And then you graduated, what did you do?
JWC: I got my master’s in political science, and I got pregnant, I was six months pregnant right
when I got my master’s degree, which was very unusual in those days. And then I had three
children, and stayed at home until, I’m trying to think, I think my youngest child was six, I did
some part-time work. And I think she was eight, I started working full-time in a community
action program, the Blackstone Valley Community Action Program, writing grant applications,
and writing a book about poverty in Pawtucket. And then, became assistant, associate director of
a (inaudible). [27:00]

CF: The agency?
JWC: The Blackstone Valley Community Action Program. And that was in ’66 to ’73, and ’73 I
worked for three years at the Jewish Community Centers, director of their administrative
departments. And then ’76, I started working at the Census Bureau, a wonderful exciting job. Do
you want this kind of thing?

CF: Sure, this is great, yeah.
JWC: Okay. I –

CF: This is in Boston, yeah?
14

JWC: In Boston.

CF: Right.

JWC: Information Services Specialist, and I started the program, and now more people working
for me. And I have a library, people come in and do research, answer reference questions. And I
run seminars and workshops and conferences all over the Northeast.

CF: What are the subjects of these?
JWC: Well today I gave a – ran a workshop on constructing a time series, which is one I’ve
never done before. [28:00] We just created this, and we decided to run a series of workshops. I’ll
tell you, some of the things I’m doing, just in the next few weeks, a couple weeks ago, I was
interviewed on television, on cable television in the New Bedford area. Statistics on women, how
businesses can use census data, two separate programs on cable in that area. A week from
Saturday, I’m speaking to the Northeast Regional Conference of Social Studies, talk about
painting a portrait of America. How you can teach your children, your students about the
changes that have taken place since they were born. All of these things, I think of the subjects as
well. The following week, March 11th, I’m going to talk to the Rhode Island Educational Media
Association, which is school librarians. And we talked a lot about what I should speak about,
[29:00] and came up with a topic, which was 200 years of counting, which was going to be from
1790 to 1990. And I said I’d put in some Rhode Island statistics over the years, and then talk
about how we’re going to take the 1990 census, and we want to get schools involved.
CF: So you basically – do you work as kind of a public relations liaison from the public to the
Census Bureau?
JWC: Yes, yes. That’s one phase of it.
CF: Interesting role, it’s great.
15

JWC: Yes, it’s very exciting.
CF: And I can see where the statistics and the mathematics, I can see why –
JWC: Well, I found out, I – you see, they have a strange thing at the Census Bureau. Not in
Washington, but in the field, in the regional offices. You can’t go above a certain level unless
you have these 15 credits of math and statistics, and you’re called a survey statistician. And they
supervise surveys and they never look at a statistic. They supervise lots of interviewers. But it’s a
requirement. [30:00] And I use statistics much more than they do. I needed the three-credit
course. And as I said, for my own self I would have liked some math. I mean I would feel more –
even today, if I talked, when we talk about getting into something like statistics, even a statistical
method, even though I know it, I’m not as comfortable talking about it, because I feel there’s this
gap. But, I don’t make mistakes that statisticians make. That’s what I talked about today. I make
a tremendous number of mistakes because they can’t read. They don’t read the name of the table,
they don’t read the footnotes, they don’t read the definitions. And they – yeah, people come here
all the time, they’re going to do rational analysis. And they take numbers from 1972 that are a
totally different kind of number from the number they use from 1975, and the number for [31:00]
1982 is from another source, and they don’t know what they’re doing. And that’s why they give
for being able to read and being able to explain them.
CF: How did you – let’s see. How do you feel your career has developed? It seems like you’ve
done a lot of different things.

JWC: Well actually, everything went together for this particular position. When I worked at the
Community Action Program, I did administration, a lot of admin, supervising lots of people. And
I did a lot of staff work where I wrote the grant applications, the speeches, and set up the public
relations programs for the agency. But I never knew which part of it I liked better. Because I was
doing these things all together.

- End of Track 1 16

Track 2

JWC: – community center, and it was 99% administration. I realized I didn’t like that. I didn’t
like having my whole work dependent on other people’s work. So, what happened is I just filled
out a job application for the federal government one day when I got unhappy. I had the
application sitting in my desk for a year, and I filled it out, I hate to tell you this, it’s a lot of luck
in getting jobs. It got to the Civil Service Commission, somebody read it and analyzed it. I was
offered about three jobs. But this particular one had just opened up, my boss was looking for the
first person to run this program. And here was the public relations, I’d been on television, I’d
been on radio, I’d done a lot of writing, you know, the academic background, everything. And I
had used census data, which I didn’t even know I was applying for the Census Bureau. [01:00] I
just thought I was filling out a job – but I wrote a very detailed resume, this form that you fill
out, the form 171, and I just wrote, I didn’t just write the name of a job, I wrote what I did on the
job. So I wrote about using census statistics to do a study about poverty in the Blackstone Valley.
So, you know, all these things were just perfect for that job.
CF: That’s great. That’s great.
JWC: If I, you know, if I had applied another year, I was just – it was just one first (overlapping
dialogue; inaudible).
CF: You didn’t take such (inaudible) applications, certainly, yeah. That’s great. So, when you
look back since you graduated, what type of obstacles have you encountered?
JWC: What type of obstacles? I’m basically a very optimistic person, so we’re going to have to
think hard about obstacles. Well, I think –

CF: Well, you can tell me about your lucky breaks as well.
17

JWC: (laughter) Well I think in the beginning, [02:00] I think being a woman did make things
harder. I think that the job, I mean I really did want to work on a New York newspaper.
CF: And so, did you run up against a lot of –

JWC: Well, what was happening there, that was not so much being a woman, because the men
were all going overseas, and they were short people. But, I think there might have been money,
because they had people who were really, they came in droves and they worked with the real
mecca for journalism. You didn’t think of working any place else, the way people try now and
work someplace else and then get to Washington, or New York, or Boston. So there were just
hundreds of people. Just thronging New York, hundreds of women looking for jobs. And they
would work, people were going in and offering to work for nothing. I don’t know whether the
newspapers took them, but you, in a way, you were competing with that. I had to earn a living
and support myself. [03:00] My friends, there were three of us who went, and we were all
writers. And we all had the same kind of job, you know, like my servicewoman job. Not great –
CF: These are people from –

JWC: From Pembroke.

CF: From Pembroke? Mm-hmm.

JWC: Not great jobs, but a sort of foothold in it, and they thought I was making a terrible
mistake to go to the Army, because they said by the time they get out, all the men will be back,
and there won’t be any jobs. Which happened. I mean, people did lose their jobs when the men
came back from the war.
CF: Could you tell me a little bit about their, very briefly, what happened with them? Did they –

18

JWC: One of them went into advertising, and stayed in advertising. I just talked to her lately, and
she stayed in advertising. She’s just retired, she never had any children, she married but she
didn’t have children. So she has worked all those years since 1943. And so, she just retired. But
she did very well. The other one, [04:00] her mother died suddenly, and she left New York and
went home to take care of her father with no, you know, that was something she had to do. She
had to go home and cook his three meals a day, and take care of the house. And she has devoted
her life to volunteer organizations, and has done some very wonderful things as a volunteer. But
I don’t think she’s done very much writing, if any since those days. But two of us stayed
somewhat near it.

CF: Right, sure.
JWC: And I’ve done some freelance writing, besides the – I do, I write every day. I write
something. But besides that, I’ve done some freelance writing, I’ve written a chapter in a book. I
was published last year.

CF: No.
JWC: I’m still doing some other writing. I’m thinking about retiring so I can spend some time –
more time [05:00] on writing. I haven’t wanted to work on a newspaper in years and years and
years. But I would like to do some writing.
CF: It seems that you’ve been able to balance getting married and having a family, and also, you
know, developing a career (inaudible).

JWC: Well I think I have, the years before I worked I was very active in the League of Women
Voters, I was president of the Pawtucket League, and active in the state League. So I did a lot of
research, and writing, and public speaking. So that, probably only a couple of years that I stayed
home and just did housework.

CF: So you never felt any particular pressure to go, or to pursue any one path?
19

JWC: No. And I wouldn’t have gone to work if we didn’t need the money to educate our
children. I wanted to become League of Women Voters president for the state, I loved that org.
But then we were awfully worried about whether we could afford to send three children to
college. [06:00] And I just, it was a lot of pressure on my husband. If I’m going to spend time, I
should spend time earning money. And fortunately I’ve been able to do things that I enjoy. So I,
you know, it’s not anything that I’ve regretted. It just sort of followed. But I was one of the first
people I know to work full-time. I’ve done a lot of things first.
CF: Yes, you have. Let’s see. Do you have any other memories in particular, perhaps of Brown
or particular professors, or particularly influential men or women that you encountered during
your (inaudible)?

JWC: I think Kappy, or I.J. Kapstein, who was an English professor, and he was a very good
influence in writing, and a very warm person. I didn’t always agree with him on his [07:00]
recommendations on my writing. But, I think I learned a lot from him. I learned an awful lot
from William Hastings, who was in the English department. His courses, his regular courses
were terrible courses. Very, very, very boring lecturer. I took all honors, almost all honors
courses. And I would say that until I took his honors course, I hadn’t really thought. I mean
everything was just a question of memorizing something, giving it back in an exam. I didn’t have
to – I found the psychology course hard the first semester. But then by the second semester I
caught onto the jargon, could just, you know, answer the questions and learn what I was
supposed to learn. But he had a very interesting way of teaching a course. It was an honors
course, [08:00] there were six people, three of whom were graduate students. So that was, you
know, a very high level course. And it counted for two courses. So it was a double course. And
every week, three people wrote papers, and the other three people learned as much as the people
writing the papers in criticizing their papers. So, I remember the first one I wrote, I wrote a
standard thing, just rattled something off. And then there were these three people who had all
done the same research I had done, and why did you say this, and why did you say that, and what
is your reason? And I really had to use my mind. So, when – I think I once read – people used to
say, that they couldn’t see – you know, they hated his course, freshmen would take his standard
20

100 people courses. And I did hear him lecture once, and he was just dreadful. [09:00] But he
certainly got us to learn. Yeah, that year. That was a wonderful experience.

CF: And this was a general, an honors course?
JWC: An honors course. And it was an honors undergraduate course about a –

CF: [Attended by graduate students?].

JWC: Honors graduate level course. You know, even if you were an undergraduate, it was
honors.
CF: Did you find that they –

JWC: Graduate level.

CF: Did they encourage you to pursue any particular path at your school, or?
JWC: I never got –
CF: Or you never discussed that kind of thing with –
JWC: I never got friendly with the professors, I never stayed – I was always going off to work
right after class. I didn’t have the kind of relationship where people drop in and talk to their
professors at great length. Talk about careers, I never did that. And you really weren’t expected
to have a career. You were expected to do something while you were waiting to get married. So
that it wasn’t something that you would talk about [10:00] a lot. And I wasn’t really, I wasn’t the
kind of person that, I didn’t go ask people’s advice. I think I, you know, I’m not saying that I
shouldn’t have. I think maybe I, you know, maybe lost some opportunities. But I didn’t have that
kind of relationship with anybody on the faculty.

21

CF: How about the people you worked with at the Providence Journal? You probably have a
totally different perspective.
JWC: Yeah, at the Providence Journal, I didn’t have a lot of – an awful lot of personal contact. I
worked for a wonderful person at the Brown News Bureau. His name was Frank Little. And he
left Brown shortly after that. He was a very good influence on me. He was a, you know, he
wanted to become a newspaper man, hadn’t quite made it, got this job at Brown. And I did go to
his – he and his wife would have me over a lot. And I wasn’t, you know, in those days, you’d be
afraid to be out at night, but you didn’t know why you were afraid. So, you’d get off and I would
stay up late, [11:00] stay at Brown, cover a speech or something, then go to Frank’s house on
Benefit Street, and then take the trolley home. I lived on Taft Avenue, over near the Brown
Stadium. Over in back of the Brown Stadium.

CF: I know where that is.

JWC: So, he was a very good influence. And we talked a lot in a very adult way. But not in
advice or what I was going to do, just we had adult conversations. I’m trying to remember what
else. Oh, did you ever hear of Miss Wilder? I can’t remember her first name.

CF: No.

JWC: She was a biology professor in 1940, and she had been there for several years, before then.
I don’t know whether she was the only – she was probably the only woman professor when I was
there.
CF: When I hear people mention women professors, the only one I’ve heard of was the – she
hasn’t been named, I didn’t recognize her by name, but I had sort of the biology (overlapping
dialogue; inaudible).

JWC: Biology professor. One of my jobs, [12:00] that neighborhood, the National Youth
Organization, NYA jobs, was working for her and typing her exams and papers and anything she
22

had to type. And she got me a typewriter, and I sat in a lab, and here was a person who didn’t
even take freshman biology, sitting in a comparative anatomy lab, with people cutting up cats on
each side of me. But I think, and we didn’t talk much, but there was a role model, I mean there
was a woman who was doing something that other women didn’t do. So, I think that she did have
an effect on me.

CF: Just out of curiosity, was she married, or?
JWC: No. And I don’t, I’m saying no because I never heard that she was. I assume that she
wasn’t. None of the women, none of the deans, none of the (inaudible). [13:00] There was
another English professor I had when I was a freshman, I can’t think of his name now, but he
went into the Army, and I think he died quite young. And I had him for writing groups, and he, I
think, got a lot out of me in getting me to write some very, very good things. Blanchard.

CF: Blanchard.
JWC: Yeah. He was (inaudible). There was some – this is going to have to be postponed, I think
I’m beginning to see that. There was a woman, Mary Louise Record, who was – what had
happened is they had a Pembroke News Bureau, and a Brown News Bureau. Mary Louise
Record was the director of the Pembroke News Bureau. And they decided to merge them [14:00]
into one. And she was either retiring or going onto another job, I don’t – she was married. And
sort of her swan song was to select the Pembroke students who would work at the Brown News
Bureau. And she was very cruel, and very hard. She demanded that we act – there were about,
we started in say, eight people. Narrowed it down to four, and we had to act as if we were
working at the Brown News Bureau every day for about two months, turning a story a day. Very,
very rigorous kind of thing. I still had to work, I had to work at the outlet on Saturdays, I had to
work in the John Hay cataloging. And I had a couple of – I had a part-time job in the educational
measurement office, typing. Still had to do all these things and take my courses. And I don’t
[15:00] know how I got through the few months, but I did get them one of the two jobs. So, I
couldn’t stand her for years. I hated her but this was pretty good training. Yeah, it was terrible

23

for the people who didn’t get it, because they had put all of that work in and didn’t end up with
the job. You know, nowadays, if you did something like that, you’d have to pay people.

CF: Yeah. I picked up that you used to work at the outlet store.

JWC: Yes.
CF: Did you have any feelings about it being – possibly being dismantled?

JWC: Oh, that was sad.
CF: I don’t think it started yet.
JWC: Oh, it’s – the store is totally closed, the building may be used for something, but the store
is totally out of business. While I worked there for – I graduated in January, January ’40.

CF: Okay.

JW: From high school.

CF: From high school.

JWC: [16:00] And I think I got the job there in March, and I worked until September. And then I
worked, I guess the next summer, and I worked every Saturday. And that was one thing that I
remember very unpleasantly, because you had to wear black, you would go out, and nobody
questioned this. You just did things – they told you to wear black, the first week’s pay, made
$13, went in to buy a new black dress. And young women did not wear black in those days. I had
to wear that black dress to Pembroke classes Saturday morning, and then go to work. And that
was a terrible scandal.
CF: Because it was – it was just socially unacceptable?
24

JWC: Yeah, yeah. And it was like, you know, no one ever discussed it or commented on it, but it
was the feeling. Maids and people who worked at department stores wore black. And here I was,
trying to be a real college [17:00] coed, glamorous, smooth, all the things we used to like to be,
and then Saturday morning I put on my black dress, I was very happy when I didn’t have any
Saturday classes. But I worked as a cashier and, you know, it was a good experience.
CF: Is there anything else you’d like to say? Would you like to have a few minutes to think?
JWC: Well I love Pembroke. I mean it’s just, you know, wonderful experience for me, my
friends, the education. And I’m very, very warm feelings. What little I have, I always give them
something every year. I try to, you know, when I have – before I worked full-time, I was
involved in some of the alumni association activities. And it just was – it was just wonderful for
me. I might mention one thing. [18:00] You know, some of the colleges were supposed to have
quotas, take in a certain number of Jewish people, some wouldn’t take any at all, I knew
someone who applied to Wheaton and was told they weren’t taking any more Jews. And they
were wonderful to me. I think I always felt I wouldn’t get a full scholarship when I started. They
gave one full scholarship a year to a freshman. Someone Jewish had gotten it the year before, so
then I knew I couldn’t get a full scholarship. That they would never do that, they wouldn’t do
that again. And it was just, it was accepted, the way, you know, blacks accept the things that
happen to them. They did give me the partial scholarship, they raised it every year, by the fourth
year it was, you know, a very significant, it was probably most of the tuition. And there was
never the slightest feeling of discrimination [19:00] either from faculty, students, the
administration, I mean, I told you about Dean Morriss, and everybody just, it was just everyone
was the same. And, you know, I wasn’t the poorest person there, but I was near the bottom. I had
close friends who were very wealthy, middle-class, all types of friends, Jewish, non-Jewish,
people from big cities, people from Providence. And it just, you know, I just felt that they were
wonderful to me. I can’t say too much about it. It was a great experience. My sister, I got my –
helped convince my younger sister to go. If things were better financially, she probably could
have gone someplace else. My younger brother went, I met my husband there. My sister went –

25

CF: Your younger brother went to Brown?

JWC: Yeah. My sister met her husband [20:00] at Brown, I could not get my three children to go
to Brown, it was too close to home. So, I kind of thought someday we’ll all march down there,
go together, but I didn’t achieve that. But that doesn’t change my feelings about Brown.
CF: That’s wonderful, you have such a sense of community.
JWC: I really, really do. And one year they asked – I was named the chief marshal (inaudible).
That was a great experience. The graduates applauding as us old people walked on, that was
really very memorable. And told you I just did a slide show for my fortieth reunion in ’84. I’m
the class historian, because I’m always the one that sits down and writes something about the
class. So, I did something different, I put together a slide show. Just dug out lots of old pictures.
[21:00] Put together a slide show for our reunion. I’ll give that to the archives. Get a chance to
put it together.

CF: Great.

JWC: I have to write this down someplace. Or then, if I should die, I want everything that the
children don’t want, that’s related to Brown, to go to the archives. Boxes and boxes. They’re not
well organized at all, but one of these days, no, someday they’ll go there.

CF: Great, thank you very much. We greatly appreciate it.
JWC: Is this the kind of thing you’ve been doing? I mean is this the – no, I mean this is the kind
of talk you wanted?

CF: This is great, this is great. Thank you very much.

JWC: Thank you. I like the opportunity.

26

CF: Good.

JWC: How did we do on time?

- END -

27

