
Ashley: This might be a little bit of a repeat from your biographical info., but maybe you could
start off with where you grew up and your parents' occupation...
Dr. Scobie: ...and stuff like that. I grew up...I was born in Bloomington, Indiana and grew up
there and, in fact, lived there until many years after I was married. My father was a professor of
history at Indiana University and my mother had very, well she didn't work a lot, but when I was
a teenager she went to work as an administrative assistant in the Kinsey Institute for Sex
Research. She had been, she went to college, got a business degree and had worked for many
years before I was born.
[goes to answer the phone]
Okay, my mother had a business degree and then a minor in music and she had done a lot of
professional music playing and, as a young woman and also had had a number of very highly
skilled jobs. But once I came along she didn't do anything except a lot of typing but mainly
typing my father's work. So then when I was a teenager, she went to work for the Institute of Sex
Research. I had, um, one brother, he was five years younger than I, I was born in 1943. My
parents were born [married?] in '37 and moved to Bloomington in '37 and Eric was born in '48 so
there was just the two of us. And we grew up in a very small university town, Indiana University
was a growing university. I don't know what the size was when my father came, probably around
five thousand and now it's somewhere around 35-30 thousand people, but I felt very close to the
university took courses there as a child, the university was very much an extension of our lives in
many, many ways.
Ashley: So there was never any doubt that you would, after high school, go to university?
Dr. Scobie: No, no, in fact, I was pressured a great deal as a child and also as an adult to excel,
or as my parents said to "do my best so that the doors will remain open" and, that bothered me a
lot when I was in college in terms of... oh, I think making me feel highly anxious about my
academic record... 'cause it all went away when I was self-supporting in graduate school…these
feelings of loyalty to them…but they're right in the sense that I would never have gotten to
Pembroke if I hadn't done well.
Ashley:

How did you hear about Pembroke?

Dr. Scobie: Well, I'm not really sure, actually it was the one college out of the package I had
applied to that didn't have any connection to us which is one reason I went there. I applied to
Stanford where my father had gotten his Ph.D. and I applied to Scripps and Pomona, which they

had ties to of one variety or another, and then I did apply to one Midwestern school, a good
Midwestern school and, I don't really know who suggested it. I'm sure my parents suggested I
look into it, and I remember having my Pembroke interview with a local Alum and looking
through the year book and thinking, --you decide these things on very arbitrary things and I
thought the kids were neat and I also liked the idea. I got into every place that I applied so it was
just a matter of choosing where I wanted to go though I did get a small scholarship, well, not so
small it was $600 in 1960 so whatever that would be worth today. And that was enough to swing
it. That money plus the fact that I really, really wanted to get away from anything that had
anything to do with my parents, particularly my father. We were a very, very close family but I
just needed to... as it turned out, the president was someone my Dad had known a long time,
Barnaby Keeney. He was an historian, but it wasn't a close friend, it was just he knew my dad.
All it did was make it more fun whenever we'd have any contact, which we had quite a bit.
Ashley: How about any memories of the first day.
Dr. Scobie: Memories of the first day... well,
Ashley: Did your parents bring you?
Dr. Scobie: No, my parents sent me and I remember arriving with far too much stuff which is
very typical, not only of everybody else but my continued status...the way I act. I was in Miller
Hall and I was real pleased to be in Miller, as it turned out, because everybody ate in the big
Andrews Dining Room and Miller had its own dining room so that was kind of like a small
family for me and it was very very nice. We became very close as a dorm, it was all years.
Ashley: Was Miller all singles?
Dr. Scobie: No, it was doubles. I had a roommate, a disastrous roommate, the first year. And
then roomed with the same girl who had been in Miller all the way through, after that. I just
remember it being a big adventure, I loved Freshman Week. I really loved Brown; it's real hard
for me to be objective about it or have any negative things to say. There were times when I felt
very frustrated, but as far as a school that was right for me, it really was a good place for me.
Ashley: Was the first week pretty much Pembroke people, or did you have contact with the
incoming Brown freshmen?
Dr. Scobie: Oh yeah. I forget how it worked. I remember we had lots of orientation, of course, at
Pembroke. There was something on this [referring to sheet of questions]... Senior Sister. I don't
really recall that, I remember there were junior counselors and, at least that's who I remember.
The junior counselor happened to be from Indiana and there were very few people from Indiana,
so I remember liking that. I was not very popular in high school and my mother had always said,
"Well, when you go to college everything's going to be different" and it turned out to be different.
I had an extremely active social life, much to my father's dismay. It began with a bang freshmen
week and that was very, very important to me, because I didn't have a good self-image of myself
as an attractive young woman and I knew I was bright-- although that concept was fairly
shattered at Brown for a while! It took me a while to get on my feet academically but one of the

reasons I chose Pembroke was that it did have an association with Brown.
I had gone to French summer school near Smith College between my junior and senior year. It
was a prep school that became a French summer school during the summer, and my parents had
sent me there basically to prove to me that I wasn't working very hard in high school, even
though I was getting good grades and it was all girls and I hated everything about it. I hated my
French classes, I hated the girls from Eastern prep schools, I hated Northampton, I hated there not
being any boys, but I worked my tail off. And actually, I think that probably having gone to that
school... we went around and saw a lot of the Ivy League schools, particularly Seven Sisters--we
didn't go to Pembroke but I'm sure that that had something to do with my feeling comfortable
going East to school.
It also, I'll tell you an interesting episode... this had a big impact on me. I failed the first half of
the summer at the summer school, which is called the Northampton School for Girls, during the
year and also during the summer, and I was just beside myself. And we couldn't talk English and
I called my parents and I was talking French, I was crying and in tears and all this and I got called
in to the headmistress, who was also the headmistress of the school during the year. She enquired
as to whether or not I was planning on finishing high school and I said, "Well, yes," she said,
"Well, surely you're not planning on going on to college," I said brightly," Oh, yes, I want to go
to Stanford," which is where I wanted to go at that time. And she said "My young lady, you will
be fortunate if you get into the state school in Indiana." Well that pretty much knocked me down
a few pegs and I worked very, very hard and ended up at the end of the summer with a B+ or
something, came back, took the placement exam at Indiana University, got the highest grade that
anybody ever gotten on the placement exam, 'cause I had studied so much stuff, and ended up
taking two years of third year college level French literature at Indiana. But my parents were
right, it did show that I really hadn't been really, really working. I gained about 15 pounds in the
6 weeks I was there, so it was a miserable experience in one sense but I think that a lot of the
homesickness that freshmen experience at Brown... I was never homesick and I think it was
because that it had all been crammed into this horrible six weeks and why that didn't turn me off I
don't know except that I succeeded, I really did well. And then to continue the story.... after I
graduated from Pembroke and I graduated well, I graduated with honors in my major and cum
laude and I was very proud, my brother was a junior in high school and we were making the
rounds of Eastern schools for him to have interviews and he was having an interview at Amherst
which is where he ended up going, and we went back to the Northampton School for Girls
because I was determined to find this lady and tell her exactly what I'd done. She was there and I
introduced myself and I'm sure she didn't remember, but I told her the story and I said that what
she'd said had made me very angry and l wanted her to know that I had succeeded. "Oh," she
said, "I did that all the time when I knew people were capable," she said, " I just felt it was
important just to stir them on, to make them work harder." I said, "Well, you certainly did make
me mad!"
So that experience I think made me feel excited in many ways about going to an intellectual
place, that had a high academic environment but determined not to go to a place that didn't have
men. And so, I was immediately attracted to things at Brown extracurricularly. So while a lot of a
people, I suppose, at freshmen week were looking at Pembroke, I never did anything at
Pembroke... well, that's not true, I did do stuff, but my major activity turned out to be the Faunce

House Board of Governors. And the way that it worked in the sixties, was that we were
interviewed, we signed up and then all the freshmen who were interested were interviewed by the
executive board, and two Pembrokers and six Brown men were chosen and they were on for all 4
years. Later on I want to talk about it because it was probably the most important non-academic
thing that ever happened to me, because of the way in which we went about doing it. I remember
that one of the seniors on the board, who later turned out was one of the interviewers, asked me
out for coffee and I was pretty set up but and this shows you how naïve I was when I went to
college. He asked me out to coffee and since I didn't drink coffee I didn't know what I was
supposed to do, I was petrified so I sat there and poured sugar and creme into my coffee and of
course had no concept that I could have a coke or a cup of tea or whatever. So I was a very
young naïve person when I went to college, that sounds really, really childish but in many ways I
was childish in terms of social airs, but that soon went away. I became more sophisticated fairly
quickly.
Ashley: I know, at least for me, as a freshman in terms of academics I felt rather unadvised, did
you pick your courses yourself or...?
Dr. Scobie: No, we had advisors and I remember not liking mine at all. He was in anthropology
and felt that I couldn't possibly graduate from college without an anthropology course. As I look
back, I wish I'd taken it but I felt very rebellious. But he wasn't a very sympathetic, warm kind of
person, so I didn't have any attachment, I don't remember how they assigned advisors. It
certainly wasn't by major or maybe it was but I undeclared, I didn't know what I was going to do.
I think then, nobody really knew, everybody came in kind of wondering what they were going to
do and that was certainly encouraged, I never felt badly 'cause I didn't know what I wanted to do.
But I remember him leaving, he had my file and he got a phone call or something and he left it
open, so I started looking at it. And they had my SAT scores ranked with the entire freshmen
class at Pembroke and I was in the 17th percentile in English, and that was a horrible feeling, to
think that 80 some percent of the Pembrokers had scored better than I. And it really made me
feel like maybe I didn't have the qualifications to do well, and I hadn't done so badly--I forget
what I got…650's or something like that, I had done much better in math, but I did struggle for a
couple of years academically and then all of a sudden I began to blossom and did very well. I
remember that, and him telling me I had to take anthropology. I don't think... we had all these
choices, we had to take this course and that course. I don't remember being turned on by anything
I took the first two years at Brown. I was much more excited about what I was doing datingwise, although I eventually came to the realization of what I wanted to major in by the end of my
sophomore year, kind of by default, and it turned out to be a good decision.
Ashley: You majored in American Civilization?
Dr. Scobie: Uh-huh. I guess my sophomore year... I'd struggled through everything in college my
first two years, although I think my freshman year I ended up with a 2.5, my sophomore a 2.75,
something like that, but I did take political theory from someone in the Political Science
department and I couldn't stand him and I thought he was very boring but I liked the intellectual
content. I remember being challenged by that and I must have taken something else my
sophomore year that led me to think American Civ was an interesting major, so I wanted to be in
that department and I wanted to be in honors but my grades weren't high enough so I came in on

probation. They allowed me to go in to the honors seminar. There was an honor seminar as a
junior and an honors seminar as a senior. And then I got a 3.75--there was this enormous
happening between my sophomore and junior year in terms of just being so excited about what I
was doing and excelling and I had some real academic triumphs. My greatest academic triumph
was, well, one of them, was in a course called History 151, have you heard of that?
Ashley: Yes, I have.
Dr. Scobie: Where have you learned about this?
Ashley: I don't know, it just sounds so incredibly familiar, one of my suite-mates is a political
science/history major, so I think....
Dr. Scobie: Maybe they still have the same number, I don't know. It was history 151-152, it was
a survey American History course at the upper division level, which is pretty unusual at a
university level because usually it's the freshmen level and then you take specialized courses. It
was taught by James Hedges who was a really unusually fine professor who had a long tradition
of people adoring him and not doing well in the course. And his courses were packed, usually he
had 150 to 200 people taking his course. He didn't like textbooks, and I think we had a textbook
but the reading we did were monographs that we had to write book reviews on and he lectured
without a note and he lectured historiographically. In other words, he didn't just do a survey or
give us a particular interpretation, he would come to a particular period such as say the Jackson
period and he would give us all the various interpretations. So the skills I learned as an historian,
the analytical skills, l learned at Brown rather than at Wisconsin which is where I got my Ph.D.
and a very fine school. But I really learned to be a good historian at Brown, and I think I learned
that mainly from Hedges. But anyway, he always had one person at Brown and one person at
Pembroke that got an A in his course, and I ended up being that one person, which really was so
good for my ego, gave me a certain status among the students. And was the first time that
anybody has said that you're really good, which I'm sure has something to do with why I wanted
to be a history major. American Civ seemed so nice because it meant I could kind of take what I
wanted to and I retained that approach to teaching history, a kind of interdisciplinary approach.
So I'm not sorry, the only disadvantage was I did not have a lot of European or non-U.S. courses
and I've always felt shallow in that regard.
Ashley: Karen Lamoree was saying that when she talked to you, you were saying that you had a
sort of mentor in the History Department?
Dr. Scobie: Political Science. Who told you that?
Ashley: Karen Lamoree...
Dr. Scobie: I don't remember telling her that. Yes. Peter Magrath who was in constitutional law
and I took constitutional law my junior year and that also was a very successful course for me.
And I just adored him- there were a certain few students who excelled in that class that he drew
around him, and he was in charge of a series called the Meiklejohn series to invite people to talk
about personal freedom. My junior and senior year he brought in, well, Justice Douglas came one

year and Hugo Black came another and so he would invite these students who were real close to
him to come and have lunch. So twice I was able to be with a group of about 10 students having
lunch with them. I did my honors work with him on an incredibly boring subject, John Marshal
and the contract laws, I've never looked at my thesis since I left school but I certainly learned a
lot. I spent a year in the law library and we kept in touch for a long, long time. Actually I know
where he is, I'm sure that if I ever lived there I would see him... we had a very close friendship.
He went on into administrative types of jobs, he was president of the University of Minnesota for
years and years and he was president of the University of Missouri. I think at Columbia, if I'm
not mistaken and really had done well as a political scientist but was more interested....and I don't
know whether he went into administration at Brown or whether he left Brown to go into
administration, but he was very special.
Ashley: So, he was your honors thesis advisor?
Dr. Scobie: Yeah, I don't know how that worked, I must have had an advisor within the American
Civ department and I don't know who that was... I don't have any recollection at all. I think it was
sort of informal. I became very fond of a graduate student named Charles Clarke, who I still see
at meetings, who was getting his Ph.D., and he was the one who taught the senior honors seminar
which was an important intellectual experience for me. The whole idea was to bring an
interdisciplinary approach to a topic and we studied Thomas Jefferson and we studied from the
architectural point of view, and the political and the civil liberties points of view...agricultural.
And that whole way of looking at things that happened and, of course we put into practice in the
course, just really colored the way I did things and, in fact, the graduate student sought people out
that would let me think about things....
Ashley: Well, maybe we should go on and talk about the Faunce House Board of Governors and
did that bring you in contact with Dean Pierrel?
Dr. Scobie: No, not at all, I was in contact with her for other things so we can come back to that.
Faunce House Board of Governors had 32 people on it and was a very closely-knit group... We
took on, at least my image which may be inflated but seemed to me fairly major kinds of things.
We ran dances, and we had speakers series and the way it worked was usually one person was in
charge of the event rather than a committee, and to this day that is the way I function. I don't do
anything with a zillion committees and the skills I developed by doing the various projects I did
there are unquestionably skills that I'm still using today. And I look back to that experience and I
suppose it's only happened by learning and then getting feedback and being successful. But the
first memory I have, which wasn't a big organizational challenge, but I introduced Joan Baez-here I was in the fall of my freshman year and I got to introduce her... that was pretty exciting.
Some of the other projects I remember doing for Faunce house included being in charge of
Majors Week. We had a whole week long series of kind of like coffees with every department
represented and so I had to get rooms for every department, and I had to get faculty members in,
and publicize it and so forth. I realized that I'm very competitive when it comes to doing things,
in other words I want to do a really good job mainly for me, I don't necessarily want to do better
than the last person, I just want to do the best job I can and I remember doing that. Then I
remember that I was told that it was an outstanding program and blah, blah, blah, which gave me
the desire to do [inaudible]. I don't remember some of the other things we did for Faunce House I

don't know if you...
Ashley: There was something in the Pembroke Record about you being involved in changing
around convocation...?
Dr. Scobie: Oh, that was for Pembroke, I didn't know I changed it around, I was in charge of the
convocation speakers my senior year and that's where I met with Pierrel because I had to come
up with a list of... it seemed like 30-odd speakers, something like that, and of course I worked
with her and got her support and got lots of people's ideas. I was in charge of Father-Daughter
Weekend when I was a junior, and I was in charge of Senior Banquet which was a fairly big job...
Ashley: Did that happen toward the end of the year?
Dr. Scobie: It happened graduation week. I ran for class president as a senior and lost, I was
quite dismayed. Which may have been partly because my life was very much on the Brown
campus, I didn't know my classmates nearly as well as I knew Brown men, I really spent a lot of
time with men. I had a lot of good female friends, but I wasn't cultivating them politically if you
know what I'm saying... you know I wasn't saying, "Well when I'm a senior I'm going to be class
president so I'm going to work to create this support system." Faunce House Board of Governors
was also important to me because the person I was very much in love with all during college was
also on the Faunce House Board of Governors. I was secretary for two years and he was
president... I guess at least one of the years I was secretary. So we did a lot of things together.
Ashley: Were there still parietals when you were there, signing in and out.
Dr. Scobie: Oh, yeah we had to be in at 10 o'clock during the week and, you probably would
know this better than I, I think it was 11:30 on Friday, 12:30 on Saturday or something in that
regard. There was a sign-in sheet, do you know about it...this rack and everybody had their card
and you had to sign it and flip it over and then when you came back in you signed it and flipped it
back over. We had to wear skirts on Wednesday nights and Sunday, we could invite a faculty
member to dinner at those two times. We had teas every, I guess, Tuesday, Wednesday with the
housemother and one was expected to show up, and be lady-like. Somewhere along the line, I
don't know whether it was through the housemother but I just remember learning how to carry a
suitcase and to drink tea properly and I had to work on my posture but that was in gym class...
Ashley: How are you supposed to carry a suitcase?
Dr. Scobie: I just knew that we had to bend down with both legs rather than stoop over and I
think it was probably to look graceful and so we wouldn't wrench our backs. I never, I was
tempted to break the parietal rules and I resented for a long time that I had been brought up to be
a very good girl. My parents were very strict, there were a couple times that I wanted to go with
this person I was in love with, Larry Gross, away for Spring Break, and even though it was spring
break she wouldn't let me go because we were not supposed to go off and be someplace without
adult supervision--no that's not true, it wouldn't be true during spring break, I guess it was a
weekend and I was so angry that she wouldn't let me do that, I just remember that very distinctly
that they said that all it takes is once and you get caught.

Parties were registered, a fraternity or dormitory or house had to register a party and only then
could you have alcohol. And you could only go into rooms on the first floor during registered
parties and you had to have the door open, I think, an inch and you had to have one foot out of
four on the floor. It was hysterical, and Larry was an officer in his fraternity which was Pi
Lambda, a Jewish fraternity which was an interesting experience for me which is another story...
my contact with Jews for the first time. I always dated other people with Larry, but he was the
person I was really in love with, and my parents broke that relationship up it's still unfinished
business for me and this is a long time later.
Ashley:

He was the year above you?

Dr. Scobie: He was the year above me and he was Jewish and my parents who were... my Dad
was a university professor and very liberal and really anti-religious, very much a agnostic and felt
that I shouldn't be involved with anybody who had differing religious views than I did, or were of
a different race. Because he felt, and I can see his point of view, that it would introduce additional
problems in the marriage. When I met the man I married, he asked me to marry him the next day
and I simply announced to my father that I was marrying him and he was all in a tizzy because
Jim was not Jewish and he wasn't black or anything like that, but he was 37 years old and had two
kids, which probably imposed more challenge to a marriage than marrying somebody Jewish.
That was a very, very painful thing to experience--to break up with somebody that I was in love
with and it was never discussed, it just ended and he would come up to the campus all during my
senior year and it was awful and my mother kept saying "Well, if you just ignore him it'll go
away," but it took a long, long time and, in fact, this year I called him for the first time since1964
and told him that I really wanted to visit with him and kind of complete the separation. It was
something I wanted to do for a long time, whether that will ever happen or not-- but I think it will
but he's married and has kids so that was a very, very big part of my life at Brown.
Ashley: It was interesting, Karen was also telling me about this, that when she was talking to
you, you had said that you got along very well with Dean Pierrel whereas I gather that a lot of
other students had a lot of problems with her.
Dr. Scobie: Yeah, I didn't know that, I liked her. I had a lot more respect for her than I did for
Dean Lewis, who I thought was real sweet and old fashioned, glove-holding and so on. I felt
Dean Pierrel, I'm sure that Nancy Lewis had an advanced degree but I never saw her as a
professional as I saw Dean Pierrel. I guess where I got to work so closely with her was when I
was in charge of convocations for senior year, 'cause I was up there an unusual amount of time
for a student and worked directly with her which again was my style to like to just do something.
Three years ago I did a big project at TWU celebrating Eleanor Roosevelt's 100th birthday and
we had a big conference on women in politics and once again I had no committees and I dealt
with the president and when I was doing that I remembered back when I had done the same
thing...just one person in charge and just do it but always getting ideas from people. So I had a
lot of respect for her and kept in touch with her for quite a while after I left Brown.
There weren't a whole lot of female models that I remember and I don't remember feeling
encouraged and, this may have happened it doesn't mean it didn't happen, but my recollection was

not feeling that we were being pushed to go on to professions and I'd be interested whether other
people had that recollection. We were being educated to be good mothers and good wives which
is why my parents thought that I should be educated. They didn't have any objection to my being
a professional--when I wanted to go on for a Ph.D., they were behind me all the way, but my
mother wanted me to get a teaching license on the way so I could be a good, prepared woman in
the event that my husband died and I had to go to work. The basic concept for them was for me
to be a better mother and I felt that that was very much a supported concept at Brown. I
remember that Mr. Hedges, who was my history teacher, said that I should go to law school--that
the best preparation for law school was history and I had a mind that would work in law school,
but I couldn't get any encouragement to go to law school. And I didn't want to practice law, I just
liked the idea of going to law school. Of course now, you'd say to somebody--go get a law degree
and then decide afterward what you want to do with it. I don't know whether I actually sat down
with a Dean or an advisor, I have no idea, but I know that I was encouraged to go to graduate
school but not to law school. Recently I read some statistics which suggest that very, very few
women went to law school in the sixties. I mean it was so unusual, and so maybe, it was just felt
that the chances of getting employment afterwards...I really don't know, I think only one person
out of my class, that I remember, even applied to law school and I think she got in, but she didn't
get in to a top law school. Again, l may be wrong, and I'm sure there are Pembrokers that have
gone back to law school. But I got involved in history, but I remember feeling very wistful when
my brother went to law school and wishing that I had somehow had the some kind of
encouragement to go....
Ashley: When I was looking through the Pembroke Record I found some article by some Dean in
the Classics department talking about how the women from Brown were going to have to
overcome being labeled "finks" and go out in to the world and try to have a profession and I
thought that was good but at the very beginning he was saying how he thought it was nice that the
Pembroke women added so much to the campus with their beauty and...
Dr. Scobie: And made you mad l guess! Well, what's interesting- my class apparently had a
number of attractive women and I remember it being talked about that this was the prettiest
Pembroke class that anybody could ever remember. We did have some very lovely, pretty
women and traditionally Brown men had never taken out Pembroke women, and even when I was
there, for weekends the tradition was to import from Smith or Holyoke. But also, Pembrokers
had a record of doing better academically, there was no question that we excelled. We had higher
scores coming in, in part I suppose because there were three times as many men. There were lots
of men at Brown that I recall were there because their fathers were Mr. So-and-So and they
needed to get a Brown degree and a gentlemanly "C" was fine. I don't remember people like that
at Pembroke, I don't think there was that need to--I mean if you wanted your daughter to have
something like that- a college degree and she wasn't strong academically, I think they'd be more
inclined to send her to a women's college. There were some finishing schools that were certainly
adequate. But I found the Pembroke women very competitive academically and very, very bright
and I didn't have any social problem at Brown, I think some women did. I ran around with a
group that had a moderate social life--none of my friends were those that were sought after by-freshman class president, you know that kind of group, but we had a fun time--social life...
Ashley: I don't know if your still in touch with any of them, but did you get the impression that

they were there to get this degree and then go on and definitely have a profession?
Dr. Scobie: Any of my classmates? Well, I think there was very clearly the feeling that you
should be engaged by the time you were a senior--there's no question about that--engaged to be
married--and if you weren't, a lot of people were upset about it. Now, a lot of people maybe got
engaged and then decided they were going to work a year before they got married, but I
remember feeling a little funny that I wasn't engaged and my mother said, "Well, it'll all work
out," and I had a lot of faith in my mother's predictions about my life. My recollection is that
women fel they could work and get a decent job, but that ultimately they were going to get
married and be homemakers. I just don't remember masses going on to medical school, I'm sure
there were some, I can think of a couple right now. Certainly a lot that went to graduate school,
and of course that's career oriented but it's different than going to business school, law school or
medical school and it's interesting to, over the years, watch what's happened to my class. So
many have gone back lately--"lately" being the last 10 years, you know after everyone's raised
their families. So it certainly wasn't thought of as bad. I think things changed very rapidly in the
nineteen-sixties in terms of women's concept of themselves and things they could do. I don't think
anybody felt that we weren't capable of doing things, just we weren't pressured to go on to a
professional degree and professional work and no one ever explained to me that you could
combine them, I mean it just all seemed overwhelming doing all those things. You see, Pierrel
may have been a good role-model in terms of being a professional, but she was not a role model
in terms of having a family and a husband. And the only other Dean I remember, I was asked by
Karen about Gretchen Thomas [Charlotte Tomas] and she, I think, was single and I don't
remember any women faculty members except one that I couldn't stand who was a history section
leader and I think she was an assistant professor or something--there weren't a whole lot of
faculty members at Brown that were women...
Ashley: And also, my conception was that the deans, at least the Dean of Women, they weren't
allowed to be married...
Dr. Scobie: Oh, really, I didn't know about that, that's interesting.
Ashley: I think, remembering the history of Pembroke, there had been deans and once they got
married they had to leave.
Dr. Scobie: Was that true of other women's colleges?
Ashley: I don't know.
Dr. Scobie: I got so interested talking to Karen about Pembroke's history, I really want to know
more about it as things start being pulled together.
Ashley: Well, I have a list of sort of traditions, let's see if you remember any.
Dr. Scobie: Oh, yeah, I didn't have of whole lot of reaction that...
Ashley: May Day and Spring Day, Ivy Day...

Dr. Scobie: I don't remember Ivy Day. May Day may have been the time we got dressed up and
had a bunch of queens and did things around the May pole. I was about as entranced with that
kind of stuff as I am now. I don't remember Sophomore Masque at all. I don't remember Spring
Day. I remember Commencement, but I don't remember our place in the Commencement march-we were probably behind the men I would assume, but I don't remember. I don't remember being
upset about it--I don't ever remember being upset about being treated in a unequal fashion. The
only time that ever happened was when I was in graduate school and it was a while before that
happened, I didn't get a dissertation fellowship because I was engaged to be married. That was
the first time really in my life that I'd ever encountered discrimination so I suppose l can credit
my family and Pembroke for giving me a feeling that I could do whatever I wanted to on one
level, it's just that obviously something wasn't there to encourage us to go on to areas that
perhaps they didn't think we would be able to have as successful a career as we might in other
fields.
Ashley: Did you have any feelings about the merging?
Dr. Scobie: No, you know it's funny, it's not like it was a Yale and women were suddenly coming
in, or Vassar and men were coming in- because it was co-educational, it really was co-educational
but yet we had the advantage of being able to do things just with the women if we chose to do
that, and some chose it more than others. I would say I chose not to do that more than others, but
I was still very conscious of being able to separate off and do things with just women, which
actually had something to do with my taking the job at Texas Women's University. So I don't
remember being particularly upset about it, except concerned that women's interests were perhaps
going to be lost and, I guess, mainly concerned that as the undergraduates were merged into the
undergraduate college there was no longer a women's Dean but I guess when Dean Sheridan was
Dean of the undergraduate college that was very important for women and, of course, the
establishment of the center and all those things that overcome that... When I went back for my
20th reunion I was pleased that there was a real consciousness, not maybe a radical
consciousness, but a consciousness and by that time I was teaching women's history. So, no I
didn't get hysterical and stuff, but all my money goes to the Pembroke Center so it probably tells
you something.
Ashley: Yeah, it took a while for them to set up Sarah Doyle...
Dr. Scobie: Oh yeah, I'm sure it did.
Ashley: Okay, well, "after Brown."
Dr. Scobie: After Brown. let me see if there's anything else about Brown I want to talk about. Oh,
did you know we were not allowed to wear pants on the Brown campus? Unless it was cold and
we always used to think it was probably much colder than it was- we had to wear skirts on Brown
campus. I guess we've pretty much covered all this stuff. After Brown, okay. Well, I applied to
graduate school in history when I was a senior and was accepted every place I applied and got no
money except at the University of Rochester where I applied for an M.A. in education. I got a full
scholarship, so I took it really for two reasons, one was because of my wonderful mother saying

that I should be a prepared woman and have a teaching license, actually it has turned out to be
fairly useful, the other being obviously that a had full [scholarship].
I really didn't know what I wanted to do, I really didn't think I wanted a Ph.D., I just knew that I
liked history and wanted to learn more history. I kind of thought maybe I wanted to teach in a
junior college. Also at Rochester a very important man in my high school had gone there to head
this special program it was a special course on [inaudible] teaching program. There were 10
students admitted, it was outside of the school of education, from liberal arts degrees all over the
country and the idea was to bring people in who didn't want to mess with the education courses as
they were traditionally set up but wanted to go into teaching. The person that ran the program was
a man named Bob Osborn that had been in the school of education in Indiana getting his Ph.D.
when I was there and was the head director of the Unitarian youth group and for five years I was
in this youth group and every single Sunday we went and talked about a whole variety of issues
and it was so popular a group that people came from the Jewish youth group and Presbyterian,
and Catholic and it was a kind of non-denominational group that talked about all kinds of issues
and took field trips.
So Bob was really important in my life I'm very distressed actually I've lost track of him and there
are those people who have an influence on your mind or the way you feel about yourself that you
kind of want to keep in touch with as you grow old. Anyway, so that was an interesting year but I
decided that I didn't want to teach in high school. I was not very good at it, I wasn't very good at
teaching high school especially the non-honors kids, I was pretty good at teaching honors kids but
terrible at teaching just the average student. I couldn't keep the class under control, I looked
about 18 years old, I looked very, very young and I didn't like all the extra stuff we had
to do- and I still am that way in many ways. I am a very successful teacher at the graduate level
and at the freshmen honors level and though people tell me I'm successful at the other things I do,
I don't feel I am, I think I'm much better at challenging intellectually, I never could think of jokes
and I never wanted to sit down after I'd written a lecture to get anecdotes, it just is not my style.
So I immediately decided that I wanted to go on, and though this was really a social studies
degree and I had taken law of sociology and psychology and political science--I took history from
a man who was very influential, a man named [Lauren Baretts?] who was an intellectual historian
and I learned a lot from him about the way to think about problems in intellectual history and
applied again to the same bunch of graduate schools I had applied to before and this time I got
money primarily from Wisconsin. I got a full ride from Wisconsin. So because I got all this
money, I went to Wisconsin. I had applied to Stanford and UCLA and and maybe one other place
but Wisconsin turned out to be a really good choice. It was one of the top schools in American
History. Meanwhile my Dad, of course, is very proud of me because I'm going on in history and,
by this time, I'd kind of overcome the antipathy of having anything to do with his life and what
he's doing. Although, interestingly enough since I've finished my degree and I've been
struggling to make a name for myself as an historian, I realized that there's a great disadvantage
in being the daughter of a famous historian and the wife an even more famous historian. It's been
a very, very difficult struggle for me, but that's not '64, that's on down the line. Anyway, so that's
where I went and I finished pretty quickly and I finished my courses pretty quickly but I was
engaged to be married the second year I was there. I was there at Wisconsin for two years,
actually I was only at Wisconsin for a year and a half because I took my prelims and then went to

Indiana University, where the person I married was teaching and did all my work there.
Ashley: And your husband had two kids?
Dr. Scobie: Jim had come to Indiana University as a Latin American historian and was head of
the Latin American Studies program, and his wife died six months after he arrived. And his wife
had a 1- and a 2-year-old child. And we met a year later and decided to get married right away
and we got married the year after that, so his kids were three and four when we were married.
Let's see, we were married in the summer of '67, which was exactly--I entered Wisconsin in the
fall of '65, took my exams in November of '66 and then took my minor work at Indiana
University--but right through and then didn't get my degree until '70--did research for a year,
went to Argentina with the family for a year and wrote but then spent the--once I came back
revising and so forth so it was actually May of '70 when I got my Ph.D.
Ashley: What was it, was it your husband's work that took you to Argentina?
Dr. Scobie: He was a Latin American historian and he was 37 and I was 24 when we were
married, he was already a full professor and had written 4 or 5 books. The first trip was a trip to
do a study of the history of the city Buenos Aires. He had already written a book on the wheat
industry and a general book on Argentina for classroom use and a book on the constitutional
period of the 1850's. So we went down for that purpose and I took rolls and rolls of microfilm.
We spent 6 months in California where I did my preliminary research for my dissertation and-which was on anti-communism in California, and I took all this stuff down to Argentina and
combined it with--first of all enjoying being away from home 'cause we were overshadowed-not overshadowed, but people in Bloomington could not accept the fact that I was a grown up
lady--I was still a little girl. And so it was real important for us to get away from Bloomington
and to get away from my parents, and then I had these two kids to contend with. It was in
Argentina that I finally began to feel as if I were their mother, and I was writing my dissertation
and learning Spanish so I did all those things for a year. It wasn't exactly my most favorite year
in some ways. And also we had made the decision to add to our family but Jim and his wife had
had a Mongoloid child, their first child was a Mongoloid child and so we went through our initial
battery of testing down there in Argentina which was kind of interesting medical experience.
Ashley:

As so you did then have two children of your own?

Dr. Scobie: Yes. I finished my degree and in the June of '70, already had a job as assistant
executive secretary of the Organization of American Historians, which is the professional
organization of people who teach U.S. history. There are two big organizations in the historical
profession, one is the American Historical Association which is all fields, and the other is the
Organization of American Historians which is U.S. So, in that position, which I took on full-time
in the summer of '70, I ran the convention and again was tapped in on the skills I had developed
and continued to learn a lot. I organized executive committees and ran the office, converted our
mailing system of 12 thousand people to computer--just had, you know, a variety of kinds of
tasks and I was very successful. The problem was that my boss, who was a senior professor who
had come up to write the history of Indiana University, he had been at Kentucky for years, felt
that I should be there all the time and part of the deal that I had struck with him, was that I would

have research time. So I was not an 8 to 5 person, I came in and out although I was there a lot and
I probably should have been an 8 to 5 person. I learned a lot about ways in which to be a better
administrator while I was there, but I did a good job at the tasks I had, and we hired good people-I was in on all the hiring. And it was a very rewarding experience up to a certain point, by the
time the third year came around, I was doing the same things all over again and I hadn't done a
whole lot of research, and I was ready to go on.
Ashley: Was that difficult, having small children?
Dr. Scobie: Yeah! I had Kirsten--let's see, I started this job in 1970 and we did have trouble
having children, it had nothing to do with Jim's initial problem, we just had close to infertility
situation. And I did get pregnant and had Kirsten in December of '71, actually she was a twin and
I didn't know until I went in and had the baby that I was carrying twins, so that was pretty
traumatic. And then Bruce was born--I didn't try to get pregnant until after I'd left the OAH, I
left the OAH in the summer of '73 and Bruce was born in March of '74 so I was not pregnant with
the second one while I was working. I pretty much decided that I wasn't going to progress as an
historian, by this time I knew an awful lot of historians, I knew all the people that my father knew
or a lot of them. Jim had this whole raft of historians he knew and in my position I got to know a
tremendous number.
[phone]
Ashley: Dealing with your job and having children...
Dr. Scobie: Oh, it was complicated. Kirsten was across--I got somebody to take care of her across
the street from where I was working so I would take her there in the morning and take her home
at night and also actually for the first six months of Kirsten's life my husband was on leave so he
would be writing and he would...
[flip tape]
So anyway, Jim would take care of her, he was so cute she would just sit there beside him for
six months and then he went back to work and I then took her across the street and that worked
very, very well, to have her across the street 'cause I felt close to her. I did not nurse which is
something that I resent she was born--the twins were born premature as so we had--pretty touch
and go but if she walks in while you're still here, you'll see she's turned out to be fine.
Ashley: So, what happened after you left the OAH?
Dr. Scobie: Let's see, that was 1973, I think I spent a year working on an article that never got
published and then in the summer of '74 Jim had a--oh, I had a baby that's why I didn't get the
article published. Had a baby, and of course had Kirsten as a young child. And then Jim got a
two year leave and we were in Princeton a year and Argentina a year. And when we got to
Princeton, I didn't have any interest in teaching but in the fall, I was asked if I would teach at
Princeton first semester so I was a preceptor for someone who taught 20th century U.S. history,
and worked with juniors in their preliminary projects before they took on their senior thesis which

was fun. I worked with Nancy Weiss who is now Dean of the College at Princeton and a very
prominent U.S. historian and still a very, very close friend. And then I remember Jim was always
trying to encourage me to go along with my career and I sort of went through an opposite thing
than a lot of women in the 1970s, I wanted to pull back and just enjoy my kids, and here he was
pushing me to go on, he was pushing me to apply for a Fulbright when we were in Argentina and
I said look we've got 4 kids, I've got this baby, just leave me alone. And I remember him telling
me when I was, when Bruce was born--well now that you have a baby you can write your book-this is the book I'm still working on, I'm taking next year off so that maybe once and for all I can
finish it. But when he left me alone, then I would make decisions to do things career-wise. So,
once he left me alone I decided it really would kind of be fun to teach in Argentina, so I did apply
for a Fulbright and I got one. So I taught for a semester in Argentina so it kind of gave me
flexibility to get adjusted and by this time my Spanish was really very good, but we did have four
kids and every kid [had to be taken] to a different school. And I taught at the Teacher Training
Institute in Buenos Aires and at the University of El Salvador at the graduate level, in English.
Then we came back, so we were a year at Princeton and a year in Argentina, while we were in
Argentina Jim got an offer to teach at the University of California at San Diego. And he had been
at Indiana for 13 years, he had been head of Latin American Studies for a number of those years
and chairman of the department following that. And it was a period when graduate students
weren't getting hired as much, and he felt that he really wanted to go someplace where he was
less pressured. We had gone through a real difficult period in our marriage--he was a very
intense, motivated person and found that anything that he did that didn't have anything to do with
me or his work was sort of wasted energy so we went through a big traumatic thing and had a lot
of counseling and it all turned out to result in a much more balanced marriage and a very
successful marriage. And so Jim decided to take the job at San Diego because he felt that the
pressure would be less to turn out graduate students who he then couldn't place. And part of the
bargain, and this was one time when I felt sort of compromised was that I would be given a
teaching position--not a tenure track position but I got two years of part time teaching
and actually once I got there, I got more. So I taught two years in the department, '77 to '79. We
went back to Indiana after a year abroad in Argentina--we went back to Indiana to kind of get
things pulled together and get ready to move and I think probably I still continued to work on the
article that I hadn't gotten done before. I wasn't doing a lot, I was kind of pretending I would tell
academic people that I was doing research and I would tell non-academic women that I wasn't
doing anything because there was no room, there was no acceptance among the women's
movement for part-time people--no acceptance at all, no understanding whatsoever that you
maybe wanted to take time off, very different than it is now. So I basically was a series of lies
depending on who I was talking to because I wanted people to think that I was continuing my
career but there was really no way I could do that and raise 4 kids--unless I wanted to hire help I
mean just hire somebody to do it all, and I didn't want to do that.
So when I went out to California, I taught for two years and also was hired by the Regional Oral
History Office at Bancroft Library, which is at UC Berkeley, to do interviews on a project that
they were--that had been funded by the Rockefeller Foundation on Helen Gahagan Douglas who
was a woman that I had been doing research on ever since '67. She was an actress, became an
opera singer and ran for congress in 1944 and was a member of Congress until 1950 and in 1950
she ran against Richard Nixon for the Senate race and was red-smeared out of the campaign. And

I had written a paper on her in 1973 and given it, delivered it and published it. Gave it on the day
Spiro Agnew resigned in the fall of 1973--I'll never forget that--also will never forget that I was
pregnant and I got a lot of press publicity on the paper just because of what happened that day
but they refused to take a full picture of me. That it was from here on up and I said "Why are you
doing a bust picture?" "Well, you're pregnant and we're not allowed to picture professional
pregnant people." So, real interesting. Anyway, so because I had this interest in Douglas and I
had also been back to interview her in 1973 and told her that someday, when I emerge from this
mass of children I will write your biography--now, do you want me to do it or not? So being
involved with doing interviews for ROHO, on Douglas, was really interesting, l didn't interview
her but I interviewed oh, I guess 5 or 6 people and did a lot of editing. So I learned oral history
skills from one of the two top programs in the country, the other one being Columbia, at that
time. And then, let's see what did I do next, then I guess when I finished my teaching I really had
to make the decision of whether I was going to look for a job or to write a book and if l was going
to write a book, was I going to revise my thesis which I didn't find very interesting or whether I
was really going to move in on Helen Gahagan Douglas and I decided to do that. I did apply for
one job at UC Riverside, which I didn't get, which would have been 2 1/2 hours commute each
way. It would have been horrendous.
So I then began the process of looking for money and also doing research and I got money--quite
a bit of money. l got money from the Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, I got money from American
Philosophical Society, and then I got a $50 thousand grant from the National Endowment for the
Humanities and I also got a large advance from my publisher, so I was riding pretty high in '79,
'80, '81 and then just as I had sort of launched into doing full-time research--that full-time was I
guess in quotes because I had all these kids and I was involved with organizing nursery schools
and organizing alternative classrooms in the public school so it really was probably more like half
time but I would go for three or four weeks away to do research--Jim would take care of the kids
and then in June of '81, Jim died very suddenly. So my life took a very different course after that
and I pretty much packed up my book for a while and decided I needed to look for a job because
though Jim was well insured, I just didn't want to be Mrs. James Scobie anymore. I really found
that very frustrating that I was a woman with tremendous potential-everybody knew I was good
and I had done well with the Organization of American Historians and had written great articles,
and I had a brilliant husband and I had a brilliant father but I was a woman with potential and I
still am that way in many ways, until I bring that book out which is like a noose around my neck-it's more like about a hundred pounds or something. I feel like I can't go on professionally until I
get this book done. When I came here, this was the best place to come, I went on the job market
and interviewed a number of places when this job offer came I took it because they at least
accepted the fact that I had this big grant from the NEH and they were willing to give me time
off--I had two years off after I got here and now I'm going to take a year off with no pay next year
and probably die. I don't have any money for that kind of thing. Again my mother always used to
say sometimes we need to borrow to invest in our future--so a year from now I expect this book
to be finished and out of my life and maybe go on in other ways. So trying to get our family life
together after Jim died was a real challenge.
Ashley: How do you find Texas?
Dr. Scobie: Well, there was a lot of time that I wondered what in the heck I was doing here. I was

very happy in San Diego and my kids were happy and they were ensconced in school and I had so
many friends and I had a department that was willing to let me base myself there and finish my
book and I had a $50,000 fellowship, so the question is why didn't I do it and the answer is
because I didn't want to be Mrs. James Scobie, I wanted to be Ingrid Scobie and I came to a place
at TWU which in the big world of universities is just a nothing university--it doesn't have a
reputation in history at all but nobody had ever heard of Jim Scobie and that was wonderful. The
Latin American historian had of course. But it meant that everything I did here, and they didn't
know anything about me, everything I did here and did well was not because who I was or what
I'd done in the past or what I did here and that's proven to be very important.
Ashley: And what is it like being at a women's college?
Dr. Scobie: What is it like? It's neat. My favorite students are the returning students--our average
aged student is about 31 and we get these women who've been out 15-20 years--don't think they
can write and actually can't when they first come back but you cultivate them, cultivate their selfesteem, help them and eventually see them begin to blossom.
Our best students in our department--that go on to the best law schools and graduate schools are
generally the 40-45-year-old student. That's exciting, plus I teach the honors section which are
all cute little freshmen, now they're not Brown quality, but they're awfully bright students. And I
work real hard to keep them cohesive as a group socially, as well as intellectually. So there is
kind of a tradition of my honor students who maintain contact with each other and I do things
with them socially. And then I'm involved in a recruitment committee to recruit high achieving
students. So again this interest in working with high achieving students has been a long lasting
one and I think dates back to my roots as a child. As far as Texas goes, it's alright. I'm getting to
like it. Well, I got married a year after Jim died, which was the wrong thing to do but l did it
anyway and it was a commuting marriage--I've always been optimistic and figured I could do
whatever I wanted to do--that one didn't work. He commuted for a year and a half and it just
didn't work at all. And I bought this house for the two of us and for combined for 7 children, and
then when he walked out l was left with it so I've been a little bit overwhelmed in terms of
finances and maintaining this house but the kids like it and it's been a very important haven for
us-- a place we really like being and I think that I'm finally accepting being single and the fact
that I may never get married. That's taken years to feel good about.
I've a child in a psychiatric hospital in Dallas, my 14-year-old, and he has attentional deficit
disorder which is a genetic dysfunction but can be complicated by emotional trauma and, of
course, Jim's death was probably the worst trauma that we had to undergo. But he'll be home in
June and he's doing very nicely, but that's been a real challenge to us. But I have found support
from the university for the kinds of challenges I've had in my personal life that most universities
wouldn't pay the time of day to. I've bent over backwards not to let my personal life intervene
with my professional life, but it still has taken its toll.
The third thing that has made a difference is becoming involved with Denton community theater,
which I began getting involved with immediately when we came. I'd never gotten involved before
but I'd always had wanted to, Jim would never let me do anything, I know this sounds like,
"Wow, how do you live with someone who wouldn't let you do things?" I didn't have a whole lot

of time to do much, but anything I wanted to do professionally was fine or with the kids, but if I
wanted to do something for me that was non-academic, it was not okay--that included having
lunch with friends. And so I worked around him, I became very involved with the nursery school
and developed a tremendous number of friends that way, used the telephone as a way to develop
friends when he wasn't there. It worked out but he was peculiar that way and I think that had our
marriage continued that he would have been increasingly supportive. His first wife had been a
homemaker so somehow the burden of four kids was pretty overwhelming and he could in
essence relieve me from the things I was doing in order to do things that he approved of but not
things he didn't approve of 'cause he was not a very social person so it was kind of odd in that
regard.
The theater I got involved because Kirsten wanted to do something and she became involved in
children's theater and one thing led to another and I eventually became involved. I was house
manager, which turned out to be very boring, and then last year began costuming and have spent
the last two years costuming shows and I love it. I just finished costuming Oliver, the Musical. It
was an incredible undertaking, we had 150 costumes, 80 cast members and I guess I showed up
for my classes, but I'm not sure but it had been an important source of immediate gratification for
me which I don't get a whole lot of--you get some immediate gratification as a teacher and I do
get a lot of support from my students, but research is a kind of lonely life and while I like
research and get satisfaction from it, there's a very social side of me. But now I've decided next
year I'm going to put everything aside and finish my book and then maybe in my second life I'll
become a costume designer.
Ashley: You mentioned having to overcome the reputation of your husband and father--have you
felt discriminated against as a woman in your particular field?
Dr. Scobie: Except in that incident in Wisconsin? No, but that's partly actually I think because I
have not been in the profession full-fledged, until I came here and, of course, this is a school that
had 70% women and the whole administration dominated by women so that the piddly stuff I did-there were a lot of reverse situations actually of husbands coming with women faculty members
and I don't think they were treated a whole lot better than I was. I had one run-in with a faculty
member at UC San Diego whose student was also writing on Douglas and I clearly felt that that
was discriminatory--he didn't respect my research and we had some pretty serious run-ins and it
got to be a big departmental issue. It is a standard thing, that's why you have dissertation
abstracts, you certainly don't write on a topic that somebody else is--I have tremendous
bitterness to that. Another experience I remember was not a person I had classes with at
Wisconsin, but who was sort of a hyper professor and very cutting and I remember him telling me
that my father was not a good editor of the Journal of American History which was the journal of
OAH- the group I worked for and cutting him down and cutting Jim down the ultimate was
cutting me down and when I came back to defend my dissertation he said, "What are you doing
here," "I'm defending my dissertation," and he said, "Well I'm surprised you ever finished it."
Just something cutting which clearly had to do with the fact that I was a woman. And then
at professional meetings shortly after that, he made fun of my job which was this new position as
assistant executive secretary and I remember that I remember telling him--he had 100 graduate
students to place--Wisconsin was cranking them out and I said, "You certainly didn't have to find
me a job, I found my own job." So I learned fairly early to retort and I also remember Merrill

Jensen, a very famous historian from Wisconsin, who couldn't stand me 'cause he didn't like
women--he wouldn't let women in his seminar--was president of the OAH that first year I came to
work and he wouldn't speak to me, he would look the other way. So yes, I've had my fair share of
experiences, but when I taught in Argentina I was teaching in a women's situation-- all my
supervisors and all the students were women, so that was successful. I don't really feel that I've
been grossly discriminated against but I've certainly had Jim's support professionally, which I
think is something a lot of women didn't get in the seventies.
Ashley: Well, we've covered an awful lot- is there anything you feel you'd like to say?
Dr. Scobie: [looking at the list of questions] How did children affect my career- you want to talk
about that? Enormously! And it still does. My volunteer work has been limited to organizing a
nursery school and organizing an alternative classroom within the public school system near San
Diego, where we lived which was a very exciting kind of experience. It was designed for
interdisciplinary studies--cross age tutoring and letting kids grow at their own rate and I was
principle organizer and I taught and as volunteer. I did that for 5 years so that was an important
kind of volunteer work. I'm not a typical volunteer though, I don't like to raise money, I don't like
to do little artsy things, I'm not an arts-guild kind of person.
I think my parents accepted men and women as being equal. I remember watching women in the
seventies having to kind of rebel against their parent expectations of them was very difficult and I
remember feeling very proud that I never had to go through that and it may contradict what I said
about going to law school, but I think if I had insisted that I was going to go to law school I
would have gone but I needed to be encouraged. The only thing that my mother did to me that
was wrong was she said my husband's career came first. I heard that from the time I was very
little-- that you do whatever you want, but you follow your husband. So
overcoming that was a real difficult thing and I was just beginning to overcome that and
say to Jim, "lt's really my turn," when he died so that was a kind of unfulfilled change that
I wanted to happen but he was ready to go. The plan was that I would finish my book
and he'd go where ever I got a job and do what he had to do, he figured that he was
pretty employable. He really was a very well known historian, he was probably the top
Argentine historian in the country and probably one of the top Latin American. He and I
had a very close intellectual relationship, when he died I felt that my life was like a
ladder and it had fallen apart. I read all his manuscripts that I had helped him work on-his research, I didn't do it for him, but we were a sounding board--he did the same for
me. We had a very intense involvement in the rewriting of each other's work which was
good for my ego and very helpful to me. So after he died, I thought I needed
another man in my life which is one reason I got married again--he was an historian, he
was wonderful. He loved my kids, there were just some other things that didn't work out.
And it took me a long time to even go out with someone who was not a historian until I
realized that I either had to go out with a non-historian or not date at all--in Denton there
is not a lot of choice! My dad was a very strong person in my family and had a lot to do
with my self-esteem as a professional and as a child my mother encouraged me too. So
in many ways Jim sort of took over this cultivating, so when Jim died I wasn't sure I
could produce. It was really sort of strange, I just felt that I needed that encouragement

and support. And I've learned that I can get the support from a whole variety of sources,
it doesn't have to come from a man--I still need support strokes a lot but I'm much better.
Ashley: Well is there anything you want to add?
Dr. Scobie: [Dr. Scobie wanted to go back and talk about social life and friends at
Brown.] [The social life was] pretty much fraternities and house parties. I had no
particular interest in going to Boston, we went into Providence to go to movies. I had no
interest whatsoever in junior year abroad. I was really happy at Brown and I didn't want
to miss a year there and I was happy intellectually the last two years and socially
the whole time. It wasn't a very exciting life but the people were interesting and I dated
lots of people but I only was in love with one person but I continued to do that, I'm not
quite sure how that worked. I needed that continual reinforcement. I'm a person that
needs lots of strokes and I needed it then and I need it now too. I came in not having
much of an idea of my success as a social being. Interestingly enough I went 2
summers--1 summer at Indiana University working and two summers at Glacier Park
waiting tables, all of which was fun but in all three cases I didn't date at all and became
convinced that the kind of person I was was more interesting to people at a place like
Brown than it was to a State school or a state park. Had my life been like that at Brown, I
think I would have had a low self esteem.
In terms of female friendships, my closest friends all through college were two Jewish
girls, who were a year ahead of me. I was really fascinated with Jews, I had never had
any Jewish friends and I think I gravitated to Jewish students in part because they were
more interesting--they were more intellectually oriented- -this is a vast generalization.
And I think I was as much a fascination to those who had grown up in Jewish
communities as they were to me. I remember going home several times with these two
girls and I was their Iittle gentile friend--they just doted on me. And I dated a Jewish boy,
so that was a real fascinating. Interesting culture for me to learn about that I still remain
interested in. My interest in music that had really been developed all through high
school kind of went on hold in college, but I did develop a continued interest in art and as
a costume designer and the art classes my mother jammed me into when I was little and
all the dragging around the art museums that she did and the art history and art courses
I took at Brown have all come to bear on what I do--and clearly the historical skills I have
to research a period. But I wouldn't say my social life was stimulating intellectually,
except in conversation but I loved it.
My closest intellectual male friend was a man named Larry Sorkin who I never dated.
We were just very good friends--he was the Brown person who got an A in Professor
Hedge's class and we still are very close and he's now a very successful lawyer in New
York-- he has a wife and two kids. As far as keeping in touch with people, I really
haven't. When I went back for my 20th reunion...the Brown class was 1000 and my
closest friends were the years ahead of me and the women that I saw I didn't gravitate
toward. Although one Brown person who I was on the Faunce House Board of
Governors with--we spent the whole weekend together. But it was kind of a surprise, I
thought I would go back and feel intellectually attracted to these people and I wasn't at

all. I have a very close friend who was an usher at my wedding, and was my intellectual
inspiration before I went to graduate school--I took a summer course in American 20th
century history with Jim Patterson and he's now at Brown and still remains the most
important intellectual support I have. Jim, my Jim, of course, was more important. His
wife died 6 months before Jim died and she died of the same thing my brother died of-he [her brother] died in '79 of a brain tumor-- so we kind of went through shared
experiences. So it's kind of neat to have somebody at Brown that kind of links with my
Bloomington experience. Plus my son went to Brown and he graduated in 1984 and he's
back there right now working in the print shop. He's been in the Peace Corps for two
years and he came back and he's living with his girlfriend and they are about to move to
Austin where he will enter the LBJ School of Public Affairs. And fortunately the print shop
is always needing people so he gets a job there whenever he hangs out there for a
couple of months.
I was surprised that BiII went to Brown since I had spoken so highly of it and since my
kids have always been rebellious. He said, "Keep your nose out of my college," and I
said, "Of course I will," and he was very happy there. And i remember going back for
Bill's interviews and commenting about how friendly the student body was--it was
something that I had always felt when I was in college and then 'cause I do interviews for
Brown, talking about that being something they really look for in Brown students. They
are personable, in other words. If somebody had a 1600 on their scores and they're
really a complainer and an unpleasant person, they won't take them.
The rest of the tape is Dr. Scobie and I looking through old yearbooks.

