
Julie Berman: …one. Interviewing Jane Walsh Folcarelli, class of 1947, at…on
May…on April 5th, 1988 at the John Hay Library.
First of all, I'd like to ask you about your family background and, you know, what your
mother and father's education was like, and where you are from.
Jane Walsh: I was born in…in Providence, and I went to Providence public schools, and
Classical High School, which has a bit of a cachet around here. And I went to…to
Pembroke. My mother was a very bright woman who was the Director of Standards and
Planning for the Department of Employment Security in Rhode Island, and she was a
graduate of Rhode Island College. She taught school for a year and loathed it. And
didn't think anybody should teach. And my father was in the…in the real estate business;
he was a high school graduate. And I was an only child.
JB: Okay, so, was it…were you planning to go to college all through high school, pretty
much?
JW: Well, in the first place, Classical High School was a college preparatory high school
and almost everyone who went, went to college, except in my generation that went to war
first. But the…no, it was fore…it was ordained that I…there was never any question
about the fact that I was going to college.
JB: What made you decide…choose Brown/Pembroke? What…?
JW: Well, in the first place, in my generation, girls didn't go terribly far from home. The
fact that I was an only child. And, certainly, the reputation…you couldn't go anyplace
else and do better, unless I wanted to go away and board. And so that that was no…that
was no problem. One of the nice things, too, was that when you went to be interviewed
by Dean Mooar for admission, you knew if you were in or out before you left her office.
JB: Oh, wow.
JW: And, you know, all you…all she said to you was, you know, if you pass your last
semester and if you survive…if you'd survived three and a half seme…you know, three

and a half years at Classical, it wasn't much doubt you were going for the whole thing.
So, the…and I often think of that. When all the fuss about April 15th and the
acceptances…
JB: Yeah, it has definitely changed.
JW: Yes. But, it was smaller, too.
JB: Yeah. What would…what was your family or your parents thinking you…what
were there expectations about your going to college. Was it to get a job, or…?
JW: Well, just because you should have an education.
JB: Right. Okay.
JW: It might get you a better job, but it wasn't…it wasn't vocationally oriented, it was
that you went to college because you learned and it broadened your experiences.
JB: Did…you said that you would have to board somewhere else. Did you live at home
when you came here?
JW: Yes, I did.
JB: For all four years?
JW: Yes. And most…almost…you know…50…more…50 or more percent of the
college…of Pembroke lived at home when I was…in fact there was a strong City Girls
organization.
JB: What was that organization?
JW: It was called the City Girls.
JB: Okay.
JW: And they had a lounge in the base…on the first floor of East House, which has now
been torn down and is part of Emery-Woolley.
JB: That's where I live.
JW: Yeah, but, I mean, that's, you know. So that there was a strong City Girls and
they…organization. The cafeteria in the basement of Alumnae Hall was…was a
cafeteria, not a dining room as it became…well, now it's the…the Gate.
JB: Can you remember what your first day was like at Pembroke?

JW: Terribly rushed. [laughter] The…the first day, because, in the first place, I was an
accelerated student, because of the war. We went three semesters.
JB: Instead of…?
JW: Instead of…instead of two a year, we went three a year. For the first two years I
was here, there were…the…the…that was another thing that was quite common. We
couldn't go away for the summer, so I might just—because of gasoline rationing—so I
might just as well go to school. And the…the…but, my…I had a Senior Sister named
Ruth Keily who had a lot of other Freshman Sisters, because the…she had
a…a…September Freshman Sister, and she had a January Freshman Sister, and I'd
known her, because we grew up in the same neighborhood. She was a City Girl.
JB: Mm-hmm.
JW: And there wasn't this big distinction between city and dorm that I think there
probably is now.
JB: I…I think everyone lives in the dorm now.
JW: Yeah. Yeah. And…but really, they really didn't…because dorms were in short
supply, they really didn't encourage anybody to commute to, and this was also true of the
men.
JB: How did you get here; did you walk?
JW: They…no, I didn't walk. I…I…until the war was over, I used public transportation,
but you have to remember that public transportation in the dark ages was much better
than it is now. You know, there were buses every five minutes going through the tunnel.
So that this was no…this was no…this was no problem. And, you know, it was like New
York is now, you can get around…you could get around very easily on public
transportation. And the first day, it was running into people I'd gone to high school with,
or that I'd grown up with, it was a much smaller, more co…it's an entirely different
world…it was a…there were only 450 of us, and—to begin with—and, a lot of local
girls, so that you knew people, or you…you knew girls, or you knew their sisters, or
something. So that is was…the distinctions weren't very great.
JB: What exactly was the Senior Sister program? What…di…was that just to help
people enter college?
JW: Well, it was a…it was like a…like a docent program, I suppose you'd call it now,
although "docent" hadn't been invented. It was to acquaint you with the rules and
regulations, answer any questions that you had.
JB: What were some of the rules and regulations?

JW: Well, they…they didn't apply as much…well, there were only three cuts a
semester…and only three Chapel cuts. We had compulsory Chapel.
JB: Every day?
JW: Twice a week. And every other week, there was a religious Chapel, the others were
lectures by various worthy souls who came to talk to us, and the dean, and various deans,
and faculty members.
JB: So what…what extracurriculars were you involved in, if any?
JW: The…not a great many, because there weren't an awful lot of extracurricular things
because of the war. The war made a big difference in what…we all did war work of
some…you know, knitting, or rolling bandages or something like that and there was also
a canteen at RISD [Rhode Island School of Design] that everybody took a turn dancing or
serving soda or something. But it wasn't the…you know…it wasn't the…and the only
really extracurricular activity was the Newman Club which was the…the club for
Catholics.
JB: Were there any initiation things your freshman year?
JW: Yes, we had…we have a…we had a scavenger hunt at the end of freshman week,
that we had a list of things we had to run around and find…and then it seems to me we
had to dress up in crazy costumes—I haven't thought about this in years. We had to dress
up in crazy costumes for a…sort of a show for the end of freshman week.
JB: And…well, how did things change after the war ended?
JW: Well, two things happened. One, of course…Pembroke didn't change that
drastically, but the men came back in bundles and they…they were…some of them were
old and, you know, we thought they were very old. And…but the ones who were drafted
first or who went first, in 1940-41, by the time…they were eight years older and had had
a lot…and a lot of them were married, and had children. They were also very different
from the men who had been here before, because they weren't…they were studying. I
mean, they had an awful lot of making up to do…they had families, or they wanted to
have families, and they wanted to study. And…so that for the first time, the men did
better than the women academically. The women had always had higher class averages
than the…than the men, but that changed the…in '46 and '47 when the men came back.
JB: How do you think the…what was your feelings of how the men felt towards the
women? Either before or after?
JW: They sort of…I mean, you were there, part of the scenery—except for someone
special that you dated, or something like that. The…they didn't consider it one way or
the other. Feminism…feminism hadn't been invented, but on the other hand, most of the
men were used to wives and sisters and mothers and aunts, and they didn't…your

relationship with them depended upon how well they got along with the…with the other
females they knew.
JB: Oh. Did you…how was integration between the schools? Did you have the same
classes or the same clubs, or…?
JW: We had…we had all the same classes. No, there was a separate student government
for Pembroke. There was a…there was the Cam Club [Cammarian Club] for Brown. Of
course, the men had fraternities.
JB: Were there sororities?
JW: No. And the…we had our own athletic association, and so…our classes were
integrated, and…and some of the men came over to the Brown…to the Pembroke
campus, because of the Pembroke Hall had rooms that were big enough, and music
appreciation was always taught in Alumnae Hall. Frank Madeira taught it when I was in
college, and he was a…he was the one who founded the Rhode Island Philharmonic
Orchestra. And the…the…but the classes were…were all integrated. And I don't think
that…oh, there were some very competitive women who would get into great debates
with men, but, by and large, you debated without having to be the winner.
JB: Right. Do you have any memories of favorite teachers or professors that had an
impact on you?
JW: There was a marvelous man named Hans Rothfels, who was a German refugee, who
came and taught Medieval and Renaissance history, who had the most humanistic
approach to life, and he was absolutely great. There was another man named Sinclair
Armstrong who taught contemporary European history, who had a marvelous grasp, and
was a great teacher. And there were a couple of good English ones, but I can't even
remember their names. Which isn't very…which isn't very flattering. There was also a
professor who I think is still living, Juan Lopez-Morillas, who taught Spanish and
Spanish literature, who was a great teacher. And there was Curt Ducasse who taught
philosophy.
JB: Were there any women professors?
JW: There was a Mabel Wilder who taught biology, but I didn't have her. Nancy Duke
Lewis was my freshman advisor, who later went on to become the dean. And the…she
was new at Brown, the year we were…the year we came in. And she was…and she
was…she was sort of finding her way, and we were finding our way.
JB: Now, you majored in history at…right? What made you decide history, or…?
JW: Well, because I was…it was a subject that I…that I was interested in. It covered
topics that I was interested in. I like to read. I was not scientific. And…and I had no
intere…I thought sociology was the stupidest thing that was ever taught. So, actually, if

you weren't going to be a science major, you had a choice of being a history major, and
English major, or a sociology major. And European history fascinated me.
JB: What was your…do you have any best or worst memories of Pembroke?
JW: No, it was a very tranquil time in my life, I suppose there were traumas along the
way, but I don't have any…I don't have any, you know, gradu…you know,
Commencement was probably the highlight and…but I don't have any terribly unhappy
memories.
JB: What…what was Commencement like? Were there…where did…what was the
women's part in it?
JW: Well, in the first place, Commencement the year I graduated was the first year it
was divided. That…we walked down the hill, we walked up the hill, because it was the
first year…because there was this great bulge of men who had come back, that…who had
been in the class of '45 and '46 and '43 that were graduating with us. And…so, the first
part of it was in the church, the way it is now, and then we walked back up the hill and
we were awarded our degrees individually…you know, I mean, it was not... It was too
big for the church, but it…well, church, and for the parents. You couldn't fit all of…and,
but we were awarded our degrees individually. The women didn't have much say, we
were rather second class, and of course, it's only the last few years that women have been
allowed to march as alumnae in the Commencement procession.
JB: So…how did you…how did you feel about this…this feeling…?
JW: It was…it's very hard to…it's very hard to describe to…to people of this era, that
you…there were certain things that you just accepted. You didn't feel second class, it…it
was just organized that the men went first and the…the men went first, and then the
women went.
JB: But looking back on it, you think that, or…?
JW: No, I…I mean the…you can't change what was.
JB: Right.
JW: So, I'm not around, having terrible trauma about, you know, about things that
happened that were just part of…of tradition. And Campus Dance was called Class
Night Dance, anyway, it was really for the benefit of the…the alumnae, or alumni, and
…so that the things that…and…and…Under the Elms, which was a nice ceremony, is
gone, but the women…the women went.
JB: What…what was that?

JW: Under the Elms was a…was where a student made a…(inaudible) was the speaker
in my time. It was like…a…lecture. It wasn't the valedictory, but it was the same idea; it
was a…it was on a Thursday afternoon, and it was in Middle Campus. And there were
some speeches, and there was a reception afterwards, and it was…we lived in a more
formal era. So that nobody thought anything about listening to someone reminisce about
his four years in college, or what the moral values of America should be, or something
like that. And…and it was a cross between a speech and a sermon.
JB: How about other traditions, like May Day or Ivy Day. Were those still happening?
JW: Well I can…Ivy Day wasn't, but May Day was. And I can remember distinctly
three different May Queens. One of them was a girl named Ruth Sherwood whose name
is now Thomas, whose fiancé was shot down or killed or something just before the
balloting for May Day, so she was a cinch to make it. [laughter] I don't mean that as
callous…but you also have to remember that…that's kind of a…this happened to people,
and it sort of made them…special. You know, it was a rather unpleasantly
way…unpleasant way…and then Alice Clark Donohue, was May Queen, but the first
time I ever saw Alice Clark, she was pointed out to me as having been the Junior Prom
Queen at LaSalle Academy. So she was another shoe-in. [laughter] And she's a lifelong friend. And the third one that I remember was [Marjorie Botsford?], who was
probably the best looking of them.
JB: How about Sophomore Masque, was that?
JW: No, that had gone.
JB: Oh, that was over? Okay. How…di…you said something about Chapel, and the
Chapel talks. Did you enjoy those? Or what was your feeling about those?
JW: Well, it depended. It depended on how you felt. And some people…there was a
woman named Martha Dickie Sharp, whose name is something else now, who had been
in...in Europe after the war as a Unitarian war worker. And she also…I don't know
whether she was elected to Congress or not, but she was…she ran for Congress from
Wellesley, or one of those towns. And she came, and she…she exposed us to something
that we hadn't really thought about, the condition of Europe after the war, and the
Commencement…the Chapel speaker I remember best was a Constitutional lawyer from
Providence named William Edwards, who came to speak to us just before we graduated
and said that we should start off on the left, because the older we grew, the farther to the
right we went. So we really should start off as liberals. And I have thought of that often
in my life, because I was married to a great liberal, and it was very good advice.
And…so, there were others that were more famous that didn't make nearly as much
impression as Bill Edwards did.
JB: How was contact with the faculty and the deans? Was it informal, or…how was it?

JW: It was…well, it depended on the…it depended on the faculty member. There were
some faculty members with whom you had very friendly, informal relations, and then
there were some that were unapproachable. The deans were…approachable, although
Dean Morriss was rather a formidable figure. She was…on the outside, she was very
willing to listen to everybody, and she was accessible. You didn't just walk in and pop
in, but, you know. And one of the things that I have said about success of Brown
presidents is that Henry Wriston, who was really a giant figure, was a very real presence
to us, because he walked across the campus four times a day. He walked to work, he
walked home for lunch, he walked back after lunch, and he walked home at the end of the
day. Now he wasn't anybody that you'd stop and chat with, but you knew the p…you felt
that you knew the president of the university. He didn't have a very high opinion of
women's intelligence, he used to come over and, you know, tell us the things we didn't
know. Although after he married a second time to a woman who was…had been a dean
of a college, his approach rather changed. He discovered we weren't as dumb as he
thought. [laughter] But it wasn't…it wasn't a put-down; it was supposed to…we took
the…the reaction was that you felt that he was trying to stimulate. He wasn't…he wasn't
putting everybody down, he was trying to say, "These are the things that you should do
and know." It was more a stimulating thing.
JB: Again, going back to how you lived at home, did you spend…okay, you came to
campus for your classes. But did you spend…?
JW: (overlapping speech, inaudible) spent time in the library, spent time at social events,
spent time playing Bridge, and after forty years, everything else may go, but the Bridge
game still stays. And, so that…no, your social life was also around, you know.
JB: What…were there lots of dances?
JW: There were fraternity dances every…every Saturday night. And…and there was a
prom…there was the…a Junior Class dance, and there was a Christmas dance at
Pembroke, and there was an Ivy Night dance, but the ceremony for Ivy Day just…I don't
think it existed. But…but there was an Ivy Night dance. So that there were lots…and of
course, these were…these were real serious dances, with long dresses and tuxedos, you
know.
JB: Every week?
JW: Yes. Just about. Not every girl went every…well, there were a few. [laughter] But
there were always a few of those in every class, but…
JB: Did you have to be asked?
JW: Oh, yes.
JB: Yeah. Could girls ever ask guys?

JW: No, and it wasn't thought of, and in fact, the only reason that you were supposed to
call a boy was if you'd broken your leg and had to break a date. [laughter] Or there was
a death in the family. So, they…and that, of course, has changed. But that was
something that was not…we were brought up that way.
JB: Exactly.
JW: So we didn't think anything about it.
JB: Were they…do you remember any favorite outfits, or dresses that you ever wore to a
dance?
JW: Yes. I had a white…I had a dress that had a white lace top and a chiffon skirt that
was the prettiest dress I ever owned. I, in fact, it's not too long ago that I finally decided
that there was no point in keeping this any longer. [laughter] But I had other dresses that
were pretty…I had a white piqué one for summer that was very pretty. The only trouble
was that my mother would only allow the laundress to do it, you know, like, every other
week. Because it had to be starched, and ironed wet. Those things…nobody remembers
that anymore. As I think about some of these things, it's ancient history.
JB: Well, were there any rules about what kind of clothes you had to wear?
JW: You couldn't wear pants on the…no, by the time we got here, the hats and glove
rule had gone. We wore hats because it…we wore hats because it was…everybody wore
hats in the winter in New England.
JB: Yeah.
JW: Well, it wasn't (inaudible), you know. You know, it really does make sense to wear
a hat. Well, you come from someplace colder, you wear a hat. And…but we didn't wear
hats in the summer. Those who went before us had to…the only thing was that you
couldn't wear pants on campus, unless you were painting scenery for Sock and Buskin or
you were sketching, or something like that. But, on the other hand, nobody…nobody did
wear slacks, except for projects.
JB: Right. Okay. How did you feel about the merger of 1971?
JW: I hated it. I still hate it. I think the girls gave up an awful lot. I have always
thought that President Hornig didn't stay…didn't…wasn't here long enough to have
implemented the decision. I think the girls gave up a lot, I think they discovered that the
first year, when they discovered they didn't have their own deans. Remember, we
registered…we had our own registrar, and our own deans, over on the Pembroke campus.
And that was lost. The…and I think the girls discovered it when they found themselves
in line with the boys, and I'm sure at Brown—I had a son who was a football player—and
a football player never stands in line for something, so I suppose the girls had the
experience of watching somebody go to the head of the line because he was, you know,

hopefully the new quarterback, and so I think that those are the things that…that were
lost. The student government had been lost a few years before the girls in SGA
succumbed to blandishments from Cam Club, and wound up with no officers in the
stu…or one, you know, one or two in the student government. The…I think they…it
didn't change anything intellectually, but it changed things socially, and it changed things
in a business sense. When I…when you talk about registration, and…and available
deans, and that sort of thing. I believe in the rights of women, but I also think that
women need a chance to grow. And I think they had the best of both worlds, because
they had the opportunity to grow in student government and running things, organizing
things in their own…on the Pembroke campus, but they also had the opportunity to…to
be with the…with the men, and participate in some of the men's activities. And I think
this was lost. And I think it's…there's a certain type of girl who this is not a problem for,
but I think for the late bloomers, a lot was lost.
JB: This is a question going back to the…the accelerated…thing? I was
wondering…you know you said you had three semesters? Did you still go to school for
four years?
JW: No, I was actually here three. I started in January of '44, and I graduated in June of
'47.
JB: Okay. I was just wondering. What did you…what did you do after Brown?
JW: After Brown, the first year I was out of Brown, I worked in the Office of the
Attorney General of the United States on a project that was searching out lobbyists…this
sounds ridiculous now, because…I don't know…there are 23,000 registered lobbyists,
and there were about 60. But, the…they had just put in a registration of lobbyists law,
and a man named Irving Kaufman, who later became a federal judge in New York, was
the one who was responsible for this. Tom Clark was the Attorney General. And I did
this for a year, then I came back and I worked…I took the training course in the
Providence Public Library. They had a training course for librarians. This was before
MLSes [Master of Library Science degrees] were required. I worked in the PPL in…in
the Periodical Room and in the Reference Room, and then I went to Newport as—to the
Naval War College—as a reference librarian. That was absolutely an ideal place,
because the library was on Narragansett Bay, and the book budget was unlimited,
because the money came out of the Office of the Nav…Chief of Naval Operations.
JB: How did you find out about these jobs when you got out of school?
JW: Well, a frien…the…the one in Washington, an uncle of mine worked in the
Attorney General's office. He was working on the…the alien properties, which were
seized properties of Germans and Japanese. Europe…you know, properties seized in this
country. Industrial properties. And they were looking for a researcher, and he thought I
might like a year in Washington, so he suggested that I apply. The PPL was, everybody
knew you could go in and apply for the training course, and if you had a A.B. degree, you
got five dollars a week extra. Well, I started at 25 dollars a week. And the War College

advertised for a reference librarian because Newport is a small place. It was smaller.
There were more…there was more Navy, but Newport was smaller. And Doris Duke and
the Preservation Society hadn't come into being. And, so I answered the ad, and was
hired.
Track 2
JB: I was just wondering, how did your…oh, this is Side 2 of the first tape. How did
your years at Brown, how did they develop...what kind of sense did they develop for a
role of, like, women in jobs, or…or what…you know?
JW: I think that…that knowing that you went to a superior school gave you a feeling of
confidence. I think that in the kind of jobs I had, the kind of background that I had
received educationally gave me a feeling of assurance. And it gave me a natural
inquisitiveness, so that, you know, in order to be a good reference librarian, you have to
be like "The Elephant's Child," full of curiosity. And, so that I always have thought that
the value of an education is the opportunity that it offers to continue being educated. And
the kind of assurance that you can explore and do and learn.
JB: What did you do after the job in Newport, or how did it last?
JW: I married.
JB: And how did you meet your husband?
JW: I met him in the Providence Public Library. And he came in with somebody I knew,
and I met him through a friend. But the physical place was the Providence Public
Library.
JB: And then when you went to Newport, did you keep in touch with him?
JW: Well, I commuted to Newport. I mean, you know, you drive back and forth to
Newport.
JB: Okay.
JW: I lived at home until I was…until I was married, but that also was customary if you
were…there were some girls who…and I lived in an apartment in Washington, but
the…the…and it was cheaper! As some people have discovered, moving home. So,
the…and I was married in 1952, and I taught…I…I worked in the library until shortly
before my first son was born.
JB: How long did you know your husband before you married?
JW: We were engaged for three years. Well, he was…when I met him, he was a senior
at Boston College. He was five months older than I was, but he had been in the service.

And he graduated from Boston College, and then he went to B. U. Law School [Boston
University], and my father said he had to be out of law school before we could be
married. And making 50 dollars a week, which…you know, you blow that in a day, now,
but that, you could live on it 35 years ago, so.
JB: So, after you ma…after you married, you continued working, was that…?
JW: Just a short time, and then I took up volunteer work in a big way. After I had four
sons, and the…the…and I volun…I did all the usual local things, I…
JB: Like…
JW: PTA [Parent-Teachers Association], and Boy…Cub Scouts, and all that. I also was
very active in the Pembroke Club, I was a president…a past president…I’m a past
president of the Pembroke Club, I’m a past president of the Pembroke Alumnae
Association. I was president of—I didn't start off as president of all these things, I
worked my way up. I was president of an institution called the Home for Aged Colored
Women that turned into Bannister House, that was the first black- and white-financed
social project. It's a non-profit nursing home. First black…where the blacks were
solicited as well as—black in the community were solicited—as well as whites to pay for
this. I also was active in a group called the Women's Intergroup Conference, which
was…the basic purpose of it was to promote enough racial harmony to get a fair housing
law passed in Rhode Island, but it brought people of various religions and ethnic
backgrounds, and colors, together to talk for a day. And this…in 1959 and 1960 was
very unusual.
JB: What…what are you do…what other types of volunteer things have you done, like
what are you…are you doing anything now?
JW: Now I just finished being the president of the Pembroke…of the Pembroke
Seminars. I was chairman of the Pembroke Seminars. I just finished being president of
the Scituate Art Festival, which I've done for the last six years, which is the
second…there are two big art festivals in Rhode Island, and Scituate is Columbus Day
weekend, and it's a big one. And I've ju…and I'm finishing in April a term as the
president of the Trustees of the North Scituate Public Library, and while I was there, we
built a half a million-dollar addition.
JB: That's wonderful.
JW: And I am now chairman of the Scituate Democratic Town Committee, which is like
being…Scituate has had two elected Democrats in 70 years, so it's like being a
missionary. But, I won this sort of by default, being the oldest living member of the
committee. And so I'm beating the bushes to find seven Council candidates and one
School Committee candidate.
JB: It sounds like you've done a lot! Can you tell me about your husband?

JW: The…the…he was a very…he was a…he was a Labor leader. He was an attorney,
and he also was the executive director of the largest union in the state, the State
Employees Union. And the…the…he was Lieutenant Governor of Rhode Island. And
he was greatly concerned about…one of the reasons that he took this executive
directorship was that he was concerned about the welfare of the people who work…the
people who work…you know, people forget that not everybody is a governor of a state,
that there are people who do rather nasty jobs at state institutions. I mean, the kind of
thing that you and I don't really want to think about, but they're there to be done. And he
felt very strongly about the quality of their lives. He also was not the kind of Labor
leader who tolerated slack performance. He standard speech was, "You've got to give a
day's work for a day's pay." He also anticipated—shortly before his death—he
anticipated exactly what is going to ha…what happened, that Labor had gotten so greedy
in some aspects, that the…the kind of wage increases that they came to expect in the steel
mills in the automobile industry could not be sustained any longer, and that this was
going to cause economic cataclysms, which it has.
JB: Mm-hmm.
JW: But he was a very much beloved man whom…I still meet people on the street who
talk about how wonderful and how kind. And the day of his funeral, which was a
pouring, rainy day, this woman came in who obviously was…had had a stroke. And
she…she couldn't get her hair up, and she had a cane and she told me that he had done
something wonderful for her 25 years ago, and she made her son fly from Washington to
bring her to the funeral, because she had to say good-bye and thank you. And I think that
epitomizes something. And it was a great experience, campaigning with him, and going
to union meetings with him. And that's part of…that's part of my education. I remember
one time when he couldn't make a speech, and somebody who had said it was a waste of
time to educate women, came over and said, "John isn't here, could you please say a few
words?" And I said, "Well, you see, my father's money wasn't wasted." [laughter]
So…that…that helped to…the…the…and he was always very proud of my Brown
education.
JB: Mm-hmm.
JW: And my involvement in Brown, although the only activity he really enjoyed here
was the pops concert. So, I think that's it.
JB: Okay. I'd like to thank you very much for your time and for everything.
JW: Well, I've enjoyed it.
-END-

