
Q: Testing, testing, one, two, three, testing, one, two, three. Testing. This is an interview with
Doris Hopkins-Stapleton, class of 1928, at Brown University. And the interview was conducted
at her home at Four Ruxton Street, in Cranston, Rhode Island, on April 26th, 1982. Mrs.
Stapleton, can you tell me a little about where you're from, and about your family?
Doris Hopkins-Stapleton: I was born in a small town, in Foster, Rhode Island. And I was the one
girl in a family of six, other five being boys. And my early education, [00:01:00] until I was in
the fifth grade, was in a small country school of one room, and then my family came to the city
for a year, and I went to a local school, but since I had been in an ungraded school, they had a
difficult time trying to place me. Because in some ways, I was ahead of the group, and in other
ways, I was not. I had a handicap, in that I had been brought up in a town where many idioms
were used instead of proper English. And both my younger brother and I – my other brothers
were older, both my younger brother and I had a great difficulty in learning to speak as an
accepted way.
Q: This was a Rhode Island speech?
DHS: In Rhode – yes, typically Rhode Island, and at one time, a student at Brown went out to the
town and had people talk to her, so that she could hear some of the [00:02:00] different ways
they had of expressing themselves. I – my family went back to the country, and – but they did
not stay for me to go back to school there. I came back, and graduated from an elementary school
in Providence, and went to Classical High. And from Classical High, Mr. Peck was then the
principal, and he very much said it was his school, and he used to go around and say you go here,
1

and you go there, and you go some other place. Several of my friends went away to school, but
my family would not let me go away to school. So, when it was decided that I couldn’t go away,
then he suggested that I go to Brown. And I went to Brown.
Q: Can you tell me a little bit about [00:03:00] your family, and your relationship with your
parents, and what your days consisted of when you were a little kid?
DHS: When I was a little kid? Well we lived on a farm. Although my father was not a farmer,
my father was a grocer and a lumber man, and these are occupations that he had inherited from
his father. If you lived in Rhode Island, my name was Hopkins, there were a great many
Hopkins’s in Rhode Island. They had come over supposedly, my father’s – both my father’s and
my mother’s ancestors had come over in the Mayflower. And so, the family had settled in this –
that part of the Hopkins’s had settled in the area. I was the next to last of the children, my other –
my brother next to me had been killed by lightning, so there was quite a break. There were three
boys, and then a break, [00:04:00] and then I, and then my younger brother.
Q: How did you feel as the lone girl in this pack of boys?
DHS: I became used to it. I think my mother was more protective of me, because I was the only
girl. I can remember her saying that a girl was a lot more trouble than boys, and yet, as I grew
up, I felt that my older brothers were in trouble all the time for one reason or another, and I
thought I wasn’t any trouble at all. I guess in this day’s world, I guess you would say that I was
my father’s child. You know, it was sort of natural, because my mother was always so busy with
the boys, and getting things ready for them, I don’t remember too much when I was very young,
my mother was a – we always had someone in the house that helped, and for the most part,
[00:05:00] we had moved into this new house that my father had built when I was about two, and
I can remember the women that took care of me better than I can my mother. My mother was
always doing something, you know what I mean? I think I missed having sisters, or having girls,
but I don’t think I realized it until I was older.
Q: What were some of your ambitions then? Can you remember what you wanted to be when
you grew up?

2

DHS: No. I didn’t really know what I wanted to be. I liked to read, and most of my games were
with the boys, I played ball with them, and did things like that. We had always had a lot of
animals around, and we – one of them was a pet pig, which is kind of stupid, but we enjoyed
that. We also had dogs, and cats, [00:06:00] and whatnot. My mother, I can remember my
mother in her – she had a driving horse with a wagon, and (inaudible) she used to – and my
mother was one of the first women that drove a car, she had a car of her own. My mother was a
very – I remember my mother as a very picayune person. Everything had to be just so. She, you
know, little girls were not supposed to get dirty. I remember my first pair of silk stockings, I fell
the very first day and tore them, she was more upset by the silk stockings than she was that – my
father was concerned because I had a gash on my leg, but I think this is indicative of the kind of
household that I was brought up in. I knew I wanted to go to school, I always liked school as a
child. And I liked [00:07:00] to, as I say, reading was my pastime.
Q: And I guess your parents really promoted that interest in you?
DHS: I don’t think they cared one way or the other, you know? My father, in addition to many
other things he did, he was connected with the state libraries in some way, and he used to go to
the state house and pick up libraries and take them – box libraries, and take them to various
places around in the country, because there was no library there. And I could – as long as those
box libraries were in the house, I could use them as much as I wanted to. And so, that gave me
access to books that I would never have had. As I got older, my mother subscribed to summer
theater, and she used to take me regularly [00:08:00] to summer theater, but we lived 16 miles
out, and in the early days, that was a day’s trip. You came to town, and you came for the day. So,
I got a chance to go to the theater a great deal, I did not have much opportunity to hear music
until I was in a city school. Although, the first teacher I had was a pianist, and I did take piano
lessons from her for a while. But, and I continued that when I came to live in the city, but I never
became a great pianist, it was just an opportunity to play. My father played the violin, and the
organ, and the piano. We always had what we called a Victrola then in the house, and always
plenty of records. So, we had a – well, it would be hard for you to imagine what life was like
then, but you know, we always had a good time [00:09:00] with the music that we had in the
house.

3

Q: OK, we’ve talked a little bit about your grammar school and your high school days. Did you
always plan to go to college?
DHS: No, it just sort of happened.
Q: Just sort of came along, and –
DHS: I was the first one in my immediate family to go to college, and yet my cousin had gone to
normal school, and my cousin is – she’s still living, I think she’s about 10 years older than I am,
she was an only child, and she had gone to normal school, but that wasn’t unusual, because a lot
of people, a lot of girls would have gone to normal school if they wanted to be a teacher. It
wasn’t necessary to go to college to be a teacher then. Two years of normal school, and you
could get a teaching certificate
Q: Right.
DHS: So, and my other [00:10:00] cousin, I had another girl cousin, girls did not run in our
family, another cousin, she had run away at 16, so I have no idea what happened to her. She had
– was living with my grandmother at the time, because her parents were divorced, and my
grandmother was too strict for her, so she just took off and ran away to California, which was
something then. And lived with my grandmother’s sister, and we never saw her again. So girls in
our family, there were really only the two in the immediate family.
Q: When you got to Brown, what interested you most in your academic life? Actually, I should
probably say Pembroke, because when you were a freshman, it was –
DHS: It was the women’s college.
Q: It was women’s college at Brown when you were a freshman, and then it became –
DHS: It became – the year we graduated, we graduated in June, and in October it became
Pembroke College. What interested me most? Actually, [00:11:00] if you went to Classical High
School, going to college was not much of a change for us, because we had had a classical
education, which meant that three hour exams were not new to us. The demands of studying
were not new to us. And I probably had at least a half a dozen of my classmates who went with
4

me, and so it was not such a change, or such a radical change, as it would be if I had gone a long
way from home, or I had been in a school that was not as demanding as Classical. I can
remember the first time we had exams at the end of the first semester, many of the girls were
wrung out, they just had never been subjected to anything – they didn’t know how to study for it.
This did not bother [00:12:00] us. Perhaps of all the things that were different was that the
restrictions, so to speak, of what you could do and what you couldn’t do, after you had been a
senior in high school, you got top of the heap, we were freshmen again. And the restrictions were
quite great, you couldn’t do this, and you couldn’t do that.
Q: What kind of –
DHS: Such as you couldn’t go on the hill, you’ve heard this before, without gloves and a hat.
You couldn’t go downtown without your gloves, a Pembroke girl could not be caught downtown
without her gloves and her hat. In high school, we had gone all over around town, anywhere we
wanted to go, in almost any dress you can think of. It was the flapper age, and anything that you
could put on [00:13:00] that was noticeable, you did it. And the high school could have cared
less, but at Pembroke they did care a great deal how you looked.
Q: So Pembroke at that time wasn’t all that reflective of society in general?
DHS: Yes it was, but generally the famous statement was nice girls didn’t do this, and nice girls
didn’t do that. Nice girls didn’t smoke, nice girls didn’t drink, nice girls obeyed the rules, Miss
Morris had been at Pembroke, she came in the academic year ’23, ’24, I believe, so when we
came in the fall of ’24, she was a relatively new dean, she was very dignified, [00:14:00] to a – I
was 16, to a 16-year-old freshman, she was unapproachable, you know what I mean? She was –
had gray hair, and stood very straight, and was very austere. When she got up and said you don’t
do this, and you don’t do that, you listened. It was quite a (inaudible) my mother wasn’t
anywhere near as old as she was, and didn’t seem that way, (inaudible). And it was – that was
probably, and we had – I had never – well maybe never, but I had never known – I guess it’s
true, I had never known a woman just like her before. She had a great many academic honors,
and we were told of this, of course, and she was a historian of note, and we were told that, and
she was really [00:15:00] somebody, a woman like I had never known before, really. I got to

5

know her later on as a – when, after she had resigned from Pembroke, and I was on the staff, and
I often wondered why I was so afraid of her as an undergraduate. But –
Q: So she had a real impact on you?
DHS: Oh yes, I think a very great impact on me. And probably because she was the only woman
at the time in any – that did, you see, for the most part, we had one woman who was an instructor
in biology, I guess she was an assistant professor, she wasn’t a full professor. And she did not
impress me as she did anybody else, but I think one reason why she was teaching biology, and I
was not a scientific mind, I didn’t like biology. And her ideas of teaching [00:16:00] and that
was, you know, she was so careful that we were treated as girls, and she’d close the door when
she was talking about biological facts, she was afraid a man was listening, and she could tell you
terrible things, and smile at you. She was just not a very attractive person as far as we were
concerned. We used to make fun of her all the time. Which she was probably bright enough, and
we used to make fun of her smile and copy it, and copy her voice, which sounds a little bit
childish, but we were kids, really.
Q: Everybody does that.
DHS: Or I suppose you still do it with certain professors, their mannerisms, and the way they
approach things, and what, but she had a very sickish smile, and we used to get awfully sick of it
by – and biology was at eleven o’clock in the morning, I do remember, and sometimes,
[00:17:00] she’d get talking about things, and we’d have to go back for lunch, and you know, we
couldn’t – all the way back, this was the only way you could sort of relieve yourself, that you
could eat lunch. The stuff she (inaudible) about.
Q: You were – you majored in history?
DHS: History, yes.
Q: So did you have any – wasn’t Dean Morris a (inaudible)?
DHS: Yes, but she did not teach. There was one woman, and I think she was only an instructor,
Miss Maurer, M-A-U-R-E-R, Grace Maurer. And probably she was the closest to a woman
scholar that we knew, she was a charming woman, and we used to go to her apartment, and carry
6

on conversations that were on a completely different level from what we had with other
instructors [00:18:00] or professors. And we enjoyed her tremendously. I often wonder what
happened to her. She left Brown after a while, I heard that she died fairly young, but she was a –
she probably, of all the women I knew at Brown, had more of an impact on students, women
students, who were in history, and I know that other students used to say how fortunate we were
that we were taking history with her. We took Renaissance history with her, it was very exciting.
Q: She was a full professor?
DHS: No, there were no full – we didn’t – the only – we didn’t have any full professors at all,
they were either assistants, or I don’t know if they ever got to be associate professors, you know,
no women full professors when we were there.
Q: How did you feel about it? Did you have any consciousness of that point of –
DHS: No, no. None whatsoever.
Q: None whatsoever?
DHS: We took – I think we took people on their [00:19:00] face value as either good professors,
good lecturers, or create a good relationship with us and whatnot. The first – other than biology
in the freshman year, I don’t think I had any classes on the hill. All the classes came to us, all the
professors came to us. History was my major, French was my minor. And because we had a very
set curriculum, you know, had to take so many sciences, so much English, so much of – so many
classes in majors, so many in minor, you didn’t have the easy way you have now of choosing
what you want, so you had to take – either it was math or argumentation as a freshman. Now we
had – I took math, because math was not difficult for me. [00:20:00] And I can remember that
the professor was good looking, a charming individual, but a terrible teacher in the sense that you
had to work hard to understand what he was doing. We had to have another year of Latin, I had
had four years of Latin in high school, but you couldn’t get an AB degree at Brown at the time,
unless you had five years of Latin. We had a very good professor in Latin, French professor was
all right. He had a reputation, I have no idea what goes around campus now, but he had a
reputation of throwing exams up the stairs, the ones that got an A, and the ones (overlapping
dialogue; inaudible). You sometimes wondered what you – when you got your grade back,
7

whether or not that was true. But that – Professor Massey was known for that. [00:21:00] But
then, we had a French professor, and he came directly from France, I guess it must have been my
junior year, and we started going over to [Marsten?] Hall then for French, and I took French
conversation with him, and he was appalled at our French conversation. And he used to swear
under his breath, and we knew what he was saying, but he didn’t think we did, he thought we
were all so stupid he didn’t know what he was saying. So then – and then, I can’t remember
much about junior year on the Hill, but by the time we were seniors, our seminars were on the
hill. I took botany as a sophomore, because I couldn’t stand another year of biology, and we went
on the hill [00:22:00] for that. But for the most part, professors came to us. And Pembroke Hall
had many classrooms in it then. And next to Pembroke Hall was East Hall, where Howard
Terrace is now, there were two buildings there. East Hall and East House. East House was a
dormitory, and East Hall was a three-story house, and the bookstore was in one level there, a
little bit of a thing, because the bookstore was on the hill, or they brought books to us, and we
could buy them. And there were classrooms on there, so that they must have – I don’t know, I
can’t remember how many, but there could be several classes going on at the hill at the same
time. We had our own gym, so there was really no need for us to go over there. We had our own
library after a while. [00:23:00] Come to think of it, we didn’t have our own library until, I don’t
know, but upstairs, where the library is now, was our chapel. And then, when I was a junior,
Alumni Hall was built. And chapel was transferred over there. And we used to have our dances
in the gym, but then after Alumni Hall was built, why we had our dances over in Alumni Hall. I
think it’s hard for you to imagine what a small, compact campus we were. We had Miller and
Metcalfe, Pembroke Hall, the gym, East House, East Hall, and on Angel Street, [Chop?] House.
That was our campus until I was a junior, then they built Alumni Hall. [00:24:00] But most of
the other changes didn’t come until after the war, after World War II. So, we were compact. We
were less than 500 when I graduated, a college of less than 500.
Q: You said, you were talking about that you went to school during the end of the flapper era,
end of the flapper era. Did that – was there any kind of outside pressure, or did you feel a need to
go along with any of that social trend?
DHS: Well, everybody did. You have the days, girls wear jeans, I don’t know about on campus
now, but you know, (inaudible) jeans, and all the rest of them. We went along with that, we wore
8

hats that came right down, or [cloche?] hats. Whatever the style was in dress, [00:25:00] it would
go sometimes – well at first they were short, short, short, and then they got down long. And what
else did we do? Well, the Charleston was the favorite dance, but it wasn’t supposed to be done,
you know, it was not looked upon as the thing to do. I don’t remember ever doing a Charleston
when there was a patroness around, but they get in another room, and they try, and –
Q: What about drinking? Was there drinking?
DHS: Well, it was Prohibition.
Q: Right. Was there any bootleg liquor?
DHS: Oh yes, there was plenty of bootleg liquor around, but you had to be pretty smart what you
drank, because a boy that I went with in high school went blind from drinking the stuff. It was
awful tasting stuff. It was called bathtub gin. [00:26:00] It was not a pleasing drink, if you know
what – and you had to be pretty careful of what you – you had to know whether or not it was
really safe to drink. It was the day of the blind pig, you know? People who went off campus,
instead of going to a cocktail house, they went to what they called the blind pig, and you had the
password to get in, kids used to go occasionally, and if – sometimes they got raided.
Q: Where was it located?
DHS: Oh, they were all over the city. They weren’t just, you know, they were different places.
Q: And kids went there to drink?
DHS: Oh yeah, to drink. But as I say, you had to be pretty careful. But you see, I can remember
the New Year’s before my first child was born, we were at a party, and I was very pregnant, they
wouldn’t let me drink it. They said, “Forget it.” [00:27:00] And this was pretty much true all the
way along, but sometimes people would come back, and they’d be deathly sick for a couple of
days from drinking the stuff. It was awful stuff, but they did it just the same. But that went on
from what, 1919, all the time I was in high school and college, until 1932?
Q: Thirty-two, ’33.

9

DHS: Thirty-two, ’33, something like that? Yeah. Before I left college, there was a smoking
room at the college. It was in East – they found a room in East Hall, East House, where you
could smoke. I used to say I thought they put it there hoping the girls would set that building on
fire, it was such a rickety one. But they said it was safer than having them smoke in the
dormitories, but I’m sure the girls smoked in the dormitories. [00:28:00] There was no really, a
while – I have no idea, I think if you look in the archives, you’ll see where girls supposedly
parked their girdles and whatnot, it was written up in the journal about Pembroke girls parking
their girdles. I didn’t have to, because I didn’t wear one. I’m not sure whether it was true or not. I
really don’t. I was never at a party when anybody bothered to take their girdles off and park
them. Rolling one’s stockings was the, you know, this was supposed to be very risqué, if you
showed your stockings, your knees were bare. And people rolled their stockings. It sounds kind
of calm, doesn’t it?
Q: Well I’m wondering, to go along with some of these social trends, was there any political
motivation, do you think, or –
DHS: Well, Coolidge was in the White House, and Coolidge took naps, he didn’t do very much,
[00:29:00] there wasn’t very much to get excited about. I think we were too much a part of
college, there wasn’t that much excitement going on in the ’20s, as far as politics was concerned.
Q: Too insulated?
DHS: What was there to get excited about? The World War I was over, the world was at peace.
If I said I was a pacifist, so what? There was no war to get excited about. Money, you know,
after every war, there’s always a place where people were making money, money was not in
short supply in the late ’20s. People were, you know, investing in the stock market, and then all
of it kept going until 1929, when it went boom, but I was out of college then. Pembroke
[00:30:00] was not a rich college anyway, as far as having a lot of wealthy people. But neither
was it a poor girl’s college, because I don’t think a lot of poor girls went to college in that day
and age. By the time I was out, and the ’29 crash had come, the ’30s was quite a different thing.
Nobody had any work, and nobody had any money, and all that sort of thing. But the – I was
thinking about this the other days, the ’20s and the ’50s were the years of sort of nothing very
exciting was going on, there was nothing to get that worked up about. I can’t remember
10

anything, none of us were old enough to vote, for the most part, anyway. You were practically
out of college before you were 21, 21 or 22. I wasn’t old enough to vote [00:31:00] until after I
got out of college. The year I got out of college, I could register and vote.
Q: And I guess any kind of real women’s sentiment had kind of subsided after the suffragettes
won.
DHS: Well I was going to say, we had the vote, there was no – I would imagine that previously,
in fact, I’ve heard them say that in the late teens and the early ’20s, where they were more
involved, in the late teens, they were very involved in World War I, and in the – those people
that were interested in the suffragette movement probably got involved then, but we were after
that, we were in that quiet period, so – as far as world affairs was concerned.
Q: Right. So you don’t think the outside world had [00:32:00] that much effect on the Pembroke
campus?
DHS: I don’t. We were very – probably insulated is the best, we were all keyed up with what we
were doing on campus, and gave our whole interest to that.
Q: Can you remember some of the books you read? It doesn’t have to be for classes, but maybe
some of the popular novels of the time?
DHS: Oh, (overlapping dialogue; inaudible).
Q: Were any of the girls F. Scott Fitzgerald freaks?
DHS: I was going to say, and Percy Marks. Have you ever heard of Percy Marks?
Q: No.
DHS: He had been a Brown professor at one time, or a Brown instructor, and he wrote the very
daring books, and F. Scott Fitzgerald.
Q: I guess Zelda was a real cult heroine.

11

DHS: Oh yes. Earlier, there had been someone who supposedly wrote the hottest love stories,
and I’m not sure they were very good stories, you know, Ella McGlynn, [00:33:00] if you got an
Ella McGlynn book, that was supposed to be very... But I had had – my family had never
supervised my reading anyway, I could read anything I wanted to. And I don’t remember any –
when I was in college, we read F. Scott Fitzgerald, we read Percy Marks. I don’t remember
anybody saying to me, “You can’t do it.” If they had, we probably would have done it anyway.
We would have gotten the book one way or the other, because you could always go to the public
library if you couldn’t get it any other place. Really, you hear more now about books that you
weren’t supposed to read than you did then. [00:34:00] Which is strange, isn’t it?
Q: Yes, it certainly is.
DHS: (inaudible). I don’t – as I was saying to somebody, I don’t remember a great many
restrictions on me as far as what I could do when I was not under the supervision of a senior or
somebody, you know, like that. I lived at home, and I could come and go pretty much as I
wanted to, within limits.
Q: So it might have been different for boarders?
DHS: Yes, that’s true. And when I – the girl who – the woman you spoke to, Alice Shimaleski,
was a very good friend of mine in college, she was a history major too, and she lives on
President Avenue, and she was also a city girl. And if I wanted to stay with her, [00:35:00] I
could stay with her any time I wanted to, so we could come and go as we wanted to.
Q: Right.
DHS: Nobody could – Alice’s family was not restrictive, either, and so, my mother used to get
annoyed at me from time to time, but my father never said anything, whatever I did.
Q: So, it sounds like you lead a fairly unrestricted life at the time, I’m wondering if you felt any
restrictions that might have arisen due to being a woman instead of a man when you were a
senior at Brown, (inaudible) graduation (inaudible). Were there different expectations for women
[00:36:00] (inaudible)?
DHS: Well –
12

Q: And if there were, did you feel restricted by that?
DHS: I think I was more restricted by the courses I had taken. And the fact that I had gone to
Classical High School, I could not type, I had no skills that were marketable, except to teach.
And I had never worked, I earned $20 as an undergraduate, and how I earned the $20, near
where I lived in the country, an orthodontist had a camp, he had bought it from my family, I
guess, and put a camp there. And he needed a receptionist for two weeks to answer the
telephone, and to make [00:37:00] appointments for him, talk to the children, you know. So he
asked my mother if it would be all right if I did that. He thought it would be good experience for
me. So I rode with him, and he paid me $10 a week. But, I was not – I did not – then the summer
after I was a junior, I went to summer school, and took courses in education, which were
required for teaching. I did it A, just in case I should get a job as a teacher, and B, to keep busy.
Because there was no job available for somebody like me. So after taking the education courses,
and thinking of what I had to [00:38:00] sell, I decided I would teach. And so, I registered with
an agency in Boston, and then just by chance, a friend of mine’s father was a school committee
person here in Cranston, and he made a date for his daughter and me to go to Warwick to be –
which was a town then, not a city, to be interviewed. He knew there were a couple of jobs
coming up down there. So, I went down, and was interviewed. And the only other offer I got was
in [Matthias?], Maine, and I didn’t particularly want to go to Maine. So I accepted the job in
Warwick. But I had become engaged at the end of my senior year, and I much preferred to stay
in Rhode Island [00:39:00] to going away. The only time I really felt restricted was I lost my job
when I got married. I was going to be fired, so I just quit. That was really the first restriction, as
far as – because you're a woman, you know, because you’re getting married, you’re going to lose
your job.
Q: Only single women could work.
DHS: Well, only a single woman could work, that was that. But remember, this was 1930, and
jobs were getting very tight. And the – it was assumed that if you were married, your husband
could take care of you, if you were a married woman, you didn’t need to work.
Q: Did that bother you at all, that mentality?

13

DHS: It made me very angry. But, I’m not so sure that I was angry because of what he did, but it
was the person who did it, and the way he did it. [00:40:00] But, right after that, he wasn’t a very
popular person, and the superintendent of school in Cranston, his daughter was teaching with me
at the time, and she said, “My father says if you come to live in Cranston, he’ll see that you get
all the substitute work you want.” You could substitute if you were married. So, I did. They even
found me a house where to live, and within two weeks after I was home from my honeymoon, I
was substituting, and I could have substituted on, and on, and on, if I had wanted to. So I wasn’t
hurt as much as some people would have been hurt. I was lucky.
Q: Right.
DHS: But you see, there were people – a great man, supposedly, when I lost my job, a man got
it. And I suppose they thought that was fairer. [00:41:00] To give a man a job, he needed the job
more than me. I might have (inaudible). [00:42:00]
Q: (inaudible).
DHS: (inaudible). [00:43:00]
Q: Let’s say if you had wanted to go to a professional school, you know, if you had ambitions to
be a doctor or a lawyer, would you have? I’m sure –
DHS: It wouldn’t have been difficult.
Q: Yeah.
DHS: One of my classmates did, and I think she’s [00:44:00] been interviewed, Dr. (inaudible).
It was not easy for her, it was not easy for financially, it was not easy for to get into the medical
school as (inaudible). Had I not been planning to get married, I’m not sure what I would have
done. I think that that influenced what I would do, I’m not sure if I had gone to teach in some
faraway place, what that would have done. I like teaching, don’t misunderstand me, I like
teaching, I liked the people I worked with, except for the principal, and I liked kids. I still like
kids, I like to teach them. So I wasn’t unhappy as a teacher. Now, as far as outside, I think my
college education did a lot more for me [00:45:00] than it did to earn a living.

14

Q: Right. Oh, sure.
DHS: A lot more. It taught me how to think, it taught me how to get along with people, probably
the best thing it did, it taught me to think. I like to organize things, and I’m not sure whether I
learned that in college or not, whether it was something I always liked to do, but I’m a great one
for wanting to think a problem through, and organize it, and see it (inaudible). But if it doesn’t,
I’m very upset. And I think that was part of what you’re learning to correct.
Q: And then your classmates said about you that you were able to manage, boss, and even
browbeat the whole senior class –
DHS: That’s – oh, yeah.
Q: – without losing your good temper.
DHS: Well, that’s a little bit – I think they hit (inaudible). And I was the one that used to have to
ask them for their class dues, and ask them for their (inaudible) [00:46:00] dances, and whatnot.
And that wasn’t easy.
Q: Because you were the treasurer?
DHS: I was the treasurer of the class, I was also the – my senior year, I ran the social calendar
for the whole college. And that meant that, you know, I had a – this gave me a chance to get
better acquainted with Dean Morris, but it also gave me the opportunity to know the whole
college, instead of just my class. And I liked that, I got to know a lot of people, and I was in on –
I knew what they were planning before anybody else, it was a lot of fun. It gave me a wider
acquaintance with the college as a whole than I would have as just a member of a class. I liked
that. I loved college, I had no complaints at all.
Q: What was fistball?
DHS: Oh, I played fistball. [00:47:00] Well, they put a net up, and they had this rather soft ball,
and you had to – you couldn’t hit it, you were supposed to hit it with your fist like this. And it’s a
little bit like volleyball, back and forth, and whatnot. And there were definite rules and whatnot.
The thing that you could really hurt, if you hit your – this way, it would knock your elbow out,
15

you’d get a good sore elbow. But if you hit it like this, that’s a – I had played hockey in high
school, but I didn’t – we didn’t have a hockey team at Pembroke then, they play hockey now, I
think. I played basketball for a while.
Q: Yeah, you were on the basketball club.
DHS: The senior – I didn’t make the – I wasn’t that good. But I liked sports, I played basketball
in high school, and hockey in high school. But I had been brought up with boys, and I was used
to the sports and whatnot.
Q: Were the women at Brown then encouraged to participate in sports?
DHS: Oh yeah.
Q: [00:48:00] It wasn’t deemed unladylike?
DHS: Well I beg your pardon, we had to go to gym three times a week, and you had three cuts in
a whole semester, and if you hadn’t – if you’d overcut, you couldn’t get your degree. A very
good friend of mine spent her last 10 days in college, when – in the bowling alley making up
cuts. (laughter) We had to go to chapel every day. Three cuts a semester in chapel, if you overcut
chapel, then you were in – sometimes you were campused if you were – but you were punished
if you did. They took attendance regularly. Somebody got paid, every four rows or something
like that, and you had a seat that you sat in, and chapel was four religious a week, and one
student government. And I was more afraid of the student government person than I was as a
freshman. She was the most austere person, she got up there and told you [00:49:00] what you
were supposed to do. You were sure you were going to do it. Right, I was really scared. But, I
think you have to remember that a 16, 17-year-old girl was a young – was a kid. Most – I’ve got
an 11-year-old grandchild that’s been across the country by herself, you know, and she’s more
grown in many ways than I was when I went to college.
Q: Right.
DHS: All – and I have three other granddaughters that are twice as grown up as I was when I got
married.

16

Q: Where did you meet your husband?
DHS: Well, his parents and my parents had been friendly from the time oh, I was about eight or
nine years old, I guess. And I had known Byron as a kid, you know, and all – he was friendly
with my brothers. And then I didn’t see him at all until [00:50:00] senior in high school, I guess,
and then he moved – his family moved into my grandmother’s house. And I went out with his
brother for a while, and I went out with him for a while, and I went with him most of the time I
was in college, off and on. And then the last couple of years I was in college, I didn’t go with
anybody else but him. So, Byron is seven years older than I am, and so consequently, by the time
I was out of college, he wanted to get married. And he was working, he had graduated from
school in design, and he had a good job, for then. And there was no reason why we shouldn’t get
married. I wasn’t that ambitious as a career person. And since he’s good-natured and I knew I
wasn’t going to be [00:51:00] restricted in any way, it didn’t bother me to think that I was going
to be married, and tied down, so to speak, in comparison to other people. I perhaps had more
freedom than people who weren’t, regularly.
Q: Right. So at that point, you just planned to settle down, and have a family?
DHS: Yeah. When I – I had two daughters, and I got very involved with volunteer work, in quite
a strange way. My daughters are six years apart, but when Joan was about four, my older
daughter, she’s the one that went to Brown, there was a Girl Scout troop here that needed a
leader, [00:52:00] and they came and asked me how I’d like to take a Girl Scout troop. Well she
was four, going to go to school and whatnot. So I took a Girl Scout troop, because this girl who
had it had been married some time, and she got pregnant, and so she had to give up the troop. So
I took it, and then I’d had it a year, a year and a half when I got pregnant again. So she took it
back again. And I had my second child, I had – then she got pregnant, and they tried to give it
back to me, and I said no, this has gone far enough. And we’ve had this – you know, this is for
the birds. So, I quit, and then having had the experience of having a Girl Scout troop, they came
and asked me to go on a district committee, [00:53:00] were you a scout?
Q: No.

17

DHS: Oh wow, so it – well it – anyway, I went on the district committee, and for the district
committee, I went to the council. And before you know it, I was commissioner. So I got a lot of
experience at the local level and whatnot. Then, while I was in Girl Scouts, I got involved in the
group work division of the council of community services. And from that, I went into the
council, and I got to be the president of the council, I got very involved in the council, which was
the all over umbrella of social agencies, and I got very involved in the United Way, which wasn’t
the United Way then. So, and I was secretary of that, so I got very involved in such things as
that. I got onto the camp committee of the Y, I did a lot of volunteer work, while I was with the
Girl Scouts, I got on the national personnel committee, and worked with Dr. [Gilbraith?]
[00:54:00] in New York on the national personnel committee. I had more excitement as a
volunteer than I’d ever had if I had been paid.
Q: Sure.
DHS: And for the most part, you see, when I was in Girl Scouts, even that wasn’t limited to
women. I had the men, a couple of – three men that were on the council with me that were very
active. When I was on the council of community services, most of the – I was – primarily it was
the executives of agencies, for the most part they were men. And I was on the executive budget
committee of the United Way, and there was only one other woman on that with me. So I got –
you know, I was involved in things that were very challenging.
Q: How did you find that, with being one of the only women involved.
DHS: It didn’t bother me. I had – it’s – probably because I was [00:55:00] brought up with the
boys, men, you know, they didn’t excite me that much. And I could talk to them, because my
brothers always brought boys home, and I was used to having those around, for the most part,
they were all older, except for my younger brother, so I was used to being around where there
were men. It didn’t faze me at all. It still doesn’t.
Q: You never felt like you were maligned, or your opinion was ignored because of your sex?
DHS: No, not at all. I still work with – tonight I’m going to a meeting, I’m chairman, and I’m the
first woman that’s been chairman of this board of management of properties, and I’m dealing
with men all the time. They call me just as if I were another man, expect me to do the same
18

things that another man does. And I don’t feel I’m – this is why – I told Joan this, I’m very
[00:56:00] sympathetic with the feminist movement, but I’m not that keyed up to it, Ramsey,
that, you know, I want to go out and say a whole lot about it, because it wouldn’t be fair. I don’t
feel that way, I’ve never felt that way. I don’t know why, but I mean – and my daughters the
same way, if they want to do something, they do it.
Q: You just don’t feel restrictions on yourself. Why? So there’s nothing to fight for you.
DHS: I don’t think my girls do. Well, and that makes me feel sometimes I’m selfish, but I’m not
really. I’d like to see the girls get what they want, but I have to admit that I think sometimes the
militancy works against them. Do you know what I mean?
Q: Oh yes, I see that, I see that. How did you view marriage at the time, in terms of a social
phenomenon? You saw yourself as settling down and having kids? [00:57:00]
DHS: Having kids, yes, but settling down, not really. Well I think my husband and I have always
had a very good agreement that we’re married, but I don’t own him, and he doesn’t own me.
We’re great ones for doing our own thing in our own way. When he feels like going out and
doing things, he does them. And likewise with me.
Q: Have your views changed on marriage over the years?
DHS: Not really. I don’t think – let me see. Both my girls have worked ever since they’ve been
married, for the most part. I think one, my view of marriage may have changed [00:58:00] a little
bit with my younger daughter, who was divorced, and that, I sometimes wondered if some of the
things she inherited from me had – that contributed to it.
Q: Right.
DHS: And I wondered afterwards, Linda’s a lot like me, Joan is not, my younger daughter’s a lot
like me, and I guess she married the wrong man to put up with somebody like that. I didn’t,
fortunately. But, I think a woman’s life is, if she marries, is dependent upon the kind of man she
marries, still. I really do, I think if I had to ask for everything I want to do, [00:59:00] and if my
husband said no, you can’t, and I had to abide by it, I’d be a very unhappy person.

19

Q: Right.
DHS: But I’ve never had to do that. I’m sure my husband doesn’t always approve of what I do,
but he – that doesn’t affect our relationship to each other. And I’m sure I don’t approve of
everything he always does, but that doesn’t affect our relationship.
Q: Right.
DHS: In fact, I’m sure when I went to Pembroke to work, one reason why they took me as a
married woman was because they knew that my husband was not going to be an interfering
person. In fact, that’s what Dean Lewis said. They had not hired too many married people. When
I went on the staff, I was the only one married except for Mrs. Bigelow, and her husband was
already vice president of Brown University. So she [01:00:00] – I remember when Dean Lewis
introduced me to the staff, she said, “Well she’s proved that she can get along with people, and is
accepted in the community,” and whatnot. So, and then afterwards, she – at the same time, she
says she has a non-interfering husband or something like that. I’m not sure now, when women
are hired, if husbands have anything to do with it or not.
Q: But at that time, it was an important qualification.
DHS: Well, I think this is the difference now. In fact, today I heard about – of a woman who’s
taking a job in Milwaukee, Minneapolis or something like that. And her husband is giving up his
job here to go with her, and that was unheard of when I was first (inaudible).
Q: Right.
DHS: So that shows the change and all the differences, and the time that’s gone by.
Q: Let’s switch [01:01:00] the tape over.

Track 2
Q: Do you see any changes between the way you were brought up, and the way you brought your
children up?
20

DHS: Definitely.
Q: What kind of changes?
DHS: Well, I think my mother wanted to know more what I was doing. I don’t think I interfered
in their personal lives as much as my mother did in mine. And that was brought home to me
when she used to come here, and the children would go out, and she’d say, “Where are they
going?” I’d say, I haven’t the slightest idea. “When are they coming back?” I’d say, “I don’t
know.” It would bother her. Now, whether that was a grandmother way of looking at things, I
don’t know, but I [01:00] know that I didn’t – I didn’t try to keep my finger on them quite so
much as to what they were doing. As few restrictions I had, my mother always had to know
where I was going, and when I was coming back, and all that sort of thing. Even now, my mother
had very definite ideas of how you took care of babies, and I let my girls bring their babies up
any way they want to. I like to go and see them, but I didn’t – once I’m there, I don’t interfere in
any way. I’ve always given my girls a pretty – I gave my two girls a pretty free reign, as soon as
they were old enough to [02:00] know what they were doing.
Q: But it was pretty widely assumed, we’ve already discussed, back then, that women worked to
attempt to go into certain roles in life, and if they did, it would be very difficult for them. Was
that different for your daughters?
DHS: Yeah. Well now, Joan, when she wanted to go to college, she wanted to go to Cornell to be
an architect, Byron’s father had been an architect, and Joan wanted to be an architect. So she
applied at Cornell, and she got a letter back saying that they didn’t take girls, there were too
many qualified men. We knew that undergraduate schools of architecture were rather restricting
in the number they took, but she thought she could make it. And she was very upset, so we went
to Miss Moore, [03:00] who was a good friend of mine, and she was then dean of admission at
Pembroke, and I told her what had happened, and she said, “Well have Joan come to Brown, and
the school of engineering, for two years, and prove herself, and then she may be able to transfer.”
Joan was more upset at that, I was upset, but she was more upset, which showed that I perhaps at
her age would have adjusted right away, but she wanted to do what she wanted to do, she was
more set in her ways, I think, and so she went to Brown, and she was admitted, she was an
excellent student, by the way. My younger daughter was not, but Joan was an excellent student,
21

there was no reason why she couldn’t get into Brown. [04:00] And she applied to be an engineer,
and she used to come home every afternoon from freshman week very angry, because she was
not getting anywhere in getting into the engineering department. And this, on top of having been
refused at Cornell, was too much for her. She was ready to fight about it. But, she had four
different interviews, and they were most discouraging. She got the feeling that she was only
going to get into the engineering school so that she could have dates, that was the impression she
got. I remember I – this is one time when I had gone to Miss Moore, and it was my suggestion
that she was applying for engineering, so finally she went to Professor [Benford?], this was the
next professor she had to [05:00] have an interview with, and she was really, by that time, her
dander was up very high, and she was ready to say you can all go jump in a lake, it’s (inaudible).
Anyway, she came back, and she said, “Well I went into Professor Benford’s office,” and she
said, “he must have seen the fire in my eyes, because he said, ’calm down Joan, if you get to me
you’re in.’” So apparently whatever was – I had no idea what the interviews – once she had
started it, I did not interfere in any way. I didn’t go back to Miss Moore and say that, you know,
Joan’s having a hard time, what can you do? But she got in, and she did exceptionally well. And
when she was finishing her sophomore year, she had thought she was – the idea was for her to
take civil engineering as an entrée to the architect. [06:00] But, Professor Bernard (inaudible)
engineering said to her, “Joan, you’re wasting your time, you’ll just be shoved off in a corner
somewhere as a draftsman. Why don’t you come into aeronautical engineering?” And she did,
and she was the first girl to graduate in the class, from Brown, in aeronautical engineering. And
that made her feel that wasn’t (inaudible) and she went to work right away after graduation, and
(inaudible). She could have stayed there, but she got (inaudible). Well she (inaudible) at
Campbell’s Soup who’d graduated from Brown a couple of years earlier. And after they [07:00]
earned enough money, the first year that – after they were married, they took off for Europe,
(inaudible). And when they came back, she went to graduate school and he went to graduate
school, and then they both decided they could teach, because then they could have summers off.
And they’re both still in education.
Q: Great.
DHS: So, but Joan’s – she does a lot of volunteer work, she’s very interested in what’s going –
she’s the incoming president of education association of her (inaudible). And she’s back in
22

graduate school, part-time graduate school, and teaches full-time. My other daughter was not
such a good student, and she went to junior college and then transferred to (inaudible)
Presbyterian. And she’s [08:00] a nurse – psychiatric nurse specialist (inaudible) a daycare center
for mental patients who either are sane enough to stay out of the mental institutions, or have
come out of the mental institution, and they’re there as an in between (inaudible) when they go
back, if ever they go back. (inaudible). But it’s a rather famous one, it’s the Dubois Mental
Health Center that’s run by the state. She’s primarily been in a woman’s job all – you know,
what you think of as a woman’s job, all along. Well, she’s probably more independent, as
independent if not more so than the other one.
Q: What year did Joan graduate?
DHS: Fifty-three. [09:00]
Q: Fifty-three. We’re talking about those post-war years when women were supposed to give up
their manufacturing jobs and have babies.
DHS: That’s right. But she didn’t have any children for the first six years she was married,
because they were trailing all over the place. They went to Alaska, they went to Europe, they’re
great skiers, and – but I think the girls have done what they wanted to do, and as I said, Linda’s
marriage broke up because of it. Joan’s didn’t, so here’s an example of what can happen if there
isn’t an understanding of – between a husband and a wife of – that one can do without any threat.
I think Linda’s job, and her ability to succeed faster than her husband was a great threat to her
husband. Definitely. [10:00] That can happen, I think.
Q: Oh, sure.
DHS: If a man isn’t quite sure of himself.
Q: Sure. In a selfish relationship, yeah.
DHS: Yeah. Well, not all marriages are unselfish.
Q: Right, right. We’ve talked about your career, and about Brown. I’d like to discuss a little
something of your views on politics. And I guess the best way to do it is to just ask you about
23

some major figures, and take it from there. What – we talked about Coolidge already. Can you
remember some of the feelings about Hoover, and about [11:00] Roosevelt?
DHS: Hoover came in, in ’28 to ’32, right?
Q: Right.
DHS: I don’t remember much about him, I remember I think I was more – if I connected him in
any way to the crash. And to what happened after the crash. Wasn’t he the man that said a
chicken in every pot, and two cars in every garage?
Q: Yeah, that was him.
DHS: Something like that.
Q: Back to normalcy.
DHS: Back to normalcy.
Q: Which isn’t even a word.
DHS: Well, what was normal? No, I don’t remember much about him.
Q: He was very well organized.
DHS: Oh, was he? Are [12:00] you trying to tell me something? When Roosevelt came in, what
do I remember about Roosevelt? Well, to most of my friends, he was a socialist, he was the
instigator of WPA, most of my friends didn’t think very much of WPA, but my younger brother
was very active in WPA, he was a state supervisor, as I remember, because he lost his job, and
he was in the right political stream to get that job.
Q: WPA was?
DHS: Or PWA, whichever one it was, public works, you know, built sidewalks and whatnot.
And he was a big shot in that. What do I remember about Roosevelt? [13:00] I’m pretty sure I
didn’t vote for him.

24

Q: He ran four times, who were you –
DHS: Yeah, he ran four times. He was going to be an – people thought he was going to be an
emperor, or a king, or – I remember more about Mrs. Roosevelt.
Q: Well, sure, share some of that.
DHS: Well I thought she was quite some individual. I used to read her column every day, “My
Day,” or whatever it was. I followed her very – with great interest. I’ve read a lot about her since
then, yesterday – was it yesterday’s paper, her interests, how the – Roosevelt might have had
(inaudible) bugs because of her supposed interest in Mr. Lash, not too [14:00] long ago, I read
the story of her possible interest in – homosexual interest in a woman as well.
Q: Right.
DHS: I heard her speak late in life, when she had lost a lot of her oomph and whatnot, but she
was still a very dominating person, OK, I thought she was more interesting than he was. But
maybe that’s because she was a woman, and she was doing – I think she – maybe my opinion is
that she broke the ice for women in many, many ways.
Q: She was a good role model.
DHS: She was a good role model. She was awfully homely. And as she got older, she was even
homelier. So, perhaps my greatest interest in politics has been in local [15:00] politics. I’ve never
been very active in politics, to the extent that I’ve ever wanted to run for an office. But, I like to
get into a good political discussion, and I like to be where questions of politics come up. Like, I
like to go to a council meeting when something I’m very interested in is coming up, like the
building of the new library, and speak my piece.
Q: Using overworked labels, would you consider yourself –
DHS: I’m an independent, I vote as I please.
Q: But would you consider yourself a liberal, a conservative, or really depends on the issue?

25

DHS: The issue more than anything else, I think. I’m a liberal in some things, and I’m
conservative in others. And –
Q: That’s the intelligent way to be.
DHS: I don’t [16:00] react always in the same way, it seems to me, to things that are going on. I
think in the last few years, I’ve become more critical of politicians than I was previously. I get
concerned about deals, and I don’t know why I’m more concerned now than I used to be, but I
am. I’m very interested in what’s happened in the Democratic running for Senate, over against
Chafee, I just wonder who bought off the guy that today said he’s not going to run. You know, I
get –
Q: I don’t follow Rhode Island politics, so –
DHS: Well see, I do. And I follow my own politics here, [17:00] I follow my own city politics
quite carefully to see what’s going on. But I’ve never – my oldest granddaughter is up to here in
politics, she’s – she was here yesterday, and she wants to pick a fight with her grandfather about
anything that she can pick a fight with, but grandpa’s not buying, you know what I mean? He’s a
smart cookie, she’s – but she’s very politically minded. She’s an out and out liberal Democrat,
and my husband’s not. We disagree a great deal on politics.
Q: You and your husband?
DHS: My husband, yeah. But that, as I say, he’s got his point of view, I’ve got my point of view,
it makes life interesting every now and then.
Q: But you get your hackles raised over some of the –
DHS: Deals that – deals bother me an awful lot. I –
Q: So corruption then?
DHS: Yeah, corruption in the – and this has happened – began when I was in college, when I
took the political science course, I used to go home and talk to my father a lot about politics. He
was interested in the town politics, always, and he would be telling about the deals that he knew
26

about them, and the corruption that was even in a small town. And I used to spout all the ideals
that I had learned in poli sci, and he was always saying, “Well that’s fine, that’s the way things
should be run, but they never are Doris, they never are.” And well, maybe I’ve been idealistic all
this time, but lately there’s some of the things that I’ve (inaudible) have been bothering me
terribly. And not only locally, but in the state as well. And I – the bottle bills, [19:00] (inaudible)
you know, I thought certainly we’d get it through this time. The nuclear business bothers me, I
write to Congressmen, I write to representatives, and I feel I’m wasting my 20 cents, but at least
I say what I want to say.
Q: Do you appreciate this growing movement for a freeze?
DHS: Yeah, definitely. Who wouldn’t? They’ve got to be crazy.
Q: How do you feel about some of the more volatile issues of the day? I’ll just name a couple,
I’m thinking in terms of abortion –
DHS: I think a woman has a right to do what she has to do, what she wants to do. I think when
she makes the decision, and it is her decision, she has to live with that decision, she shouldn’t
expect somebody to bear the burden for her [20:00] afterwards. Having had a couple of
miscarriages myself. Not abortions, but miscarriages, I think it can be very, very hard on a
woman, I don’t know what it would have done to me if I had caused it to happen. And even the
bravest of women would, I think, might have misgivings at some time, that might upset her
terribly. But if one of my daughters or my granddaughters wanted to do it, I would never try to
talk them out of it. I would tell them, as I’ve always done before, this is the way – these are the
possibilities, have you thought of all these possibilities? Do you see what I mean? Are you sure
enough, are you big enough to face it afterwards? [21:00] Have you thought it through well
enough?
Q: Are you adult enough to make this decision?
DHS: To make this decision. Are you doing it – what’s your purpose in doing it? Do you have a
real reason for doing it? I think that’s – but I still think that no one, a church, or otherwise, has a
right to say whether you can or you can’t do it.

27

Q: So I presume then that you are for the Equal Rights Amendment?
DHS: Definitely. I don’t see any reason why a woman shouldn’t have all the – I’ve taken all the
rights, why should I begrudge them to somebody else? I think sometimes they go at it the wrong
way, I’ve said that earlier, but I see no reason at all why they can’t – my oldest granddaughter is
a deckhand on a Greenpeace [22:00] ship.
Q: Right.
DHS: She came here yesterday with dirty hands. Her father, her grandfather, great-grandfather,
never had their hands soiled in their lives. But, I – you know, I – Gwendolyn, what have you
been doing? She says, “Well, you know, if you tar the brush” – she’s trying to prove that a girl
can be just as good a deckhand as a guy.
Q: I think that’s fine.
DHS: Sure. Oh, it’s fine. I think it’s fine if she wants it, and whatnot. And she’s willing to get
arrested for the Greenpeace movement, and that’s fine with me, but remember, she’s made that
decision, you know? She was just up in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, and four other boats were
arrested. I said, “Well remember now, if you want to go into something, you have an arrest on
your records, it’s not [23:00] going to be, sometimes you think you might want to do something,
and you’ll want to be interested in politics” – she was accepted to Brown in the graduate school
of political science. But she’s not going to go there, because she thinks she can stay on the
Greenpeace ship and go to the South Seas and Japan. So she wants that experience before she
goes. But, I think I get concerned because if you get into politics, Ramsey, they can pull anything
out of the hat and use it against you. And I just don’t want – you know, I don’t want that to
happen to her, but if she knows that, she says, “Well I’ve been lucky so far, I haven’t been
arrested.” And I said, “Well that’s fine, but just remember that you could be, and you could it on
your record.”
Q: Right. What do you feel about gun control?
DHS: Definitely. I don’t think anybody should have a gun if it isn’t –
Q: Registered?
28

DHS: Registered. I don’t think they should [24:00] have it if it’s registered, unless they’re a
policeman or something that they actually have to have it. I wouldn’t have a gun in my house on
a bet.
Q: Do you think your views on that might have changed over the years?
DHS: No.
Q: Do you think you might have been upset (inaudible).
DHS: I’m scared to death of a gun, always have been. My brothers always hunted, but under
supervision. My father had taught them how to use guns and whatnot, but were country – you
know, they were in the country, they used to shoot squirrels and rabbits, and we used to eat them.
But, they were rifles, they weren’t pistols and whatnot, and they were – my brothers were held to
the period of time when it was allowed to shoot, I think, except perhaps they might have gone a
few days before the deer season came in or something like that. But, I don’t remember the guns
[25:00] ever being kept in the house, they were kept out in the barn, and right outside, they were
never allowed to fool around with them in the house. And yeah, they never got hurt with them, I
don’t think they ever shot anybody. I’m sure they didn’t ever shoot anybody, but no, (inaudible).
No, I – and I’m completely against capital punishment.
Q: I was just about to ask you.
DHS: Absolutely against capital punishment. So, I – all the things, I believe in the value of
human life, there’s always the possibility that the person was not guilty, or there’s some – taking
a life for a life is not my idea of a way to make society better. [26:00]
Q: OK. I guess I’d like to ask you a general question, in closing. Do you feel satisfied with what
you have accomplished so far in your life?
DHS: No.
Q: And if you don’t, talk about some of that dissatisfaction.
DHS: Well, let’s see. I’m never quite satisfied with anything I do, I always feel I could have
done it better. And that’s my own fault sometimes, in that I sometimes do things in a hurry that
29

would have been better if I had taken a little more time to think it through. I always want things
to be [27:00] done when I want them done, and sometimes they take longer than that, or
sometimes they don’t come off at all. Because sometimes it’s my fault, I think, sometimes it’s
because I haven’t done it right, or because I haven’t made it clear to people how it – I thought it
should have been done.
Q: Do you feel frustrated because of that?
DHS: Definitely. From time to time. I’ve got a couple of things that are going now that I feel
very frustrated about. Particularly when I work as a volunteer, and I’m not completely in charge,
and I have to work with someone and that person is really in charge. You know what I mean?
[28:00] It’s as if I were the volunteer, and working for a paid person who’s the person
responsible. And that person doesn’t seem to do exactly what I think he or she should do to make
it right. I always feel I don’t make myself clear, or I’m not thinking through well enough to tell
them what I think should be done, or I can’t break that barrier between a volunteer and the
executive. Am I making myself clear?
Q: Yes.
DHS: I have that feeling every now and then when I’m on my own, and I don’t do well, then I
can be frustrated with myself, and talk to myself a little bit about it. But I’m not always sure that
[29:00] I make myself clear enough to the person, or I want to break that barrier between the
volunteer and the person in charge. And that can happen. And when I was the one in charge at
Pembroke, I always tried to make myself as much a volunteer in this as possible. See the
volunteers’ point of view, and I think I took that over from having been a volunteer for so many
years. And so you could be frustrated at times by your own inadequacies.
Q: But the thing is just to keep pushing on.
DHS: Yeah, next time you’ll be lucky, or next time you’ll do better. Or next time you’ll take a
little bit more time and think it through a little bit better. I find it very hard [30:00] to criticize
people sometimes, typically. I just don’t like to. I never have. And sometimes, I think it’s the
personality of the other person that makes it (inaudible). Sometimes I get along very, very well,

30

and I can be very open and whatnot. And sometimes, I feel I don’t have that same rapport with
the person I’m working with. And then I’m frustrated. My fault.
Q: No, I think being unable to criticize isn’t necessarily a fault. I just think it’s a –
DHS: Well, because constructive criticism, you know?
Q: Very hard to –
DHS: Yeah. [31:00]
Q: It’s putting yourself on a level above somebody else.
DHS: Above, and I find that sometimes very hard to do. But for the most part, I’m a pretty happy
person, most of the time. I get depressed occasionally, but I wouldn’t be a normal person if I
didn’t, I guess, but I’m a pretty happy person. I like what I do, for the most part. When I don’t, I
just – when it’s time to quit, I quit, find something else to do. I like to be busy. But I can make
myself busy, because I can always read, I can always shop, I can always go out and find another
volunteer job to do.
Q: That’s great.
DHS: (inaudible). [32:00] I have a good relationship with my families, both sides, (inaudible). I
have a good relationship with my girls, and with my grandchildren. I have five grandchildren and
three step-grandchildren. And so we’ve had – my husband and I have had to adjust to another –
you know, another situation late in life, and we’ve gone along all right with it. So, I can’t
complain, Ramsey. And that’s – I don’t mean to sound smug, I’m not, you know. But, we’re
fortunate.
Q: That’s great.
DHS: It’s been nice. [33:00]

Track 3
31

DHS: She did. She left (inaudible).
Q: And when was (inaudible)?
DHS: And that’s 1972. And Dean Thomas, [Sean?] Thomas was [present at this meeting?].
Q: So it was more (inaudible).
DHS: Oh, yes. She’d give you every opportunity (inaudible). (inaudible) [wanted to be?]
(inaudible). She applied. She was (inaudible) girl. She was (inaudible) [to campus?]. She [didn’t
let us?]. [01:00] It’s too big a risk. This was taken care of, and so (inaudible). So her second
choice, she went with Brown. [I set it up?]. (inaudible) student. So I had her come over and talk
to Ms. Moore. And Ms. Moore told her, “If you want to make it in a man’s field, you first have
to prove yourself.” So we would do that. So we would come to Brown in two years, and then if
you approve” – and she called [your mom?] – “then I’ll do everything I can to get you into
Cornell.” Two years (inaudible). This is kind of a (inaudible). So she came, and she elected the
engineering [course?], which (inaudible) particularly (inaudible). But that was where she got her
basic math, or things that would help her (inaudible). [02:00] So she came to Brown, and she
found almost the same problem here, except that when she got to the fourth professor and
[proved himself?], he said, “Well, get to (inaudible).” So she came in as an engineering student,
and then she stayed, because she switched to aeronautical engineering (inaudible). And so she
stayed and graduated (inaudible). But Ms. Moore was still doing (inaudible) women without any
great feminist trade, if you know what I mean. She was trying to let every girl – I think you could
talk to almost any woman that was (inaudible). She never said it was impossible. She didn’t
always say it would be easy, but she was (inaudible).

Q: And every girl you’ve talked to –

32

DHS: So far as I know. Every (inaudible). Plus, teaching was not, even though it was a thing to
do [03:00] for girls, there were very few educational [lessons?] on the campus, so that was
another thing. When I switched my major, I took (inaudible) education course, which I never
would have done, because the education [at Brown?] was very weak. I’m very interested
(inaudible) on campus. But I was not particularly... If you really wanted to teach elementary
school, you didn’t come to Pembroke, or Brown. You could go to normal school (inaudible).
There were normal schools, and schools of education. I think the turning point was when the
shortage of teachers became (inaudible), and Brown put in (inaudible) master of education, or
master of teaching or something. [04:00] But other than seeing Ms. Moore, and facing the reality
of leaving college, there was not a great deal of emphasis on what you were going to do with
your education.
Q: So you came in knowing that you’re just going to get a good education.
DHS: Education, a good liberal arts education. And that was another thing: if you got a good
liberal arts education, it was the basis of just about anything. And that was careers [may come?].
Q: So then what was the [best?] of being (inaudible)?
DHS: Well, yes, (inaudible) people went on to get masters (inaudible) [teach?] (inaudible). I
have my (inaudible) mother-in-law that I (inaudible) [differently?] as she thought [she
established?] [05:00] (inaudible). So they were all different. Some people went into religious
(inaudible). I got married (inaudible) several (inaudible). [Kay Shaw?], her husband graduated
’29?, so I was the one Kay did (inaudible) [waiting for?] (inaudible) to get through school, but
then after she got married there were not many opportunities... I got out ’28. In ’29 and ’30, the
crash, you were darn lucky if your husband had a job, or if the man had a job. (inaudible) [who
cares?]. (inaudible) I [talked about it?] (inaudible) [06:00] jobs [that pay a person?]. I was lucky,
apparently. I thought I was broke, and I got $1,200 a year, so (inaudible) [after I?] (inaudible).
(inaudible).
Q: When you were still in school, though, this was before the crash, before anyone knew that the
crash was going to happen, so did people still at that time (inaudible)?
DHS: [I didn’t?].
33

Q: (inaudible).
DHS: (inaudible) married, (inaudible). And yet, help was available as far as – more help and
babysitting was available (inaudible). [It’s available now?]. Because there were [07:00] more
women (inaudible) [housing?] (inaudible). And then women’s (inaudible), and she [lived?]
(inaudible).
Q: Good deal.
DHS: She (inaudible). That allowed me to get out (inaudible). Well, [I think it was true?]
domestic help was available, and domestic help was – you could say, “I won’t do this and I
won’t do that.” Women (inaudible), all the married women needing some help financially
(inaudible).
Q: [08:00] Did you [think you were?] exposed to other actions that (inaudible)? Did the
[placement of the offer?] (inaudible) experience teaching the...?
DHS: I don’t know who they would’ve brought in. The women.
Q: Other than teaching (inaudible), or...
DHS: I told you as late as 1949, (inaudible) want to break into a man’s world, you had
(inaudible). And that was after World War II, [when?] a lot of good people left. That was an
emergency. I’m going to do it, but I don’t think (inaudible). [09:00] And soon after I was [in?],
the Depression (inaudible).
Q: So your friend did become a doctor, I guess, (inaudible) –
DHS: Yes, well, that’s Sarah [Saklen?]. I didn’t put my name down, but if you’d like to talk to
her, she’s Dr. Sara, S-A-R-A, Saklen, S-A-K-L-(inaudible). And she lives on the [East Side?].
(inaudible). Let’s see, there are two doctor Saklens. (inaudible). [Ellehe?], E-L-(inaudible).
(inaudible) [10:00] this is Kay (inaudible). She married a Brown man, and she could (inaudible).
See, I married a School of Design, and this gal married a School of Design (inaudible). This
woman has just been remarried. She is (inaudible) that I was in high school with. She’s just been
remarried, and she was the first alumni secretary, and she was the class of ’24. And so she had
34

been here when [Ann Crosby?], [Annmarie?] was back again. And she also had some of
(inaudible), because she came in 1920. Now, she will give you a different picture of what it was
like to have a changing dean, and a changing picture. And she lives right here on the East Side.
And the last I knew – she’s Mrs. Edward Windsor, but I’m sure you could get her name from the
alumni office. I think they have moved, [11:00] because they were married in the summer, and
there was a were they going to live in his apartment or his house, or were they going to move
into this special apartment. There’s quite a possibility that she’s living right over on Angell
Street, but I’m not sure about that. But they are in my office. Here’s all these addresses. She’d e
probably a very good person to talk to. This woman lives by East Side, but she’s a class of ’23,
so she would have another year of Lida Shaw Kind. And she lives right on Angell Street, and her
husband’s a Brown man, and very active in alumni affairs. She lives down (inaudible). This gal
is [Bidris Cohn?], class of ’25, is a black girl, black woman, and I don’t know where she went,
but if you’re interesting in anything like that – [12:00] you know how there weren’t that many.
There was one black girl in my class. They had about two. But (inaudible) they got [something?]
(inaudible). See, (inaudible) university (inaudible). University [costs?] (inaudible), because
whatever a professor came to teach us was exactly what people were taught. There were no
Pembroke courses, per se. But they were just [common classes?]. I think the thing that is
outstanding in my mind, and from the time when I came to college until I went in 1972, one
reason why I think [13:00] that (inaudible) Pembroke College, (inaudible) complete integration
[in your personal lives?], but it’s very, very difficult for people to have engrained in them here
everything you do, everything you [learn?], everything that you have done [at college?], to
suddenly find that it’s gone.
Q: (inaudible) the name.
DHS: The name [and date?] (inaudible). The integration meant nothing to (inaudible).
Q: (inaudible).
DHS: And I can remember saying that after multiple college presidents (inaudible) and a dean
(inaudible), that faculty and administration can go anywhere, and the college always... [14:00]
Faculty can go anywhere, whether it’s a college course, and the students can go anyplace
(inaudible), but the alumni have lost their college, and that’s quite different, [come in?] when
35

(inaudible) Pembroke was taking over, even though there was no longer an [entity?]. A lot of
women remembered what they’d been told. And I think a lot of men felt the same way. Brown
University changed its nature, because we had been told – and this was published (inaudible);
she did a series of publications (inaudible) – the university college, and the university college
was the men’s college, the women’s college, and the graduate school. This was the ideal
situation. [15:00] That’s why we had... That’s what gave Brown University its uniqueness, and
for us the coordinate system (inaudible) had so many different meanings. But we had a unique
situation (inaudible). And in 1960s, what happened was people (inaudible) [president?], he stood
up in New York and said Pembroke College was the star in a crown, the brightest star in the
crown of Brown University. And all the time he was working to destroy it. And that (inaudible).
So when you talk back and think [16:00] did we talk about integration when we were a part of
Brown University, but we didn’t necessarily have to sit in class with the men? What about
coeducation? Coeducation is very (inaudible). There’s no reason in the world why a girl should
have to put up with some of the men’s nonsense. And there was inferiority. There was a period
of time we had a greater percentage of (inaudible) men had. And in the ’50s, the SATs of the
women who went to Pembroke (inaudible) the SATs.
Q: Seems like (inaudible) SATs (inaudible).
DHS: We don’t know. Yeah, could’ve been (inaudible). (inaudible). And Ms. Myers – you read
about Ms. Myers, but [17:00] she (inaudible), and she did (inaudible). Well, so as far as
coeducation (inaudible), (inaudible). I think (inaudible). I think the college began to change in
the early ’60s. The first thing that really gave me an inkling of it was (inaudible) [freshman
year?] (inaudible), the boys and girls [rode a matchbox over the hill?]. The breaking down of
rules and where certain (inaudible), you’ll not see (inaudible) with [shorts?] (inaudible). [18:00]
Actually, it was easier (inaudible). She was not at Pembroke. She did not (inaudible) on the
Pembroke campus. She was a (inaudible) student. [She just was?].
Q: This was –
DHS: Rosemary Pierrel. So she kind of – she didn’t have the same idea what Pembroke was
about, (inaudible) [had a feeling?], but she never (inaudible). So when all these things began to

36

happen, she did not have the background here (inaudible) experience [on the campus?]. She had
not (inaudible). Do you see what I mean?
Q: Yes.
DHS: She did not have the same relationship to the [19:00] president of the university as
(inaudible). I’m not sure what would’ve happened if Ms. Lewis (inaudible). You know, it’s very
difficult to say how would Ms. Lewis have fitted into the ’60s. She died in ’61, and so
(inaudible). I know she always looked – we always looked forward to the year 1975. This was
the projection she’d make what we’ll be like in 1975. Nowhere in the projections for 1975 is
there a feeling of togetherness as far as staff. So we were staffed (inaudible) ’60s. It was very,
very difficult. We were relearning, redoing it, at quite different times. Well, the dean went
immediately (inaudible) staff changes (inaudible), and I was no longer – I had worked for the
dean at Pembroke College, [20:00] because was a member of Pembroke staff. So then (inaudible)
I was working for the vice president instead of the dean, so I was (inaudible) completely
different staff. You see what I mean?
Q: Yes.
DHS: And all the time I was (inaudible) because we had met. I was no longer a member of the
Pembroke staff. The Pembroke staff got whittled away, whereas when I first came here we met
as a Pembroke staff. We made [rules?] for West Campus. We didn’t have to report what we had
done.
Q: And I think it’s a separate administration.
DHS: That’s why people thought of it as a separate college. We knew it wasn’t separate. We had
(inaudible) and a graduate school (inaudible). Now there’s the integration (inaudible). Now, I’m
not sure whether or not, even as a sophomore, if you looked under requirements, [21:00] if you
had asked if we could go into a class on the hill for [the period?] (inaudible), it probably
would’ve been (inaudible) that class (inaudible) this campus within your schedule. But if the
class were not given (inaudible) science.

37

Q: So there was no – they wouldn’t have to get permission from the dean, special permission, if
the class wasn’t offered.
DHS: Well, sure, if the class – of course, well, they may have actively set that. If you started and
you were going to major in biology, it was pretty silly of the dean to say, “Well, you can’t go
(inaudible),” because (inaudible) chemistry, (inaudible) chemistry. There was no chemistry in
that period. You have to (inaudible). [But they would not?], because the opportunity to really get
that degree was open (inaudible). And not being a science person, [22:00] most of my classes
were here (inaudible). We had our (inaudible). It could’ve been (inaudible). That was something
(inaudible). That’s why [socialites?] (inaudible) [a lot of people?] (inaudible), and a lot of the
(inaudible) were here (inaudible). (inaudible) met with a Brown (inaudible), and met with
(inaudible) class (inaudible). And Helen’s [brothers?] went to do [23:00] (inaudible). Somebody
had a brother, had two college-age brothers. So probably, and then [went and came?] (inaudible).
So there was socialization (inaudible).
Q: (inaudible) come to the social part of things, [the spot that?] the boys [had?], (inaudible). But
there still was that tension?
DHS: In social things, I don’t think (inaudible). (inaudible). It was just – [24:00] I don’t know
how to explain. It was [then?]. I think the [record?] and the (inaudible) a lot more (inaudible).
Q: (inaudible)
DHS: I didn’t feel it. I was quite happy on this campus [most of the time?]. I was (inaudible), and
I have no memories of (inaudible) nothing (inaudible). And (inaudible) study (inaudible)
embarrassed by him. [25:00] (inaudible) going on there (inaudible). We used to have a – be clear
of (inaudible) [mass?] (inaudible). This would be our (inaudible) on campus. This was the sort of
campus we had, (inaudible).
Q: Did the boys have [all that?] (inaudible)?
DHS: Oh, sure. I think everybody was (inaudible) on the campus was (inaudible). There were
boys (inaudible). I can’t remember boys using the Pembroke library or anything. The boys
(inaudible) classes. I don’t (inaudible). But there would be no need to, because –
38

Q: The same classes.
DHS: The same class. They were given probably two or three different classes because of the
(inaudible) numbers (inaudible). Because when I was here, the college was only 500. [26:00]
Our class, we had 128 register, but then they dropped out, so (inaudible) graduated (inaudible).
We were the largest class (inaudible). (inaudible) [a lot of?] students. It was quite possible for us
to know every student on campus well enough to speak, whether they were in [one?] dormitory
(inaudible). [There were?] only (inaudible), East House and West House. West House was
(inaudible). I don’t know what it was, the education (inaudible) big building next to the corner of
Angell Street on (inaudible). I don’t know (inaudible).
Q: (inaudible)
DHS: And then it wasn’t until [27:00] [the war?] (inaudible) that the number of college students
(inaudible), and they allowed the fraternities over into the girls’ dormitories. The war was over.
They couldn’t cut back. [That was?] (inaudible) [products?]. (inaudible) [house?], West House,
(inaudible). And then that was when they had (inaudible).
Q: You were saying earlier the sororities had been [ongoing?] (inaudible). Do you know
anything about that (inaudible)?
DHS: [You should read it?] in here, I think, [to get it?]. (inaudible) about – it’s kind of in here
about sororities. What happened was that it became too divisive for a small campus, [28:00]
because of the people who didn’t (inaudible). In fact, [Mariam?], I have – it was a very loyal
(inaudible) in the class of 1905, who never forgot that she was (inaudible). That was the thing
she remembered almost more than anything else (inaudible). She (inaudible). And the people
who supposedly (inaudible), she could remember that so well. (inaudible) it was (inaudible).
Then they pick up that from the sororities where the different groups like the (inaudible) groups
and all that (inaudible) [29:00] pledged (inaudible). I forgot a lot of the story, but I remembered
(inaudible). (inaudible). That was a real (inaudible). But I think, as I say, the (inaudible) the
sources in here (inaudible) I think we get (inaudible). We were (inaudible) teased (inaudible) that
started, and then we went – we got the benefit of Ms. Morris’s (inaudible). [30:00] It was like

39

eight, 13 years old, you know what I mean? Then the college [grew and grew?]. And by the time
Ms. Lewis took over, she really brought the college (inaudible).
Q: Do you think Dean Morriss was [the first?] –
DHS: She was the (inaudible) Pembroke College. She laid the foundation (inaudible). She
changed the whole outlook. Well, under Dean [Alison?], she had been the motherly type, and the
college was small. It was like a family, (inaudible). Ms. [Kind?] was (inaudible) [a whole lot?].
She was so strict, and everything had to be just the way she wanted it. She didn’t think in terms
of educational opportunities and all, everything. She had such a bugaboo about men, and that
probably didn’t help the situation as far as the college was concerned. But Ms. Morris came in
with a definite [idea?]. [31:00] She wanted to make (inaudible). She set right about doing it. She
(inaudible) this (inaudible).
Q: (inaudible)
DHS: Well, she was here from 1923 until 1949. She went through the Depression. She went
through the war. And she (inaudible). She knew what she wanted (inaudible) exactly what
(inaudible). And they would (inaudible).
Q: So what was it she wanted to make (inaudible)? It wasn’t (inaudible).
DHS: (inaudible) quite the sense that it was. She (inaudible). People always (inaudible). [32:00]
She fought to get everything she wanted [for Pembroke?], (inaudible). She (inaudible)
scholarship. We were never just (inaudible) that thing over there.
Q: And she [did?] (inaudible)?
DHS: She was a... She was a [scholarly woman?]. She was a feminist of her age. [This kind of
person?]. She was very stately. She was handsome.
Q: The students (inaudible).
DHS: Yes, they looked up to her. She was not a cozy person. She was always immaculate,
[33:00] beautifully dressed, but not flashy. She didn’t really, except for her hair going grey, she
40

didn’t change (inaudible). She was very well thought of in education (inaudible) as well as
national (inaudible). She was very active in the A&W. And she was a person that could only
(inaudible) in their long life. She brought that to Pembroke College. (inaudible) [respected?]
(inaudible) she might not have been loved. Anne Crosby Emery had been loved. She was a
[cozy?] (inaudible).
Q: [She was so?] motherly.
DHS: Motherly, and she had mothered the students. Ms. Kind, I really don’t know much about
that era. All I can say is (inaudible) [insane?]. She was strict and crazy, (inaudible). What
would’ve seemed crazy to a person [34:00] in 1907, I really don’t know, except that we know
that she eventually was in an institution, and she had a real thing about men, which probably
didn’t help Pembroke College any.
Q: And you don’t know what (inaudible) –
DHS: And I have no idea, and I have yet to find anything that I have read that tells how she dealt
with the college president. I have no idea what she... She may have done very little as far as
(inaudible).
Q: Well, Dean Morriss (inaudible).
DHS: Yes, Dean Morris (inaudible). She fought very hard (inaudible) [very easy?]. There were
reports (inaudible) [you read?] in the archives, there are annual reports of the deans.
Q: (inaudible).
DHS: Yeah, (inaudible) annually, annual reports (inaudible). And I think you get a feeling of
what she accomplished. I’ve got a couple of them at home. [35:00] I save [reports?]. I think
(inaudible), but I read a couple of them, and how much she – she did a lot for the alumni.
Q: What did she – ?
DHS: Well, up until the time – this is about 1927, spring of 1927 (inaudible). But she worked
very hard to get (inaudible) staff (inaudible) the office (inaudible). That was one big (inaudible)
41

that was where I came (inaudible) secretary. But she started working with the alumni then quite a
different (inaudible) than she could have before (inaudible) building and an office, because most
of their activities were in someone’s home. And it was through her that she hired Betty Windsor.
And Betty was the first one (inaudible) secretary. But Betty (inaudible) she got married. She
married a man who was [36:00] a member of the faculty at the [private school?] (inaudible). But
then (inaudible) in 1929, she stayed until 1955 (inaudible). But it was with Ms. Morriss that the
alumni became a part of what was going on (inaudible) activities (inaudible). (inaudible) money,
but they had to put [chairs?] (inaudible). But, I mean, she built up an entity here that had to be
respected.
Q: You think that she was (inaudible) the college (inaudible)? Do you know anything about the
way she and President Faunce –
DHS: President Faunce was (inaudible). [37:00] The stories I’ve heard (inaudible) tell stories of
President Faunce, they were always funny stories.
Q: (inaudible)
DHS: (inaudible). He was a chancellor. And he had these big, big voice (inaudible) more than
anybody else. As far as I was concerned, he was (inaudible) [something over there?], and [if he
came?], he didn’t make that much of an impression on me. He could’ve somebody else, but, I
mean, it was the time for the president to come. I think he opened [college life?] one day, and he
opened Pembroke College the next day. We had opened the same day as they had, but he
couldn’t be in two places at once or something like that. The story was told of Mr. Faunce that he
met these two alumni on the campus one day, and they were members of a corporation. And he
said to them, “Good morning.” And they said, “Good morning.” He said, “It’s a lovely day, isn’t
it?” “Yes, it’s a lovely day.” “What are you doing on campus?” And they said, “Oh, [this is?] the
corporation [38:00] (inaudible).” “Well,” he said... At noontime or sometime (inaudible) same
two men on the campus, and he said, “Good afternoon. Haven’t I seen you on campus? What are
you doing on campus today?” He asked the same question, and they’d been in a meeting with
him all morning. (laughter) So if this is indicative of, you know, what went on, he had his head
in the clouds and whatnot, and was a bit (inaudible) didn’t affect my life, I can tell you.
(laughter) And what Ms. Morriss did with him, I would think, (inaudible). Following him we had
42

Barbour, and he was worse. He left no impression on the college at all. It wasn’t until Mr.
Wriston came that the college – I mean, that was ’37, ’38 or something like that – that the
college began to take shape (inaudible) anything but college (inaudible). He came in with
definite plans, and I think any strain there was between Ms. Morriss [39:00] and Mr. Wriston
was because [they had the?] same (inaudible). (inaudible).
Q: But it wasn’t [by way of Faunce?]?
DHS: I don’t know.
Q: [Or her?]?
DHS: I don’t know, because they (inaudible). I think (inaudible). We had a guy (inaudible) just
(inaudible). But Barbour [was always?] (inaudible).
Q: (inaudible)
DHS: You see...
Q: [Whatever the climate was?].
DHS: (inaudible). I realized it’s quarter of 12:00. You’ve got a class?
Q: Actually, I’m doing –

Track 4
DHS: – from [Graham to?] work, or for dances – this was Ivy Day. And that’s when they planted
the ivy over around the chimney. But see how elegant they were with the real leather covers?
Q: That’s beautiful. And that was a big celebration?
DHS: Oh, big celebration. Ivy Day was Senior Day – it was like a Senior Day in high school.
And this was the program that went on during the day, and at night it was a dance. And it was a
big day on campus – on our campus.
43

Q: And did everyone go to the dance, or was it couples, or –?
DHS: Oh, it was seniors, seniors and juniors, usually. Sophomores and freshmen, they – yeah.
They weren’t old enough.
Q: It wasn’t their privilege yet?
DHS: They weren’t old enough.
Q: And did the men come over then?
DHS: Well, the men – no, no, no, [01:00] no. I think that’s hard for you to understand – we were,
to all intents and purposes, two separate colleges. That’s – and the men had their social life and
we had our social life. The men had their fraternities, and the fraternities were the center of them
– of dances and that kind of thing. We did not have – sororities had gone out long before I came;
there had been a big to-do about it, and they had gone. So our organizations were the Brownies,
which was the social organization, all-campus kind of thing. And they planned several things,
and, see, this was an all-college dance, and this was the program that the Brownies put on. And
we apparently had the [Westling?] Serenaders, which would probably have been comparable to
[02:00] any Brown singing group – that entertained at intermission. And the idea was that you
got your program filled, and this looks as if I had these – saved these dances – it was, of course,
you always saved the dance before intermission and the last dance and the first dance with the
person with whom you had come. It was – that was a must. (inaudible) anything else [like?]. But
of course, some people might not have liked the person that they came with, (laughter) and so
they just – but there was a certain etiquette, if you know what I mean. And so these – and this
was – I don't know, was there a dance program in here? No, it’s just the program. Doing –
(inaudible) Oh, it was a big do. [03:00]
Q: Yeah, (overlapping dialogue; inaudible).
DHS: See, the president came over, and the dean came over, and then the campus was the scene
of the senior – (inaudible) senior class, and then the planting of the ivy. So all the ivy had been
planted, for the most part, but the senior class in [these?]... and that’s –
Q: When – did President Faunce and Dean [Moyers?] speak? Did they give a little –?
44

DHS: Oh, yes, they gave a talk. And this was (inaudible) –
Q: Do you remember what the topics would be that they would... (inaudible)?
DHS: We were talked at so much.
Q: (laughter) I’m sure.
DHS: I don’t remember really what was going on. Then this was kind of – here’s an Ivy Day in
1925. Now, this was – would have been the first Ivy Day I went to. This would have been for the
class of 1925.
Q: [04:00] So you were a freshman that [night?].
DHS: Yes, (inaudible).
Q: So you went anyway.
DHS: Well, everybody went to the exercises.
Q: Oh, I see, but the – the dance and –
DHS: But the social affairs were restricted.
Q: I see.
DHS: We went – everybody went to the... And these were – this was a gym program I found.
Now, don’t ask me why I saved that, but...
Q: Hmm. You seem to have done a lot of gymnastics.
DHS: We had a – well, we did, because, you know, congratulated, you didn’t – (inaudible) – you
didn’t really flunk them, but you had to go three hours a week for gym. And –
Q: For all four years?
DHS: All four years. But if you had not o– as I remember, if you had not over-[cut?] in your last
semester of your senior year you could be excused. But most of us went anyway, [05:00] if you
45

liked it. If you didn’t like it – if you had over-cut, then you had to make it all up. And some
people [rolled it to the letter?] –
Q: (laughter)
DHS: (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) all the rest of it in the last year. And on the men’s
campus this was true even when my son-in-law graduated in 1951 – if you couldn’t swim across
the pool twice, you couldn’t graduate. And I remember my son-in-law, he wasn’t then, but he
was soon to be my son-in-law, he came and his hands were all wrinkled. He’d been swimming
back and forth the pool with this fellow for hours, holding him up and trying to get – and the
fellow is now a minister down in Newport, and every time I see him I think of him not being able
to swim across. So the restrictions as far as gym were relatively strict on both campuses. We
didn’t have a pool. Later they used the pool at the Providence Plantations Club, which was a
women’s club downtown, but we didn’t use it. [06:00] Some may have if they wanted to swim,
but I didn’t use it. I took fistball and basketball and things like that. Dance was a part, you see.
But dance was a part of the gym program for a long, long time. It was separated, oh, not more
than 15 years ago. Now I believe it’s part of the theatre arts program. But there was no theatre
arts program – the theatre was probably (inaudible).
Q: Uh-huh.
DHS: In addition to that, we had the [Comiums?] – [I’ve got the whole thing, is it?]. The other
thing I was going to say – have you heard anything about this at all?
Q: Yes. I’ve seen it.
DHS: And have you been over to see it?
Q: Mm-hmm.
DHS: Because I think the style might not be what you would like, but the facts were there. And
these facts were brought about – make known to her a great deal of research [07:00] on her
(inaudible). And we had a series of teas when my office was across the – where the Sarah Doyle
Center is now. So we had – at that time we had available to us people who had graduated as early

46

as 1905 and 1906. Those people who were really knowledgeable. And we had them in decades,
so that – and I often wonder what happened to that material, because –
Q: She interviewed? This woman?
DHS: She interviewed – she came to my office, and we had a tea – it was a tea, and we invited
all these people who were available in the neighborhood, or, you know, nearby in Rhode Island
and Massachusetts. And they came, and it was very informal, but it got to be very interesting,
because you heard what was going on from the people who’d experienced it. [08:00] And in
addition to that, she did – she has – apparently she had a lot of scrapbooks and diaries and that
sort of thing. The other source to find out things – to read the old Brown Daily Heralds and the
Pembroke Record.
Q: Right.
DHS: Because they really were – they really tell you what student life was like. And then – what
else that I got here? Well, this one – I’ll talk about that later, and then talk about that later. So –
and this is the Commencement program. They didn’t even list the women with the men. The
women were listed separately. (inaudible) I’ve got my name at the top.
Q: Great.
DHS: Well, it was interesting, that [09:00] we got – I want there to be no misunderstanding. We
always got a degree from Brown University. We never graduated from Pembroke College. And
when peo– when you read that, it’s a [false?] statement. You attended Pembroke College in
Brown University, and the degree was given by the same board of fellows that gave the degree to
the men. And that, that – so that people – I think some women get very, very upset when they
say that, “well, of course you graduated from Pembroke.” You didn’t graduate from Pembroke.
The degree is a Brown degree. And it really goes on and on and on. I don’t get as exercised about
it as some people, but that does upset people very much, because it’s as if it were downgrading
the degree.
Q: So then when [10:00] it was renamed, do people feel that was downgrading the (inaudible) at
all?
47

DHS: No. Not at all. Because we had been called Pembrokers for years. And the college itself
that had – the women’s college had been adjunct to and whatnot. And to talk about women’s
college in Brown University was a tongue-twister. It was much simpler to call it Pembroke
College. (inaudible) When we had the anniversary, 75th anniversary of Pembroke, we had this
skit, or series or skits, and (inaudible) back – see, we did it – in addition to Miss [Hawke?], we
also had people come who were going to write the skit. So they listened to these people talk, too.
And of course the – this was a takeoff, definitely, on [Kendall College?]. [11:00] But it was the
age of the flappers. Long skirts, hats that came – cloche hats that came down, and (inaudible) the
’20s, the bobs. But before that, it was the cootie garages, they used to call them. You know what
those are? You know those – well, you sort of parted your hair in the middle or on the side, and
then you ratted it as far as you could, and you rolled it over your ears, and then made some sort
of bun in the back. Well, those got – when the cloche hats came in, the cloche hats (inaudible)
the cootie garages. And in some ways a cootie garage maker would just have a short [bun?] with
thick hair, so when they cut their hair, it looked –
Q: [Looked the same?]?
DHS: And you could see, a cloche interfered with the thing in the back, this way. [12:00] And
most people had their hair waved flat right down to their heads. You’ve seen the movies of the
’20s, haven’t you? Cloche – close waves (inaudible). And those were done by irons, [those
were?]. You know, hot irons. But it went back to curlers – you know, a lot of girls were using
curlers, and I have a couple of grandchildren, granddaughters, (inaudible). But – and the
Charleston –
Q: Was big on campus?
DHS: And so long skirts at the beginning, and then they began to go up and up and up and up.
And so this one – but then it said, [“Up with the bathtubs, but rather than baths”?] – and you
know what that meant, bathtub gin.
Q: Right.
DHS: And “Save Cootie Garages from Demolition” was when they cut the cootie garages off of
– and the world is [13:00] safe for democracy. And I thought this would give you a tone of how
48

they could – room in [a Satan?] now decorated much like the ’60s room was – same bedspread
and (inaudible) lamp, and a blowup of Rudolph Valentino and [Van Joe?]. He was the – you
know, Rudolph Valentino was – well, that’s the [room would be replaced now?]. Somebody. I
don't know. But he was the hero (inaudible). And you’d (inaudible) is a light magazine science
book labeled Pollyanna. Her roommate [Ena’s?] in a slip, and she grabs Pollyanna away,
revealing that the girl is really reading The Plastic Age.
Q: Right. Percy Marks.
DHS: Yeah. With the subtitle “Sex.” (inaudible) about an Ace bandage and the [latter?] winds it
all around the girl and [slept with it?] until she looks flat. Well, that was because bosoms were
out, flats were in. It never bothered me, because I haven’t had any bosoms, but the girls who did,
they really wore tight bras. [14:00] And your age – well, earlier, girls used to go without their
bras, because, you know, but at dances, there’s a Daily Herald that has quite an article in it about
the girls who [dropped?] their girls and rolled their stockings.
Q: And that was a wild thing to do?
DHS: That was the – yes. People got all excited when the girls took off their bras. In our age, it
was the girls who took off their girdles. And probably half of them didn’t wear girls, because
they didn’t have enough figure to wear a girl, but, you know, (inaudible) 40. Anyway, [ah, Jesus,
can’t you breathe?] (inaudible) – that’s right, the look goes back to – they’re wearing my – I
don't know what this [wear?] on my bedspread was. Bedspreads then were for the most part
chenille. [15:00] I don’t get that. In the Roaring Twenties, did they roar around college? And
then they carry around the thing – but you wanted to know about how they felt about the new
name, and this goes on to say “All they talk about is changing the name, changing the name –”
Q: Changing the name.
DHS: [An adjunct to Boo?] – an adjunct to, an adjunct – and just plan “In Boo, Brown
University – something must be done, and what are your thoughts?” And then Carberry comes –
you know, Carberry was a – and my thought would be to chuck the whole idea of being a college
in ground and start off at Tennessee. And this is the way – you know, this was the guy on
campus, as far as Pembroke was concerned – why don’t they ship it south?
49

Q: Really.
DHS: Yeah. And hardly, after all the trouble we’ve taken to a civilizing influence around here,
and how about being coed? Then there won’t [16:00] be any problem about this name thing,
“Boo,” and this is pretty indicative of the attitude of all the students, as far as being – why aren’t
we named Pembroke?
Q: Both the men and the women?
DHS: The men didn’t want us, and the women didn’t –
Q: At all.
DHS: No.
Q: Would have rather – just had it be just the men’s university?
DHS: This is probably as extreme as it could be, but this was, like, this was the whole attitude on
campus. We didn’t want to be coed; they didn’t want us.
Q: And why – why do you think people didn’t want it to be coed, and why do you think
(overlapping dialogue; inaudible)?
DHS: Well, I think if you look right through the early days, even before I was here, right up until
the early ’60s, as far as the women on our campus was concerned, coeducation was inferior
[17:00] to the separate college. And I think the reason for that was because we had been so
indoctrinated with the idea that a woman could develop, or a girl could develop into a far more
educated, capable woman if she were not constantly in competition with men. We had our own
organizations, we were president of our – and we were responsible for, and we had our own
newspaper, we had our own social organizations. We had a separate campus, we had our own
dorms, we had our own dining rooms. We had everything, and we were sold the idea that this
was ideal, because at the same time we had this individuality, this sep– we had the advantage of
a university (inaudible). [18:00] And this was so ingrained in us – we had our own chapel. We
didn’t need to go to Sales Hall. We had an organ, we had everything. We had our own singing
groups, we had our own orchestra, we had our own glee club.
50

Q: And still you got the Brown education.
DHS: We had a Brown education. Now, when I was here, when I first came, and this probably
was true for most freshmen and sophomores in the ’20s, all my classes were on this campus.
Now, professors did not have to teach over here, but they could – if they were asked to they
could say yes or say no. But we seemed to get equally as good professors as they had. Because
when I was here [19:00] the graduate school was not a big entity, so that it was not – and
research was not such a big deal. And we had excellent professors. And they came over here and
taught over here. There were, let’s see, one... there were several classrooms in Pembroke Hall,
including the basement, after this building was built. And that was East House, which was right
next door. And there were three floors to East – it was East Hall. There were two buildings
where there – where the campus was open now. It was East Hall, next to Pembroke Hall, and
East House, which was a dormitory (inaudible). And there were three floors of classrooms, until
one room – one place was made into [20:00] a smoking room, and that was where the smoking
would be. If you wanted to smoke, they would smoke (inaudible).
Q: Now, was that one [where you graduated?].
DHS: Yeah, very late in the ’20s. I don’t – oh, probably ’29. Well, it might not have been even
while I was on campus. There was much to-do about did Dean Marr smoke or didn’t she smoke?
You know, we thought that was a big deal.
Q: But the students –
DHS: Yeah.
Q: – didn’t smoke.
DHS: [They actually weren’t supposed to?]. But they weren’t supposed to drink. Lots of things
we weren’t supposed to do, but you did them. Curfew hours were very strict, but there were
always ways of people getting in or getting out. Getting caught (inaudible) – discipline was
[21:00] very, very strict about many, many things.
Q: What would happen?

51

DHS: Well, as late as when I came here in the ’50s, a girl got married without permission, and
she promptly was thrown out of school. The boy wasn’t, but she was.
Q: And the boy was at Brown?
DHS: Mm-hmm.
Q: So there was a rule about not getting married. That was a –
DHS: Well, not getting married without permission.
Q: Oh, I see. Wow. Permission from...
DHS: The dean.
Q: The dean?
DHS: Well, the dean and the housemothers were [really?] in loco parentis, and they felt very
responsible for all of us. Right up in through the ’60s. In fact, when the ’60 revolution started,
much of it had to do with social rules – dormitory rules.
Q: Which had been around for –
DHS: [22:00] Years and years. But I think most of it accepted it with more grace than we would
today, because most of us had not had that much of freedom anyway. I didn’t – it was something
I accepted. I can’t imagine anybody telling you now that when you go over on campus, you put
your gloves on and your hat and you act like a lady.
Q: Right. But that’s what you had to do.
DHS: I wore out more coats and gloves and hats just putting them on and taking them off – we
didn’t have to wear them here, but when we went over there we had to. The freshmen and
sophomores used to have a (inaudible) [poll?] – they had beanies, whether (inaudible) they had
to wear their beanies anymore. Hi, Joan.
Joan: Hi, (inaudible). [23:00]

52

DHS: How you doing?
Joan: See you later.
DHS: OK. And we were told that was not the place for a young lady to be seen. Of course we
went, but it wasn’t a place – with gloves and hat.
Q: Right. Always with gloves and hat.
DHS: Of course, yeah, so when you left it looked as if you were going down there (inaudible).
[And when we’d got tongue?], (inaudible). So – I mean, [I would?] pack another hat for my
younger daughter when she went away to college, and it was still in the bottom of the trunk when
she brought it home, (laughter) seven years later. So –
Q: So when – you said that all the girls did go over anyway for the freshman ordeal over at
Brown. Did – how did the boys respond to that?
DHS: Well, they were really more interested in what was going on.
Q: So they didn’t mind?
DHS: They didn’t really harass us that much. They harassed us more in the newspapers.
Q: Really. [24:00]
DHS: Because many of the girls – or many of my classmates married Brown men, and you asked
me to find some people who might be interested, you know, you might like to talk to – well, I
have a classmate, and we can write these names down later, [Kayla DeSchaal?], she married a
fellow in the class of ’29. And I tried to find people local, because I wasn’t sure, but I have a lot
of classmates who married Brown men. And that was true always, even from the very beginning.
They might not have liked us, you know, as a group, but that didn’t help some of them from –
Q: But as individuals.
DHS: (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) And then I have some names of people in the early ’20s
who you might be interested in, because the change of deans in the 1920s made a big difference.
53

Q: How so?
DHS: Well, [25:00] this is the program – you were talking about separateness. This is a program
that I saved when Dean Lewis was installed as the dean. And much of the – many questions were
raised, and she was accepted almost as a president of the college because of this reception. And
when you look at the people who came, many presidents came to see her installed. And so when
you ask about coeducation, in 1949 was this, I believe – 1950, she was here as an acting dean
from ’49 to ’50, but in 1950, if you had mentioned coeducation, people would say, “What do you
mean, coeducation?” And for her whole term, that was the (inaudible) ever be coeducation.
Q: [26:00] And would you say that it was [not like?] Dean Morris?
DHS: Oh, definitely. Because she – yes, it was Dean Morris. And of course, this woman was
mentally ill, and that was why she was let go in 1922. And this woman came back and [Crosby
Emory?]. She had been dean from 1900 to 1905.
Q: Right. She came in then between Deans King and Morris.
DHS: Then she left to get married. She married a Greek professor – a professor of Greek. And
then she came back and filled in the interim until Dean Morris came. And I think this is why it
would be interesting to talk to somebody who worked with or had some experience with Dean
[Alinson?], and then what it was like, and this, what it was like to have Dean Morris come in and
sort of take charge.
Q: She was that type of –?
DHS: Definitely. [27:00] She was a very capable, scholarly woman, with definite ideas about
what a women’s college should be. Even in the face of whatever went on on the hill, she
definitely knew what she wanted.
Q: Did you sense that there was some sort of conflict there, with what Dean Morris was going
for?
DHS: There was always conflict. Always conflict.

54

Q: Did you hear about it at all as students?
DHS: Not really. I can’t remember that students in my era ever got involved in what you would
call the administrative part of the college. I think we were – we might discuss it, but we
discussed, discussed, discussed – trial marriages, we used to sit and talk about that. And some of
us were [28:00] definitely going to be in Lucy Stone League because we were never going to
give up our names. We argued the pros and cons of peace and war. Most of us had been children
when the World War came along. But there was a big peace movement on campus. By the time I
was in college, I already had the vote, so there wasn’t much for us to talk about, women’s
suffrage, because we already had it. When you were 21. And most of us looked forward to the
time we could vote, which was the year I graduated from college, because I wasn’t 21 until then.
We were young in many, many ways, over against your generation. We accepted (inaudible).
[29:00] We talked about it – we accepted it.
Q: Did – do you think then – well, you said that you probably would have talked about the
university, the women’s college and that sort of, the tension there. What were people’s...?
DHS: Well, the college existed, and there was the president and corporation. They might make
judgments that we didn’t approve of, but we had no mechanism, really, to make our voice heard.
There was student government on campus, but student government, for the most part, had to do
with the rules of how you behaved on campus. We had a – I was trying to find – I couldn’t find –
I thought I had a book that was given to you when you came to college, [30:00] and this was
published by the student government association. And they told you what you did and what you
didn’t do. And from time to time, some of the things that were done were taking people on the
student government [not?] before the dean. For instance, freshmen had to hold doors for seniors.
You could not go in the door in front of a senior. You – if a senior were coming down by the
gym, and you were going to lower Pembroke, that’s where our lunch room was then, if you went
in ahead of them, she would report you to student government and you would be brought up
before the student government – that didn’t go to the dean. That was a violation of student code.
So you went – I could still see opening the door at Pembroke Hall and then looking to see if
someone were coming that – you knew who your seniors were because we had senior sisters.
Every senior had a freshman sister. And so you knew, for the most part. And we wore caps – the
55

seniors wore caps and gowns [31:00] every morning to chapel, so it didn’t take you long to
recognize those people who were in chapel in gowns. The only day they didn’t go to chapel was
– didn’t wear the gowns was when the senior government announced, Thursday morning – ah,
student government chapel service (inaudible). And the president of student government
presided. I thing I told – boy, I was more afraid of the president of the student government than I
was of the dean.
Q: Yeah. They would give out punishments for those violations?
DHS: Oh, yeah, you got called up before the board.
Q: And were – were there rules, then, that were student government rules about –
DHS: Oh, yes.
Q: – going on the campus, and –?
DHS: Oh, no. There were the deans – there were college rules and then there were student rules.
Q: I see.
DHS: And college rules were then ruled over by the dean, and her assistant. But student rules
were taken care of by the student government association. And you had – look, there was no
question about what you could and could not do, because you had – we had been given a book
when we came. [32:00] But things like closing hours at the dormitories – that was a college rule,
ruled over by the house mother. And then that got (inaudible).
Q: If we can get back to [going home to?] (inaudible) classes – did you do that in your later
years?
DHS: Yes. I started out in my junior year to take honors in history. And my father talked me out
of it. He said it was – you know, why did I want to work that hard for – just for honors
(inaudible)? Why didn’t I take some things I really could enjoy, and take my history, because
you had to take certain – but don’t take all that extra work? I don't know about honors now, but
with honors, we used to have to be that much more – do that many more papers from the regular
56

people [33:00] also. So when I came back my junior year, I changed my – just taking honors in
history (inaudible). And because of that, that I had to redistribute my courses, so that I – and
right away, one of them that I wanted to take – I had had three years of German in high school
but I had had no German in college. So there was a course given on the campus which was
interesting, I thought, it was German literature in English, and I thought I would enjoy it. So I
took that, and I was in the course with – I was even in (inaudible) [hall?] with half the football
team. And there were probably three or four of us girls in the class. They didn’t bother us. You
know, they didn’t razz us or anything, unless – we might get a better grade, [34:00] because
some of the football players were not exactly scholastically inclined. Then my minor was French,
and the last two years of French were all with [Master Paul?], and they were (inaudible).
Q: And again, it was something (inaudible) girls?
DHS: No, in French conversation class there were quite a few girls – it might have been half and
half. We had a lot of fun in that class, because the man was (inaudible) – same as Professor
[Londre?] And he came directly from France. And if you do talk to [Kayla DeSchaal?], she
became a very good friend of Professor [Londre’s?] and his wife, and when they went to Europe,
they visited.
In the spring they used to open the windows on campus – we didn’t go outside
(inaudible), and [35:00] a couple of the fellows in the French conversation class hired a [goodygoody?] to come under the window where Master Paul was [lovely?] (inaudible) [with his
monkey?].
Q: Oh. (laughter)
DHS: Professor Londre could swear in French better than anybody I ever knew. He was
something. And of course, outside were all the students that didn’t have class, and here was
Professor Londre, and he was about to slam the windows down.
Q: (laughter)
DHS: And I don't know if girls would have done that, but we thoroughly enjoyed it. You know,
the tri– things that girls didn’t think of doing or would have probably not been able to do. So that
57

livened up a couple of French classes. But I don’t remember being harassed. Then I hated
biology. And we had biology on the men’s campus, but we had it by ourselves, because we
didn’t talk about reproduction and all that sort of thing and – but we [36:00] had a woman
professor, and we met on the campus, on that campus. There was no – there were no science, or
no science labs on this, so that’s – this is another thing. If you talk to somebody who majored in
science, they would have been on the campus almost from the beginning, I guess. Now, whether
those classes were after a certain – I think they said when you got to a certain level they were
men and women together in the classes and sciences. But I wouldn’t know about that, because I
steered clear of the sciences. After biology, I had had frogs and formaldehyde, and I didn’t get
(inaudible). And so I took botany, and I was on the campus in botany on my sophomore year, but
there were only girls in my class. We just went over there and came back here. And there were
no girls in our botany lab.
Q: No men, you mean?
DHS: No men, I’m sorry. No men in our lab. And of course there were no men in my biology
lab. And only women supervisors [37:00] in the (inaudible). In the botany lab, we had a couple
of fellows who were lab assistants. Cut (inaudible) because I [remember they were going to help
me?], I (inaudible). But I was not a science person. So I was (inaudible). They talk about people
now – if this is – would have been a class that I would have taken pass/fail if I could.
Q: Uh-huh. But the teaching assistants did – did help you out?
DHS: Oh, definitely. (inaudible) But you had to have two (inaudible). But I’m not sure we even
thought of those classes as being coeducational. The word coeducation was not [plucked
around?] very much. In fact, it was inferior. You had to be inferior if you went to a coeducational
school. [38:00] Pembroke’s aim for years and years and years was to be on the same level with
Smith, Mount Holyoke – we didn’t like the idea of being left out of the Seven Sisters. But you
had to be as good as. And we were better, because we had one or two (inaudible) – as those
schools have proven now, most of them now have lined up with some university in the area to
give more people (inaudible).
Q: You used the university libraries?
58

DHS: Yes. We had the Pembroke library, but we also had the John Hay.
Q: Did you go to the John Hay a lot?
DHS: Oh, yes. We would go to the John Hay. And wear your hat and gloves and be a lady. That
was it – if you’re going on the campus, wear your gloves, hat, be a lady.
Q: And people didn’t really violate that (inaudible)?
DHS: Oh, you became – you know, you just ordinarily, you just grabbed your hat and gloves
[39:00] as you would go around the campus, and that was all there was to it. It wasn’t – it really
wasn’t much point if you came to college to fight whether you wore a hat or gloves. It wasn’t an
issue. Not really. We look back and smile about it now, [go downtown?]. But then, it’s only been
15 years, and people don’t wear gloves and hats to church. I still – there are still people who
come to our church who wouldn’t think about going to church without their gloves, white gloves
in the summer, and (inaudible) later on [they’re still wearing gloves?].
Q: And when I look at the Brown Daily Herald, and even at some of the Pembroke Records, you
get this sense of this real hostility [happening?] on the campus. But you don’t – the idea I get
from you is that that wasn’t true. There seemed to be – you know, people complained about
getting harassed when they went to the John Hay, and – but there were [40:00] plenty of women
going to the John Hay, right? The girls and the boys were both studying in the same library and
that was –?
DHS: What do you call harassment? Maybe they’d whistle at you, or make something like about,
“Oh, look, Pembrokers are here again.” But I was brought up with a whole lot of brothers, and
maybe it had a difference, the – my attitude towards men has always been, men don’t faze me at
all. And I’ve been the only woman in lots of rooms, and I don’t take it – you know, if they make
a remark, I don’t take it as [bristling?] (inaudible). And that might have been true of students that
had – I really don’t know. No, I never felt harassed.
Q: And you think people – students in general didn’t really feel uncomfortable?

59

DHS: Well, I didn’t. I don't know that we talked about it a whole lot. And earlier, we knew we
weren’t wanted over there. That didn’t make any difference. [41:00] We were paying our tuition,
had every right to be there. We knew they didn’t want us – they hadn’t wanted us from 1891.
Q: And what – when you first came to school, how did you know? Was that something that
seniors just announced?
DHS: Well, it sort of permeated the campus. But, you know, we’re Pembroke, and they’re
Brown. They don’t particularly like us and want us, certainly. And I think – well, even when I
was over here, I first came in on the staff, it still was a – we were separate. Even yesterday I got
a telephone call, it was some man on the campus who was screaming and hollering about
something that Pembrokers had not done. I mean, I got along very well with my counterpart in
the alumni office just fine. And Dean Lewis got along just fine with the men on the campus,
because she just said what she had to say, [42:00] and she knew what she wanted, and she was
not about to give in.
Q: And Dean Morris was the same way?
DHS: Dean Morris was the same way. Dean – I think the animosity between Dean Morris and
President Wriston was prevalent the whole time. President Wriston was not that way with Dean
Lewis, but I think it was just a difference in personality of the two people.
Q: How about with President Faunce? Did you have any sense of that, or –?
DHS: Oh, President Faunce lived in an ivory tower. To us, he was there. I don’t think we ever
had a chance to approach him. He came and went – you’ve seen pictures of him, haven’t you, in
the, you know – he was the unapproachable [grandfather?].
Q: He did come over and give speeches.
DHS: Oh, yes. He was here on occasion. But he was there. [43:00] [It’s like saying?], I think
you’ve got – your generation, the ’60s on, they have been more concerned, so to speak, with
administrative matters that has to do with them, that had to do with them, than we were. The
acceptance of authority was just a difference (inaudible). We might not accept it really, but you

60

had no mechanism to get at it. So we talked and we talked and we talked. That’s about as far as
we went.
Q: (inaudible)
DHS: The student government dealt very closely with the – [44:00] I’m sure the student
government, [who would later rule it in a group down there?] – I don't know what would have
happened if they’d [had time?]. You know what I’m saying, (inaudible)?
Q: So the people on the student government and Dean Morris (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)?
DHS: Oh, yes. Now, when I was a senior, I would have kept charge of the college calendar, [for
advance – it’s not like a community?]. So the first of every month, like, once a month, I went in
and we cleared the calendar – that would be so that if there was something that was important
going on, they wouldn’t toot something else. So it was just a big calendar, and I used to
(inaudible), and we would clear that calendar, what the students wanted to do and what was
coming in as far as (inaudible). And that had to be an adjustment, and I had to go to the students
and tell them about it and reschedule it (inaudible). The college was well run. Very well run. We
had our own officers, we had the dean, [45:00] we had the dean of admission, we had the person
in charge of replacement – we had a bursar, several years. We paid our tuition on this campus.
Scheduled for setup on this campus. (inaudible) there was no need for us to go on the other
campus. The other – the thing you have to realize, too, is that we had very few choices of classes
until our senior year. We had to take history, English comp and your languages and your science.
We had five courses. And freshman and sophomore years, you had to just get those behind you.
And then you chose your major your junior year, and you had to get (inaudible). And that was
when I branched out into music, German literature, and things like that. (inaudible) a strict
honors girl.
Q: So your first two years –
- END -

61

