
[00:00:00]
Tracy Corrington: Today is Friday, March 11, 1988. My name is Tracy Corrington, I’m class of
1988, and I’m speaking with Margaret (Waterman) Devoe, who’s class of 1927. We’re meeting
today, this afternoon, in the Sarah Doyle Center, across from the Pembroke Library.

(break in audio)
Margaret Waterman Devoe: Maybe we’ll – maybe (inaudible) before World War II.

TC: Did you have it long at Pembroke the whole time?

MWD: I wore a bun and bangs.

TC: Oh, okay.

MWD: But we wore hats a great deal in those days.
TC: That’s what I wondered. Did you have to wear a hat –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: – or hat and gloves – to wear over to the men’s campus?

1

MWD: Well, I don’t remember having to wear a hat, but I don’t know. I – you wore hat – you
had to walk to school. I didn’t live here, I lived at home, and I only went two years to Pembroke
and two years to Smith.

TC: Oh, okay.
MWD: I went freshman year to Pembroke, sophomore and junior to Smith, and grad – came
back and graduated senior year.
TC: Oh! Why did you [00:01:00] come – what made the switch to come back?

MWD: Well, I never planned to go to Pembroke in the beginning. I was trying to go to Vassar,
where my mother had gone, and my sisters. And we had to take college boards. I didn’t do well
in one exam. Math, I guess. And so I came to Pembroke. And then I got a B average, so I was
able to transfer anywhere without any trouble. And I had a friend at Smith – I never liked Smith
[very much?]. I liked it much better here.

TC: But your mother went to Smith?
MWD: No, my mother –

TC: Oh, no, your mother went to Vassar.

MWD: No my mother went to Vassar.

TC: Oh, okay.
MWD: And I wrote that down somewhere, what – is that on?

TC: Yes.

2

MWD: I wish my voice wasn’t [so odd?]. [laughter]

TC: Well, I think it’ll be okay to pick it all up.

MWD: What are you going to ask next?
TC: Okay, well, we can start – so, your mother went to Vassar, you said. And did –
MWD: (inaudible) [light?] –

TC: It’s hard to see. How [00:02:00] did your parents feel about you coming to Pembroke? Did
they – did you want to come?

MWD: My father was dead.

TC: Oh, he was.

MWD: He died my last year at school, in high school. [And?] (inaudible) my mother [graduated
from Vassar?].

TC: And where did you go to high school?
MWD: Graduated Vassar in 19 – 1890. I went – the last three years, I went to Lincoln School,
and I went two years to Hope. I took (inaudible) at Lincoln. I was short one credit, because I’d
been out one fall sick, so they thought – I had swollen glands – [that was on my neck?]. In those
days, the doctor said, “Well, take her away to the mountains.” [To the?] (inaudible) that’s their
idea of treatment.

TC: So, where did you go?

MWD: I had my tonsils taken out (inaudible) so, we went up to Lake Mohonk for the fall season.

3

TC: Really? [laughter] Your whole – [00:03:00] your family or just –

MWD: What?

TC: Your family?

MWD: My mother and younger brother, myself up there. My father would come up weekends.
Maybe not every weekend. [laughs]

TC: That’s so fun! So, what did you do?

MWD: Well, they gave us some work to study, and I guess we mailed it back. And we played
tennis. That’s a beautiful spot. I don’t suppose you’ve ever been there.
TC: No, where – which state is it?

MWD: (inaudible) New York.

TC: Oh, okay.
MWD: I think we took the train to Poughkeepsie maybe, and – [it was the?] other side of
(inaudible) people still go there. I see (inaudible) up there [to?] (inaudible)

TC: I’ve heard the name.
MWD: (inaudible) [then – I know they call them now?]. They’re hills, but it’s – and they only
had horseback riding. And they couldn’t bring the car way up. You had to get – I don’t
remember whether – yes – we had a car back then, but I don’t think my father drove up there
ever or not. [00:04:00] Had to leave it somewhere down lower and go up in a stagecoach or
wagon up to the top.

4

TC: Wow, that’s – what – now, when you – for example, horseback riding, what kind of clothing
did you wear?
MWD: I wore – regular riding habit.

TC: You did, okay.
MWD: My mother didn’t ride, [but my family?] –

TC: Was that like bloomers?

MWD: No, no, no.
TC: Or did they have a –
MWD: [Regular?] things [that – regular?] leather boots.

TC: Okay.

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: So, same –

MWD: [Same as other things?].
TC: Okay. Did your mother –

MWD: [Yeah?].

5

TC: – want you to come to college? Is that – did you want to go to Pembroke? Or did you want
to go to college in general?
MWD: Oh, we all had to go to – expected us all to go to college. My father graduated from
Brown, my mother from Vassar. I brought this book with me – information. My mother’s name
was – that was my mother’s name, [of?] –

TC: Okay. [00:05:00]

MWD: And she and the publisher of [The Westerly Sun?], I think it was, they wrote this book on
the other family together. That’s got all the information I need in it.

TC: Oh, okay.

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: Oh, [for – right?] –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: – for your [mother?], okay.

MWD: [Right?].
TC: Well, we can do that afterwards, some –

MWD: Yeah.
TC: – and look through that. And can – and you said you had one younger brother?

6

MWD: Yes, I’m the fifth child of six children. I’m the next youngest, and had a brother – young
– seven years younger than I am.
TC: Did your sisters –
MWD: And my –
TC: – go to –
MWD: – oldest brother was seven years older.

TC: Oh, okay.

MWD: The three of us are still alive, the three in the middle there somewhere died.

TC: Oh.
MWD: One last year. She was only 88. My oldest brother’s going to be 90 March 24th.
[00:06:00]

TC: Oh my gosh.
MWD: And I’m only – I’m going to be 83 in – July 24.
TC: Did they go to school – to college also? All of them?
MWD: [They – yeah?], my two sisters went to Vassar. My oldest brother went to Harvard. My
brother in between went to Harvard, and my youngest brother just went one year to Brown. He
dropped out of college. That was during the Depression. I don’t know why. He wanted to get
married or something. I don’t know [laughter] why he dropped out.

7

TC: So, when you were here, how – did you live at Brown? Or at Pembroke?

MWD: I never did. I lived at home. Maybe I like living at home. Maybe that’s why I liked it
better than at – Vassar.
TC: Than going to Vassar, right. So, how did you get into school every day? Was that – where
did you live in –

MWD: Well, I lived in East Side here.
TC: Oh, and – okay. So, it wasn’t Westerly.

MWD: Right.

TC: Okay.

MWD: I was near.

TC: Okay. So, did you walk or take the trolley?
MWD: (inaudible) [00:07:00] (inaudible) I walked, I’m sure. But then, I lived – the last year I
lived on [Kohler?] Avenue, and my father died and we sold the house. And I think sometimes I
took the trolley. There were trolleys in those days.

TC: Okay.

MWD: Wasn’t any big problem. It’s not that far away. People used to expect to walk a little
further than they do now.
TC: Were there many people who lived in – on campus? Many women?

8

MWD: Well, it wasn’t a very big college. I don’t know (inaudible) you have no record of how
many students they had in those days?

TC: Oh.

MWD: Would you?

TC: Yes.
MWD: – [you said your last?] name –

TC: No, there’s records of that.

MWD: Well, they had Metcalf and Miller.

TC: And Alumnae, right? It was built?
MWD: And I’m not sure when –

TC: We have it in 1926, Alumnae was built.

MWD: This one here.

TC: Right.

MWD: So, that was one year. And then the Alumnae Hall, [00:08:00] here. We were raising
money for it my senior year. I think maybe it was built my senior year, I’m not sure. Do you
know when that was built?
TC: This – Alumnae, here?

9

MWD: No, this – Alumnae Hall.

TC: Oh, 1926.
MWD: That was ’26.

TC: Right.

MWD: (inaudible) at the same time?

TC: Right.

MWD: Yeah.
TC: Okay. So, what – now, why did you come back to Brown? Just didn’t like Vassar?

MWD: I didn’t like Vassar, and I did like it here. And because my father was dead, then, anyway
– so, that might have made some difference, I don’t know. I liked the sports here. I was
interested in sports –

TC: Oh, yes.
MWD: – when I came to college.
TC: Tell me about that. What –
MWD: And at Smith, they had to have nine people playing on the basketball team –

TC: Nine?
MWD: – so more people would play, I guess. [laughs]

10

TC: Did they have lots of – (inaudible)
MWD: We didn’t have – didn’t compete with outside schools, where at Brown there were at
least three, I think – maybe [Reed and Jackson?] and – three teams [00:09:00] we played outside.
And Smith didn’t have that. Well, I wasn’t in too good a dormitory, actually, there. That’s
another thing, coming in sophomore year. I had to live off the campus for a while. (clears throat)
I wish in some way my voice could change. [laughter] And then I moved onto campus when the
opening came, when I would – because I didn’t know the people so well in the – just not crazy
about that house. I don’t (inaudible) but lots of people love it when they go away. To me,
Northampton’s up in the midst of nowhere.

TC: It is.

MWD: You’ve been up there?
TC: Yes, it is kind of – it did feel like – for me, I mean, I’ve come from St. Louis, which is very
– for me, it’s incredibly far, because it’s almost impossible to go home.
MWD: And that – we had to change – I think we went to Worcester first, and we went by train.
[00:10:00] And I’m not sure whether we changed or not after Worcester. Maybe Worcester –
went up through Springfield. I don’t know. I just didn’t care for way up there. But maybe if I’d
come in freshman year –

TC: Right.
MWD: – Maybe that would’ve – I’m sure I wouldn’t like the 91 basketball team, though. We
had six, though.
TC: Oh, wait, six at – here? At Pembroke?

11

MWD: No, that played on the basketball team.

TC: Oh, okay.

MWD: A center and a sort of a side center, and two forwards and two guards.

TC: Okay, which position did you play?

MWD: (inaudible) You had to stay in divisions, you see? They had lines across, so we really
couldn’t go out of our section.

TC: Oh, and it was just up and down, this way?
MWD: Well, you ran around that section, this way, because you couldn’t cross [that – you?]
(inaudible) I don’t know – they threw the ball, you couldn’t run across to the center section. Now
you run all over the thing.

TC: What [00:11:00] about dribbling? Was there a rule as to how many times you could dribble
a ball before you shot it?
MWD: I don’t think we had to dribble that much – [only in sections?]. I mean, if you’re up in
this line and they throw the ball at you, you’re a forward, you could do [dribble up?] once in all
those – be able to throw to the basket from there. [Of course, I?] (inaudible) [tries to?] get much
closer and dunk it and all that stuff, which I think should be abolished.

TC: Really?
MWD: Well, you know, it wasn’t built for those tall people, the basketball –

TC: Yeah.

12

MWD: – when they invented that. And they let them touch it! You know, you see them do that –
TC: Well, it’s – yeah, oh –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: – definitely.

MWD: I mean, I think it should be a foul or something to be able to hang on the basket!
TC: Yeah, I agree. It’s not – it seems – not as much skill. [laughs]
MWD: I don’t know what the girls do. They’re not quite as tall as the men.
TC: Yeah, and I know they’re not – you can’t touch the basket.
MWD: Well, I’ve seen those –

TC: That’s a foul (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)
MWD: – [was?] touching it, haven't you? (inaudible)
TC: [Did you?] –

MWD: [laughs] (inaudible) [00:12:00]

TC: How many games did you play?

MWD: You mean how many outside places?
TC: Just – was it all year long? I mean, during the year?

13

MWD: Oh, no, we had seasons.

TC: Okay.

MWD: The winter season, really. We had tennis (inaudible) in the springtime, [I suppose?]. We
had (inaudible) well, I guess field hockey. I never played that.

TC: Field hockey and tennis are in the fall, as far as I know.
MWD: [Those are in the fall now?]? –

TC: Maybe in the spring.
MWD: I think tennis used to be in the – think it was both times.

TC: Actually, they might have it both times.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: Because I played field hockey.
MWD: And they had volleyball. They played, I guess (inaudible) because we did compete –
some – [what was the classes?]. Then we had the bowling alleys down in the old gym, there.

TC: Right.

MWD: I don’t remember if we ever played [any?] (inaudible) and we had a track meet.

TC: Did you run in that? [00:13:00]

14

MWD: They don’t have that now do they?

TC: Oh, yes.

MWD: Yeah, I liked track.
TC: There’s both –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: There’s indoor –
MWD: – [said here about me?].

TC: [Yeah?].
MWD: I should have brought a lozenger – over with me.

TC: Well, here’s some more juice if you’d like some.

MWD: Well, I can have just a little tiny bit.

TC: Okay.

MWD: Oh, you’ve got it here. Oh, okay.

TC: Yeah, right there.
MWD: [So, you don’t have?] (inaudible) I don’t smoke, so I don’t know why I get this –
[laughter] (clears throat)

15

TC: I know that they mention there that – they said that you had come to college for sports.

MWD: [Right?], that’s what I used to say. Look at, I’m looking up Devoe and I can’t find it.
TC: Where – did you meet your husband at Brown?
MWD: No, he never went to a college, though he was very active in a lot of the track and – he
knew a lot of the people who went here. [00:14:00]

TC: And he lived in Providence, also?

MWD: He lived in Pawtucket. Oh my God, well, apparently (inaudible)

TC: Oh, what I wanted to ask you, what is fist-ball?

MWD: What?

TC: Fist-ball.

MWD: You’ve seen them play, haven’t you? They have a big round ball, and they have a net and
teams on either side and – course, they had to hit it with their fist. I guess you can’t hit it on your
hand.

TC: Oh, okay.
MWD: [Because you had to?] (inaudible) you’ve seen them in the Olympics – or somewhere
I’ve seen them playing.
TC: I’ve never seen it. I’ve seen volleyball –
MWD: Oh, probably the same –

16

TC: – but I’ve never seen –
MWD: – maybe.

TC: Okay.

MWD: I call it fist-ball. That may be the same thing.

TC: Okay.

MWD: (inaudible) [must be?] I just without thinking call it fist-ball, right?

TC: Well, that’s how they have it in the yearbook, also.

MWD: They did?

TC: They have it [00:15:00] written down as fist-ball.

MWD: That looks like my tennis team, yeah. [laughter]

TC: Congratulations.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: And how about the Pyramid Squad?
MWD: I don’t know where it mentioned that. The pyramids – you used to have – you’ve seen
people do that. They have the different stand, and they can – well, we almost – in – [laughs] at
the Brown football games – the fight pyramid, you know? You can get up and do a –

17

TC: Right.

MWD: Well, I mean, you can go up. I’ve forgotten how high anybody went up now, but I don’t
think it amounted to much. I (inaudible) with a squad? – make a fancy name (inaudible)
TC: What would you say that –

MWD: I was two inches taller when I was in school.

TC: Oh, really?

MWD: Got osteoporosis in my spine. As you get older, you get shorter anyway. [laughter] I was
about five feet eight.

TC: Oh, [00:16:00] that is pretty tall. [laughs]

MWD: Well, for those days.

TC: Yeah.

MWD: Not now.

TC: Were you taller than most of the people in your class?

MWD: Most of them.

TC: (inaudible)
MWD: [We were?] the tall ones. [I’m taller?] – but in general, I was always tall. Now I’m
getting near the normal height, because I shrank.

18

TC: So, you’ve kept pretty – so, you did athletics a lot for high school. And did you keep doing
them after college? I mean, you did them through college, you said. Basketball and tennis?
MWD: Yes, I played that. Well, I played tennis, and then I – during the war years, I played a lot
of badminton. We had a group – that’s when I was married – that would go first down the
YWCA. And then we went up at? Hope High School [in their gym and meet at night?] which
was a lot of fun. Did you ever play badminton?

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: I like that. And now you go, also?
MWD: Now I don’t – do what?

TC: Now you do the Indian (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) right?

MWD: (inaudible) [some people are [00:17:00] really heavy?]. You know (inaudible) they look
like a bowling pin – something?

TC: Okay, right.

MWD: You know that dumbbells are?

TC: Right.

MWD: They used to have dumbbells (inaudible)

TC: Okay.

19

MWD: (inaudible) swing them, [and not much?] – but it makes your back feel better when you
go like this (inaudible) [like that, but they didn’t do?] – they’re not very athletic, most of them,
that are doing it. And then you kick your feet a little bit when you did something. [laughs] But it
does move you – make you move a little bit, and my back’s got so round-shouldered.

TC: So, have you been doing that for very long?

MWD: A few years. I was meant to do this morning, but I canceled that out because of my
grandchildren, because they said they’d be back this time and that time, lucky [I can’t lift?] –
TC: [Yeah, that’s – yeah?]. How would you say that – one thing that we’ve been wondering
about is how the men felt about the women – the men at Brown and the women at Pembroke?
MWD: Oh, sure that –
TC: Was there much –
MWD: – we went around with the [00:18:00] men quite a bit. But a lot of us didn’t see much of
them. In fact, I was not too much interested in boys when I came to college. Maybe after
freshman year I was, but then I wasn’t here (inaudible) but there were some that were – went out
a lot with the men. But in general, we didn’t know them the way you people know them – [the
time to?] –

TC: Right.

MWD: (inaudible) separated. We did have classes with them. I don’t know if we did freshman
year, though. I’ve been trying to remember whether we had classes with them freshman year.
And we didn’t – think were – some of the classes were over here in – where you have your
library [at?] Pembroke –

TC: Okay.

20

MWD: – Hall, I guess it was. [Can’t?] – that’s – it was not Pembroke when I was here. It was
known as the Women’s College in Brown University.

TC: Okay.
MWD: And then they took the name of that building – that first building, I guess –

TC: Right.
MWD: – and called it Pembroke. I guess named it that, maybe. [00:19:00] Then they decided
that wasn’t satisfactory. Personally, I thought it was a good idea. The women had their own
organizations, and some women get kind of lost in a man’s organization where you have both.
TC: So, the name change, you mean –
MWD: They called it –
TC: – was a good –

MWD: What?

TC: The name change was a good idea?
MWD: Yeah – no, I didn’t say the name – the name change was a good idea, you say?
TC: Yes, is that –

MWD: No, I didn’t say that.

TC: Oh.

21

MWD: I don’t think the change was a good idea.

TC: Oh, okay.

MWD: I mean, I don’t see any advantage of it.

TC: What do you think about merging the education, then? Of having men and women taught
together, like it is now, as a –
MWD: Well, that’s all right. I went two years to public – I went four years to public school. We
always had boys (inaudible) I don’t see anything wrong with that. But I don’t really like them
mixed up in the dormitories.

TC: Yeah.

MWD: I think that’s stupid, myself. [00:20:00]
TC: There’s still some that are single-sex that are –
MWD: Yeah (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) when I was at Smith and I did the – you had to be
in at a certain time of night. I – nobody pays any attention, I’m sure, to what time you come in at
night, do they?

TC: No. [laughs] Not at all.
MWD: You’re not going to (inaudible) [what’d they say? They’re not connected to?] in loco
parentis or something to the – well, I think they should be acting a little bit in place of parents
when they come as young freshmen. I think it’d be a shock to (inaudible) freshmen when they
first come here.

22

TC: You have so much time. That’s definitely true. It’s just – you don’t know what to do.
There’s no one watching you, which is true, when you first come here.

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: How did you –

MWD: Yeah.
TC: So, living at home, then, would – did you have to be home at a certain time?

MWD: At night?

TC: Mm-hmm.
MWD: I don’t – let’s see, my father died –

TC: Yeah.
MWD: – when I was in high school. [00:21:00] I don’t know, at some point maybe they did. But
later on, I didn’t. And I just don’t – but I do remember my (inaudible) sister and – sisters. I had
one six years older and one four years older. I can remember fighting to go out without a
chaperone.

TC: Really?

MWD: I used to (inaudible) be very strict.

TC: Who would chaperone them? One of your brothers?

23

MWD: Oh, no. We had all grown up. This was when – when I remember this, they must have
been in high school or something. It wouldn’t have been college, because they lived in
Poughkeepsie where Vassar is.

TC: Okay.
MWD: It was very strict about people. One time – now they think girls ought to be just like boys.
I guess they weren’t so strict with the boys, maybe. I don’t know.
TC: That’s what I’ve heard, yeah. [00:22:00] They – that they weren’t so strict with the men, but
much more so with the women.

MWD: And I was brought up a Baptist, and they didn’t believe in drinking.

TC: Right.

MWD: Baptists. Of course, they did have those fraternity parties where there was a lot of
drinking. They talked about bathtub gin and stuff like that. But it’s – but I think there’s a lot
more drinking now. You didn’t have any liquor near a school. No, every place there’s liquor
now, it seems to me.

TC: Did you go to many of the fraternity parties?

MWD: I didn’t, no (inaudible) freshman year, I wasn’t interested, and I was away sophomore
and junior – I guess I probably went to some senior (inaudible) I can’t remember.

TC: When did you meet your husband?
MWD: After I got out of college. But I have a – [00:23:00] some of the people here are too old
for me. I’ve got a – they used to have dances here, and they used to have these (inaudible) thing.

24

You had a little booklet where they write the names on – [of each?] one was going to dance.
They arranged the dances, the one that invited the person.

TC: Okay, right.

MWD: Have you seen those?

TC: Yes, I have.

MWD: And I’ve got one of those of my husband’s at home. So, he was going to dance with
somebody a year or two ahead of me in college – because I’m a year older. But some of the
people I knew, he went with – I didn’t know him, though, in college.
TC: And he –

MWD: Matthew (inaudible) that’s on TV.

TC: Oh, no. [laughs] Oh, what?
MWD: No, I’m just saying that – people he went out with when – I don’t know it’s too good to
put– one name I was going to mention I don’t think I should while that’s on.

TC: Would you like me to turn it off for a minute?
MWD: Turn it off a minute. [00:24:00] It doesn’t matter – (break in audio) so, I didn’t know her.

TC: Okay.
MWD: [And she?] – I wasn’t particularly friendly with her in college.
TC: And how – what did you do after you graduated?

25

MWD: I – you know, I graduated ’27. I went to a – took a little secretarial work – I learned
shorthand. Either had to teach or do something like that.

TC: Those were pretty much the options you had?

MWD: Well, what was there to do? Go work in a store. A lot of people ended up teaching, I
think. A lot of them did secretarial work, so then – and I worked at Brown and Sharpe, now, six
months. I lived at that time way out in Rumford, it was too far to get to. You had to be there at
eight o’clock in the morning.

TC: Oh, gosh. [laughs]

MWD: And you had to work Saturday mornings.
TC: Really? What kind of – what [00:25:00] –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: – [work – like?] –
MWD: [You know, the?] (inaudible) [machine tool place, but I didn’t?] –

TC: Oh. Oh, okay.
MWD: – [have a choice?]. Used to be down on Promenade Street.

TC: Right. And what did you do for them?

MWD: (inaudible) did some typing.

26

TC: Okay.

MWD: Which I never liked anyway. Then I worked for the Women’s Republican (inaudible)
[started?] (inaudible) [some money?]. I don’t know what else I did there. Then a lot of times, you
didn’t work during the depression. I got married ’32. During the Depression, you couldn’t get
many jobs. And then my children were born in ’33, and I had twins.

TC: Oh.

MWD: Had boy and a girl, and they both went to Brown.

TC: Okay.
MWD: And then I did – see, this is why I say with all this (inaudible) I didn’t have many regular
jobs. I did a lot of survey work at the time that I – like the Gallup poll – and some other survey
work [00:26:00] (inaudible) do part-time. And then I was one time working for Brown full-time
for a while there, doing some survey. And I don’t remember what it was. And then worked on a
number of census – do the census. Anything like that that you could do part-time. But I never – I
could – my daughter always said I should’ve been a teacher, but you really need to go back to
school again.

TC: For a year?

MWD: Well, you know, when you get out of Brown, you don’t really have credits for teaching in
a public school. You have to take your education courses, [you know?].

TC: Right.
MWD: And – so, no, I worked [in a?] (inaudible) [too?], from seven [to get?] there. We had to
be there before seven, and we got home around 10.

27

TC: That’s a long day.

MWD: And very little to do. [And?] (inaudible)

TC: And what was the pay like? Was the pay very good? [00:27:00]

MWD: I think I got about $90.

TC: Wow.
MWD: Oh, it’s a racket in a way, what it was – I’m not too sure, but I did work in the fall. I got
paid. I was surprised. They tell you to come down a few days ahead of time to be trained [out of
town?]. They used to let you go over to Branch Avenue, where they have the board of elections.
So, it doesn’t take very long. But they pay you extra, and I think I might have got $70 or 75 – if I
hadn’t gone downtown and listened to them talk and get some literature and get sworn in.

TC: Okay.

MWD: And it’s not bad.
TC: Did you live with – at home?

MWD: Where?
TC: During – time after you graduated to before you got married?

MWD: I did. People didn’t used to have this notion they had to have their own apartments. I
don’t think people could have afforded it. When I worked, we’d get $20 a [00:28:00] week.

TC: Wow.

28

MWD: And when I was at school, I think I worked two Christmases, down at Gladdings. You
don’t remember that store, but it was a very nice store in the corner where Johnson & Wales has
a little shop in the corner of Mathewson and Westminster Street (inaudible) I’d get $20 a week.
No, I think I got 15 there. Then I worked at Tilden’s one year at Christmas, and I got 20, I think.
TC: And how many – that was during vacation from school?

MWD: Yeah, Christmastime, you could do it.

TC: Okay. How long of a vacation did you have over Christmastime?
MWD: I don’t know that – I don’t know – was a week or not? I do know we had to go to school
more days than you do nowadays –

TC: [Oh?].
MWD: But we didn’t start so early in the fall, [and I?] (inaudible) we didn’t have that long time
in January.

TC: Yeah. [laughs]
MWD: Which is a racket now. [00:29:00] They said it was to save fuel, oil, energy. Now I – we
didn’t get through in May. We got through in June, and we had graduation in June.

TC: Can you tell me about graduation, what kind of ceremony you had?
MWD: I can’t remember. I can remember (inaudible) graduation, [except I?] don’t really – we
marched down the hill. I remember marching down the hill (inaudible)

TC: With the men?

29

MWD: – [From the back of the campus. Yeah?], we must have marched down with the men, yes.
I remember looking for my cap and gown, not being able to find it at the time. Yeah, we marched
down the hill.

TC: Yeah.
MWD: They must have fed us when we – like they do now. Nowadays – I’ve been back to the
(inaudible) [they feed us, so?] – you know, I can go to some of those – I did – I – well, I –
[00:30:00] when I had my sixtieth reunion in June, and then you go over to the Refectory to get
something to eat (inaudible) [in the morning then?]. But that was kind of – the Union, maybe,
some of it. But I think anybody that’s been out as long as I have could go to some of those
things. But I’m trying to think what we did do after we came back. And I remember distinctly
going down the hill, and coming out – I should call somebody up from my class. I cannot
remember. You have so many things scattered around –
TC: Well, now we do the same – we march through the gates and go down to the church at the
bottom of –

MWD: Yeah, we did that.
TC: – and then have a speech down there and then come back up. When you – oh, when you –
MWD: I can’t – I remember that, but I’m wondering if we didn’t – I’ve been so many years—to
the campus since then. I wonder if we didn’t [00:31:00] get our degrees down in the First Baptist
Church on ours – I mean, I remember when I was living here, go there all the time, and I can’t
really remember.
TC: I know we receive them on the hill, on campus –

MWD: Yes, I know.

30

TC: – today.

MWD: Yes, I know. [00:31:28]

- End of Track 1-

Track 2

[00:00:00]
MWD: (inaudible) I went to my children’s (inaudible) I just –
TC: Oh, that’s – yeah.

MWD: I'm very vague about it.

TC: When you received a degree then, what did you study? Or did you get sort of a social
science degree? Was that your department?

MWD: No, you get just a regular degree. I took as little social science here as I could. And that’s
one thing I liked at Smith. They had a good social science department.

TC: But not here?
MWD: (inaudible) Well, I didn’t think so after Smith. And I took – yeah, think I took a little
more history. I took a lot of American history there [when I went back?] here. Maybe I took it
before. We had so many required courses, you know. When I came back from Smith, I had to
take another science course, because they didn’t apparently require quite as much science as
Brown did. I’d had Biology [00:01:00] and math here at Brown. When I get to Smith (inaudible)
[I saw the science I’d rather have?]. When I came back, I took a [snap?] course in science.
Botany, which was a snap course in those days. [laughter] What’s it like now?

31

TC: It’s – actually, I don’t know. I haven’t taken it.

MWD: Did you take Biology?
TC: Mm-hmm –
MWD: [It’s always been?] –
TC: – [11 and 12?].
MWD: – [fun?], but I hate lab work. I don’t like to – we had to cut up that embryo pig and draw
a picture of the circulatory system. And I can’t draw and I can’t see all the things they say there,
and certainly in Botany, through that microscope, I can’t see a lot of things the other people see.
So, they say they see them. Maybe they do.

TC: It’s hard. It’s straining on your eyes.
MWD: (inaudible) could have somebody helping [him?]. We had – we only had to take Math
and English, Latin. We had to take a year of Latin – you wouldn’t get the same degree –

TC: Oh.
MWD: – if you had Latin [00:02:00] or Greek.
TC: Did people take foreign languages? Spanish or –

MWD: No.
TC: – German?

32

MWD: No, not all together. No, I took – actually, we didn’t – I didn’t take French here. I had in
high school. I took a year of Spanish, because I had to take another – had to take a modern
language and (inaudible) [Latin?] and Math and English and (inaudible) I had Biology. Did I say
Biology?

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: Took five courses, I think. Math, English, Latin, Spanish, Biology, [I think, I guess?].

TC: (inaudible)

MWD: I think we had five. You got three points of credit for each course. We had to have 15,
but now I’m sure you count it differently anyway.
TC: Yeah, that’s –

MWD: And then sophomore year, we had required courses.
TC: But whatever – you were able to make them all up when you came back to Brown? In time
to graduate?
MWD: Well, I probably took some of them at Smith. [00:03:00] I took – I guess I took History at
Smith (inaudible) I had Philosophy and Psychology. Just remember they didn’t demand as much
science – I think the other things – probably are very much the same.
TC: Were there many – so, were there many women professors?

MWD: At Smith?

TC: At Brown, or at Pembroke.

33

MWD: We had a – one in Biology. Trying to think – there were some. I don’t know there were
many. [I’m sure?] (inaudible) Spanish, there was Math, English [and the Math?] – what was the
other one I said I took?
TC: Greek? Oh, it was Latin –
MWD: [The Latin?] –
TC: – Math, English, Spanish, and Biology.

MWD: (inaudible) [thinking?] [00:04:00] Biology I had a woman, and English I know was a
man. In Spanish, I remember him. That was a man. [Where do they?] get five courses [at?]?
[laughter] [I feel?] – do I make five courses, really?

TC: Mm-hmm.
MWD: [What are they?]? Spanish, English, Math – what’s the other one?

TC: Biology.

MWD: Biology. As I remember, I only had one woman a year. And I know there were some
women around.
TC: What – how – what about the ratio of men students to women?

MWD: Oh, it was much bigger. I think we only had three or four hundred women.

TC: Okay.
MWD: I know – that’s one thing I liked about the class – is the class is small, you know? Class –
[00:05:00]

34

TC: Right.
MWD: – you knew everybody almost in your class.
TC: Really. What –
MWD: And Smith, it was a place of – one of the big women’s colleges. I think there were 2,000
girls. That was big in those days.
TC: So, there’s – you couldn’t meet everyone.
MWD: Oh, no, you wouldn’t. They had a lot of different – well, you have different houses,
dormitories here to live in, too, [even?] – but we didn’t have that many.
TC: Was there – did you have the tradition of having a little sister in the freshman class when
you were a senior?
MWD: I remember having – I must have, I suppose, because I remember my having the big
sister but I can’t remember the freshman one, I mean, when I was a senior, and my freshman
(inaudible) wouldn’t have been ’til I was a senior.

TC: Right.
MWD: No, I wouldn’t have had – I probably missed that entirely. I don’t – when do they have
it? All through the time they’re here? [00:06:00]

TC: Just senior to freshman.

MWD: Just senior to freshman?

35

TC: Right.

MWD: Well, I probably did have one, but I can’t remember who it was.
TC: What did you do for your big sister when you –

MWD: My what?
TC: – when you were a freshman?

MWD: What’d I do?

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: What do you mean what’d I do?
TC: For your – when you were a freshman, you said you had a big sister –

MWD: Yeah.
TC: – in the senior class?

MWD: I can’t remember what we did, particularly.
TC: No? Were there any sort of initiation –
MWD: We didn’t have any fraternities or anything, anyway, that I know – in those days. Do they
have it now?

TC: They’re sororities.

36

MWD: You have sororities now?

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: Oh, my goodness. How long have they had that?

TC: Just two.

MWD: What?
TC: And there’s – they’re trying to have another one. There’s two right now.

MWD: What do they want sororities for? So (inaudible) because it gets so big, you mean, they
need –
TC: Exactly. It’s sort of – in order just to have a group of people that you know very well, that
you feel very comfortable with.
MWD: (inaudible) in a way it’s too bad, though, because some people – in general, I don’t
[00:07:00] believe in fraternities, because I’ve known a lot of people’s feelings have been hurt
that they didn’t make the fraternity they wanted to make.

TC: I’m sure that goes on in fraternities.

MWD: I don’t know as that happens with your sorority stuff or not.
TC: Not as many women – it’s about 10% of the students are involved in fraternities and
sororities together right now.

MWD: Yeah?

37

TC: So, it’s not that – maybe – actually, that’s high. Like, 15 or 20%, I would say.

MWD: Yeah?

TC: But they’re a very big part of the social life right now.

MWD: Oh, yeah?
TC: Mm-hmm. They’re always having parties on the weekends and –

MWD: What about the ones that aren’t in fraternity, though? I mean, the sorority?

TC: Well, like, I’m not in the sorority.

MWD: You’re not?
TC: No, and I just – we have – I either go – I live with a woman who’s in a sorority, actually.

MWD: Oh, you do?
TC: But you don’t – the – sororities, you don’t have to live there if you don’t want to.
MWD: Oh, can you go their –
TC: So, she –
MWD: – parties, then?

TC: Oh, yes. It’s all open. Anyone can go.

MWD: Oh, I see. Well, that’s all right, then.

38

TC: Yeah.

MWD: But, I mean, the fraternities, they used [00:08:00] to be quite exclusive. I don’t think
(inaudible) well, maybe if the (inaudible) [some?], but [I thought?] – I remember [this?]
(inaudible) [somebody was?] (inaudible) [so much, so you wonder?] which one’s going to ask
them and all this.
TC: Right. That’s – I think that would just happen in general. What about – were there many
clubs, women’s clubs, at Pembroke? Any sort of organizations that –
MWD: Well, they had somebody – I mean, they had a – I don’t think they were clubs and such –
they had their own organizations, like the – Brown has organizations. Like, you had your paper –

TC: Right.

MWD: We must have had one, but I don’t know what it was. Maybe they had organizations that
people worked in. I don’t remember the clubs. I was always interested in the sports [00:09:00]
thing, and I wouldn’t have been in the club.

TC: And you were vice president of the class?

MWD: I was vice president (inaudible) [and I came back, then?] I was vice president. Oh, they
put my name up when I was a freshman, but I said (inaudible) [in the way?]. And then I became
vice president senior year, I guess.
TC: What – if you had to – if you had the –

MWD: Does that say that there?
TC: Yeah, it does, the very bottom, in that small – vice president.

39

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: Four. I guess – yeah, senior year.

MWD: [Yeah, there’s four?]. We had two (inaudible) groups. I was kind of friendly with both of
them. Some (inaudible) very nice. Then there was the other group.
TC: Do you keep in touch with any of the women? [Or have you?] –
MWD: Oh, not many –
TC: – after you graduated?
MWD: Not many stay around here. I go to [00:10:00] the – well, one – my brother married one
of them. They got divorced years ago. And her son just came and called on me last weekend.
But, yeah, I keep in touch with her. And then there was Hope Kane (inaudible) there aren’t many
of us, or at least not many that I keep in touch with. [I’m just wondering?] (inaudible) the other
day. Should write to – and see if she doesn’t want to join this – are you undergraduate –
graduates – a member of this group that’s doing the survey? This women’s thing? What do you
call that?
TC: The – what you had to fill out? Oh, this one?
MWD: No, not (inaudible) [part. They had as?] – the women’s something group. [00:11:00]

TC: Oh, I’m not involved in that, no.

MWD: You’re not?

TC: Mm-mm.

40

MWD: Well, how are you doing – who are you doing this for?

TC: For the archives.
MWD: Well, isn’t the – that group involved with the archives?
TC: I think so. I’m doing this for – just for records for the archives, and also for a class. I’m
taking class – Studying the New Woman, we’re calling it, from 1890 to 1920 –

MWD: Yeah.
TC: – or 1930. And so, I’m studying all about the rise of suffragetteism and women gaining the
vote and settlement homes and Hull House and –

MWD: [because I?] always had (inaudible) [change the vote?] (inaudible) I've forgotten when
we got the vote [was?] (inaudible) I don’t remember when we –
TC: Oh, okay. Did you – were you interested in getting – in being able to vote? Did that make a
difference to you?

MWD: What (inaudible)

TC: Being able to vote?

MWD: Yeah, I could vote. I’ve always been interested in politics, actually, [but?] [00:12:00] I
think women have gone a little bit too far at times now. They want equal rights –

TC: Oh, really?

41

MWD: – they want equal this, but what they really want is a little more than equal at times
(inaudible)

TC: How so?

MWD: I mean, they give preference, like they do to blacks. They give preference to hiring
somebody just because she’s a woman or just because it’s colored. We called them colored, or
black. I don’t call that equal. It isn’t because they’re more qualified, and the same with taking
them into college. They’re taking in a certain number of – after the discernment standards, there
are a number of blacks and a certain number of this and a certain number of that.
TC: Right. Well, there –

MWD: And I don’t like the sports stuff. Now, as much as I like sports, I think they’re going
crazy what they’re doing with the women. They can’t – can Brown afford all their doing?

TC: Monetarily afford, you mean?

MWD: Yes.
TC: Oh, I think so. They have a pretty good –

MWD: What do you mean? Why are they always begging us for money? And they say [laughter]
the money is not [00:13:00] coming in as expected to come, that – Depression, whatever you
want to call it, in October –

TC: Right.
MWD: – the money is not coming in. And they’re begging for money all the time. I don’t see
why girls should be taking trips all over – to Timbuktu or wherever it is they’re going to.
Nobody pays to go to see a girl do a sport except figure skating, maybe diving. There are a few

42

things that girls can do just as well as men, you might say. Most of them, they can’t, and nobody
wants to see them. And so, why would we – [spending?] all that money? I went over to Brown at
(inaudible) to see some of them play basketball (inaudible) they didn’t hardly speak to you when
you get there. I went over to look. Anyway, I just think the college is going crazy about money,
[just like?] –
TC: So, you think – well, what about them – but having teams?

MWD: I think the boys go too far, too. What?

TC: Well, what about the women [00:14:00] being able to have the teams? Like, being able to
play –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: – basketball?

MWD: Why don’t they, if they want to be equal, try out for the men’s team? See if they can
make it. That would be equal.

TC: That’s an interesting idea.

MWD: That would be equal. They couldn’t. Some could, some sports.

TC: Right.

MWD: Not many.

TC: Right.

MWD: So, they really want to be favored.

43

TC: Yeah, but I think in sports, especially, because there is such a difference (inaudible)

MWD: [And they get?] (inaudible) come to college, they let them in because they may not be as
quite as good at studies, but because they can play basketball, they’re taller, they’re good at
jumping – that hockey (inaudible) is ridiculous. They’re good at – I know the [Jeffords?]. Do you
know them?

TC: No.
MWD: One of them played on the hockey team – girl, I think last year (inaudible) on the hockey
team, the girls’ hockey team.

TC: Okay.
MWD: I never went to watch it but –

TC: (inaudible)
MWD: – I know she’s [00:15:00] working out. I think it was last year. I wouldn’t think they’d be
very good – hockey, maybe they are. I didn’t watch them.

TC: They’ve actually been pretty good.

MWD: Against other women.
TC: Mm-hmm. There’s much more intercollegiate in the Ivy League. I mean, they’re playing –

MWD: I see it!
TC: – all over.

44

MWD: I belong to that sports foundation – I give some money to – and I get all these things
(inaudible) but I think they’re all spending too much money. I don’t (inaudible)
TC: What do you think they should spend –

MWD: What?
TC: – the money on?

MWD: What?
TC: What else would you have them – would you like them to spend the money on?

MWD: I don’t think they have the money to spend in the first place, and I don’t think they have
the money to do all this other stuff they’re doing.

TC: Right.

MWD: All this building.

TC: Outside, right now.

MWD: Yeah. Well, yeah, I didn’t really approve of the medical school coming in, because I
thought they couldn’t afford it. Is it taking away from the rest of the college?

TC: Oh, I don’t think so at all. In fact, I think it enhances the college, because then you have the
reputation of a very good undergraduate school [00:16:00] and a good medical school.

MWD: Well, somebody told me that Brown didn’t really compare with a lot of the other medical
schools. I don’t know if that’s true or not.

45

TC: I think it’s still very young, comparatively –
MWD: [Well, I?] –
TC: – to other [medical?] –

MWD: (inaudible) [Dr. Herndon?], who’s, I guess, head of the orthopedic department here. He
just accepted a job (inaudible) [guess they’re?] (inaudible) the University of Pittsburgh, head of
the orthopedic. And out there, they’re doing all this – I guess all that operating – he’s one of
these people [that’s?] (inaudible) [cut off?], things like that. And he’s gone up to a – [but?] I’m
sure the other place is better.

TC: Yeah, I would say probably right now. But they’re working on it. They’re trying to gain a
better reputation.

MWD: Of course, if they keep the money raising for the medical school separate from the other
– but Brown’s always crying poor mouth and all the other colleges are. And I don’t think
(inaudible) or whoever decides our money has much sense about money. [00:17:00] Is that on
there? [laughs]

TC: I can cancel it if you want. [laughs]

MWD: No? (inaudible) It’s where it’s going.
TC: Yeah, there’s the possibility of someone –
MWD: (inaudible) I shouldn’t say that. They may not have (inaudible) [laughter] [81, 81?] – and
I don’t approve of the faculty having so much power (inaudible) there used to be an NROTC
here at Brown. My son was in it. They’re begging for scholarships. They get scholarships with
that. But – lot of the professors don’t like the idea of there being an NROTC.

46

TC: A lot of the students don’t, either.
MWD: [So, there, there’s the money and?] – what?

TC: A lot of the students, don’t, either.

MWD: That’s too bad.
TC: But there are –

MWD: I don’t think they should have the say about it.
TC: Well, there are individuals –

MWD: Some people like it.
TC: – who are on campus who are, who are doing that.

MWD: And they lose a lot of money, because they don’t have it. What did you say? [00:18:00]
TC: There are some individual students on campus who are ROTC going through school –
MWD: Not NROTC, are they? This is a Navy –
TC: Which is –
MWD: – Reserves Training –
TC: Well, this is –

47

MWD: My son went in the Navy when he came out.

TC: Okay.

MWD: Then he became a flyer. Well, where do they go? Providence College is ROTC. There’s
no ROTC at Brown that I know of.

TC: No, there isn’t.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: But I was under the impression that individual students were able to get ROTC scholarships
and go to Brown.

MWD: (inaudible) they might be (inaudible)

TC: [No, so?], I’ll check that out. I’ll find out about that.

MWD: I don’t say they might not be able to get in some way or that you can go to Brown, too
(inaudible) Brown.

TC: That’s what I thought, that you could do it kind of in that way.

MWD: I know Providence College has an ROTC, so I was wondering if they could go into one
of those other groups that are around here. [00:19:00]

TC: Were there any scholarships when you were at school?

MWD: NROTC?
TC: Any type at all for women who were interested in studying but couldn’t afford –

48

MWD: I think there –
TC: – let’s say they needed to work –

MWD: I’m sure some people had scholarships, probably, that couldn’t afford it. But I don’t
know – when my daughter was here – she graduated in ’56 – I know that they had scholarships.
But I don’t know – I think it was for need rather than – like NROTC. Well, then NROTC was
here, but no women went into it, of course.
TC: Right. And what about your – what did your mother do after your father had died? Just
going back to another subject, I was just thinking –

MWD: My mother was chiefly running a household (inaudible) my mother did do a little
teaching. My mother was a schoolteacher after she graduated from college. And she did a little
teaching when – I think when – I think maybe a little down – [00:20:00] [Macon?] School
(inaudible) private school. But in general, she didn’t do anything.
TC: And did – was – did your eldest brother stay at home? That kind of – was there someone
home with her?
MWD: Till we got married, yes. My oldest brother stayed – my sister got married right out of
college, one of them. And my oldest brother stayed home, and my other one didn’t marry. [And I
did?], and my younger brother – but my – there’s another sister, older than I am, four years older,
that was working up in Boston. She went to Cambridge School of – they called it Cambridge
School of Architecture and Landscape Gardening, I think. That – I think that became part of
Harvard. And then she worked up in Boston. She didn’t live at home (inaudible) nobody thought
everybody had to live some separate place.

TC: Right.

49

MWD: (inaudible) the way they talk nowadays. Well, they can’t even buy a single house now.
[00:21:00] They’re talking about – during the Depression, you couldn’t, certainly, buy a single
house.

TC: Right.

MWD: You’re lucky to have a place to live anywhere. But now everybody wants everything,
right?

TC: It’s a big change, yes.
MWD: And that’s –

TC: Very much so.
MWD: – what’s ruining the country. No wonder the country’s going broke. I do some driving
for…I’ve been involved in FISH [Friends in Serving Humanity], ever heard of that organization?

TC: No, what is it?

MWD: I think it started in England, and some of the churches have sponsored it here. We used to
drive to (inaudible) hospital, the doctor’s office – so forth, for nothing. And eventually, it – the
person running it and everybody was getting older, they decided to close it up in Providence, but
I think there’s one in Barrington. I think there’s some around, [00:22:00] still. And I said I will
take Mrs. Warren – why don’t we each take one person. I’ll take Mrs. Warren. You know, she’s
going to outlive me. And she calls me most every day. [laughter]

TC: How old is she?

50

MWD: She’s in the eighties somewhere, but I don’t know where, she won’t tell. [laughter] But I
have to drive to get some food for her. She’s so fat – she’s Jewish. You know, they eat too much.
I have to get food for her twice a week, generally.

TC: Wow. And just going shopping? Does she come with you?

MWD: No, she doesn’t walk very well, but next week she wants me to take her to the doctor.
And I’m getting kind of tired sometimes this week.
TC: Can imagine with all your –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: – grandchildren.

MWD: Do you ever buy lox?

TC: I’ve had them. I don’t particularly like them.

MWD: [She?] (inaudible) lox. Do you know they cost $13 or $14 a pound? She’s under
Medicaid. You know what [00:23:00] Medicaid is?

TC: Right.
MWD: She takes lots of medicine because she gets it for nothing. And she goes – [laughs] she’s
not doing anything – doctor, you – she has Medicare, but you don’t – they don’t pay for
everything, Medicare (inaudible) [Blue Cross?], but she gets that (inaudible) and then she’ll
spend $25 for food, somebody that’s much overweight. And she thinks the government’s got
loads of money.

TC: Really?

51

MWD: Course they do. These poor people. There’s something wrong with our system that we
don’t teach them a little economics or something. But money does not grow on trees. There isn’t
all this money around.
TC: That’s really interesting that –

MWD: It’s frightening. A lot of those poor people think, oh, if only the wealthy people gave all
this money out, then it – and the Pope talks that way. If you – if all the wealthy gave – all shared
and gave to all the poor, everything would be all right. [00:24:00] There isn’t that much.

TC: Yeah.

MWD: And then they have a million children.
TC: Well –

MWD: What church do you go to?

TC: I’m Episcopal.

MWD: Are you? Well, I don’t know, it’s really frightening.

TC: I agree, very much.

MWD: Exploding population’s our big problem in the world.
TC: Well, that’s what I –

MWD: (inaudible)

52

TC: That’s something I’ve been thinking – hmm? No, that’s just something I was thinking about,
just about, then, birth control. I mean –

MWD: You’re thinking about what?

TC: Thinking about birth control in that sense, then.
MWD: I agree with –
TC: If you should have –
MWD: – birth control, abortions, whatever. [laughter]

TC: Well, it’s interesting. It’s really interesting.
MWD: Of course the Pope – the pope has an idea – of course if you don’t live with anybody,
then you wouldn’t have any children. Unfortunately, that doesn’t work out in practice.

TC: Not at all. Not at all.
MWD: And another thing I don’t like [00:25:00] about Brown (inaudible) [kids?] – the teachers,
all this thing about apartheid. It’s a tough situation down there. I wish we would scream about
Russia as much as we do down there. You see they’re having the riots in Russia now about the
different nationalities. Have you been reading the –

TC: Yes.

MWD: It’s really tough, what should be done. I think we should keep our nose out of it. It’s not
helping the blacks.
TC: But it’s not going to change, though. That’s the big –

53

MWD: What?
TC: That’s – it’s not going to change. I mean, that – they have no intention of changing the
government.
MWD: It’s not going to change anyway. [Don’t – it?] – right. They’re going to have a big
(inaudible) actually those companies – all these big companies, like Exxon – they gave jobs to
the blacks. And the company – now what have they done? They’re so – these? – not – Exxon’s
still there, but some of them – they’ve sold them to somebody from South Africa. Do you think
that’s going to be [00:26:00] better for the blacks? They’re getting out – but they sold the
company to somebody that probably is very much for apartheid. I don’t know, but they’ve sold
them all to (inaudible) and what’s more, a lot of those blacks were never there anyway. And
you’ve heard about the fighting amongst the blacks, haven’t you?
TC: Oh, yes. Well, it’s very homeland-oriented. You know, they’re very –
MWD: The Zulus and something like that –

TC: Yeah.

MWD: And these people poured in there to get jobs. You must be getting late.

TC: Oh, no, not at all.
MWD: They poured in to get jobs – the blacks. Now, who was there originally – what race – not
the black – now, I worked with blacks – I told you, I worked at the polls or – what do you call
them – [primary?] – everybody else working there was black. Or colored (inaudible) they just
love Jesse Jackson. He is attractive looking, I think. But outside of that, [00:27:00] one of them
kept talking about the blacks were the first race in the Earth, civilization started down in Africa,
and that – everybody there was black (inaudible) [laughs] maybe they were. I don’t know,

54

obviously, [now?]. And she went on – she was quite an intelligent black, but she went on and on
about the blacks, all the things they had done, everything. But nowadays, when they give them
freedom, like, [and go in that?] – they can’t handle it.

TC: Well, it needs to be moderated. That’s for sure.
MWD: Well, look at the way they can’t handle it up here. Have you noticed – you take the
Portuguese, from the Cape Verde islands. They’re colored. And they’re very good looking. And
they keep their property up, their hard workers – one works for me. You take our native blacks,
they’re apt to ruin a neighborhood. The ones that you – we get a [00:28:00] lot of nice colored
people, fairly light blacks who lived in Providence. And they weren’t shiftless, and they did
work. And some of them were (inaudible) one was at Pembroke with me. But nowadays –

TC: She was in your class?
MWD: – the ones that came from the South – what?

TC: She was in your class, this woman?
MWD: No, I think she was actually there – Beatrice Coleman, she might have been two or three
years ahead of me. You could look the name up. Beatrice Coleman.

TC: Oh, I’ll do that.
MWD: She’s awfully nice. And they don’t have that chip on their shoulders. She’s always –

TC: And she’s black?

MWD: What?
TC: She’s black? Beatrice –

55

MWD: Yeah, she’s black.

TC: Okay.

MWD: Colored. I don’t use the word colored.

TC: (inaudible) new terminology.
MWD: She used to live outside the city, but now she lives down at – Grace Church built one of
those – I guess Section 8 deals across from the public library. And she did it down there. But
there’s a [00:29:00] Mrs. Abrams, whether she still lives here – lives right here on Meeting
Street, right next to the gas station. I think she might have gone to – I’m not sure if she went to
Brown – I’m not sure about here. My hairdresser was mentioning about her being there and I
never –

TC: Would that be her maiden name or her married name?
MWD: I’m sure married.

TC: Okay.
MWD: She had a sister – used to live there, and they said – this person said they’d try to buy that
house (inaudible) right next to Wendy’s, that little house.

TC: Oh, right. Oh, yeah.
MWD: I think they may still live there. But she’d be fairly old. Whether she’s still alive or not I
don’t know but I know she told them she was never going to sell that.

56

TC: May I – I’m going to move back to the questions, because there’s something that – a specific
question that I wanted to ask you is when you were studying in college, I mean, did you feel like
– was your – did you want to study in order to get an education so you could get a job? Was that
the logical –

MWD: No, we never thought of jobs in those days. [00:30:00]
TC: No? What –

MWD: We didn’t go to college to get jobs. We went to be educated.
TC: And –

MWD: We were just expected to go.
TC: – just – really?

MWD: My family, we were.
TC: Did you feel like it prepared you for –

MWD: No, we didn’t really (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) you got to take another year
somewhere. What would you prepare to do?
TC: Well, just to enter the world, I suppose –

MWD: Yeah (inaudible)
TC: – and know more about it.

57

MWD: And because we have – they always had a lot volunteer work people to do – they didn’t
expect the women to work. My mother had to give up working when she got married. She
couldn’t teach school.
TC: Couldn’t? By who – who wouldn’t –
MWD: The public schools – she taught at public schools [or some?] (inaudible) but she – I think
she could finish out the year or, it doesn’t say it there.

TC: How did she feel about that? [00:31:00] Did she want to keep working?
MWD: People didn’t think of it –
TC: [Or just in the?] –
MWD: – there weren’t enough jobs – I don’t think there are enough jobs to go around now,
frankly. There weren’t enough jobs to go around. I think they take the – they didn’t expect
everybody in a family to be working like they expect nowadays. The husband worked and
supported the family (inaudible) children grew up. I don’t remember being pushed to get jobs,
because my brother – my father was a lawyer – [00:31:34]

- End of Track 2 -

Track 3
[00:00:00]
MWD: – you know, they closed up some schools –

TC: Right, and that’s a big problem now.

58

MWD: – now they’re going to need them again.
TC: I would say that’s a very, very big problem. Did you have much – was there sort of a career
counseling program when you were in school? Or anything like that?
MWD: I don’t remember having that at all –

TC: No.

MWD: (inaudible) [job?].
TC: Really? Did they talk about getting married? Was it like –

MWD: I don’t (inaudible) [what we did that was?] (inaudible) probably helped us with our
courses, but I don’t remember them talking about getting married or getting a job.

TC: That’s interesting.

MWD: And (inaudible) one thing she regrets, her father would never let her take a job. She
would like to work – he said he could support her. Maybe they looked down on people taking
lots of jobs.

TC: How did you feel about taking it?
MWD: What –

TC: Did you want to? To get a job?

MWD: I didn’t think about it one way or the other, [00:01:00] because I don’t really like typing
and that sort of work. Now, I – maybe I should have become a – gone into social work. But then

59

I think – I usually had to take some other courses, too, I’m sure. I did some – volunteerism –
those who worked, and they gave me gas money.

TC: Oh, okay.

MWD: So, you had a lot of things you did for nothing.

TC: Right.

MWD: Just like I’m doing it for nothing for Mrs. Warren.
TC: But she’s – well, hopefully, you’re doing something for her, I hope she’s appreciative of it.
MWD: No, she’s – [laughter] she likes to think she pays, so she will give me a couple of dollars
[that I?] (inaudible) do all her shopping and (inaudible) I don’t remember talking about a job,
that’s an interesting question, really. I should call one of my classmates and ask them that
question.

TC: I’d be interested to find out what they said. [00:02:00]
MWD: I don’t remember them ever counseling about jobs but my sister-in-law, I know – in fact,
I don’t think my family – in the summer she used to be a waitress way back then. But I don’t
think my family wanted me to be a waitress. They never suggested that I be a waitress. My
daughter waitressed in the summer to earn money. Do you work in the summer?

TC: Yes.

MWD: What do you do?
TC: I – well, last summer, I took a semester and I studied at the University of Vienna in Austria.

60

MWD: Oh, yeah?

TC: But the summers before that, I was in St. Louis, working. One summer, I did clerical work
and data entry for a computer company.
MWD: And what kind of a – data what?
TC: Data entry. Writing –

MWD: Oh, did they teach you this?

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: Or did you know it anyway?

TC: I knew some of it, and I was taught some of it.

MWD: You had it in school.
TC: Right. And I learned – [did my?] (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)
MWD: – oh, they do have a big computer [00:03:00] department. Do you take it at Brown?

TC: No, I didn’t. I took a computer course in high school, and then I just learned how to use the
computers myself at Brown.

MWD: Really?

TC: There’s a fantastic system you can use, and hook up everywhere. Now they have
Macintoshes and IBMs, also.

61

MWD: Yeah?
TC: And then one summer, I was an intern at an advertising agency, and in order to make – and I
lived in Washington, DC. So, in order to make money there, I painted houses, which was –

MWD: Where did you paint houses?
TC: – outside and inside in Washington, DC, which was –

MWD: Are you good at painting?
TC: Well, houses. But that’s about it. I’m not very good – small, artistic –
MWD: Oh, I think that’s –
TC: But I would –

MWD: Quite a lot to do with the houses.

TC: I would never do it again.

MWD: No?

TC: No. It was very hard. Really hard work. But I was doing this other job for free, and I learned
a lot more, working for an advertising agency.

MWD: When? This summer?

TC: Last summer.

MWD: Oh, last summer. Where? St. Louis?

62

TC: No, this is in Washington, the same time.

MWD: Oh, you’re in Washington. [00:04:00] How did you get down in Washington?
TC: I went with two girlfriends, and we stayed in Georgetown houses –

MWD: But where do you stay? It’s so expensive to live down there.
TC: Well, we stayed in Georgetown University –

MWD: Oh.
TC: – in their housing, one of their dormitories – see, that’s very nice, is you can stay in the
dormitories in the summer.
MWD: Oh, yeah. Well, who – and were you painting the stuff in Georgetown?

TC: Mm-hmm.
MWD: [Yeah?], I mean –
TC: Some houses –
MWD: – were you painting the college or –

TC: Oh, no.
MWD: – the community?

TC: The community.

63

MWD: And (inaudible)

TC: That was another company.
MWD: – got you the jobs?

TC: A friend of mine worked at the advertising agency, and he mentioned it to me. So, I just sent
sort of a resume and a letter. And I got that job, which was for free. And then the house painting
was – a lot of other friends of mine were down in Washington, and one guy – there’s a thing
called College Pro Painters, which is a group.

MWD: Yeah.

TC: And he was a part of that, and we worked for him. And he went out and found houses, and
then [00:05:00] we would go paint.

MWD: Really?
TC: It was very good, it was –

MWD: (inaudible) don’t you go back to St. Louis at all in the summer?

TC: That summer I didn’t, but every other summer I have.

MWD: What are you going to do this summer now?

TC: I’m graduating.

MWD: (inaudible)

64

TC: So, I don’t know, I’m not sure.
MWD: You talking about place? – what are you trying to do?

TC: I’d like to go into writing, some sort of journalism.

MWD: Oh, are you?

TC: For magazines.

MWD: You’d like to write for a magazine.

TC: I would love to.

MWD: Yeah.

TC: So, we’ll see what happens.
MWD: [Well, they have them coming up – now, Brown has people come here for jobs. I mean,
different companies, don’t they?
TC: Oh, tremendously – a lot.

MWD: Now, do you have any coming here for magazines?
TC: No. They’re all for investment – right now, a lot for banking and investment banking.
Corporate management.
MWD: It’s really awful how so much has been –
TC: It’s much – it’s all finance oriented.

65

MWD: (inaudible) I think it’s frightening. Look at the mess they made in [00:06:00] New York.
[laughs]
TC: Yeah, it’s – that’s why it’s harder for me – I’m doing it all – most of it on my own.
MWD: It’s hard why? Because – that mess?

TC: Well, because I’m not interested in it. I don’t want to go into the banking scene.
MWD: Why would – I just don’t understand (inaudible) ever want to work for a newspaper?

TC: Mm-hmm. Well, I’m working for the Brown Daily Herald.

MWD: Oh, are you?

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: Yeah. And you like that?

TC: I like that a lot, yeah. It’s nice.

MWD: But the newspapers don’t come around and try to get people to work?

TC: No, it’s very competitive, and they’re not as willing to hire people right out of college. They
want you to have a lot more experience.

MWD: Yeah.
TC: So, you usually go to a much smaller town –

66

MWD: Yeah.
TC: – somewhere that you would find on your own and write for them, and then move back to a
city.
MWD: It’s tough.

TC: That’s my route. [laughs]

MWD: I think it’s downright (inaudible) somebody wants to come in.

TC: Yes? [00:07:00] (break in audio) Towards more questions of Pembroke, Pembroke-oriented.
So, I know that you said that you didn’t live in the dorms. But did you know people –

MWD: I did.
TC: – friendly with people who did?

MWD: I did. (inaudible) played basketball and sports together.

TC: And what kind of regulations were on them? You mentioned at Smith they had curfews and
–
MWD: I’m sure they had to be in at a certain time. I think (inaudible) everywhere. They couldn’t
just be roaming the streets at night. And, as I say, there was no liquor –

TC: Right.
MWD: – around.

TC: What sort of social activities went on in the evenings?

67

MWD: What kind of – what? In the evenings would they do?

TC: So, yeah, social activities.

MWD: (inaudible) you said social life? [I don’t?] know. I think they went to bed at night.
[laughter] I don’t know what they did. Maybe they played bridge. We used to play a lot of bridge
at one time. People don’t play bridge much anymore, do they?

TC: Not as much. My mother does, once in a while.
MWD: And we used to – when I was young, you didn’t have the radio, you didn’t have TV.
[00:08:00] [So, what the children would do – there were other card games you could play.
TC: And you mentioned the dances earlier. Were there –

MWD: The which?
TC: Dances, and balls –
MWD: Yes, they did have some formal – they dressed up for them. Now, whether that was – I
don’t remember how many times a year they had anything like that. I just remember (inaudible) I
might look at home, see what it says on the outside of it, whether that was the junior prom or
whether it was a –

TC: Okay.
MWD: – whether they had it regularly, I don’t remember. I missed those sophomore and junior
years.

TC: Right.

68

MWD: Freshman year, I wasn’t interested.
TC: Could you feel very much a part of the college then? Or were you – did you feel that you
were very separate from it?

MWD: No, I felt very much a part of it. You know, you went over to the gym and practiced and
– maybe we were where the day students – there were quite a few day students here. Are there
now [00:09:00] still a lot of day students?

TC: Not as much, no.
MWD: They’re not letting many natives in then – Providence people. Well, they might be
coming from more in around Rhode Island.

TC: Oh, there are a lot of people from Rhode Island, yeah.

MWD: It wasn’t necessarily from Providence. And West House started (inaudible) no, we didn’t
have a West House. You know, the West House up in Brown Street? The corner of – well, it
used to be the corner of Meeting, right up here. What’s that house on the corner of Meeting and
Brown?

TC: Hillel House?

MWD: What?

TC: Right now, there’s a Jewish center there.

MWD: No, no, no. That’s the (inaudible)

TC: Hillel House.

69

MWD: – that’s on the west side. I’m talking about on the northeast side of Cushing Street, on the
corner there. You know where Cushing is.

TC: Oh, oh, oh, right, okay. It’s a dormitory right now. Just a student house.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: That one, you mean?
MWD: I’m trying to think whether it was that one. I’m trying to think [00:10:00] of the west –
you know, I said first here Meeting. I’m not sure whether this is – no, I think it was this street.
What is the house on the corner here? The northeast corner –

TC: Right here at Cushing and Brown?
MWD: Right up here –

TC: I mean Meeting and Brown?

MWD: Meeting and Brown.
TC: There – it’s – I don’t believe it’s Brown-owned or anything.

MWD: What?
TC: I don’t – I’ve never been in there, if it’s something for Brown –

MWD: It wasn’t a dormitory, it was just a place you could stay in the daytime.

TC: Okay.

70

MWD: No, they did have a few places you could sleep. They must have something – now, what
is that – I’m trying to visualize that building now. Well, when I was here, we hung around –
well, of course, we studied up in the Pembroke Hall up at the top floor. At night, I don’t think we
hung around here.

TC: No?
MWD: And then [00:11:00] we ate – trying to think which one we did eat in. We had a place,
and it isn’t the same as – there that we would eat our lunch, and you can buy your little food
there. But I don’t know – this is the basement of Pembroke Hall. I’m not sure. I have to look at
it. Is it – what’s in the basement there now? Do you know –
TC: [There?] –

MWD: Do you ever go in Pembroke Hall?

TC: The library, do you mean?

MWD: No. Yeah, the library here.
TC: It’s –

MWD: What do you call it?
TC: – Pembroke Library.

MWD: Pembroke Library. Do you ever go in the basement?

TC: There are classrooms there now.

71

MWD: I have a feeling that we had a place we could – we had a locker room, a place to hang
our clothes, coats. And I think there was a place where we could eat our lunch and buy a few
things [00:12:00] I think it must be there, because I can’t – you know, this has changed so – no,
that’s across the street, isn’t it? I’m trying to think of what [today’s?] –

TC: Oh, yeah.

MWD: No, that’s Alumnae Hall. It must have been there, because it wasn’t in the new building.
The Gate and all that. That wasn’t in when I’m talking about.
TC: Okay. I – yeah, I don’t know when the Gate – when that section was built, because I know
that Morriss and Champlin were all built –
MWD: That wasn’t built –
TC: – very, very late.

MWD: What?

TC: Those were built very, very late. And even underneath Alumnae, I think.

MWD: Yeah.
TC: So, was it – was there anything between the men’s campus and the women’s?
MWD: (inaudible) [any building?] –
TC: Was it – were there buildings there? Was it mostly houses?
MWD: No, there must have been – I’m trying to visualize – I was over the – where the medical
school is. What was there? I cannot – [00:13:00] (inaudible) and then the parking lot on –

72

between Angell and Arnold Street – there’s some building in there somewhere, probably on
Waterman. And they (inaudible) that’s been changed a lot anyway.
TC: Do you have any – a best memory of being at Brown? One of the best things that happened?

MWD: It was a generally good memory, I think. [laughs]

TC: Really, that’s great.

MWD: Yeah.
TC: How about –

MWD: I enjoyed it.

TC: How about a worst memory?

MWD: Don’t remember any.

TC: No?

MWD: I should.

TC: Any losses in basketball that you especially remember? Or games?

MWD: No, I don’t remember that.

TC: Did many people come to watch the games?
MWD: No. Some. You know, the [00:14:00] – You’ve been in the (inaudible), the library – I
mean, the gym, the old gym. You know, they had the balcony up top –

73

TC: Right.

MWD: Where are people going to sit? They can sit there. You can’t get many people in there.
TC: Did – was – athletics, I mean, did many women participate in athletics? Was it a very –

MWD: We all had to take gym.

TC: Why was that? Do you know?

MWD: Gym? Don’t they have to take it now?
TC: No. Most people –

MWD: (inaudible) I wonder if they continued all the time that we had to take gym, whether it
went through to your senior year. I was always so involved in sports…I don’t know if people
took gym, but they may not have done it – had to do it senior year. I don’t remember that.
TC: So, it was –

MWD: I remember freshman year.
TC: And it was looked upon as – was it looked upon as unladylike –

MWD: No.
TC: – to play basketball [00:15:00] or –

MWD: No, no.

74

TC: No?
MWD: No. And we had, as I say, the bowling alleys. But I was just trying to – I don’t know why
they had bowling (inaudible) they had some class and we played each other’s classes some. I
mean, really, before you had TV and all those things, it was much more – I mean, it was much
more in sports. I always did a lot of sports. Lot of my friends did. But then a lot of them, of
course, didn’t. But isn’t that awful? I can’t remember about senior year. I had that break in
between, and I can’t remember about what I took (inaudible)

TC: And what about relationship between the students and the professors?

MWD: Students and who now?
TC: And the professors? [00:16:00] Did you see them outside of class? Or was it –

MWD: No.
TC: – strictly an academic setting?
MWD: Not too much. I don’t think we saw – Dean Morriss was the – ever heard of Dean
Morriss?

TC: She gave all the furniture in this room.

MWD: Did she?

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: Oh, she was the dean when I was here.

TC: What was she like?

75

MWD: She was – very nice-looking woman (inaudible). Not thin. I mean, Dean Lewis, she was
the one, I think, when my daughter was here. She was – much slighter build and everything. But
you’ve got pictures of Dean Morriss, haven’t you?

TC: Oh, yes.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: I’ve seen pictures of her.
MWD: – imposing woman, yeah. But she – I mean, she wasn’t, I mean, friendly with us all. I
mean, she’s friendly, I don’t mean that. But I don’t think you were so intimate with your
teachers. Or maybe you are now. Are you intimate with your teachers now?
TC: Some of them, yes. It’s – definitely depends on the teacher.
MWD: Yeah, well that’s true. [00:17:00] I was trying to remember – I remember an International
Relations that I took, Professor [Slough or?] – I had to take it over at the Brown campus. I know
this was senior year I (inaudible)

TC: With the men?

MWD: So we could go to the Brown campus to take other courses. I think maybe freshman year,
Biology – we had in the Biology building. But we had a number of classes over here. And I think
there was (inaudible) girls freshman year, maybe once over here.

TC: Right.

MWD: Now you have them all mixed. The boys have professors here, too.

76

TC: Right.

MWD: But, see, again, I don’t remember in between. I remember taking History over here, and
Latin in there. I don’t think there were any boys in those classes, here. But when we went over to
campus, as you get [00:18:00] more advanced, you go over to more advanced courses. I think
there were more beginning courses over here.
TC: Were you encouraged to take much more advanced courses? Was it –

MWD: No, we get all these required courses, and then you had your major, and you had so many
things you had to do in your major (inaudible)
TC: Like – yeah, professors pushing you to do better. Was it all – was it individual?
MWD: Maybe they did with some – I don’t know with me. I mean, you took five courses, you’re
fairly busy with what you’re doing. Then you had – sophomore year was mostly required
courses, and you picked your major in junior year, you go onto your major. And that I – when – I
was taking several of the – I think my senior year, perhaps all of them, all of them were over in
the men’s campus.
TC: And they were pretty friendly? The men? When you went over there – [00:19:00]

MWD: Who?
TC: – so far as –

MWD: The men?

TC: Mm-hmm.

77

MWD: Oh, yeah, they were friendly when you saw them, but the – there were lots of – more men
around, but it’s plain that all the girls didn’t go out with them. I think they went up to Wheaton
College a lot to – and some of the other went around –

TC: Yeah.
MWD: – to date. Nowadays, of course, Wheaton is having trouble, and they’re going to let men
in, because they’re really having trouble with people going there. And why is that? Because you
have so many girls were here maybe.

TC: My mother went to Wheaton.

MWD: Did she?

TC: Mm-hmm. But it’s interesting, because she is pushing for the merger, simply for the life of
Wheaton College, because so many women today are moving much more into coed universities.

MWD: And she wants the coed?

TC: Only because she thinks Wheaton won’t survive if it stays only women.
MWD: I was up there this – was it Sunday? They had a concert up in Wheaton. That’s a
beautiful chapel they have there they had it in.

TC: Yeah.
MWD: Lovely (inaudible) [00:20:00] [and some group?] (inaudible) [brothers?] singing. And –
TC: So, not many – you don’t think –

MWD: What?

78

TC: – many women dated the Brown men?
MWD: Well, I don’t think – well, quite a few did, I guess. But I know – and quite a few – I
mean, I wouldn’t really know whether they all dated or didn’t.

TC: No.

MWD: I was always very busy when I was there freshman year in my sports and your studying.
You didn’t have much time left for anything else anyway. I wanted to get decent marks to get in
anywhere else, because I’d always planned to move on to Vassar. By the time I got through it I
could have moved on to either Vassar or Smith, I decided on Smith.
TC: But you kept the idea in your head in the first year at Brown that you were going to go –

MWD: Hmm? Yeah.
TC: –somewhere else?
MWD: Well, that’s what we always thought – I was going to go there.

TC: How did you feel about going to Brown in the first place, then?

MWD: How do I feel [00:21:00] when I did what?
TC: About coming here in the first place? That you would just use it as –
MWD: Oh, I didn’t mind too much, I don’t think. I don’t think I minded. I was the type – maybe
liked to stay home.

TC: Yeah. It could be true. It’s nice. [laughs]

79

MWD: And so, you didn’t have to worry. It was very easy just to stay home.

TC: Did you correspond with your mother much while you were at Smith?

MWD: Through the laundry. We sent our laundry home, did you know that?

TC: No.

MWD: You had these laundry things, you put them down to the post office and sent it home.

TC: That’s interesting. My mom wouldn’t like that. [laughs]

MWD: I don’t know whether (inaudible) I’m sure I corresponded, but I don’t remember anything
about how much. She certainly didn’t come up that much, or she didn’t – well, it wasn’t too
convenient a place to get.

TC: Right. [00:22:00]

MWD: And she didn’t drive until (inaudible) old age she finally did drive. And she was a terrible
driver. [laughter]
TC: And what about your – rest of your brothers and sisters?

MWD: About what?
TC: Did you correspond with them while they were –
MWD: Oh, I don’t –

TC: So, they were at Harvard and your sisters were at Vassar?

80

MWD: – I don’t think so. I don’t think – I mean, you’d see them or not. My – I did write a lot –
my father (inaudible) my mother used to go out to New York sometimes when they’d come
down from Vassar to New York and see them. It wasn’t so easy to get around. Of course, from
Boston it was easy. But from Vassar, it wasn’t so easy to get around as it is now – just get in a
car.

TC: Right.

MWD: I think you must have to change in New York to go up there but I don’t know, I can’t
remember. I did go up there once. How do they have (inaudible) corresponding – do most people
correspond much when they’re in college? [00:23:00]
TC: They have a couple letters of – actually, many letters from one woman, and I don’t recall her
name. And – because we were talking about – that there was not a telephone where you couldn’t
just call home, or go home as often. So, there are a couple boxes of letters that they found of
Pembroke women.

MWD: (inaudible) once a week or something like that, and I just don’t remember. Didn’t
impress me one way or another.
TC: How did it affect your family, then, when your father died? Must have been –

MWD: Terribly.
TC: – awful.
MWD: I was – and my youngest brother, of course, was – what was he? About 12 (inaudible)
[my youngest?] brother (inaudible) was born in 1912. My father died in 1923, so he was only 11
years old. I don’t know if it affected him as [00:24:00] much as the others, really. But surely it’s
a – because my brother was just about to get out of law school. And my sister was married, and

81

she came up – actually, she and her husband and two or three children…they came up and lived
in the house that we lived in. We sort of divided it up. Plenty of room, for a while. I think my
father had been paying their rent. [laughter]
TC: A-ha! So, then they came up – okay.

MWD: But it does affect people a lot. And some people more than others. Like, one of my
brothers, I think, was affected terribly. The one in – the younger one at Harvard. But that’s the
way things go. Nowadays, they wouldn’t – he wouldn’t have died nowadays. He had pneumonia.
[00:25:00]

TC: Oh.

MWD: I guess they have penicillin now. They didn’t have penicillin. You really had nothing.
You just had to get through the crisis, as they call it. Some people did, some people didn’t. They
had nothing to give you.
TC: Yeah. You mentioned being – that you – right now, seeming pretty politically active, or –
and that you said that you liked politics.

MWD: I like politics, I do.

TC: Were you able to do much with that in college?

MWD: No, I (inaudible)
TC: Insofar as becoming involved in any international issue –

MWD: No.
TC: – or anything?

82

MWD: Don’t think I did anything in college with politics. But after college, of course, I worked
in the Women’s Republican Club. I was always interested about the voting (inaudible)
TC: Really? How –

MWD: (inaudible) my father ran for [00:26:00] governor one year (inaudible) But I was young
then, about 1912. And, no, I – are you interested in politics?

TC: Mm-hmm. I don’t want to go into it, but I’m interested in following it.

MWD: I hope you don’t like Dukakis.
TC: I don’t – [laughter] I’ve got to think more about the –
MWD: So many of the –
TC: – people now.
MWD: – young people are Democrats now. If you lived in Rhode Island all your life, you’d be a
Republican.

TC: That’s funny. And St. Louis is very Republican, but I’m definitely going to vote Democrat.

MWD: You’re going to vote Democrat?

TC: Uh-huh.

MWD: Well, who is in it for you to pick from? Dukakis is a big liar. He’s given himself credit
for what he didn’t do.

83

TC: Well, actually, I have to –
MWD: And he may not like nuclear power –
TC: – research them more. [00:27:00] I don’t know much about them.
MWD: And he’s really put one of the companies in bankruptcy that – New Hampshire utility has
gone into bankruptcy on account of Dukakis. And he was in for governor, you know. Then he
got beaten, and King came in. He’s the one that did a lot of this stuff in Massachusetts. And
Dukakis got in again. Everybody – all the politicians take credit for everything.

TC: Oh, definitely.
MWD: And just what he believes in, I don’t know. But I read some article that said he’s getting
so much money – 20% of it was coming from the Greek community. Not just in Boston. All
over. The Greeks are supporting Dukakis. I didn’t realize there were that many Greeks.
TC: I think – yeah.
MWD: And they – what else (inaudible) [something they?] say you’re liberal or a conservative. I
no longer know which is a liberal and which is a conservative. [laughter] They change. Now is
free trade being a liberal [00:28:00] or being a conservative?

TC: Yeah. Moderate. No, I would say liberal.
MWD: Some of – I think – I’m not sure which the Democrats choose to believe in, but that’s one
of the things that – coming up. Should we have free trade or should we make it so that countries
can’t – other countries can’t send their goods in here or they can pay tariffs and stuff, which –

TC: (inaudible)

84

MWD: And, of course, the Democrats always held – talk about how they’re helping the poor
people. Is your mother a Democrat or Republican?

TC: My mother’s a Democrat, my father’s a Republican. [laughter]
MWD: Course, I think it – if I lived down South, I think I would be a Republican. No, a
Democrat. A Democrat. I think I would.
TC: If you – I’m sorry?
MWD: If I lived in the South –

TC: Oh.
MWD: – I think I’d be a Democrat. [00:29:00] If I lived up north in Providence, I’d be a
Republican, because the Democrats have had control the here for years, you know? We have
hardly any Republicans up –
TC: Right, oh, yeah, in Rhode Island. See, I voted in – will vote in Missouri.

MWD: You voted for what?

TC: I vote in Missouri still.

MWD: Who did you say you voted for? Did you say what you voted for? Or what did you say?
TC: No, I said – I said that I voted – I’m voting in Missouri when the vote comes in Missouri.

MWD: Oh, in Missouri.

TC: Right, so I haven’t registered in Rhode Island.

85

MWD: I don’t think the students should be voting for all the issues here.

TC: That’s another big issue.

MWD: I think the national issues, yes, for president. But not the local issues.
TC: Let me see if there’s – if – look through just real quickly and see if there’s anything else –

MWD: (inaudible)
TC: – anything else. Excuse me?

MWD: You have a lot more questions?
TC: No, we’ve covered pretty much all of it. I’m just going to make sure – [00:30:00] oh, did
you have any role models, female role – women role models, that kind of idea?

MWD: Not really, because I don’t think I ever had role models. Actually, when I worked the
Women’s Republican Fund, this (inaudible) next door, she founded it, and she was very active in
the Motor Corps [American Red Cross Motor Corps] during World War I. She was a woman that
tried to run – liked to run things. But I don’t look up to those people, necessarily. I don’t know –
I don’t think I have the tendency to look up to people anyway. I don’t think anybody’s perfect
and I don’t think anyone’s (inaudible)
TC: Well, would you say that –

MWD: Who would I look up to?
TC: Was there –

86

MWD: Dean Morriss?
TC: Yeah, that’s what I’m wondering. Like – or even a famous [00:31:00] film – someone in
film or a literary –

MWD: Films? Did you say film?

TC: Mm-hmm, or literary person?

MWD: I certainly don’t look up to people in the [laughter] (inaudible) something quite
respectable (inaudible) person. I tell you who I looked up to: Colonel North [Oliver North].

TC: No?

MWD: He’s my hero! [laughs]

TC: Oh, no! [laughs]

MWD: Trying to think of some woman I could have looked up to. I’m sure there must have been
somebody that was good, but I don’t think anybody’s God. [There’s a lot of?] (inaudible) think.
TC: So, you pretty much were making – when you were making decisions – [00:31:51]

- End of Track 3 -

Track 4

[00:00:00]
TC: (inaudible) [laughs] This is side two, tape two. Forgot to do that last time.

87

MWD: So what happened?
TC: So, they’re going to be confused – nothing, I’ll just put it on later.

MWD: You mean it just didn’t come through?
TC: Right. I – no, I forgot to say it.

MWD: [laughs] That’s probably just as well.
TC: It’s no problem. What about, then, for volunteer work? What kind of volunteer work – you
said – you mentioned going to the polls. Was there any sort of social services, like working for –
MWD: Going to the – which? You say the polls?
TC: You said you worked for – did – like, driving people around, that kind of thing?

MWD: FISH! (inaudible) that organization.
TC: Were there many –

MWD: But I was brought up being the next to youngest child and waiting on a lot of people. My
mother, my sister, my – [laughs] now my daughter. No, I am – I actually – I’m – been active in a
lot of the Adriatic societies. [00:01:00] But I don’t know (inaudible), the DAR – the Daughters
of the Fathers of the Patriots.

TC: Okay.

MWD: The John Howland Society (inaudible) and the Roger Williams Society. I’m not active in
certainly the Roger Williams Society. I was active in the DAR. We had a – and the Fathers and
Patriots of the – the Daughters of the Fathers of Patriots of America. [laughs]

88

TC: It’s a big one.

MWD: Actually, a lot of them, I suppose are things for people to do. You didn’t work. You had
social things you went to, and they had different ways of…I shouldn't say keeping people out.
But my mother was active, was in the DAR. Maybe that’s why I do it – and in [00:02:00] DFPA.
Instead of entertaining people, my mother seemed to prefer to go to these club meetings.

TC: Really?
MWD: My mother had enough children at home without having to – [laughs] she didn’t really
like to entertain.
TC: Or they went – like the clubs that you just mentioned, those kind of meetings?

MWD: What?

TC: Clubs, like the Daughters of the American Revolution meetings? That kind of thing?

MWD: She would go to those, and they were apt to be in somebody’s home, but I don’t know if
she ever had them at her home. And she could have. I mean, she had, you know, the – she always
had help. Anyway, now – what – now I’m in music club (inaudible) my daughter teaches piano
lessons. She graduated from Brown, then went three years to Yale School of Music. And so –

TC: Wow.
MWD: – I go to Chaminade Club and the Chopin club. It’s just a – something – when you ask
me to do something, I do it –

TC: Right. [00:03:00]

89

MWD: – I guess.

TC: What about fashion?

MWD: Fashion?

TC: What did you feel about fashion then, clothing?

MWD: You mean the new fashions? Or do I like clothes?
TC: Or about fashion back then in – and the whole rise of the women with the shorter haircut.
You mentioned having your hair long the whole time –

MWD: Yeah.
TC: – at college, and then the flapper era and the shorter dresses and the shorter haircuts.

MWD: Yeah, we had the shorter dresses. But I don’t think my family ever bought me a pair of
brown and white shoes in those days, when everybody –

TC: No?
MWD: – was wearing them. I mean, I believe I get less of some of those things, because I was
younger and the others had outgrown that sort of stuff.

TC: Right.
MWD: I’ve always liked fashion. I’ve always liked clothes, but I don’t – I used to think
sometimes they didn’t give me the right clothes.
TC: Did you go out and – did – were you able to buy them or to find them yourselves?

90

MWD: When I –

TC: Yourself?
MWD: – became 21, I went and spent a lot of money on [00:04:00] clothes. So what does that
show? [laughter] I had bought what I wanted, right?
TC: Was it very – so, when you were walking around – when you were in school and college,
what did you have on? What kind of –
MWD: We wore –
TC: Was it very layered –

MWD: We wore overshoes.
TC: – like petticoats? [laughter] Oh!

MWD: We didn’t have boots (inaudible) you’ve seen those old-fashioned (inaudible)

TC: Mm-hmm.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: Yeah.
MWD: Well, we wore skirts. We didn’t wear dresses I don’t think– skirts and sweaters. I don’t
think so different from now, except the style was so different (inaudible) [one time?]?
TC: Oh much –

91

MWD: (inaudible) you know –

TC: Exactly, yeah. Today, you mean?
MWD: None so slight. Some of them I can wear, a lot of them I can’t wear. I’ve decided – made
for a fatter person. [00:05:00] Because I’m not clothes – six – size six, which – I’m bigger than
six, and they’ll be too big for me, some of those blouses. They’re not going to size (inaudible)
relation to fashion – [I mean?], I – we didn’t dress the way my mother’s era dressed, with the
long – we had short skirts.

TC: Okay.
MWD: I’ve got an old dress and – some old dresses (inaudible) an old evening dress I’ve got at
home that I had – must have had during the ’20s in a box.

TC: What’s it look like?
MWD: And they were fairly short during the ’20s. But they weren’t – as I remember, they
weren’t full up top the way they are now.
TC: So, it wasn’t that tight, very, like, corset, kind of, around the waist and –
MWD: I never wore corsets (inaudible) we had fitted clothes at the time. But during the ’20s, it
was more – there was more of that – straighter thing, and quite short. The flapper era. [00:06:00]
Before that, though – I remember the ’20s (inaudible) I was old enough at one point to buy some
of my own clothes. Actually, it was in the late ’20s, I guess. I wonder when they did go up. May
have been the late ’20s they went up because I didn’t graduate from college until ’27.

TC: Okay.

92

MWD: So, anyway –
TC: Well, that’s –

MWD: Who made out the questions?

TC: I believe Karen did, Karen Lamoree.

MWD: Karen who?
TC: Lamoree, who –
MWD: [Is she?] –
TC: – phoned you.

MWD: (inaudible)

TC: Right.

MWD: I’ve got to go look at those things now.
TC: Do you have anything else you want to add for the –
MWD: I think I’ve added a lot of things –
TC: – archives?
MWD: – that shouldn’t be on there, but luckily (inaudible) which is good.
TC: Well – [laughter] well, thank you very much.

93

MWD: Well, thank you. Now, what am I meant to do with this? [00:07:00] They want me to fill
this in, then, because it said oral, but you didn’t ask me those dates.

TC: Okay, well, we can go over that right now.

MWD: You don’t have to; I can fill them in at home. [00:07:10]

- END -

94

