
Q: [00:00] – 23rd, in her office outside of Boston, Massachusetts. And OK, I guess we’ll begin by
getting a little bibliographic information on you. What was it like – where did you grow up? And
tell me about your parents’ background and just all leading up to before you went to college –
your education, your high school education.
Carol Rita Dannenberg: OK. I grew up in Arlington, Massachusetts, which isn’t very far from
here. I haven’t strayed very far. And I went to Arlington High School. I went through the
Arlington public school system. I have three sisters and a brother, an Irish Roman Catholic
family. My father had been a student at MIT, and his parents had saved every nickel they had to
put him through school, and my mother did a couple of years at secretarial school. So we were
the first generation that went to college.
Q: Did all your brothers and sisters go to college?
CRD: Every one of us, yeah. My older sister went to BC. [01:00] My brother went to Merrimac,
and then there was me. So I was the one with the big aspirations.
Q: Why did you pick Brown? Or Pembroke, as it was...
CRD: There were two reasons. The lofty reason was that I thought I was going to be a writer,
and I thought I was going to go in the English expression program. I never did that. I studied
American history instead. But probably the more critical reason was I was far enough away from
1

home that I had to live there.
Q: That’s good. All your brothers and sisters went to school around Boston?
CRD: Yeah.
Q: What did your parents think about your going so far away?
CRD: It was fine with them. In terms of academics, I was the superstar, so they knew I was
going to want to go to a really good school. And all my friends said, “Go to Radcliffe,” and I
said, “No, I'll never get the chance to live away.(inaudible).” And I applied to Tufts, and I
thought about going there, and I didn’t, because that was too close, too. And I fell in love with
Pembroke when I first went down there.
Q: What attracted you to it?
CRD: The woman who took me around was really warm, and the whole [02:00] sense of
community was very present, that I really liked. I mean, I was probably and easy mark.. I don’t
think you ever end up getting out of college what you thought you would when you first made
the choice.
Q: Were you attracted to a single-sex school, or did it really matter in your choice?
CRD: I thought I loved the balance. I knew I didn’t want to go to Mount Holyoke, where it was
going to be all women all the time. And I liked the idea of having the classes integrated with
men, but having that kind of small, women’s college atmosphere, too.
Q: Did those expectations hold up?
CRD: Yeah, and as you probably know from what you’ve read, by the end of our senior year, we
were a little sick of the Pembroke community. We weren’t really sick of what we had as a
2

community. We were sick of some of the traditions. Times were changing, and we were ready to
[demitasse?] and move on to things. But I’m guessing that there was some loss with Pembrokers
when it all became integrated. [03:00] Maybe it wasn’t important, but what we had was really
kind of special.
Q: Can you tell me some more about the little traditions?
CRD: Oh yeah, we used to have – the dress dinner was Wednesday night and Sunday noon.
Q: Did you have the VW then?
CRD: What’s that?
Q: Where did you eat?
CRD: We lived in Andrews. That was the home dining room.
Q: Oh, that was the dining room then?
CRD: That was it, yeah. And then, the new dining-room over in – is it Champlin and Morriss, or
whatever?
Q: Yeah, Verney-Woolley dining room. That was the VW.
CRD: Ah, OK, yeah. That came into being just as I was leaving. It may have been – in my senior
year, that was just opening. But everybody ate in Andrews, and we would have sherry hours.
Everybody was sick to death of sherry. That was the only alcoholic beverage that was allowed.
Q: Ladylike enough.
CRD: That’s right. Some of that was really kind of fun, and you also felt like there was family
3

there. [04:00] We were really close. The Pembrokers were really close. I’m sure that’s true
today. It’s just – we had this circle of friends, but there was a nice feeling about the college, that
rapport (inaudible) Andrews and Metcalf and Miller. Miller was where I was my freshman year.
Q: Can you tell me about your freshman year, like what do you remember on the first day? Do
you have any little stories about your roommate?
CRD: My roommate was wonderful. She was my roommate for four years. She wasn’t –
actually, when we got to be juniors and seniors, we got singles, so we were side by side. But the
thing that was special about her was that it was real clear to me right away that she was in the
same league I was. And I can remember coming up from the back of Andrews and looking
down, and there was a woman, a student, arriving with a station wagon, and from the front seat
to the back was full of clothes. And I said, “Oh my god, that was…. I’m out of my league here.”
There were a lot of [05:00] people much more well-off than I was when I arrived here
(inaudible). And the first month was strange, because I thought I was such a hot shot that I
wouldn’t homesick, but it was really – that first week, everybody’s new, and you’re away from
home for the first time, and I was sobered by that.
Q: How did you like living in a dorm? Was your dorm really close?
CRD: Yeah. There was a ton of things for freshman. We were very close-knit as a freshman
group. We had junior counselors. We had all kinds of traditions and things we would do in the
first six months we were there. So there was a lot of that. There was a lot of support.
Q: Did that continue through your four years, or a lot in your freshman year?
CRD: It was heaviest in the freshman year, and then of course, you got your own circle of
friends, and so you developed your own support network. It was still – it was a little cloistered. I
mean, I think that’s what was happening for people by the end of the time. We sick of being
cloistered. And there was never – [06:00] there wasn’t as much sense of that in academics at
Brown. We used to complain a lot about not really having a personal relationship with a
4

professor. It was something we missed.
Q: And was that, do you think, because a lot of the professors were male? Or it just didn’t – that
had nothing to do with it?
CRD: It’s hard to say, because I don’t know what it was like for Brown students. It felt a little bit
impersonal. Maybe we just had unrealistic expectations about what that could be.
Q: How big were most of your classes?
CRD: There were classes that were like seminars that might be 20 to 30. And by senior year,
there were some classes that were smaller, like 10 to 15, and then, there were lectures where we
would have 200.
Q: Pretty much the same as it is today.
CRD: Yeah.
Q: Let’s see what I want to hit here. What were the relationships between the male and females
at Brown and Pembroke? Did they generally get along, or did they import the Wheatonites in?
CRD: Oh yes. Oh, of course. [07:00] That was a big thing. There was a lot of put-downs on
Pembrokers, and of course, we were a five-to-one ratio, so I thought, “Oh great,” you know?
“It’s going to be all these men (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) it was going to be great.” Then,
I found out that generally, the Brown men were convinced that all the Pembrokers were [a
grind?](inaudible). There were a fair number of Brown-Pembroke marriages for all that stuff.
But that was the whole thing – the grass is always greener in somebody else’s yard.
Q: Yeah, so it seemed like the Pembroke women were the ones you married, but not the ones you
brought to your fraternity parties or something. [laughter]

5

CRD: There were always the couples right from the get-go, but there was always that tension
about Pembrokers. I can remember this one incident with this guy – I was a freshman, and he
was a sophomore. And I don’t know if this is still true, but you had to have your ID card to go to
a football game, so the Brown guys were constantly trying to figure out how they could get a
Pembroke ID for their imports. And I remember this guy, he was so uncool. [08:00] He called
me up, and I was really interested in him, and he said, “Oh, are you going to the football game
this weekend?” And I said, “Oh no, I’m not,” and he says, “Well, can I borrow your ID?” And I
nearly killed him.
Q: That’s terrible. [laughter] So where did you do most of your socializing?
CRD: Well, I did a fair amount of it at Brown. But that was the part that always felt a little alien
to me, and I think that was true for a lot of my friends. There were only a few of us that dated
Brown guys regularly. I think my junior year, I dated a Brown guy a whole year.
Q: Did you hang out with Brown guys, though?
CRD: I had a lot of friends – Brown guys – but more of my friendships were with Pembrokers,
which was strange for me because that not been the way it had been in high school at all. And
maybe that was where some of the distance was felt, that there was always this kind of disdain
that kept them apart. I have a feeling that might be better now. I don’t know.
Q: Well yeah, because it’s really one college. There’s really no reason to sep – we live side-byside in co-ed dorms and you know. [09:00] There’s really no distinction. So what female role
models did you look to? Did you look to your professors? I heard that – tell me about the dean,
Dean Pierrel.
CRD: Oh yeah. I just want to – just before we continue, do you want to just backtrack?
(break in audio)

6

Q: OK, here we go again.
CRD: OK, great. So, the question was who were the female role models. There was a fair
amount of tension between us and the deans, and actually, that probably wasn’t true amongst
freshman or sophomore years. But as I got more involved with student government – and in my
junior year, Nancy Buc was the student government president, and she was a real firebrand, and
she was very close to Dean Pierrel. And they really cared – they really like each other a lot, and
so we were really sort of in cahoots with the dean at that point, and a lot changed in that senior
year. It was always cordial, but there was already beginning to be some tension. So I’m trying to
think of who the female role models were. There weren’t very many professors who were
female. I don’t remember any, now that I think of it. [10:00]
Q: Did you get along well with, was Keeney President then, (inaudible)?
CRD: Yeah, and he was great, yeah. He was really great. A lot of things were happening in the
Civil Rights Movement. I’m trying to think of who we were looking to in that. There was almost
a kind of love-hate relationship with the deans, because they were still the role models, and we
breaking out of it. You know? And I remember – who were some of the other deans? I’ve
forgotten them. Dean Brown was the one that interviewed me, and she was really very, special,
and I always had that feeling about her.
Q: Who is she?
CRD: Dean Brown.
Q: Dean of the College?
CRD: She was the Dean of Admissions, I think, but she – and Dean Tonks and Gretchen Tonks,
and that’s another one who I really liked a lot. So that – you know, it’s a funny question. They
were important to us, but it was a little – we were breaking away.

7

Q: What were some of the other traditions and rules and regulations that were being broken
[11:00] at that time or that you were starting to question?
CRD: It was all around curfews. Have you read the stuff about the social system and the reports
that we did?
Q: Tell me.
CRD: There was a lot of campus unrest going on all over, and first of all, it was all projected out
that it was the Civil Rights Movement, and we would do this and then that. And then, people
started looking internally with the campus, and we really wanted change. And it began to feel
ridiculous that we had – I don’t know what it was – it was like 11 o'clock curfew on the week
nights and 12:30 . on the weekends, and I think we actually got all the way to 1:30. on Saturday
night or something like that. But there would be this mass return to the dorm, trying to get in, and
there were little fines for being late and forgetting to turn in the card.
Q: Did you sign in?
CRD: Sign in, yeah. And people had duty for checking to make sure everybody was back in.
They didn’t go checking on you, but if you had forgotten to turn your card back over – it was a
little color or something – they would go check [12:00] to make sure you were there. And then if
you had come in and just forgot to do your card, there was a fine for having messed up on that
and all that kind of stuff, so it was completely regulated, completely regulated.. And there was a
lot of resentment about that, and people saying, “Well, why are we having all these curfews?”
Where at a lot of other schools, the people that had off-campus apartments, and the Brown
students had off-campus apartments, and they didn’t have curfews. And it just – it was clearly a
double standard.
Q: You had to live in your dorm all four years?
CRD: Yeah. The year – I have some of my old paper. I’ll show you. At the end of my – this is
8

the killer, too, because we worked all year to try to get off-campus apartments, and they finally
granted them at the end of the year. I said to my mother, I said, “Would you have you have let
me live off campus?” And she said, “No.”
Q: My mom has no choice. I’m moving next year off campus.
CRD: Well, by the time my baby sister got to American University, [13:00] everything – all bets
were off, and my parents were astounded.
Q: But they had no choice either.
CRD: No choice.
Q: Let’s see what I should be asking you. OK, what kind of – OK, I’m going to ask you directly,
because – how did your years at Brown develop the sense of appropriate role, education, jobs for
women?
CRD: OK. There was a tension between the idea that what we were doing there was getting
educated so we could be good wives for our (inaudible) husbands who would be the president
and career – what kind of career you wanted. There was, at the time that I was there, a real sense
that there was a lot of openings because recruitment people came every weekend on campus to
recruit, particularly in the computer business, which was opening up at that point in time. It was
real clear to me that I was going to Washington, DC, and would work for the government
(inaudible) [against the war?], [14:00]
Q. (laughs)
CRD: so I wasn't looking towards computers. But I’m trying to think who the women were, you
know?
Q: What was career services like? Did Pembroke have their own?
9

CRD: Yeah, and I got a summer job with the Peace Corps the year between my junior and senior
year through that, and that was wonderful. That’s why I was going to DC, obviously.
Q: Idealistic.
CRD: Yeah, and there were some women – because [India Gasbar?] (inaudible), whom I worked
for, was a woman. And she actually introduced me to the woman I went to work with when I
graduated, in the Poverty Program. So, there were actually more women off campus than there
were on campus.
Q: What do you mean by off campus?
CRD: Like that summer that I spent in DC, there were more women who were role models.
Q: Oh, I see.
CRD: The thing that I really got from Brown was a real commitment to excellence in academics.
And it wasn’t just memorization – it was really [15:00] a real clear academic tradition. We were
really studying. I loved the American history program.
Q: You majored in American history?
CRD: Yeah. I was an American civilization major, which allowed you to do a whole range of
different things (inaudible) in history.
Q: Did you have to write a thesis?
CRD: Did I have to write a thesis? I wrote several long papers for some courses, for my senior
seminar. And we had comprehensives then. Do you have those, now?

10

Q: They’re not called that if we have them. What are they?
CRD: It was like two days of pure test. There wasn’t multiple choice. It was like an essay writing
test, and everything hinged on it. If you didn’t pass comprehensives, you didn’t graduate. It
didn’t matter what your final (inaudible) was.
Q: People must have been really tense around that time. Lots of pizzas being eaten in the dorm.
CRD: I remember the first question on the – we had three hours to write this question. The
question made no sense whatsoever, none, [16:00] and anybody who had any brains just
regurgitated everything they knew about American civilization and assumed that somewhere in
there would be what they were looking for.
Q: Oh wow. What about academics? What were your most favorable memories of the academics
at Brown? What classes really stood out? Do you remember them?
CRD: Oh yeah, I do. The two that were probably most special were my two American history
courses, and one of them – John Thomas. I don’t know if he’s still there or not.. That was my
junior year, and it was “Political and Economic History.” And the second one was (inaudible)
McLaughlin, the social –
Q: He’s still there. He’s still there. Wow. He’s been around for a long time.
CRD: Yeah, and that was fabulous. I can remember at the end of the first semester, he stood up –
or the end of the first, yeah, the first semester. And he gave his lecture using “The Battle Hymn
of the Republic,” the words of “The Battle Hymn of the Republic,” to just [17:00] bring together
the entire first couple hundred years of American history. And everybody – he got a standing
ovation. It was just amazing. It was wonderful.
Q: Was he young then?

11

CRD: Not to me.
Q: He must be really old, now. I’m really interested in what social life was like then. What did
you guys do? Where did you hang out on Saturday nights?
CRD: Is the place still – what is it – right across from Miller Hall down underneath –
Q: The (inaudible)? Yeah.
CRD: Yeah, that still exists?
Q: That still exists. They turned it into – it looks really discotheque-ish, now. It has, like, mirrors
everywhere. What was it – it was like, just a pizza place then, too?
CRD: Yeah. And you know, we used to take study breaks, and we’d go down there [en masse?]
and just hang out for a little while. What else did we do? There was a place that was a restaurant
down on that same street, [18:00] the street over...
Q: Thayer Street?
CRD: Thayer Street. We used to go down to and do hamburgers and French fries. A lot of food, I
remember (inaudible).
Q: Oh yeah, still the same. Do you think the atmosphere was really intellectual among the
women at Pembroke?
CRD: Yeah.
Q: Big emphasis on academics achievement?
CRD: Yeah.
12

Q: What about people who did sports? Was that still considered pretty cool?
CRD: It may have been in some circles. It wasn’t considered a negative. It didn’t have any bad
feelings about it. I was much more interested in the Brown hockey team, which was real good
then.
Q: Oh really? It’s terrible, now. They haven’t won a game in like five years or something.
CRD: So we went to a lot of hockey games, and we went over to the Meehan Auditorium, and
we skated. But we had a lot of social life just in the dorm, and then weekends was date night.
There was a fraternity in the independents.
Q: What’s an independent? [19:00]
CRD: They were just regular Brown dorms that didn’t – where they didn’t want to be in
fraternities or they couldn’t get in to them or whatever, and it was a real different atmosphere in
the two environments.
Q: Like what was the fraternity like?
CRD: Fraternities were much wilder.
Q: A little (inaudible).
CRD: And it was – was considered was much more prestigious. But among the independents,
there was a kind of disdain for the fraternities, too, like (inaudible). There were always parties,
and everybody was always drunk. It was just one bash after another. There was one tradition we
had. You still have a exam cartoons?
Q: No.
13

CRD: That was the most wonderful thing. All during your exam period, they would have –
they’d have a 4:30. showing and a 5:00 o'clock showing. It was a half hour of cartoons, and there
was-Q: Where?
CRD: At Faunce House. And people would go, and they would scream and holler – totally
outrageous.
Q: Cathartic.
CRD: Cathartic, right. [20:00] And there was one guy – Road Runner was the all-time favorite.
If you didn’t have Road Runner in the cartoon, you were in big trouble, because the audience
would feel ) awful. There was some guy from Brown who was a writer for one of the cartoons
(inaudible). It was great. It was (inaudible). And then there were just millions of hours in the
Rock, studying. And I remember – do you still have to get there really early in the morning to get
a carrel?
Q: Uh-huh.Well, there are so many other libraries now. Did they have the Sciences Library when
you were there? That’s 13 extra floors of space.
CRD: Oh wow. Oh god, it used to be – I mean, people would be waiting there first thing. As
soon as the doors opened, they’d run in and grab a space. And then we used to use the lobby or
the social studies lobby and whatever the other one was. We had a lot of break time there.
Q: Yeah, still do. [21:00] It’s still the social place is the Rock. So is that one place where you
would scope guys – would be the library?
CRD: Oh yeah, definitely. And by my senior year, there was a crowd of us from both Pembroke
and Brown who knew each other pretty well, and most of us were in American Civilization, and
14

most of us (inaudible) government or in the newspaper. One person you might find really
interesting to talk to is Charlie Bakst.
Q: Charlie?
CRD: Yeah, it’s M. Charles. He’s the political editor for the [Providence] Journal.
Q: How do you spell the last name?
CRD: B-A-K-S-T. He was – I saw him last year, and occasionally I do, and I’m really fond of
Charlie. But he was Chuck, anyway – at that time, he was unbelievable. (inaudible). He was the
(inaudible), he was the editor of the Brown Daily Herald.
Q: Oh no, you should tell me about that.
CRD: Oh god. I’ll never forget – the first thing he said to me after I got elected student
government president, he says, “You realize, of course, I can never totally agree with you on
anything.” And so every day, the Brown Daily Herald [22:00] would come under my dorm
room, and I’d say, “Oh god, what does he have to say about us today?”
Q: So the Brown Daily Herald was really at war with Pembroke?
CRD: Well, they were at war with everybody. I mean, they were just [very busy?] (inaudible)
very ahead of all us. (inaudible), they knew everything. (inaudible) – what is the Brown student
government? Is it (inaudible), still?
Q: No, it was – it’s just UCS, Undergraduate Council of Students.
CRD: OK. Well, there was the Brown student government, and then there was the Pembroke
student government. We met on different nights of the week, but both of us took a great deal of
harassment from the Brown Daily Herald.
15

Q: Did your two organizations work well together, though?
CRD: Reasonably. Oh, well, there were those two organizations, and then there was the Faunce
House Board of Governors, and a lot of – they did a lot of the work of whatever had to be done
jointly between the two student bodies. [23:00] We – on the Pembroke campus, we dealt with
Pembroke affairs. And on the Brown campus, they really dealt with the student affairs at Brown.
I don’t know – there must have been some integration, but I don’t remember a whole lot about
that.
Q: What do you feel about the merger of Pembroke and Brown?
CRD: I don’t know a lot about it. It seems fine to me. I read some stuff that there was some sense
of a loss of community for the women. And if that – I would guess that might be true. Does that
seem real to you?
Q: Well, I think during the transition years, there must have been. But I think now there’s – we
have women’s peer counselors, and there are plenty of female faculty members. I don’t feel that
really, but I think that happened when it was like – suddenly, Pembroke lost all its identity being
part of (inaudible) Brown’s. Let me see what I have to talk to you about now. I’d rather just ask
you my own questions, [24:00] but I do have to get through these. OK, let’s go on and talk about
after Brown and the impact the education had on your life. What – being a woman and
graduating fresh out of a really good college, did you ever feel like there were problems that
presented a problem for you in the real--the work world?
CRD: Not really. I felt like that was a tremendous advantage, and maybe it’s just because we had
good attitudes about ourselves, going out. While I don’t remember a lot of clear role models, I
have a real clear sense that the message we got from everybody was that could do whatever we
wanted to do. And the other thing was that in 1966, there was a real sense that there was room
out there, not so much necessarily that the men wanted anything to do with us, but that there was
work to be done. [25:00]
16

Q: What fields?
CRD: My roommate [Kathy Coney?] went to New York, and several other people with her, and
they were all courted by a few companies – AT&T, American Tele– , yeah.
Q: AT&T, still.
CRD: They all had cushy, well-paid jobs. They could name their terms. There was a need for
skilled labor, and we really did walk out of there feeling like of course, because we graduated
from Pembroke, that we would – we were (inaudible).
Q: So you felt that Brown definitely gave you a lot of confidence in your ability to do –
CRD: Yeah. And I never felt with the male professors any discrimination, really. There were a
few put-downs, but not a lot. For the most part, Pembrokers did better, academically.
Q: Really?
CRD: Yeah, so by my senior year, [26:00] I had some nice relationships with some professors.
Not real close, but I mean – there was clearly some respect there, so you didn’t feel like you
were in any kind of an inferior position.
Q: Were the Brown men, like, respected intellectually?
CRD: Yeah. Definitely.
Q: That’s really cool. I like that. So wait – so just tell me more about after you got out of Brown.
You said you had worked with the Peace Corps before. What field did you go into when you
graduated?

17

CRD: I went to DC, and I worked for the government.
Q: (inaudible). Self-fulfilling prophecy.
CRD: Absolutely. And I worked for the […Parks and Wild ](inaudible) for a little while, and
then I worked for the Poverty Program for a couple of years, I think. And I worked for a private
research company that had grants for the Poverty Program. So I think, all told, I was in DC for
about three years, and then I came up to Boston, and I worked for the Poverty Program here. And
I had met my now-husband – he’s also my partner – [27:00] when I was in – briefly in DC. He
was passing through, living with a friend, and when I came back to Boston about a year later, we
got married. And then, I went into teaching. He introduced me to probably the first really strong
female role model, a woman who had been his teacher and who was a mentor for him, and she
was the chairman of the social studies department in one of the local high schools. So I went to
work for her, and I did that for ten years. That was wonderful, because she was a leading edge
thinker about teaching kids about social studies. She really valued what I did, and we created a
lot of good curricula together around American history.
Q: Did you teach high school?
CRD: Yeah.
Q: For ten years?
CRD: Close to – I taught, actually, eight years there, and then I went back to graduate school and
taught a little bit more as I finished up my (inaudible).
Q: Oh, where did you go to graduate school?
CRD: I went to Goddard-Cambridge, which is an offshoot of Goddard College in Vermont.
[28:00] Totally unknown.

18

Q: How do you spell that?
CRD: G-O-D-D-A-R-D, and they had a place in Cambridge. It was in a real radical period, and
you could create more (inaudible). And I had always been Miss Goody Two-Shoes academically,
and I said, “I just want to learn how to make film.” I went into a feminist film course.
Q: Oh wow, that’s so cool.
CRD: It was great. It’s a lot of fun.
Q: So cool. They have their feminist film class at Brown, and I’m thinking of taking it.
CRD: Yeah.
Q: So cool. So you took two years of graduate school?
CRD: One year, and then I took a year to finish a thesis. I was making a film, and I taught parttime in the Brookline school, and then I totally changed, because I was – I had fallen in love with
film. And my husband was making a change, and he was doing a TV program on cable TV.
Q: What had he been doing before?
CRD: Everything]. He had not found his place in the world at all. He had been (inaudible). He
was in politics, and he was much too outspoken for that, [29:00] so there were a lot of changes
for him. And we just sort of willy-nilly found a place where we ended up working together, and
that’s what this company came out of, eventually.
Q: This is an advertising –
CRD: It’s an advertising agency, although our strong suit is not really so much traditional
advertising. It’s more creating innovative strategies for – in a sort of nuts and bolts strategies for
19

not huge companies, small companies. We do a lot of work around (inaudible).
Q: Do you have children?
CRD: No, this is it.
Q: This is your baby, right?
CRD: Yeah.
Q: OK, I’m going to turn this off for a second.
(break in audio)
Q: All right, that’s the end of the formal interview. Now, what I wanted to ask you about for my
own personal interest – and I’m recording this, because I’ll use it for my paper, most likely – is
what the whole atmosphere at Brown [30:00] around ’65, ’66, that would have led up to this
national scandal of the birth control pills. And specifically, what was available? What was talked
about? What was talked about among – as far as birth control – among students, among faculty,
among health services?
CRD: Can you refresh my memory about when the birth control thing was?
Q: OK, this was October 1966. Were you still at Brown then?
CRD: There was?
Q: [You’re?] quoted all over the place.
CRD: Are you sure it was ’66?

20

Q: Oh, it must have been ’65.
CRD: Yeah.
Q: And it was the two unmarried undergraduates who were prescribed birth control pills by the
doctor at health services. And for one reason or another, it really – it made real national news.
CRD: Yeah ,it did.Yeah, OK. It’s funny, because that whole – [31:00] my best recollection of
that is that what really came out of what that tension between Pembroke and the Brown Daily
Herald, because I think the report originally came from the Brown Daily Herald. I’m quite sure
that it did. They were notorious –
Q: (inaudible)[How did they find out about it?]
CRD: I have no idea. They found out everything there was to find out. I’m going to give you a
letter that Barnaby C. Keeney wrote to me, which would give you some flavor of what it was
like. But it was like this constant banging up against this, them looking at this, saying, “Look at
this ridiculous college.” Now, in 1965 –
Track 2
CRD: [00:00] – so, I mean, that’s the way they were seeing it. And we were seeing a little bit of
it, but we were still being really nice, you know. And there was a lot of stuff we loved about that
college, so we really – it wasn’t like we wanted to give up everything. We just wanted to open
things up a little bit. But the Brown Daily Herald, their thing was – the journalism they were into
– getting the best stories they could get, and they were analyzing everything. They were
criticizing everything, and they were really pressing us on the social system. “Why are you living
in the Dark Ages?” So what we did – my senior year, one of the things we agreed to do was to
analyze the social system, and Barbara (inaudible) agreed to take that on. She was a sociology
major, and she developed a questionnaire. And we talked with the whole college about what they
thought would be appropriate, and we made some proposals to the administration based on that,
21

asking for (inaudible) and for extension of curfews [01:00] and things like that. So the Brown
Daily Herald was just constantly pushing through this whole process, so any piece of hypocrisy
that they could possibly bring to light, because the whole big issue about curfew was, “Oh god,
Pembrokers are going to go to get pregnant. The parents are going to be upset. What are we
going to do?” And so there was still that kind of sense of – we have to be in loco parentis, you
know. We got so sick of hearing (inaudible).
Q: Yeah, I’ve read about that term a lot.
CRD: So they just pressed on that, and they found that out somehow, that the infirmary was
dispensing birth control pills. And then everybody – they got national attention. It didn’t last
very long.
Q: The national attention?
CRD: No, it didn’t, but it was a major embarrassment for the university.
Q: Did it change things in health services, do you think?
CRD: I’m not sure, because – is Dr. Johnson still there ?
Q: No, but Dr. [Everard?] – do you remember him? I mean, he was the first OBGYN person, but
he was at Brown, [02:00] so I’m going to try and hunt him down. I think he’s still in New
England, somewhere.
CRD: Yeah, well, I think it was Dr. Roswell Johnson.
Q: Yeah, he was the main...
CRD: And I don’t know what the circumstances were, but he was a good guy. He was a real
good guy, and he really tried very hard to respond to the student body, and that was an issue
22

then. The mores were really in flux, and there was still a very strong standard of (inaudible). And
there was a big, big need on the part of the deans to protect the students, because pregnancy was
a scandal. So somewhere along the line, he made an independent decision, I think. And it was
important to consider whatever he did – I don’t know the circumstances – but they basically took
that and made it into a public issue, because to them, it was hypocrisy. So we spent a lot of time
running around, avoiding the press. [03:00] And we had no idea (inaudible).
Q: God, it’s funny how the BDH has changed. It has gotten to be a pretty dry rag these days.
CRD: Really?
Q: Yeah.
CRD: Oh god, it wasn’t then.
Q: Well, I guess it’s because there’s so much scandal going on anyway that there’s no need for
real investigative reporting. It just sort of slaps you in the face.
CRD: You might want to go down the hill and make an appointment with Charlie Bakst and talk
to him and get his perception. And the other one who would be really good to talk to is his wife
Liz, who is the (inaudible).
Q: What’s her maiden name?
CRD: Her maiden name was Feroe, F-E-R-O-E – one of the wittiest people who I’ve ever met.
She was so funny. She was part of our circle of friends and would tell me (inaudible).
Q: That’s really cool. OK, I think we can stop now. (break in audio) Who is this?
CRD: This is Sister Richard Frances. She was marvelous. She was the resident fellow, [04:00]
and she – they say she’s the only nun that ever left the Order with a bathing suit and a set of wine
23

glasses, and that was after I left. That was maybe a year or two afterwards. She stayed at Brown
as long as she could get away with staying at Brown. She was doing a PhD. And probably, of all
the people – I had grown up Roman Catholic, and she was wonderful. She was a real mentor, and
she was for all of us, not just those of us who were Roman Catholic. She was really open and
warm and connected with the students in a very special way. Ireally liked her. And the Brown
Daily Herald actually wrote an editorial, which was – I’m going to give you this particular issue,
even though I don’t have a duplicate, because of what they said here. It’ll give you some sense of
the tone of what they were trying – what they were saying.
Q: And there you are.
CRD: There I am. Oh, yeah, this is a riot, because I’m going to – if you would send these back to
me. Actually, why don’t you keep them. I suppose I could actually Xerox [05:00] a copy.
Q: OK, well – no, you can keep these actually, because we have – if I just read off the dates, this
is September 17th, 1965, and this is October 6th, 1965. I can just look it up in the record.
CRD: This is a scream. I mean, I just reread that the other night, and I laughed and I laughed and
I laughed. And this gives you a flavor of what they – I mean, this is one of the nice things they
did to me.
Q: God.
CRD: But I loved –
Q: But it sounds like it was sort of all in fun, in the long run.
CRD: – yeah, it was. And then what they did – this was really the killer. This is an issue you
should go check.
Q: OK.
24

CRD: On December 6th, they wrote a totally fake edition. They made this entire thing up.
Q: They did this on April Fools’ Day last year. They made an entirely...
CRD: Well, they had always done it April Fools’ Day, but they hadn’t ever done it December
6th.
Q: OK, just random.
CRD: The national press picked it up. The deans were bullshit – I mean, totally bullshit. [06:00]
And here they are for their last paper, because they really had to resign.
Q: They resigned after that?
CRD: They did, because the deans were so pissed that they had actually put this out, because
they were chasing all over the nation, trying to retrieve this story.
Q: Oh my god.
CRD: And then, when it actually happened, they got in one last day in April. And you can see
they did almost exactly –
Q: It’s the exact same thing, oh my god. [laughter] That’s so funny. That is so funny.
CRD: – and those are two issues you might want to go look at.
Q: April 14th and December 6th. Oh, that is great.
CRD: And Charlie looks just like that.

25

Q: Still?
CRD: (inaudible) the belly. But after that – you know, once he had resigned – there was a lot of
playfulness, and he was dating one of my best friends. So we had a good time, even though that
morning, I can remember walking down the street to classes, and I must have had my teeth
clenched as . he came up to me, and he said, “Well, don’t you think it’s fun?” I said,
“(inaudible).” [07:00]
Q: So they must have mellowed out a little after they resigned.
CRD: Yeah.
Q: Wow, that’s so funny.
CRD: Let me see what else – this is probably the most important thing I could give you. And I’m
going to Xerox this, but I’m going to give this to you, because this was his letter to me about
something, but you’ll get a sense of (inaudible) when you read it.
Q: OK, great. The archives loves you for this.
CRD: This is wonderful. It says, “I have decided to save my worn out socks and underclothing to
burn in front of the BDH door. I think the effect will be appropriate and will reduce my own
[commitment?].”
Q: So you got along really well with him?
CRD: Yes, but I didn’t know him well, and I was so astounded when he would write something
so tongue-in-cheek as that.
Q: That’s really funny.

26

CRD: And this was another thing, too. And that gives you a sense of how he was about hockey.
Q: That’s funny. So hockey was really the big thing.
CRD: It was, [08:00] yeah. And this you might find interesting. This was the last – Professor
Hargrove and Henry Couture were our honorary class members. And I think it will give you
some flavor of who they were as people, and the archives might like to have that, too.
Q: This is what – a copy of their speech?
CRD: Yeah.
Q: How did you get a hold – did they pass these out?
CRD: Yeah, they passed these out. And this is the Brun Mael.
Q: It’s so much fun to go through old yearbooks.
CRD: This is another thing you can take if you want to. There’s Professor Hargrove.
Q: This is a Pembroke alumna?
CRD: This was a Pembroke alumni in October, ’66. And Mary Tudor, who was the next
Pembroke Record editor wrote an article in it. And I wrote an article in it, which I reread the
other night. It was really interesting to see – [09:00] I don’t know how accurate my perception
was, but it was – they asked me to just sort of analyze what had happened in the change in
student government over the previous couple of years and why the students were all up in arms
about the social system and stuff. So I’ll Xerox that too, and you can take that with you.
Q: Great.

27

CRD: When you were talking to me before, there was just one other thing in terms of
biographical data that I would add, because it’s almost like – say for the first time I see some
connection. You were asking me about the academic environment and what the role models were
and that sort of thing. And in the past – Bob and I have built this business over the past ten years,
but the other thing that I do is I spend a lot of time in (inaudible) war, which is really the thing
that is closest to my heart, the work that I really do in the world about building a consensus that
war doesn’t work as a solution to solving international problems. [10:00] And I’m just
remembering back to those early days and that sense of leaving Pembroke and going out and
really saving the world or whatever it was –
Q: It never went away.
CRD: It never went away.
Q: That’s so good to hear, yeah. [laughter]
CRD: There was – it’s really, I think, that I got that from Pembroke more than any place else,
was that there’s work to do in the world, and you can do it.
Q: That’s great.
CRD: Yeah.
Q: That’s great, because – I don’t know. Today, there’s such an emphasis on preprofessionalism. And I think you find at Brown – more so than at other schools – you still find a
lot of idealism. But it’s nice to hear that the idealism doesn’t go away. I don’t know. It’s just nice
to hear that.
CRD: It may have something to do with the ebb and flow of time, because you’re going to
school in a time when the pre-professional stuff is really – it’s not just at Brown. It’s every place.
And in those days, when Kennedy was president when we were there – Kennedy was
28

assassinated when we were there.
Q: Was Brown – [11:00] and Pembroke – comparatively, a really liberal place?
CRD: Yeah, certainly in terms of thought. Real early in the game, we had people coming into the
campus to talk about Civil Rights. There was a real consciousness about that.
Q: This is still early ’60s?
CRD: Yeah.
Q: Yeah, Brown still, I guess, is known – it is one of the more liberal of the prestigious private
universities. And that’s a good – that’s one of the reasons I chose it, because I find – I don’t
know. I just find, at Brown, we don’t have –
- END -

29

