
Karen Lamoree: [00:00:00] This is Karen Lamoree interviewing Elizabeth Leduc,
December 12, 1988. Is it the thirteenth? It’s the thirteenth, 1988. Okay. Why don’t we
start off with you telling us where you were born, where you grew up?
Elizabeth Leduc: I was born in Rockland, Maine. Do you want to know when?
KL: I have been in on your bio (inaudible).
EL: When I was about five or six, we moved to northern Vermont, right on the Canadian
border. And I stayed there through high school. Then I went to the University of
Vermont, entering in ’39 and graduating in ’43. And I was a biology major, thinking I’d
go to medical school. But I discovered I didn’t really want to, as I was moving along. So
I went instead into academics, first by getting a master’s degree at [00:01:00] Wellesley
College. And the reason I did that was that I decided, as a senior at UVM, to get a PhD.
But at that time, one had to read both French and German. And since I knew the French
but had had no German, I went to Wellesley as a teaching assistant in biology. Took
courses, but also studied German. And then I came to Brown and worked with J. Walter
Wilson. He was my mentor. He came here in ’45. And got my PhD in 1948 with him.
And then I stayed one more year to complete a lot of my work. I had a doctoral
fellowship through the National Institute of Health. And from there, I got my first job at
Harvard Medical, where I stayed until ’53. [00:02:00] And then J. Walter hired me back
at Brown, and I’ve been here ever since. As a result, when I got here, Dean Morriss was
still active. And I used to see quite a lot of her, because she and J. Walter Wilson were
good friends. And he was writing a history of Brown at the time, and wanted to write
about the nursing program, which is something that Dean Morriss had a lot to do with.
And I guess it was just terminating about that time. And I don’t think she was particularly
happy about having it terminated. And so then I went off to Harvard. When I came back,
I guess Nancy Duke Lewis was just acting, and then became the dean. So I was here
throughout her tenure. And then when Rosie Pierrel became the dean, I lived through her
era. [00:03:00] Would you like me to say something about my contacts with Pembroke as
a faculty member?
KL: Sure

1

EL: Well, I was one of these people who had their noses plunged in their research,
morning, noon, and night. Teaching, research. I didn’t pay much attention to anything
else on campus, really. So I really didn’t know what was going on over there. However,
once a year, I was invited to come over to (break in audio)–take. Seven were part of the
core that they had to take within. One of the things they had to take, for example, was
math. And I helped them decide which math, and things like that. But the [00:04:00] one
thing I got out of this was that Pembroke was so well-organized. Those deans were
marvelous. They had the whole advising system fed up so the faculty members came in.
And they told us what we had to do. And then we were all in one big room. Faculty could
consult each other in person. We didn’t have to be on the phone. The deans were all
there. And it just worked like clockwork. It was wonderful.
KL: This was in the sixties?
EL: This was in the sixties, yes. So, you know, this was my only contact. And I said,
“Gee, this is a well-organized place, and they’re wonderful people, and that’s great.” And
then I’d go back to my lab. That’s all I knew.
KL: Did you ever organize Brown freshmen? I mean, consult or advise?
EL: No, I didn’t because Pembroke [00:05:00] had my name. And every year, I got
pulled over there. But my colleagues, who did advise Brown freshmen, said it was a
disaster area. It was always this great contrast. Everything was so well-organized
(inaudible).
KL: That’s interesting. Why don’t we digress because you went through your life in
about three seconds there?
EL: Wasn’t that enough?
KL: No, no no no. Okay. I know when you were at UVM, you were originally going to
be, I think it was in education.
EL: I started out in education, but I discovered I loved biology so much. I concentrated in
it. But I was the only woman doing it. There weren’t many women in science then. And
all [00:06:00] my classmates were pre-med. And so I sort of fell into that mold saying,
“Well, you know, I guess that’s the thing to do.” But then, in my senior year, I worked
for an MD, a little research project for my honor’s thesis. And so I was sort of in and out
of the hospital, and seeing sick people. And I decided no, I didn’t like that really. And so
that’s when my professor said, “Why don’t you go to graduate school?”
KL: Now is this [Gertrude Petrie?]?
EL: Yes, Gertrude [Petra?], I think she called it, was a young woman who had just gotten
her master’s degree at Wellesley and had been hired as an instructor at UVM. And
because I was always hanging around, I’d help her in the lab. I got to know her very

2

[00:07:00] well. So that was her suggestion (inaudible) I go to Wellesley, because she
had worked with a woman (inaudible) Wellesley cancer problem (inaudible).
KL: And that was Elizabeth Jones?
EL: Elizabeth Jones.
KL: (inaudible)
EL: I didn’t realize I told you so much before this.
KL: Okay. You worked with her on mammary cancer?
EL: Mammary cancer, yes, in mice. And we were studying drugs, seeking ways to reduce
the growth of cancers.
KL: And so while you were there, you decided to go on for a PhD? Or was that the
previous–
EL: Yes, because I met another young woman who was an instructor at Wellesley, who
was just completing her PhD at Brown. And she was working with J. Walter Wilson.
“He’s great. Why don’t you go down and talk to him?” Because I was [00:08:00] asking
around, saying, “Where should I apply?” “Just go see him.” So I did. And I never
bothered to apply anywhere else, because he said, “Come.” It was easy.
KL: So you started in the summer of ’45, when the war was still on?
EL: Yes, the war was still on. We had... There were Quonset huts down on the lower
campus, where the navy men lived. And J. Walter himself was still teaching mathematics,
because they were short of the professors. I think all the navy students had to take math.
So I don’t know what he was teaching, if it was calculus or what.
KL: What was the composition of the PhD and graduate candidates? Was it mostly
women, or was it mixed?
EL: (inaudible; sound greatly diminished) [00:09:00] First of all, there were very few
(inaudible) There were two men I think, for one reason or another I couldn’t (inaudible).
KL: And Dr. Wilson, was there ever any difference in the way he treated students
because they were men or women?
EL: No. I owe my elevation through the academic realm to the fact that I was always
supported by men who were broad-minded and supportive of women. Now, this started at
UVM. Because not only did Trudy Petra suggest Wellesley, but actually it was one of the
men, a physiology professor who later became one of the presidents at UVM, who was
the first to say, “Why don’t you go to graduate school?” And, you know, suggesting that

3

a woman do this, [00:10:00] which was already a little unusual. And J. Walter [J. Walter
Wilson] was an unusual man, because he’s very supportive of all kinds of people. He
brought black graduate students to Brown. There were very few of them. He had women.
And then, during the period when the McCarthy era, when they were investigating all
these terrible people who dared to look at socialist types of government, some young
biologists lost their jobs, because they went to these meetings. And he hired some of
them, gave them jobs here, postgraduate students, post-docs, instructors (inaudible). So I
was in a very good environment here. And this continued when I went to Harvard. Again,
I landed with a very good chief. [00:11:00] And I came back to Brown, had J. Walter for
a while. And then there was Herman Chase was one of the people who ran the
department briefly. And then there was Pierre Galletti. I’ve always been very fortunate in
having these people, because there have been other departments on campus where the
women are told [not to advance to a level?]. There would have been fewer of them, if
any.
KL: When you were doing your PhD, what you were doing, is that when you started to
do research on the liver?
EL: Yes. J. Walter had started on the liver. He was interested in cell growth, and the liver
was selected because in the adult, it’s a quiescent organ. But if you remove part of it, it
starts to grow again. And when it returns to its original mass, it stops again. And we don’t
know, [00:12:00] to this day, what sets it off and what stops it when it gets to a certain
size. But it was wonderful to study the process of mitosis, to look for the answers, which
we never found.
KL: Isn’t that fascinating? I never knew that (inaudible). So when you finished your PhD,
you had one more year as a postdoctoral fellow.
EL: Yes.
KL: And then did you want to stay at Brown, or did you want to move on?
EL: Well, I was told well before I graduated that I could not stay at Brown, because they
never kept their own graduates. And this is true of any of the PhDs in biology, at any rate.
J. Walter said, “You have to go elsewhere and prove yourself. And then, we’ll decide if
we want you to come back or not.” And I was very lucky, because I got into an excellent
department, Harvard Med. Harvard Medical School [00:13:00] had already hired a
woman from Brown. That’s probably one of the reasons why they looked at me, because
she was very successful. They had just admitted women as graduate students the year
before I got there on the faculty. And it was a very exciting place to be. It was an area
where new kinds of research were just being launched, so I got in on the ground floor of a
number of important technical advances in my field.
KL: How did you hear about the job opening at Harvard?

4

EL: I don’t remember. I think we just asked around. I went to scientific meetings all the
time with J. Walter. And I began saying, you know, “I’m interested in a job.” And he
probably was telling people, too. The [00:14:00] chairperson in the anatomy department
came up to me and said, “Come up and see us, and let’s talk about it.” I just walked in.
KL: Now, when you were at Harvard, that’s when you worked with Albert Coons and the
Coons technique?
EL: Yes, that’s right. Albert Coons was an immunologist. I was in anatomy. And while
there, I was learning various histochemical procedures. (inaudible) looking at slides,
sections of organs. We could locate certain chemical compounds by staining reactions.
And Albert Coons developed a staining reaction that involved antibodies. Antibodies are
the most specific compounds we make that combine with very specific chemicals. And he
developed a way, using antibodies, to [00:15:00] locate proteins and nucleic acids, things
that had been hard to see before. It was an extraordinary discovery, this technique. And
it’s still used extensively today. Enormously, in fact. But at the time, when Dr. Coon
started this technique, he produced the antibodies, as immunologists do, in animals. And
he tagged them. And then he developed the way of applying them to sections. And he
was a perfectly good anatomist himself. But he always said he wanted a trained anatomist
to read his slides. So he told my chief that he needed someone to work with him. The
chief decided that I would be that person. And so it was an extraordinary opportunity.
Really marvelous. [00:16:00] He was a great person to work with. Everything we looked
at was something new. Fabulous.
KL: So why did you not stay at Harvard?
EL: I didn’t stay because, at that time – I don’t know what it’s like now – but at that time,
it was impossible to stay on indefinitely. My department was made up of several very
distinguished professors. Not professors. Associate professors. Who were approaching
their eleventh year at Harvard. They published enormously. They were internationally
known. When they reached the eleventh year, Harvard said, “It’s been nice knowing you.
Thanks a lot. And goodbye.” It was just one professor. That professor was the chief.
[00:17:00] There was no way that they could stay. And even when the chief was
approaching retirement age, the young men who wanted his job were smart enough to
leave and make it somewhere else, and then apply for the job from outside. That was the
only way you could stay. And I could see this happening. And I said, “Gee, you know.
The first time I get a good offer, I’m getting out of here.” Because it’s very difficult
sometimes. You can be over trained. Someone that’s advanced too far has more trouble
getting a job, because they cost too much. Or would rather hire the young people. So I
had two offers after my fourth year at Harvard. One was at Brown. I came right back.
KL: You wanted to work with Dr. Wilson?
EL: Yes, and I liked Brown. I like New England. [00:18:00] I didn’t want to go out to the
Middle West. It was a good university, but I wanted to stay here.

5

KL: So my note says that Wilson was traveling for NIH.
EL: Yes. That was a time when NIH was expanding very rapidly, and pumping money
out into the universities for research. And (inaudible) chemistry, biology, physics,
anything, could apply to NIH. And, you know, the money would come. But they had to
be visited. They had a site visit, usually of professors in the field who would go and
discuss the kinds of research people were doing. Asked to see examples, and so forth.
And on the basis of these visits, they’d come back, and [00:19:00] advise NIH as to
whether or not this was a worthy project. The same sort of thing they do all the time in
terms of grant applications for specific areas of research. NIH is not putting up buildings
anymore. But at that time, J. Walter was on the building committee, and he was also on
one of their other committees for evaluating research projects, which meant that he was
on the road a great deal. So I was brought in pretty much to take over his courses. He
would give an occasional lecture, but I gave most of them.
KL: And they were courses in what?
EL: They were courses in cell biology and histology.
KL: And taught to (inaudible) classes?
EL: They were taught to both. The histology was for undergraduates, and the cell
biology, when I started, was for graduate students. I think my first class had five students.
[00:20:00] And it grew and grew. And we began, you know, began bringing in
undergraduates. And it was 60 when I stopped.
KL: Medical school wasn’t open (inaudible).
EL: Oh, no. The medical school was developed (inaudible).
KL: Did you then later teach in medical school, as well?
EL: Yes. In fact, as things evolved, and as we brought in young faculty, cell biology was
a very rapidly – still is– a very rapidly moving field. My training was further and further
back, and they were bringing in young people who had more recent training, had more
recent techniques. They had come from other environments. They were full of new
things. And for them, it’s easier to teach that area. And they were more effective at it than
[00:21:00] I. So what I did is give them my course. And I stepped back and took on an
additional histology course. Histology is a sort of basic, fundamental training where there
isn’t an awful lot of activity now. So not only did I have the undergraduate histology but I
took over (inaudible) teaching histology to medical students as a required course. There
were four histologists at the local hospital (inaudible).
KL: At this time you were still working with five thousand (inaudible)?
EL: Three thousand. Don’t exaggerate.

6

KL: Three thousand was enough. I just read the article. They were fat [blond?] mice. And
I think you were working on cancer, also. Was it liver and breast cancer in the mice?
EL: Yes. Well, the breast cancer [00:22:00] we did a little bit on. It was mostly liver
cancer.
KL: And that must have taken up a lot of time, working with those mice.
EL: It did. I had help taking care of the mice, but (inaudible) special diets or injection
(inaudible) things like that, (inaudible) that.
KL: Would you say, talking about the 1950s for a while, how long would you say your
typical day was at work?
EL: Oh, it was very long. But I was one of these people who didn’t want to do anything
else. (inaudible) really terrible back by 7:00 and work until about midnight. This went on
for years.
KL: You weren’t alone (inaudible). Was this a sort of [standard?] (inaudible)?
EL: Oh, all the graduate students came [00:23:00] (inaudible), the whole third floor was
graduate students, and I was on the second floor. And we’d be there every night. I would
leave about midnight. The graduate students would work later.
KL: Did any of your colleagues, the professors, associate professors, work at nights, too?
EL: Yes, but by then, we were isolated. The cell biologists were over in Partridge and
then across the street were the biochemists and so forth. Some of them still do. The young
people do. I don’t come back nights anymore.
KL: I have a note that you were on a faculty committee when the subject of Pembroke’s
gymnasium requirement came up.
EL: Oh, no. That was a faculty meeting. Regular faculty meeting.
KL: Could you describe that [00:24:00] to Louise? Do you remember? They had a fouryear requirement, and they were asking for it to be decreased.
L: This must have been the early sixties or the late fifties.
KL: Yeah, it was early sixties.
EL: Well, I’m not sure that... It seems to me... Yeah, it was decreased at some point to
two years, but then, it was eliminated. And I think that the faculty meeting that I
remember was when they said, you know, “Why should physical education be required of

7

women when it isn’t of men?” So it was those last two years that they wanted to make
optional. Let the students get involved in – well, it was all intramural then for women –
let them do these things if they want to, but why force them to? That was the point. And
the interesting thing [00:25:00] was that it was the male members of the faculty who were
standing up and saying, “Why should the women students do this?” It was very nice.
KL: Who was proposing that they continue to do this? Was there two sides to the issue?
EL: Well, they were the women at Pembroke who were teaching physical education.
They wanted to see it continue. They lost.
KL: When you were promoted to full professorship in ’64, now, your promotions had
come along steadily prior to that. And then, in ’64, of course, you became actually the
third but touted as the first real teaching professor. And as I recall, you were shocked by
the response you got.
EL: Well, yes. You know, being submerged in my research, I was oblivious of what was
going on [00:26:00] in the outside world. Just doing my work, just like everybody else. I
got my full professorship at about the time that the men who arrived with me moved up at
the same rate. And I began getting letters from women all over the country, [women?] I
had never heard from who congratulated me. (inaudible) realize how lucky I was. Things
I had been taking for granted just were not available to everyone.
KL: Now in ’67, you became chair of the biology department.
EL: Yes. Briefly, I was chair of biology. Medicine [00:27:00] was just starting up, and
Dr. Eds was head of the medical program. Dr. Chase was head of a small research
institute that we had just down on Hope Street. And then, over all of that, Dr. Fenton was
sort of the head of the group. So it was a group of four that was working together. And
then that changed, what, about a year and a half later. It was about that.
KL: I don’t think so. It becomes confusing right about here.
EL: I don’t remember the dates on these things.
KL: You were chair of biology, and then dean of biological sciences.
EL: Okay. Well I ceased being chair when the university administration changed the
[00:28:00] organization of the division. And developed the one that we... It wasn’t quite
what we have now, but they had Pierre Galletti come in. And I don’t know whether he
was a vice president or what at that time. But he was put in charge of the whole division.
And he had a group of people. Executive committee, that’s the name of it. And I was on
the executive committee. That was the time he was setting up the hospitals and hiring
people in the hospitals. Very busy time. And a little bit later, I think ’73 – I’m sure it’s
’73 – I became dean of biology, or dean of biological [00:29:00] sciences. Dean of
biological sciences. The name has changed now. It’s now biology. I was dean of

8

biological sciences. And that’s when the current administrative structure was set up, with
a dean of biological sciences and a dean of medicine, under the vice president. Dr.
[Aaronson?] was dean of medicine. And I was in that job for four years.
KL: And was this in addition to teaching or was this a substitute to teaching?
EL: I taught one course instead of three. And my research went downhill. I had thought
I’d keep it up. (inaudible)
KL: (inaudible) [00:30:00] (inaudible) So do you recall how that worked? Did he call the
office, or however, and tell you that this was going to happen and you’d be chair?
EL: Well, he first of all... I got a letter saying, would I be on the committee? And I
thought, “Gee, why not? Here’s Pembroke. I will learn something about Pembroke.” And
I was astonished that there was any question about Pembroke. You know, it always
seemed like the ideal from across the street there. And I said, “All right.” And then he
later called me up, once I had responded in writing that I would be willing to be on the
committee. He asked me [if I?] would chair it. And I agreed to that.
KL: Do you know why you were selected as chair?
EL: No. Maybe because I was a woman. I don’t know.
KL: The only (inaudible). She was on the committee as well, but not asked to chair it.
EL: Right, right. And were there any other [00:31:00] women faculty members?
KL: No, you were it. It was Dr. Infante. Is that how you say it?
EL: Yes, [it’s a?] male.
KL: And he’s math. Oh, that’s interesting.
EL: And Dr. Stultz, from political science.
L: Do you have any idea why you three were chosen?
EL: No.
L: It’s an interesting combination.
EL: We may not have been the first choices, you know. They may have sent out a
number of letters. I don’t know how it was done. Sometimes, they’ll send out letters.
Let’s make believe they sent out four letters, and two said they were too busy. So then
they selected two more, until they got their four.

9

KL: Do you think Stultz was the one who did the selecting, though? Because I saw in one
of the letters that you received from Stultz that said something about the faculty had
voted you on the committee. [00:32:00] It was peculiar (inaudible).
EL: I don’t remember that at all.
KL: Maybe they voted confidence?
EL: Well, would it be the nominating committee? There is a faculty nominating
committee. “As you know, you have been elected [with the?] faculty to serve.” Well, in
that case, what probably, if it was an election, then the nominating committee did it.
What probably happened is that someone probably called and said, would I be willing to
run? And you’re always teamed with somebody else, you know. You may or may not be
selected. And then a ballot goes out to the faculty.
KL: We do things like that, too, in the library.
EL: All right. So this must have been a ballot thing. I had totally forgot about it. Totally.
I’m glad that you got those papers. [00:33:00] So I suppose I was elected. [Is that good
because they?] need a woman thing. It was maybe ’69 that was. I think probably Rosie
Pierrel and I would have [won?] full professors. We were women then. So there you are.
(inaudible)
KL: The selection came down to... As you recall, were you given any intimation that the
decision about the future of Pembroke had already been made, or were you seriously
supposed to look at the future?
EL: I was given no intimation to that whatsoever. We were seriously asked to look into it.
I’m sure of that.
KL: I know that this is the major report at the end of the year, so in ’70, spring. Do you
know when [a major?] [00:34:00] report to Hornig as far as I can tell from the records. Or
that Stultz had left, and Hornig had come in. These are dates that we can check. But do
you remember that change?
EL: I don’t really. Stultz was around through most of... He must have just...
KL: He would always be around. He didn’t just leave.
EL: We simply submitted a report, but just what the root was, I don’t remember.
KL: So the charge was to look into all facets of university life. And so I would imagine –
I don’t know – you would start with student life. What did the committee consider the
most serious problem?

10

EL: When I had the first meeting, we were there with the four [00:35:00] faculty
members you mentioned, students. I think there were two male and two female. Is that
right?
KL: Two female, one male.
EL: One male. Okay. And we had a woman, marvelous woman, who had graduated from
Pembroke and was a trustee, I believe, or had been a trustee.
KL: [Frances Weeden Gibson?].
EL: Frances Gibson. (inaudible) Very unusual. She had gotten her degree in engineering
and was an expert in combustion engines for automobiles. That’s pretty unusual for that
period. She’s just marvelous. And was that it? I think it wasn’t a very big committee.
KL: No, it was very small.
EL: And so the first day, we just sort of asked people, went around the table, [00:36:00]
“What are you bringing to this? What would you like to say about the question?” And all
that. And I was pretty astonished by how vehement the students were about needing a
change. Dr. Infante was very much for a change. Dr. Stultz and I were a little more in a
position of listening. Because I was surprised that the students wanted change in a way,
of course. Change was in the air. In the sixties, there was a lot of discussion. All the
university. It was spreading all through the country. Students wanted a change. And one
of the big things I remember was a period when dormitories were becoming coed for the
first time. [00:37:00] And this was a big thing in the students’ lives. And Brown was a
little slow at getting into change, because it had started in the mid-sixties. And I had sort
of had the impression – maybe the students dispelled it – this was the thing to do. And so
I was sort of defending Pembroke. I had this wonderful image of Pembroke. And so I
kept trying to defend Pembroke. And, you know, students were always saying, “But,
but.” And what it turned out – I don’t remember the details – but I come away from it
with the feeling that the students, the women, were telling me, “We are different. We
have been set apart by Brown.” [00:38:00] We have been given a separate administration.
We don’t want to be different. We want to be treated like all the male students. We want
to have the same administration. Everything must be the same. That’s what they wanted.
KL: Do you remember... I know that in some of your correspondence that the dean of
Pembroke in particular stressed that the advantages for Pembroke was that they offered
specialized services for women. There was some concern that women would lose
advantages that they had gained. Do you have any ideas specifically, when people said
“specialized services” or “advantages,” what they meant by it? What they thought was
most valuable in the Pembroke administration?
EL: I don’t really know. The one thing I said was the advising. They did get specialized
advising. It was well known that it was the best. I don’t know what else. [00:39:00] I
really don’t.

11

KL: Do you remember anything said about the advisement? There was the advising
profession. There was also career counseling advising for seniors. And a lot of people,
though there was mixed opinion on it... So I was sort of curious if you had heard anything
about the senior advising through the placement office.
EL: I have not. Or if I heard it, I’ve forgotten it.
KL: In one of, I believe it was Rosemary Pierrel’s report, she talked about one of the
meetings of the study committee in which some of the students joined in. It was a
demand for coed housing. Was that the students on the committee, or was that a group of
different students who came in?
EL: No, the students on the committee were very much for it. In fact, the women were
saying, “Yes, [00:40:00] you know, why not?” And I agreed with them there, because,
you know, it’s coed at home. And it’s sort of artificial to separate them so much.
[00:41:00] I’ve always thought that. (inaudible) That stuck. I thought, that’s a strange
reason.
KL: (inaudible)
EL: (inaudible) [00:42:00] (inaudible) Separate. But the faculty (inaudible). Some
faculty, who were much more sensitive to this than I, were aware of it. And Dr. Infante
was especially aware of it. And he spoke very strongly for the women. And that was an
eye-opener for me. Another eye-opener was from Frances Gibson. Along towards the
end, as we were sort of winding down at the end, and we were sitting. The students were
talking about the problems in detail – and I don’t remember the details – and Frances sat
back and she said, “You know, nothing has changed. [00:43:00] It’s just as bad now as it
was when I was a student.” And that did it for me. I mean, that’s when I said, “All right.
Let’s go.” And I was convinced at that. And you know they were right. I think it’s been
better since then. It really has. I realized at the time that a lot of the Pembroke graduates
were very unhappy with it. But it really has been better.
KL: Do you remember – I know that the committee issued two reports, a majority and a
minority report. Do you remember how that division came about, why it was decided to
issue two reports?
EL: Well, it was... Some people felt more strongly than others. And we had, at the end,
split up into small working groups. And [00:44:00] as a result of that, it [came down?]. It
seemed a better expression of all the points of view if we did that.
KL: In the majority report, one of the recommendations is clearly to increase the number
of female faculty. Do you have any recollection of how the discussion of female faculty
was introduced? Because it’s kind of surprising that the connection was made that early
about role models. I mean, Nancy Duke Lewis always went on about herself. But it’s

12

always surprising, when you look at the study committee and see very clearly kind of
what prefaced the Lamphere, you know, a few years later.
EL: Well, as I recall, it was just that, having role models. And the only role models they
had were the deans in Pembroke. And there were very few on campus, [just Trudy?] at
that time.
KL: So was it something that the students on the committee brought up?
EL: That I don’t remember, but I think so. I’m not sure. It could have been Dr. Infante.
KL: One of the other recommendations that was very strongly put was that it go from a
two-to-one to a one-to-one ratio.
KL: Male-female ratio in the student body. Is that something else the students felt
strongly about?
EL: Yes. And the young man was for it, too. This one male undergraduate was for it.
KL: Oh, yes. There weren’t enough women.
EL: That’s right. Why did we have to go? And he named other schools. But I was pleased
that [00:46:00] he felt that way. You know, some of the young men might have been on
the defensive. Let’s not get too many of these women here. Get your arm up. Protect
yourself. No. I thought that was a big plus in his favor.
–End of Track 1–
Track 2
KL: We were together for six hours.
EL: Just talking about everything.
KL: Oh, yeah. We had a good time. We talked about all these people we didn’t know and
explained to each other. Anyway, it was fun. So when you submitted your report...
Actually, it was very quickly acted upon, the decision to merge.
EL: It was. I don’t remember, but it did go through rapidly.
KL: Were you surprised at how quickly it went?
EL: No. I mean, when something has been completed, you might as well go ahead. Why
wait? I was pleased that it got through. [It just had to?] go through with trustees. Am I
using the right terms?
KL: Absolutely.

13

EL: Board of Fellows, whatever. Subcommittee.
KL: Now, in the recommendations, also there was a recommendation to establish
[00:01:00] basically a center that could be called Pembroke, to study higher education for
women [and might continue the services?]. Do you recall when the decision to merge was
made? If there were any discussions at all about any of the recommendations beyond,
say, increasing to one-to-one?
EL: I don’t recall. I’ve really forgotten an awful lot about it. But if it’s in there, if there’s
material there, why don’t you use it? I really don’t remember.
L: You were teaching both before and after this merger? I’m curious if... I don’t know.
Were you? You were teaching?
EL: Yes. Oh, yes.
L: Did you notice any change in the classroom?
EL: Well, no, because in biology, we had always had a lot of women as well as men.
[00:02:00] And, you know, they were treated the same. So that I didn’t notice any. I think
if there was a change, it would probably be in some of the other departments where there
hadn’t been.
KL: Do you have any other questions for [Ms. Leduc?]?
KL: No. Why don’t we zoom ahead? Last time we talked, we talked about the Lamphere
case. And you being on the other side, because you were an administrator.
EL: Yes, well, I was deaning at that time that Lamphere brought her case. And we had
just gone through a very difficult period when we had seven assistant professors come up
for tenure decision, at a time when we had only two positions open. And one of the
[00:03:00] candidates – this is the one who was not chosen – there were two other men in
her group. And one of them was chosen. And so she joined the Lamphere case.
Therefore, I became involved as an administrator because the administrators had to
answer questions to the lawyers and so forth. But it was unusual to have a woman
administrator to deal with, because they had made it a class action suit. So I was
essentially on both sides of the thing. So I remember this because I went down to give a
deposition one day, and there were seven lawyers there. They got advice from lawyers in
Boston. And they spent a whole first half-hour trying to [00:04:00] decipher just what my
role was there, because I was a woman and an administrator. It was hard for these male
lawyers to swallow that one.
KL: I take it they allowed you to give your testimony on behalf of the administration.

14

EL: Oh, yes. That’s right. Agreeing that, nonetheless, I was part of the class action. It was
weird.
KL: Did that case, and the (inaudible) make a difference in biology?
EL: Well, [Helen Serve?] remained, and I was glad, because she was excellent. It was a
matter of having several excellent people, and having to choose [from among them?]. But
I’m glad she was able to stay. Biology has always been a good place for women. I keep
saying that. Biology currently [00:05:00] has a higher percentage of women that any
other department on campus, I was told Saturday night. There were 19 of us in bio, out of
roughly, I think [we’re?] approximately 60. You know, plus or minus one or two.
Nineteen women isn’t bad. Year before last, we [graduated?] five in one year. Isn’t that
great?
KL: As a result of the (inaudible), or [just normal?]?
EL: No, we’ve always had a good department. J. Walter sort of set a standard, and we’ve
always been a good place for women. They’re hired, they’re promoted. They’re helped a
lot. One of our assistant professors just had a baby. We encourage that. When I first
[00:06:00] came here, there was all young faculty. Lots of little children. And we went
through this drought. Then all of a sudden, we got a couple of little children again. It’s
kind of fun.
- END -

15

