
Phyllis Santry: This is Phyllis Santry -Ruth Hartmann: And this is Ruth Hartmann.
PS: And we are in New York City on July thirty...
RH: 30th .
PS: -- 30th, 2013 doing an interview. OK. First question: can you tell me a little about your
family and your background, where you grew up, and where you went to school before college?
RH: Yes. I was born in Providence at the hospital, because that’s where the hospital was, but I
grew up in Saylesville, five miles north of the city in the country. My mother was born in
England, but was brought to the United States as an infant. My father was born here. All my
grandparents were born in Scotland or England, and they all lived around in that area of Rhode
Island. And I went to [01:00] a four-room country school with two grades in a room, until the
eighth grade. Then the town of Lincoln had no junior high school, so they paid to send students
for the ninth grade to Samuel Slater Junior High School in Pawtucket where I went for one year.
And from there to Pawtucket High School, where I was in a senior class of 666 students, the year
before the second high school in Pawtucket was built. Maybe it was a couple of years later than
that, I’m not sure, because obviously they were overflowing. And I graduated from there at 15,
and I went -- I had a choice. [02:00] I mean, I had dreams of Wellesley or Smith, but this was

1	
  
	
  

1939, nobody had any money. So I had a choice of going to what was then called Rhode Island
State, where I would get free tuition -- what would I get? Free tuition, I think, and you’d pay the
board, or something. At least half of it was free; maybe all of it was free because I came from the
state. Or I could go to Pembroke and live at home and apply for a scholarship, so I wanted to go
to Pembroke. The admission -- having lived through my children’s and grandchildren’s
admission process, it was such a different story in 1939. My father called up and made an
appointment, [03:00] and I asked for my records from high school and a letter from the dean.
And we went and saw Miss Mooar, who was the registrar in Pembroke College -- the building
Pembroke College. Pembroke Hall I think it was called then. And I applied for a scholarship, and
I went. You want to go, you are qualified, you go. Anyway, that was that. That was how I got to
Pembroke. And I was a city girl for -- it was a long way. I had to walk a mile to the bus and then
take the bus into the city until my senior year. And then the war was on, [04:00] gas was very
short. My father really couldn’t justify getting me home at night, because I was in Sock and
Buskin and in this and that, and I couldn’t come home, the buses didn’t really... So I lived in the
dorm that last semester.
PS: What dorm were you in?
RH: What dorm was I in? Metcalf. Metcalf.
PS: It was just the two back then, I think, Metcalf -RH: Yes. Metcalf was the newer one, I think. But they were identical. Well, they’re still there.
You can see that they’re identical.
PS: And what was your first impression of Pembroke when you got there? Were you already
used to it because you had lived in the area, or were you intimidated, or...?
RH: Everything was wonderful, everything was just wonderful. Principally [05:00], I had always
been the first in my class, and the youngest in my class, and I really loved going to school. But it
wasn’t very socially acceptable to like school, so you had to not let on that you really enjoyed
doing homework. I loved Ivanhoe, and I had loved all that stuff and everybody said, “Oh, isn’t
that awful.” But at Pembroke, everybody was the first in her class, everybody was smart. It was
just wonderful.
2	
  
	
  

PS: Yeah, it was great.
PS: What did you think about the relationship between Brown and Pembroke when you were
there?
RH: We had very little. What we had, we had the best of everything because we had our own
student government. We had our own yearbook, our own newspaper, our own dramatic society.
[06:00] The dramatic society was chancy, because we borrowed [actors and actresses] back and
forth from Sock and Buskin and pretty soon we amalgamated. The Pembroke Dramatic Society
was called Komians. And pretty soon we amalgamated, and that was really much better. And we
had all the advantages of the instruction, of the tuition. And when they were in big classes, like
Psychology 101 or American Lit. 101, there were enough people in those classes, enough
students, so you’d have two classes, and of course they’d be guys and girls in classes. But other
classes were [07:00] mixed, because there weren’t enough to fill a class for one, a class for the
other. Some of those classes that were separated, girls and men; the girls’ classes were on the
Pembroke campus. There were classrooms in Pembroke Hall. The library was at the top. And
next to Pembroke Hall was a building called East House, which I think is no longer there. And
that was also classrooms. The women were there. Then I think there was a second building next
to it, which I think was a dorm. Alumnae Hall was quite new, and the music class was in there,
because there was a piano and an organ. It was in the [08:00] place where we had chapel. There
were at least three times as many Brown students as Pembroke women. And I was very young,
so they weren’t that interested in me when I was 15. So most of the Brown men I knew, I knew
in Sock and Buskin because I was the business manager, and I had a whole lot of younger people
working for me. So I knew more in the class two [years] down, because that’s where you got the
free workers from, you know, you didn’t get it from your own class [09:00]. And by junior and
senior year, I was taking graduate seminars. They were called “graduate seminars,” but I think
most of them were seniors. And that was nice because those were small. And then when we got
into the war, of course Dean Morriss decided we all had to do our bit, and so she wanted us to
take something “useful.” And she was my advisor unfortunately, so she saw I was taking all
these humanities. And so she advised that I take something called Business Accounting, which
was such a waste of one of my courses, you know? Anyway, I took that, and-- arithmetic is not

3	
  
	
  

really difficult [10:00], so I didn’t have any problems, and the homework didn’t amount to
anything, but it was really a waste of time. But I think she probably meant well.
PS: What was her name? Dean...?
RH: Dean Morriss. Margaret Shove Morriss. She was a formidable lady, and of some distinction
in academic circles. She was a real sort of -- I don’t know how to say this. But I’ve worked for
women like her early, because you know I was working in the ’40s. And there were some
women in positions of authority who treated other women very badly. As if, “I’m here, pull up
the gangplank.” And others were different. But [11:00], I’m afraid Ms. Morriss was a little like
that. Actually, basically I think she was a snob. I think probably the Italian girls, those brilliant
girls from classical high school, I think she probably didn’t help them a lot. That’s probably all I
need to say.
PS: Now what do you think were the advantages of being in a coordinated college as opposed to
co-ed? Or were there any?
RH: What I just said, actually, that we had all the advantages of a women’s college in that we
had our own campus and our own government and our own extra-curricular activities, but we
had full run [12:00] of the tuition and educational and library facilities of a great university. I
mean, the library facilities were infinite. There was not just the John Hay where we went all the
time, but there were those special libraries at the Annmary Brown and John Carter Brown, and
all of those collections, that if that was our interest we could use. But we still had this
government of our own-- Oh I fought hard to keep Pembroke.
PS: In 1971, when they had the merger?
RH: I remember being in one meeting with Robert Reichley, who was the vice-president [13:00]
at the time, and I was sounding off about all these advantages and everything. And he said,
“Ruth, forget it.” He said, “It’s a matter of money, and it’s going to happen.” And it did. It was
probably anachronistic but... I don’t even know. What is the situation of Radcliffe? Is Radcliffe
still a coordinate?
PS: No.
4	
  
	
  

RH: But it’s not co-ed, is it?
PS: Yes.
RH: Are they two separate-- It is co-ed.
PS: Yes.
RH: So it’s just like Brown.
PS: Yes.
RH: That must’ve been hard for them, too.
PS: I’m sure.
RH: So who’s left, Mount Holyoke...?
PS: Holyoke, yes. Bryn Mawr, I think -RH: No (inaudible) Bryn Mawr. And men are at Vassar?
PS: Yes. [14:00]
RH: I don’t know about Smith?
PS: No, no men at Smith, but -RH: Wellesley.
PS: Wellesley and Barnard. Columbia went co-ed and Barnard decided to stay all women. Which
is strange.
RH: OK, so Barnard is separate, not coordinate.
PS: Yes, right, just a women’s college.
RH: But they do share their campus?

5	
  
	
  

PS: I’m sure, yeah.
RH: I can’t believe they don’t share the facilities.
PS: What would be one of your more striking memories of your college years that you enjoy the
most or that stuck with you the most throughout the rest of your career? You said you were in
Sock and Buskin -RH: Yes, that was great. I really enjoyed that. And it’s [15:00] a wonderful experience. You
know, I used to be chastised all the time by Miss Rudd about not being in gym, and I had to take
that swimming test in my senior year. And she said that team sports were so good for me, and I
said, “I don’t think there’s a better team sport than putting on a play.” You really have to work
with other people, or it doesn’t -- Listen, would you like me to turn on the air conditioning?
PS: I’m fine.
RH: Because sometimes it gets too humid... Yeah, I really enjoyed that. I had some wonderful,
wonderful teachers. And I went back over the years and saw them.
PS: Who were your favorites? [16:00]
RH: Ben Brown, who was head of Sock and Buskin and drama. Warren Hastings who taught
English and most specifically Shakespeare in a Shakespeare seminar. And Professor George,
who taught history. The class was always enormous. I mean he was at the Treaty of Versailles,
you know? And Randall Stewart who was the expert on Hawthorne, so his Hawthorne lecture
was always full. And Les Jones, who has been Brown’s assistant. Those are the ones [17:00] that
probably... I mean there were other courses that were as valuable as those courses, but those
particular men were memorable.
PS: Were there any specific classes or professors you thought were particularly challenging or
particularly useful in your career, in your future?
RH: No, I majored English, I was prepared for nothing, you know? And I was expected to go
forth in to the world and be a nurse or a social worker, or a secretary, none of which I had the
slightest interest in. So there were no career advisors; if there were, they escaped me. Nobody
6	
  
	
  

told me [18:00] what was out there. Nobody told me I could have applied to graduate school and
become an academic. It was an education. And it was invaluable, you know? Well, I didn’t go to
graduate school, so I didn’t go-- didn’t even know I could. So that kind of specialized workoriented training I didn’t get. That was it, I just graduated and that was it. And as I said I was
supposed to do one of these useful things. Mostly I think I was supposed to get married. That
would take me off the work force.
PS: But it was in the middle of World War II, so -RH: [19:00] Well, it was the war that saved me.
PS: Yeah, so when you say that, how do you mean the war saved you?
RH: I elected to go for that... If we backtrack to December the 7th, 1941, when we were all-- all
the city girls anyway-- we were in the cafeteria and had the radio on with the president -- It
wouldn’t have been December 7th, it would’ve been the day after, I guess -- When the President
spoke, you know, the “Day of Infamy” speech. And everything was different after that. And then
the administration decided that they would . . . It was mostly, I think, for the [20:00] men who
were going to be drafted, or the ROTC guys who were going to be called up. They decided to
have the semester through the summer. So I elected to do that, which meant that I graduated not
in June and walked down through the gates and all that, but in February. But before that, various
people came to the campus and interviewed. They [the administration] came from the
Department of Def-- it wasn’t the Department of the Defense and they certainly didn’t want to
call it the War Department. It was called the War Department, but they didn’t announce
themselves as such. Anyway, people came interviewing the math majors and the physics majors.
I’m talking now only about the women. [21:00] Then, somebody came from the Office of
Strategic Services and picked a few people from the English department, including me, to
interview. I got the job, and I graduated, walked down the hill in the snow, got my diploma, took
the bus home. And then in March, I went to Washington. My mother would never have let me go
off to Washington at 19 with no place to live, by myself. But there was a war on, and you had to
serve your country. And that’s what I mean, that’s how I went. There were a couple of other girls
I went with, one of whom was a roommate for a while. And then I had [22:00] my own

7	
  
	
  

apartment, and I worked there. I loved it. Imagine getting paid for doing the equivalent of
crossword puzzles, you know? I was in the coding department. It was wonderful.
PS: Just getting back to the Pembroke days for a minute, there were a couple of more questions I
wanted to ask. Were there very strict rules of proper behavior for women?
RH: Oh yes. But they did not seem to be strict because they were just what your mother told you
anyway. Yes. I mean, we didn’t have strict rules like Katharine Gibbs, the business college
[23:00], which was on Angell Street. There is a -- it’s a university now, I forget what it does. I
mean they had to wear gloves and hat and all that stuff. We didn’t have to do that. We just had to
be reasonably respectful. But inside, I mean when I lived in a dorm, at dinner there was at least
one or two [adults], however the housemother was with the house, and one or two other staff
members at dinner. You stood up when they came in. You dressed decently, you didn’t come in
your gym clothes to dinner. And it was [24:00] like somebody’s home. I was appalled when I
went out with my son [in 1969], and saw the state of some of the public rooms, with the drapery
sort of in shreds, and the furniture written on or broken up. It was amazing, because it looked
like -- When I was there, the common rooms looked like the public rooms of a nice country
hotel, you know. They had carpets, they had Windsor chairs, and it was just decent. And of
course, there were the curfews, I mean you had to be in by ten o’clock. First of all, you had to
sign out, because I think the doors would close at 8:00, I can’t remember all the laws. But you
couldn’t stay out late. [25:00] And of course no men above the first floor. By the time my
daughter went, there were co-ed [dorms], I mean it was amazing.
PS: Were there any people who flouted the rules when you were there?
RH: Oh yes, there were always wonderful stories going around about what this one or that one
had done, some of them true, some of them I’m sure not true. Oh yes, always. You can’t have
rules without somebody wanting to disobey them. That’s the way it is.
PS: You said that when you went to work with a friend from Brown from Pembroke, how did
you meet your friends at Pembroke? Were they from the dorm, or the other city girls, or...?
RH: Well, in the beginning it was the other city girls, because some [26:00] lived in the area,
could walk. Others were on a bus. Others like me were driven in by their fathers in the morning.
8	
  
	
  

Or I took this long bus ride. And there was a city girls’ room in the basement of Pembroke Hall,
right near where the mailboxes were. And so those were the first people I got to know. I can’t
remember how I got to know the others in the dorms. I mean, I signed up at the beginning of the
year, you know, I signed up for the dramatic society, for the yearbook, and for this, that, and the
other thing. And ran with another city girl, senior year, ran for student government president, and
you have to get to know everybody if you expect to campaign. [27:00] But there was so few of
us, you know? It was easy. I think, I may be remembering this incorrectly, but, I seem to
remember that at the time I was there, the enrollment of Pembroke College in total, all four
years, it was 600 girls. So it was kind of easy to know that many, because there were the two
dorms, Miller and Metcalf. There was East House, that was another dorm. There was Sharpe
House, on I think Angell, which was the co-op dorm. And there was West House, which was
new the year I came. And that was just a house, you know, a Providence house. The dorms were
the two, Miller and Metcalf. All those others were private houses that had been bought by the
university and made into a dorm [28:00]. So it was easy to get to know everybody, which is why
when I see their pictures in there [the BAM] for the wrong class, I know who they are, you
know? (laughter)
PS: Did you spend much time off campus, or were you pretty much always on the Pembroke
campus?
RH: Well, why would I want to be over there? Oh yes! I was there every day at the John Hay,
because that’s where I studied. The Pembroke library was nice, and if all you needed were your
own books, you could study up there, and it was really cozy. But if you needed material off the
shelves, you were better off with the John Hay. So I spent a lot of time over there. There and in
Faunce House, because that’s where the theatre was.
PS: Oh, of course. Now you mentioned about [29:00] wearing the white dresses and the Ivy Day.
Were there other traditions that you particularly were fond of or didn’t like at Brown? (laughter)
RH: Well, we didn’t have anything like Barnard’s Greek games, but we did have something
called the Sophomore Masque. And a lot of fun has been made of that, poked at that. It was a
masque, M-A-S-Q-U-E as in Milton’s Comus. And it took place on the field house lawn, the
hockey field. The year I was there, the year I was a sophomore, Franny Skerrett wrote, the girl
9	
  
	
  

whose picture is there identified [30:00] as somebody else, she wrote the masque, and it was
called “The Symphony of Women.” And it was extremely clever. She had the four movements of
a symphony. They had the appropriate music. Not of one symphony, but of whatever music she
liked. I can’t remember the plot, but those four movements symbolize women’s progress or lack
of. It was very clever. And there was a man named … Otto, and I don’t know he came in there,
but he was the dance master. Very full of attitudes, very [31:00] charming, with a wonderful
accent of unknown provenance. And he had us all assemble, and then he had us all dance,
because we all had to do gym, you know, all the time. And then he went, “You, you, you, you,”
for the various movements of this symphony. Then we all had white dresses, and music out on
the lawn. And that was the Sophomore Masque. And I bet it doesn’t take place anymore. I mean
it was strictly a women’s thing. There was that for the sophomores. Then, there was Ivy Day. It
was called the Ivy Chain I think. And I think that was junior and [32:00] senior year, but I’m not
sure. I remember being in it either once or twice, so I don’t know whether maybe it was juniors
and seniors, I think it was juniors and seniors. Then there was the May Queen. And that always
hit the papers, you know, the Journal and the Bulletin. I remember hearing about the May Queen
as a child, you know there were pictures. Of course, it was the prettiest girl. And then she had a
court of the next most prettiest girls. And I forget what else happened. I can’t remember what the
ceremony was. I do remember the girls who were chosen to be queen, they were pretty. [33:00]
And then there was the Senior Sing to the dean. Those were women’s things, I mean you know,
there is a Senior Sing now, but it’s on the steps of Sayles Hall. It tends to be a little bit raucous, I
mean, I remember ours was extremely dignified, all of us in our caps and gowns. We lit the
candles with a piece of cardboard, all very decorous and emotional. And it followed something
or other, I can’t remember. But I think those were the principal activities that were just for the
women. One nice thing, I told you I spent [34:00] the one year in the dorm. And the last day
before the Christmas holiday, the Christmas vacation, I was waked up in the dark in the morning
with the girls from the dorms singing Christmas carols, that they did for every [new girl], you
know, they would do it for freshmen, and it was an equal surprise to me. And what else did we
have that was our own? The paper, the Pembroke Record, was very serious, and it was very well
done. I didn’t work on that. I did work on the yearbook. There was a recent Pembroke [35:00]
graduate, I think who was sort of guiding the paper at that time, it was very well done. Most of
these things were really quite serious, you know. I mean, they really were well done.
10	
  
	
  

PS: If there was anything you could change about your undergraduate experience, can you think
of anything that you would’ve done differently or that you think the school should have done
differently preparing for life?
RH: Yes, I certainly do.
PS: OK. (laughter)
RH: I certainly do. And I made a lot of noise about this. Not then, but when my kids were going,
yes, I would’ve wanted some guidance, what to do when I graduated. And also some guidance
about what courses to take. I mean if hadn’t been for those recruiters coming [36:00]-- I don’t
know what I would’ve done. I suppose I would have gone to the employment agency and throw
myself on their mercy, you know. And I even suggested that they should enlist the alumnae in
this, so that alumnae in towns where graduates went back to, they could contact those alumnae
and have help from them, and so forth. Yeah, I would do that. Girls know much more about
careers now. We didn’t have any careers, you know. We weren’t supposed to have any careers.
We weren’t expected to, you know. Yeah, I would’ve changed that. I also wouldn’t have taken
that accounting course [37:00]. And the whole gym thing has fortunately changed. Not that I
don’t believe you need to learn to swim. But they don’t have to make such a fuss about it. And
they were good about helping us do things in the community. The Red Cross headquarters was
up there in the east side, perhaps it still is. And I remember taking first aid courses there, I don’t
know if that was because of the war, or just whatever. And I remember teaching something there.
I don’t know what it could’ve been, I didn’t know anything much. [38:00] But the administration
was good about that. And what else would I change? Oh, I would’ve liked to live in the dorm the
whole time, that would’ve been most enjoyable. I mean, I had to go bed when my mother said,
you know, I couldn’t stay up all night and work. So I wasn’t really on my own until I went to
Washington. Not that you’re totally on your own in college, but it’s a step. It’s a step.
PS: Well, when you were at Brown, did you have any specific career plans, or were you just
going to do like the rest of us did, just graduate and get a job?

11	
  
	
  

RH: Oh yes, I know exactly what I wanted to do. I wanted to major in French and [39:00] go to
France for my junior year and study French, and then I wanted to live there. So then the war
came along, and Europe was kind of out of bound.
PS: Didn’t exactly pan out the way you thought.
RH: Didn’t exactly pan out, no. So I didn’t do that.
PS: So you went to Washington. You said you enjoyed doing that job. It was like doing
crossword puzzles all day?
RH: Oh, I loved it, yeah, I loved it. Computers were just beginning to be in use for that sort of
thing. You know, punch cards, there was a machine that made punch cards. And you could make
random one-time pads out of those, and that was just beginning. But basically we were working
with one-time pads that we then were decoding [40:00] by double transposition. And then there
were two machines. A small machine that we called Betty, and a big machine that we called
Bertha, that also had their own in-built codes that changed. Then we also had a teletype machine
that had direct communication -- I’m so surprised hearing myself talk about this, because I
signed a paper saying I’d never say anything. And I didn’t, until all of a sudden, all these books
were being published. And I thought, you know, that guy was in Kunming, he wasn’t supposed
to say a word about this. [41:00] If I think about it and the way these things are done now, it’s
kind of a miracle we won this thing. Isn’t it?
PS: Came very close to losing.
RH: Yes we did. But the OSS officers -- is this still recording?
PS: Yes.
RH: It doesn’t need to be. I’ll tell you. The OSS officers --End of Track 1Track 2
PS: Now we’re recording again.
12	
  
	
  

RH: OK.
PS: OK. After that, after the war, what jobs did you do after that, or did you just get married,
have babies and stay home?
RH: No. That’s what I was supposed to do. When the war was over, the men came back, took
our jobs, and we were supposed to marry them and have babies. First I went home, then I came
to New York and looked for a job. I finally found what I liked. I worked for a publishing house. I
was assistant to the book editor in a publishing house. And shortly after that, I met my husband.
We married. He had just got back from the war [01:00], and he went home to Albany. Then he
came to New York, and I met him through a mutual friend. And we got married. He wanted to be
a journalist, a photo journalist, he’s a photographer. And so I worked until he could get started.
You know, because he had to amass enough work to show to editors and advertising people. And
then, he was getting on okay I -- we decided we could have a baby, and I worked freelance at
home for the publishing house. There were a couple of things, there was a particular [02:00]
children’s catalogue that I did every year and I could do that at home. And I did that. And then
by the time I had a second baby, and my husband was away a lot [on assignments], that was all
that I could do. And then, I just freelanced as a researcher and as a writer since then. I didn’t go
back to publishing. Publishing has changed tremendously too, you know?
PS: Did you like working in publishing or...?
RH: Oh I loved it, I loved it, it was wonderful. And nice people. Yeah, that was nice.
PS: But now you’re the keeper of your husband’s legacy too, I was reading about that.
RH: Yes, that’s what I do now. I run his archive [03:00]. I mean, first of all I spent a lot of time
putting the archive in order. He died almost more than 14 years ago now, and yeah, I’ve had at
least one exhibit every year ever since then. I have a book coming out-- I have two books coming
out. One is done and it’s in the catalogue. And the other one, I’ve just submitted all the material.
And they’re putting it together now.
PS: Now, I’m supposed to ask this, it sounds silly, but what ways has your actual career path
deviated from what you thought it was going to be?
13	
  
	
  

RH: [04:00] I think that question doesn’t make any sense to me. (laughter)
PS: OK, skip that one. (laughter)
RH: I’m not sure I ever had a career path, you know? Which is probably not at all the way one
should be, but it seems to me things have happened to me more than I ever had all that much
control over them. I’m not touting that as the correct way to do things, but I think that’s the way
it was.
PS: Certainly. And was there specific ways that your time at Brown influenced, or at Pembroke
influenced the choices that you made in your career? Probably not, as you say.
RH: No. The time at college influences your life choices, I mean, unless you’re going to MIT or
getting an MBA somewhere. I think [05:00] a university should prepare you for life.
PS: Yeah, it’s not trade school.
RH: It’s not trade school, and it shouldn’t be trade school, and the ones that aree trying to make
them into trade schools are making a big mistake in my opinion, you know? I think we need
trade schools. And I think what has happened is that -- I mean there are a lot of kids who don’t
do well in school. And it may be because they don’t want to ever learn history. Maybe they want
to be a plumber. But they should be a good plumber, and they should go to a good school, and
they should learn more than plumbing there. There used to be high schools that divided people
up. When I went, there was academic [06:00] and business, and trade, what they call vocational
or something. I’m not crazy about channeling people, so yeah. But I think there ought to be those
options, for people to get. If they don’t want academia or can’t deal with it, we ought to be able
to at least help them to earn a good living.
PS: Do you have any other thoughts about the Pembroke, Brown that you went to as opposed to
the Brown today? My thought every time I go to the campuses the girls are wearing cut-off blue
jeans. That would’ve never flown, when we were at school. (laughter)
RH: Oh my goodness.
PS: And I think [07:00], “You go girls!”
14	
  
	
  

RH: Oh my goodness, never. It wouldn’t have gone. I think they can do what they want within
reason, and within some reasonable proprietary bounds. When I’ve gone back, which has not
been often, and when I’ve had, you know, both of my children, my grandchildren went there,
they’ve been there, classmates have been here. I have never failed to find those kids interesting,
hard-working, I don’t buy the business that these current generations are lazy, I don’t think
they’re lazy. I think they’re smart, and I think they’re smarter than we are than we were. And
[8:00] that I love what they’re doing. My younger granddaughter who has been in New York this
year, but she finished up in June. She’s going to Boston to seek her fortune, and to live with a
girl who’s working for unions. And another one that I met at graduation is off to Teach for
America. And I think the opportunities they have and the way they’re grasping on to them, I
think it’s wonderful. I think it’s wonderful and I think the university has done that for them.
PS: There seems to be more diversity on campus than when I was there. Do you notice that, that
there are more Latinos, [9:00] more blacks, more whatever.
RH: Oh my goodness, yes! Oh, absolutely!
PS: A lot more interesting than it was when we were there.
RH: Oh, it was white when I was there. It was white. Period. The most exciting, exotic girl we
had came from -- she was a war refugee -- and she came from Bulgaria. And she spoke only
Bulgarian. And Latin. And we conversed with her in Latin until she spoke English. Our Latin
was, you know, pretty small. Oh yes, it was definitely really white place, I think among the men
as well. I mean, a dark-tinged face would have been -- You would have noticed. Oh yes, and now
[10:00] it’s a rainbow.
PS: Do you think this is a positive -RH: Oh, absolutely. The more people who’re exposed to a better education, the better off we
should. And the more they travel, the better off we are. My two grandchildren are colorblind, you
know? From the time they were in kindergarten. They went to kindergarten, they went to public
schools in New York City. Their playmates have been African Americans, Asians. I think it’s
wonderful. That’s what we’re supposed to be, right?

15	
  
	
  

PS: Yes. (laughter) My sister calls herself a “Euro American --”
RH: Yes.
PS: -- As opposed to an African American. And you said your daughter [11:00] went to Brown?
And did your son?
RH: My son and my daughter and my granddaughter.
PS: Oh, lovely.
RH: The other one did not, she said, “I don’t want to go there, it’s too cold.” (laughter) She
applied only to colleges in southern California.
PS: Now, have you stayed in touch with Brown? Are you still doing things on the campus, going
to Brown?
RH: No. What did I do with Brown? At the time that the merger was coming up, I saw a lot of
Bob Reichley, who was the vice-president at the time. And when Nicholas was there, Erich took
pictures, and Nick wrote a piece and I wrote a piece for BAM. [12:00] I was up there when
Nicholas was there, and a couple of times on (inaudible). You understand, my parents lived in
Providence, so you know, I did go back and forth. But I didn’t have a job to do in the university.
I have not worked with the alumnae relations at all, except to stay in touch with them.
PS: Is that because you were disappointed in the merger or you just didn’t have time to do it, it
wasn’t -RH: Oh no, I had too many other things to do. And we traveled a lot. Therefore so much made
me unreliable-- I never knew when I was going to be going away, no, I had too many other
things. No, no, no, I had nothing -- they seemed to have done it very well. In spite of me. It
seems to have worked out very well.
PS: What about other volunteer work that you’ve done?
RH: Oh, the usual thing. [13:00] I did all my volunteer work when my children were small. And
now I work-- I like to get paid for work. I did all the usual things; the Parent Teacher
16	
  
	
  

Association, the Block Association, the community association, the voting, you know, getting
people out to vote, and all that kind of stuff. The neighborhood stuff. And what else did I do?
The children went to the UN school. That was after we came back from London. We lived in
London for a number. And I was quite active there, because I was the parent, sort of a liaison,
you know, [14:00] with the UN. That was a wonderful school. I think it probably still is. I don’t
have much to do with it now...
PS: OK. Well, I’ve done all of the required questions. Is there anything that you would like to
add, or you can think of that I should have asked you and I didn’t ask you, or, some burning
issue that you’ve been dying to share with everybody?
RH: No, I’m dying to tell you about the mistakes that I’ve made, but I’ve told you that. I was
most recently there at commencement this year. You didn’t happen to be there -- no, it was not
your reunion year.
PS: Right.
RH: It poured. [15:00] And it was freezing cold. In retrospect, it was quite amusing. That’s one
thing they could do, they could put some heat in the dorms. It was freezing. What do you think
about the size of Brown? Do you think it’s getting too big?
PS: No, it hasn’t really-- well, it’s expanded, but with the medical school, it hasn’t expanded the
undergraduate school that much.
RH: That’s true. And the medical school is good.
PS: Yes. I think they should have a law school, but they didn’t ask me.
RH: Well, if they ask you, you can say I agree with you, OK?
PS: Oh good, thank you. (laughter)
RH: It’s amazing they don’t have a law school, isn’t it?
PS: It is. There’s only one law school in Rhode Island [16:00]. Roger Williams.

17	
  
	
  

RH: That is funny. That’s a fairly new college, my goodness. Massachusetts must have a ton.
Can we turn that off now?
PS: Sure.
- END -

18	
  
	
  

