
Derria Byrd: Interview with Dean English, October 3, 1994. Okay, I'm just
going to start with some background information. (Lydia English: Okay.)
What were your experiences that lead to your decision to attend Brown?
Lydia English: Well, I don't know if you know that I came to Brown as an
adult student. And I had worked for a number of years in the field of
banking. And also my last. ..! guess my last seven or eight years in that field I
worked in the Virgin Islands - in the US Virgin Islands. And during that
time I really got an interest in culture. I really became interested in how
cultures interacted and how an international company like the one I was
working for was doing business in various countries in the Caribbean that
had different cultural styles than maybe the corporation itself. And in...while
I was working there, I became a manager of the bank in the Virgin Islands.
And in my capacity there I worked with people from various countries in the
Caribbean - from various countries in Latin America and the main challenge
of the job was to get all of these different people from different culture
backgrounds to work together for a common goal. So I became very
interested in how one might do that and what were the common
denominators to reach all these different people who thought of themselves
as unique and individual and different from each other. So I started thinking
about it and my training prior to coming to Brown had all been professional
training in the field of banking and not a university type training. One of the
things that I wanted to do for myself was to expand my own foundation base
of knowledge - general knowledge - liberal arts knowledge - and I really felt
limited by not having that degree even though I was successful in my career.
But personally I felt limited. So I was at a time in my life when I could take
the risk to leave an established career and start something new. And I was
encouraged by some friends of mine who were familiar with Brown and
knew of the admission program that Brown had for adult students.
DB: It's a pretty good program?
LE: It's the same program as you go through. (DB: Oh.) It...The difference is
that it is a different admissions process and a different admissions criteria. In
other words, one doesn't have to submit a SAT for example. And your high
school record or any college record that you have is not as significant as it
would be for a traditional undergraduate. So that the evaluation is based on
recommendations, the applicant's personal application which indicate their
sincerity and committment to doing this, and an evaluation of what they
have been doing in their lives all along.

English

- 2

DB: When you were attending Brown, how common was it for your
immediate family members to be in college?
LE: You mean was I a first generation college student? (DB: Yes.) No, I
wasn't a first generation college student although I will say that the large
percentage of my family in the generation before me did not have a college
education. I say that my father didn't have a college education. My mother
had gone to college for like three years. Her sisters and brothers - my aunts
and uncles - I don't think any of them went. I mean they all graduated from
high school. But my own brother had gone to college as a traditional age
undergraduate, so he had done that. Interesting. That's an interesting
question because in my mother's family, although she and her siblings had
limited access primarily due to economics, the generation before her - her
father and his siblings - all went to college - all five of them - and all
graduated from college. So the idea of education as a way of advancing
oneself was quite a prominent value in my family.
DB: While you were at Brown, what were some of your fondest memories
from that experience?
LE: (laughs) Lots of 'em. Walking through the Van WickIe gates. Coming
in at the convocation ...beginning. That was a real thrill. I saw that
as...symbolically as walking into a new life and changing my life altogether.
Walking out of the Van WickIe gates (smiles. DB laughs) was the biggest
thrill of all, that was great. That was wonderful...a wonderful moment. I
think that the whole commencement ceremonies - weekend, the campus
dance, the commencement forums, the this and the that, the Pops concert,
and I had all of my family here then - was just wonderful. But on the
everyday basis, I really had.. .! was really fortunate. I had a lot of positive
interaction with faculty. I had a lot of positive interaction with deans and
through the time.. .! was here for four years...through the time I was here and
the development of those relationships, I think were in ...were very
instrumental in giving me not only the confidence but the idea that I wanted
to go on in higher education.
DB: Okay. And where were you living when you were a student at Brown?
LE: 95 Keene Street. Which is ...(DB: So you were off campus the whole
time?) It was about...it's walking distance. It's about four or five blocks up
Brown Street.
DB: How was your experience here affected by your being a resumed
undergraduate student or an adult undergraduate student?
LE: Umm. Well, I think my experience wasn't affected that much except for
that since I'm adult and was an adult then, I think maybe it might have been

English

- 3

easier for me to approach faculty and deans and just to chat and talk. And so
as so many undergraduates are...feel a little shy approaching faculty and
deans, I didn't feel that so much. What I did feel was kind of conspicuous in
the classroom. Especially if it was a new class and I was standing outside the
door and all the students would think I was the teacher. (DB laughs) And for
them to you know they were really curious about me so I made a lot of
friends through that because I understood their curiosity. And so I had a lot
of regular-aged students who were people I sit in the Blue Room and chat
with or talk about the class materials and stuff like that.
DB: So socially you don't think it was a drawback for you?
LE: No, I don't except that I mean, I certainly don't feel like I had the same
opportunities as the traditional undergraduate in the social sphere - that is to
say living together, you know having that kind of support - studying together
and having that kind of support. And there were a lot more things going on
in my life than just school. (DB: Right.) So, from that point of view, there
is a difference because I had other obligations as well as to school. And the
committment to go to school here was a major committment for me. It was
the giving up of an established career to start all over again with something
that I didn't where it was going to go. And so from that point of view, it was
a much different kind of risk than coming in as a traditional undergraduate.
DB: What clubs and organizations did you participate in or did you have
time for all that?
LE: laughs. Well, let's see. Clubs. The only club that I was in was the
Resumed Undergradute Student Association. (DB: Do they still have that?)
Yes. And I was a Writing Fellow. I was also an Odyssey Fellow. And after I
did the Odyssey research part, then I was a T.A. in the class. I was a T.A. in a
class when I was a sophomore. So a lot of my extracurricular activities had to
do with academic stuff. (DB: Right.) Yea.
DB: While you were at Brown, the groups of friends that you had, were they
- did they vary on class, racial, religous lines?
LE: Absolutely. (laughs) I had every kind of friend you could think of. You
know. It was really...that was the most amazing part of the experience. It was
wonderful. I...yes, I did a lot .. .! worked with racial diversity and pluralism
kind of committees. And I was on committees and things even though I
wasn't in any sororities or those kinds of things. But certainly, it was just the
most wonderful thing to meet all these different people from all of these
different places because I told you I was interested in culture anyway. So I
came here and I just had a banquet of it. (LE & DB laugh)
DB: So were there any low points to your Brown career?

English

- 4

LE: (emphatically) Oh yea! I always thought I was going to fail. And I always
wondered what I was doing here. I would study study study and still be scared
to death that I didn't know what the material was. (LE smiles and DB laughs)
I would be writing papers at five o'clock in the morning because they were
due at nine. (LE smiles and DB laughs) It was just a rollercoaster, you know.
I'd feel just the lowest and then I'd get back my paper and it would have a
good grade and then start all over again. So, yea.
DB: Sounds like college life. (laughs)
LE: Yep, only worse...because it was like (pause) for for an adult, it's like
your whole identity's one the line. And so...yea I had lots of low points. But I
had lots of high points, too.
DB: Do you feel that your time here was affected at all by being an African
American woman - a plus or minus?
LE: Ummm. I think it was a plus. You know, altogether...overall. I'm not
saying that things were perfect or that... there still today are areas that need
improvement. But I think because - and probably an adult African American
woman - but because I was an African American woman, I was asked my
opinion which I freely gave. And I feel that I was allowed to participate in the
dialogue of the university. Not that what I said made any structural or
institutional differences, but it allowed another voice into the fray. And so I
think it was definitely a plus. Socially, with maybe some groups of students,
maybe it wasn't. But my agenda was preparing myself to move on and so my
focus was more on that than trying to be involved with people who didn't
want to be involved with me.
DB: Right. That's a good thing to know. (LE: Yea.) As far as finances, were
they a big part...
LE: Absolutely!! (LE & DB laugh) I had no mommie or daddie giving me
any money to go to college. And I quit my job to do it so finances were a big
part of the thing. I received financial aid or scholarship is what we are calling
it now - which included loans which I'm still paying. (DB: Right. laughs)
And some grant money and some work study. I did all kinds of work study. I
worked at media services cataloguing films that had been done at Rites and
Reasons. I worked...where else did I work? I worked in one of the deans
offices answering the phones - secretarial stuff. So I was always doing some
kind of work on campus. But yea I went through all of Brown on financial aid
- 100%.
DB: Was it hard to balance your work schedule with your classes and your
committees and your T.A.ing and all that? Time management.

English - 5

LE: Yea time management was always a problem. Still is. (LE and DB laugh)
But I don't know, when I look back, I got it all done. And I...sometimes I
can't even remember how that happened you know. But in summers when I
worked like full time and not here at the university. I worked..I worked at a
couple of the local banks here and.. .! got real pay. (LE and DB laugh) And so
that helped. And I had the support of...and although all my schooling was
paid for, I still had to live. So I did receive some support from a whole
consortium of friends and family. (LE and DB laugh)
DB: It comes in handy, I know. (LE: Yea) I was thinking of this before
actually, what type of on-campus support networks did you utilize?
LE: The writing centers. That was one of the first things. The writing center.
At the library? (DB nods) The chaplain's office. I used to go on the women's
retreats that the chaplains would have. Deans. One...two... two deans in
particular: Dean Charlotte Thomas was the person who was in charge of the
resumed ed program when I as here. And that's what...I'm in charge of it
now. It's sort of funny to me. (LE smiles and DB laughs) And Dean Karen
Romer. Those were two who were very supportive of the RU program and
you know they really went out of their way to give advising to students and
stuff. But some of the deans that are still here now are people I used to see
when I was a student. (LE smiles and DB laughs) And now they're my
colleagues and that's great. Faculty: Anani Dzidzienyo was one that was very
supportive. Una Fruzzeti. Bill Beaman. Karen Newman. You know - Ann
Fausto Sterling - these were people that I worked with in various.. .in various
capacities. And again now to be back in an administrative capacity and
teaching -part-time- to have these people as my colleagues is like .. .!t's
wonderful. It's great. (DB laughs) Yea. So I'm one of their success stories for
them. Right.
DB: I can imagine. (LE: Yea.) I was going to ask you how it feels to one day
have been sort of a mentee... these people were your mentors and now you're
their colleague.
LE: It...it feels great. And you know it's...for them and each of the people that
I named have at one time or another told me this. They feel that they did
their job. And that it was a job well done and that they have a concrete
product to show (LE smiles and DB laughs) for what they did. And so you
know sometimes when I go out to social occasions with someone, they'll say,
"Oh, do you know she used to be my student?" (LE and DB laugh) And so it
makes them feel good and it makes me feel good that that after you know I've
done my part of the training that they have accepted me as a friend number
one and as a colleague number two so it's great.

English

- 6

DB: While you were here what social or political issues were big on campus?
LE: Oh, financial aid. (LE laughs and DB: Always!) It's always has been big.
Diversity. You know the numbers.. .increasing the numbers. It was just
beginning.. .They were just beginning to have like women's issues being
raised. This year...in '95 is my tenth reunion year which is really interesting
to me. And a lot of the women's stuff was corning along then and there had
only been at that time say...when I carne here in '81, that was really the
beginning of feminist writing - the new post-modern modern feminist
writing. And so that was one thing I was very involved in. The whole
feminist critique and all of that kind of stuff. So those were the.. .! think the
major...the major issues then.
DB: And there is one more question about your actual time at Brown. What
do you think was missing from your education here or your time here? Are
there any voids or. ..
LE: Wha t was missing was enough time for me to take all the things tha t I
wanted to take when I was here. When I graduated from here, there were so
many areas that I would have like to have explored and so many courses that
I wish I could have taken and so many opportunities offered on the campus
that I never got around to, like study abroad or doing an internship in the
community. Although I did do two internships through through courses in
community health. One: I did an internship with the visiting nurses
association. Where I went with a nurse and visited homes and people and
that kind of stuff. And the other I did at the Southeast Asian Refugee Center
which was a center for Hmong, Cambodian, Vietnamese people over in
South Providence to a liason between health care services and the people.
So ...
DB: Time is always a problem. (LE: Yep.) Since graduation, what...when
you look back on your Brown years, how do you think they benefit
you...have benefitted you?
LE: You know in ways that continously pop up. In ways of seeing people and
learning how to listen for that critical element in the conversation to
respecting people of all types of differences to having that foundation of
critical thinking skills to being able to talk to students now you know based
on all those experiences and understanding sort of the stages that one goes
through in the learning process and how we you know doubt ourselves and
make things rough one ourselves when we don't need to. But you know
that's a part of being smart accomplished and a professional person. You're
always doubting, you know. It's always...You just have to put that pressure
there. I don't know. I feel really proud of having a...being a Brown graduate
and that pride sort of manifests itself in a certain amount of confidence.
Certainly a certain level of social skill. The ability to be able to say I don't

English

- 7

know something that I know how I can go find it out. Those kind of things
just set you well on whatever course that you're going to take.
DB: As far as graduate school is concerned, when you were here...before you
well...when you started your undergraduate, had you known you were going
to go to graduate school or were there other influences that came in...
LE: I had no idea that I was going to go. If you'da told me (LE smiles and DB
laughs) when I came to Brown that I was going to end up doing what I ended
up doing, I would have said you know you are really nuts. (LE & DB laugh)
That is not even in my thought. L.all I knew was that I wanted to make a
change and basically I was starting a new life. And so coming here was
enough of a challenge in and of itself that I was hardly thinking (LE smiles
and DB laughs) of what the next step was going to be. I mean I was going
from semester to semester trying to struggle through and make sure I was
passing my courses and so on. Which by the way, I did graduate magna cum
laude. And I did graduate with honors in my discipline so that's what I was
saying. (LE & DB laugh) You still have these doubts though, you know. So it
got to be senior year first semester and that's when I started thinking well,
what am I gonna do? Because I didn't want to go back into middle­
management banking, that's where I was. And I only had an AB in
anthropology and that didn't seem to likely that - I don't know. I don't know.
I didn't seem too impressed with that. Sure, it was impressive to me but in
the work world (DB laughs), I didn't see where somebody was going to say,
"Hey, an AB in anthropology, I'ma hire her." So, through the process of
elimination I came up with well (laughs) I'm gonna have to go to graduate
school. It's no way I could stop now. And besides, the Brown experience
opened up for me a real quest for knowledge that's still there. You know, I
just want to know things. I want to understand things. I'm always interested
and you know I don't think. . .! think it's a life-long process. It's not
something that: you know it and then you stop learning. So that was one of
the features of the experience really of having that...just a real desire to know
stuff. Just for knowledge's sake. (DB: Right.) Not what kind of work I was
going to do with it. So I talked to all of these people I mentioned as my
mentors and I said, "What shall I do?" And they said, "Well, you are going
to graduate school, of course. Aren't you?" (DB laughs) And I said, "Well, I
don't know. What's graduate school? (LE & DB laugh) So I started and I
started thinking about it and I said, "Well, where shall I apply?" And you
know, and I knew nothing. And so so some of them said well apply to
Harvard; apply to Yale. I was like, "What?!" (LE & DB laugh) You know, it
was the same response I had when I was told to apply to Brown. I can't do
that. I can't you know go to one of those schools. I don't have that kind of
money and I don't have that kind of brain and you know blahdie blahdie
blahdie blah. And they said, yes you do, yes you do. So L.it was very scary.
So I applied to Harvard and I applied to Yale. I applied to Brown. My.. .! don't
want to leave (LE & DB laugh) My safety. I also applied to the Big Ten which

English

• 8

is Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Iowa, MIchigan, and Nebraska and
Chicago - the University of Chicago. And I did that. I had a ... there was a
combined application for minority students and you could just apply on this
one application for all of these. (DB: I was gonna say. laughs) So because I
couldn't afford all those application fees. (DB: Right.) In fact, I didn't pay
any application fees. I checked cannot afford to pay on my applications. And
then I went to a dean and I said, I just applied to all these schools. I said now
the thing is if I don't get into any of them? I have no other plans. And she
said what are you going to do if you get into all of them? (LE & DB laugh) I
went I don't know; I don't know. So what happened was I did get into all of
them. (DB: And you were worried. LE & DB laugh) And then I was worried
like which one do I pick now you know? What's the best one? And what
will make the most sense? And geographically, financially - all of these
things. Well through a whole lot of wrenching work with a lot of different
considerations involved, I decided to go to Yale. And so I did.
DB: And how was that compared to your Brown experience?
how... ) Is there any way that you can compare them?

(LE:

Oh,

LE: Apples and oranges. First of all, graduate school is very different than
college (DB: Right.) in that you just focus in one department very narrowly ­
single-mindedly focused on that. Secondly, I thought my whole identity and
career was on the line when I was a Brown student, but then it was
exponentially advanced (LE & DB laugh) like, "Oh my god, if this doesn't
work then I'm going to you know...I'm a complete failure." You know, it's
like...It was a lot of pressure. A lot of pressure. A lot of work. Very lonely
and isolating because a lot of the work you are just doing by yourself. You
know, your own research. So it doesn't compare. It wasn't the social,
supportive, warm, embracing kind of experience I had at Brown. It was
more being a marathon runner out there and having to prove yourself and
once you were able to break the tape, then people would hold you up and say,
"Job well done!" (LE & DB laugh) But it was along time getting there. Yea.
DB: So after undergraduate and graduate,
Brown?

how did you end up back at

LE: Well, I graduated from Yale in 1991. And all the time I was at Yale,
which was 6 years, I maintained a household here in Providence. And so I
used to corne horne on the weekends. I lived down in New Haven during
the week and I'd corne horne on the weekends. I had a lot of friends here in
Providence and I had my horne here. And I still kept up contact with people
on Brown's campus. I mean Brown always.. .! always felt connected to Brown.
You know, in many different ways. I would corne and you know do panels
and forums even when I was a graduate student at Yale. So when I
graduated.. .I decided not to apply for a job until I graduated. Because so many
would-be Phd's start jobs before they graduate and they never finish their

English

- 9

Phd. And I was.. .! didn't want that to happen to me after all these years and
all that struggle. (LE & DB laugh) So that was kind of scary ... you know.
Waiting up until the last minute but I had been on several job interviews
because people had solicited me. And not that I was looking but that they had
called me and said, "You know. We would like for you to come and
interview for this particular job." And I started doing that sort of about
October before I finished the degree in the following Spring . And I realized
how much that was taking out of me. Because you have to prepare a talk and
you have to travel to the job and then you have to meet with thousands of
people (LE & DB laugh) when you got there. And so this whole interview
process was very (pauses) debilitating, time-consuming, and distracting
because I was trying to finish my dissertation. So I decided to stop and not go
on anymore job interviews about February and just you know work to finish
my dissertation. So after I graduated and had the big party and invited all my
friends from here - from Brown - and you know my other friends and my
family and started talking to people about finding a job. (LE & DB laugh ­
emphasis hers) Now that the glow was off (LE & DB laugh) you know. And
it was like reality. And they started sending me the notice from the student
loan office, telling me that my loans would be coming due in six months.
(LE & DB laugh) So I was swimming. I used to swim at the Brown pool; I
still do. And talking to people...and so one of my friends here said well you
know, why don't you...they.. .it was coming from different corners. One said,
"Why don't you give me your dissertation and I'll see if I can you know sort
of like get you...give you a post-doc." You know - a post-doctorate. And then
another said, "Well, maybe you could take a job temporarily teaching. And
then some one else said, "There's this job in this division maybe you would
be interested in that." So there were all these things, but nothing. And
finally, one of my former mentors, now colleague, (LE & DB laugh) said, "I
think there may be something of interest to you in the Dean's office. And I
don't know if you'd be interested in working in the Dean's office, but come
and check it out." So, I did and the deal that we worked out was that I would
work half-time in the Dean's office and then I was teaching half-time in the
African American studies. And then, the next year I was working full-time
in the Dean's office and teaching in African American studies. So I
couldn't...they did not have a tenure tract position availible in African
American studies which has to be in conjunction with another department.
And so they couldn't like guarantee me a job. You know... a tenure...going
toward tenure position. So they did offer me a full-time position in the
Dean's office. And still with... you know still teaching like in the Spring in
African American studies. So that's how it happened.
DB: Okay, and another question about race and gender and how that affected
your professional career here.
LE: Race and gender affects our whole lives you know. Those ... they...those
are integral components of who I am. And I don't know. I mean I don't

English

• 10

know that answer to because it's such a profound question. Certainly in this
country, everyday one's identity is impacted and affected by race, whether
you are black or white or purple or green. It's just the color line that W.E.B.
DuBois talked about in 1903 is so palpable, so solid you can you know...it's
just there. It's a part of how we live and so since it's a part of how we live,
it's hard to sort of stand back from it and say what exactly is its implication.
Its implications of course is always that- for a black person in America - is that
you're always looking through your own eyes looking through someone
else's eyes looking at you. And so that is really the phenomenology of it.
You're always... there's no you know... there's no way to get around that even
if you are not conscious of that. For gender, all we have to do is.. .! mean
that's quite quantitatable - we can look at the...sort of the statistics and see
where women are. What salaries women make. What positions women
have and realize that we have a problem. Whether those problems and those
ceilings are attributable to race and gender, in my particular case, I'd have to
say both. You know. Sometimes it could be an advantage if they want you to
be a token something or other. But that's only a transitory advantage. It's not
a real advantage. It's not a life enhancing advantage. Only in the aspect that
perhaps me being in a certain position may allow you to be in a certain
position at some point in time or maybe I can crack open a door to bring - you
know - several other people through the door and that kind of thing. So but
it's more of a mission and a responsibility than it is an advantage. So I think
it's a lifetime struggle. A lifetime struggle with one's own consciousness and
as much as we are able to prod the consciousness of others. To teach those
coming along after us, like you, you know and your generation that you
know to give you that sense of history, to make you aware that this goes back
hundreds of years - it didn't start with me and it won't start with you and that
we are all building on the shoulders of what others did is the important thing
to convey and to diseminate. And hopefully to create or to be able to enhance
your advantage just a little bit more so that you're in a position to carry
forward and to bring you know maybe twice as many as we're able to bring
along. So...
DB: Okay, thank you for that. That's most of the basic questions and if you
have more time we can go into the other questions. If not, we could try to
schedule for another time.
LE: Well, shall we do part two at some other time?
DB: We can do that. You can just let us know...We could schedule it now,
actually or some other time.
LE: Well okay, we can schedule it and put it on the calendar and...
[End Tape I, Side 1 - Part 1]

English

- 11

DB: Second interview with Dean English. October 28, 1994. What was the
situation with financial aid while you were on campus? And was there any
type of feeling of discrimination in the department?
LE: Well, when you ask what was the situation, 1 am not sure quite what
you mean. There was financial aid.
DB: 1 am saying as far as students were concerned and rallying for it and how
it was given out...disparities.
LE: 1 think the financial aid office was a very interactive place where the
officers in that office at that time would sit down and talk to students quite a
bit. And 1 don't recall any problems... any public kind of outcries about the
situation in financial aid. Of course it was as tight then as it is now. And as
difficult.. .! mean 1 am still paying back my loans now that 1 took out when 1
was a student at Brown. And so for that reason you know financial aid is
always going to be a tough issue. 1 mean how much financial aid has to come
from somewhere. And so you know it's parcelled out and sometimes it's not
parcelled out fairly. And those are the kinds of things a financial aid office is
constantly struggling with.
DB: Compared to now, how strong was the African American studies
program? Or department?
LE: (pause] Again, 1 think that that's a very difficult question. The African
American studies program began like twenty-five years ago - probably in 1969.
So by the time 1 was here as a student in 1981, 1 think it had gotten fairly
active and a lot of work was coming out of the department. But, as you may
know, everyone in African American studies is also affiliated with another
department. And so there was the constraint of that. There was also some
other kinds of friction going on within the program that 1 think resulted in
courses not being offered and that kind of thing. 1 think it's been a very
strong program with very very limited resources in terms of faculty .. .in terms
of budget...but never in terms of students because students of all colors have
always been interested in African American studies.
DB: How volatile were race relations while you were on campus? And 1
have listed some incidents such as bottle-throwing (LE nods) in Wriston
Quad, vandalization of the Third World Center, etc.
LE: That's interesting...An interesting question. And to tell you the truth, 1
do not remember any race-related incidents on campus when 1 was...between
1981 and '85...1 don't know if any happened but there wasn't any.. .! mean it
could have happened and it could have been handled in someone's office or

English

- 12

something like that. But I don't remember in the BDH [Brown Daily Herald]
or in any of the Providence media any discussion of race relation problems.
That is a very interesting question. I am remembering one of the senior
speakers at my commencement was Ann Arthur and I think she went on to
law school or something. A black woman. And her. .. her speech, although I
don't remember exactly what it was, was so forward-thinking so visionary
particularly in terms of people of color and black women in particular taking
charge to have a positive vision and going after it and that kind of stuff. It
was really really good. I may still have a copy of it somewhere. But I don't
remember any overt kinds of things. And the Center of Race and Ethnicity
was not started yet but the discussions leading up to its establishment was
being...were being talked about during those years. So...
DB: While I was researching in the Archives, I came across issues of the
Dartmouth Review. Do you have any memories of that? There were several
articles discussing blacks in America and one was written in this
southernesque dialect but it was a white author and it was just really a parody
of black culture altogether. And I was wondering... there were articles written
from like the president of the United States who was saying you know the
Dartmouth Review is a hard-core publication and worthy and you know. I
was wondering if there was any discussion of that on campus.
LE: I don't...I did not read any of the articles. But the Dartmouth Review had
always been thought of as a right...white right-ring organization. Very... not
just conservative but arrogant and demeaning to many kinds of people. So
essentially a very crude kind of publication. You know and uncivilized. And
yes there was always this sort of attitude or perception of attitude out of
Dartmouth as people were just arrogant and you know nobody's feelings
mattered. So when this .. .I do recall a racial article in the Dartmouth Review
when people were just outraged and there was all kinds of discussion back
and forth in academic publications like the "Chronicle of Higher Education"
and people were speaking out about it on the outrage about it. I don't know
what it did to redeem the Dartmouth Review. I really don't know what their
attitude is now. But when all of these things happened, there's always a lot
of discussion. Now I don't know how much discussion there is among
students in general but there is certainly a lot of public discussion about these
things.
DB: As far as minority faculty, what... approximately if you know any
numbers...or your interaction with them.
LE: The [pause] I don't know what the statistics are but the actual real
numbers of black faculty has not changed much from what it was when I was
here. And I'll be doing my tenth anniversary this school year. So the the.. .in
answer to your question, the number of black faculty [pause] at Brown is ...has
not changed significantly over twenty-five years. And it seems shocking

English

-

13

when I think of it that way because the black faculty that are here are so over­
extended and so around everywhere you know they sort of seem
omnipresent you know. But the truth of the matter is I can count them up
and I believe I would come up with something like eighteen but of those
eighteen probably about six are working in other jobs or on leave. So we're
talking twelve. (DB: Right.) Right.
DB: And as far as other minority faculty, were you aware of say Asian
American or Latin/Latino American professors or deans?
LE: Well, no. There weren't any. Right now we have one or two we can call
Latino and we maybe have a few Asian American. We have more sort of
foreign Asian people than we do Asian American people.
DB: What were the interactions between police and security and the minority
population on campus?
LE: [pause] I don't know. I mean again, as I reflect back on that time, I don't
recall you know a whole lot of conflict. But maybe I don't know. I don't
know.
DB: As far as the African Sun and the Brown Daily Herald, how functional
were they in social interactions between communities?
LE: Well the Brown Daily Herald was always the major campus newspaper
and I always felt that more students of color should write articles for the
Brown Daily Herald or letters to the editor or just have their voices in it since
it's the main campus newspaper. I don't think even now that there is very
much participation in the Brown Daily Herald and it's too bad because it is a
major way to have a voice and to have influence and to have your opinions
and perspectives known. You know and to open up an engaged dialogue you
know more broadly based. So I think that was true then and it's true now. As
far as the African Sun is concerned. I don't even recall seeing an African Sun
until recently. I don't know so if there was an African Sun, I never saw it.
DB: Were you active with OUAP [Organization of United African Peoples]?
LE: No.
DB: As far as Third World groups were there like the Latin American
students organizations at the time or was there just OUAP?
LE: I don't know. I don't know anything about the student organizations.
DB: And the John Carter Brown library sit-in in '85, do you know anything
about that?

English

•

14

LE: [pause] What was it about?
DB: Well, I... (LE: You don't know?) I just read it was just really the re­
enactment of issues from '71 and '73 like financial aid, minority faculty,
admission, and things like that.
LE: Was it a sit-in or a celebration?
DB: It was a sit-in.
LE: Hmm. I don't know. I don't remember. (laughs)
DB: You were on the Task Force for the Third World Center? (LE: Yep!)
What were your interests and goals?
LE: Well when I was a student, the Third World Center as it is called was the
basement of Churchill House. And you know it had very little space. And it
was cramped quarters and you know it wasn't a center, it was what was left
over in the building. So I was on the task force to get a Third World center
and to evaluate different alternatives, to get a budget together, to lobby for
and to present the final proposal to the Corporation for establishing a Third
World center. And we set out the Partridge House. And we had a lot of
meetings; there were several properties being considered. How they could be
transformed to use as a Third World center. What the Third World Center
would be. What its mission would be. What kinds of programs would come
out of there and just a whole range of issues in establishing an official center.
So I think there were about maybe seven or nine members of the task force
and to ..get all the information and research done and then present a final
proposal to the corporation. And Partridge House was a biology lab; offices
for professors and had a lab in there. And that had some kind of special
microscope that was you know grounded into the ground and there it was a
big deal. And so that was a political issue too - to get those faculty members to
give up their space. And what they were going to get in return you know. So
it was quite a lengthy and complex proposition to get the Third World Center.
And that's one of the...one of the areas that I settled in as a student that I'm
really really proud of.
DB: Beside the faculty in the Partridge House, as there any other opposition
to the project?
LE: Well having faculty opposition whatever the reason is a hard situation
because other faculty members might mumble and grumble, "Well you
know if they decide they're doing this for these groups - who are they and just
decide to take away our space for whatever." So there was all kinds of
discussion about it and all kinds of discussion about...I'm sure if you look in

English

- 15

the Archives during that period in the BDH probably in memorandum and
in department newsletters. A discussion of the Third World Center and what
it would mean for the campus.
DB: Any last things you would like to say just to wrap up?
LE: About what? (laughs)
DB: Just about your experience at Brown as a student and administrator.
LE: My experience at Brown as a student changed my life forever. It opened
my mind and my spirit to the understanding of the power of knowledge.
And the responsibility of that power. And I feel that I was really privileged to
have had the opportunity to be a student at Brown and to grow in the many
ways that I did and to learn many things that I have learned and am still
learning. And to have created that kind of open quest so that I realize that my
whole life will be a life of learning. And what I learned as a student and what
I learned from students now is just a special privilege that I can't even convey
the overall quality is has brought to my life. So you know it happened to be
Brown and it clicked with me and my spirit and how I corne to know and
how I corne to understand life around me. And then to have the double
privilege of having this opportunity to work here as a dean, particularly.
And also as a part-time teaching faculty and corne to know you and all of the
potential yous corning along there and that knowing as I do from my
perspective as a more mature person, that some of you are going to be great.
You know it's just...everybody can't be great; everybody can be really good,
but some of you are going to be great. And for me to think of my own self­
gratification - that I had even a miniscule part of that creating that great you ­
is just the most beautiful thing in the world. You know it's true...it's a true
sort of ideal aesthetic of reciprocity - giving and taking. It's always giving and
taking, giving and taking. And here I joined the giving and I joined the
taking part. But I love what I do and it has given me a profound respect for
the potential and creativity of so many human beings even though potential
is not reality and does not necessarily mean that that's going to happen but at
least it's there, you know. And it's great.
DB: Alright, thank you very much.
LE: You're welcome.
