
Limary Rios Camacho: [00:00] – This is Limary Rios Camacho, Brown class of 1990 and I am
interviewing Charlene Ingraham Underhill Brown class of 1959. It’s May 8, 1988 in the lounge
of Buxton House of Brown University.
Charlene Ingraham Underhill: Are you going to ask the questions?
LRC: Uh-huh. Charlene, can you give like a family background, your mother and father’s
occupation, education, aspirations? Can you talk to us about your family a little bit?
CIU: All right. I come from a lower middle class financially family with middle class
aspirations I’d say, middle class expectations. I think it was expected that my brother and I both
would go to college. And we never really thought in terms of anything else. And I think both of
us [01:00] certainly did want to go. And neither of my parents are college graduates, they’re both
high school graduates. And they both did office work practically all of their lives until their
retirement.
LRC: And what kind of occupation did your parents have?
CIU: My mother was a secretary and did other kinds of office work too over the years. And my
father worked in an office also, but for another company. They didn’t work together or anything.
LRC: And can you tells about your hometown and your high school?
1

CIU: Yeah. I’m a Rhode Islander. I was born in Providence and lived a couple of years in Bristol
and then about ten years in Providence. And the rest of my time until I was married I lived in
Cranston. So I graduated from Cranston High School, which is now Cranston East. [02:00] And
took a college course, of course. And I had a strong interest in language, so I had a couple of
years of Latin and three years of French and two years of Spanish.
LRC: In high school?
CIU: In high school. Well, starting actually with 9th grade and junior high school.
LRC: And how did you hear about Brown Pembroke?
CIU: Well, I guess simply because I was a Rhode Islander, it was always here. It was here far
long longer than I had been here.
LRC: Why did you come, the same reason?
CIU: Well, no, I can’t say I came here primarily because it was here. But of the schools around it
certainly was the finest, had the best reputations, was the oldest. And it was where I really
wanted to go. Now, I did apply to Wheaton College, because you always have to have a kind of
backup. And certainly URI as a backup also. [03:00] But then I heard from Pembroke early, so I
didn’t pursue my applications at Wheaton or URI.
LRC: And did you have any difficulties in your family about going to college because of your
gender?
CIU: No. It was equal opportunity for both my brother and me.
LRC: And what about your family expectations about possible uses of your education?

2

CIU: Well, yes, I think they did. Of course, a girl back then it was assumed that she would get
married. And I was going into teaching and my parents thought, great, that’s the kind of thing
you could always go back to after you raise your family. Didn’t necessarily turn out that way, but
it was the thought at the time anyway. [04:00]
LRC: Do you teach?
CIU: Yes.
LRC: Well, when you first arrived at Brown Pembroke your freshman year, how was your first
day at Brown Pembroke? How was your roommate when you met her?
CIU: Well, first of all I commuted, so I didn’t have a roommate. And we did meet with other
commuters and our house was West House. I assume it still has the same name, but it’s the one
brown house on the corner of Meeting and Brown, right across from the Bio Med Center. And
that was the house that commuters could use. And if it was necessary to stay overnight if you
signed up ahead of time you could stay overnight there.
LRC: Did it have like a kitchen or something? [05:00]
CIU: Yeah, there was a kitchen, everything.
LRC: Was there a curfew to get in?
CIU: Well, there was a house mother. And so I don’t recall if there was any necessity for a key. I
don’t think we worried so much about outsiders, unwelcomed outsiders coming in.
LRC: So it was more relaxed than living in a dorm if you stayed there overnight?
CIU: Actually, I ended up staying overnight, I think, only once. Because we had had a dance in
March and when the dance was over we had a tremendous amount of snow, which I don’t think
3

was expected. And my parents had planned to come pick me up around two o’clock and they
couldn’t get out of their driveway. So I guess, I don’t remember, but I called them or they called
West House. [06:00] So there were several of us who unexpectedly had to stay overnight. So we
put a couple of small beds together and we laid not the lengthwise of the beds, but across them.
About three of us across each of these beds.
LRC: Wow. And can you talk to us about the courses you chose? Like how was the counseling
for them?
CIU: Well, I can’t say there was a great deal of real counseling. You were assigned to a
particular teacher who helped us select four courses per semester. But were fairly free to make
the sections that you wanted. But, of course, there was a core curriculum. So we had to make
sure that we covered all of the ground within the first couple of years. [07:00] And then after
that, of course, you’d be into your major, plus electives. But we did have to take, I guess it was
four courses within each of the three areas of courses.
LRC: What do you think about having a core curriculum like that compared to now?
CIU: I really kind of like the idea of a core curriculum. I have read a great deal about the new
curriculum and it many ways it seems pretty good. I don’t know. [Laughter]. I guess a lot of the
students know enough to break into some new areas and try different things and get a rounded
education. I think that’s the main thing. [08:00] And I think actually for a college to provide this
kind of freedom is fine. I don’t think it should be in high school or less. But I think the fact that
there is a college like that, like this is good, because you have a choice. When you have a choice
where you want to go to school and if this is the kind of thing you want it’s provided. And if you
want something more structured there are certainly plenty of schools with the structure too.
LRC: And how was the social life in your freshman year, like the social life extracurricular )
activities, that kind of thing?

4

CIU: I can’t say I was involved a great deal in the extracurricular. Although my friends and I
generally took part in the Pembroke weekends, Spring weekend and back to the Maypole Dance
and the Queens Court and all that kind of thing. [09:00]
LRC: Is that the same weekend?
CIU: Yes, it was always the weekend following Brown Spring weekend and we had our own.
And there was a dance and this whole Saturday afternoon that was crowning the queen of the
spring weekend. And she had a court made up of junior girls. The queen was always a senior.
And then the sophomores put on some kind of dance. And the freshman did the Maypole Dance.
LRC: And what’s the Maypole?
CIU: It’s like a tall flag pole and there would be streamers of various colors all hanging from the
top. And each one of us in the dance would have a streamer and the dance involved going around
the maypole in various directions so that all of these ribbons mixed and twisted around the pole.
[10:00] I think it’s something that’s probably some kind of ancient English dance or something.
LRC: And is that the same like the May Queen?
CIU: Yes, yes. I don’t know whether you still have that kind of thing.
LRC: No, not anymore. Did you have a senior sister?
CIU: As I remember it wasn’t a senior it was a junior sister. We did have that.
LRC: Did you get along with her?
CIU: I did. We didn’t really do very much. It was something thought of in name and I suppose it
depended upon to the matchup of the two girls how well you got to know each other and so forth.

5

[11:00] I really didn’t get to know my sister, my bigger sister that well really. But we had the
formality of it anyway.
LRC: What was the core purpose of having a –
CIU: I think it was that if you had any problems or any questions that you had someone that you
could go to for help or information.
LRC: And what are your feelings about the faculty at that time during your freshman year/
CIU: I think for the most part I was happy with professors that I had. Most of them were helpful
if you wanted them to be. I think there was really only one and he was from the math department
that really provided no help as far as I was concerned at all.
LRC: Why?
CIU: I don’t know, I think he, you know, there are many who are scholars within themselves, but
[12:00] they’re not necessarily that great at teaching. And I think in many ways some of the
graduate students who teach can sometimes be actually be better than the professors.
LRC: Wow. And then this is like the freshman year. Then the subsequent years did your ideas
change or how was it?
CIU: Well, except for one’s major, one intended to have different professors each course. It was
rare, I don’t remember having the same professor. [13:00] Well, unless it was a continued
course, like Classics D-1, Classics D-2 kind of thing. Which I know they had a different person.
So it wasn’t as if you got to know the teacher and what he or she expected and therefore the
subsequent exams would be easier because you knew what they were looking for, because it
would always be somebody different.
LRC: Were they all male or what?
6

CIU: No, not all. Not all. Anything that I took in classics was all male. I think everything that I
took in French was all male. I did take the education courses before I graduated and that was
some male, some female. And most of them were. But I had an economics teacher who was
female and English comp female. Only those two it seems to me that…. [14:00] And a couple of
education courses they were all male.
LRC: What was the most important influence on you like at Brown Pembroke: courses, a faculty
member, a dean, counselor, a fellow student or chapel communication talks, what was like the
most important?
CIU: That’s pretty hard to say. Probably later today I’ll think of something, but that’s really hard
to say. It was everything together, I think. Everything, the whole atmosphere. Everything
working together made the impression, I suppose.
LRC: And do you remember like any teacher that you might remember the most [15:00] or like a
(inaudible)[cover?] or fellow student?
CIU: Well, certainly teachers from my major. Professor Ridgely in French. Professor Workman
from the classics department. Certainly others too, you know I just mention them because I’ve
seen them too since graduation, had opportunities to talk with them since then. I think there’s
one, the woman I had in economics was just unbelievably helpful. She spent so much time trying
to get economics through my head.
LRC: Oh, really?
CIU: She really did, a tremendous amount of time. Just a very, very fine person. [16:00] And she
was actually a graduate student and she was wonderful.
LRC: Really, a graduate student?

7

CIU: Um-hum.
LRC: So that proves your theory.
CIU: Right. She was so patient and just kind about everything.
LRC: Do you take a lot of courses in economics?
CIU: No, it was just the one just to get the distribution requirement.
LRC: Right now I’m taking one economics course to have like a completed occasion and it’s
giving me a hard time. Oh well… What’s the best memory at Brown Pembroke for you?
CIU: That too is difficult to answer. It's going to be on various levels. [17:00] It could be fun
socially, for example. Just meeting the people. Graduation itself. Although I must say I think I
had more fun when I was a class marshal for my 20th reunion. Then I did when I actually
graduated. I think you see it all from a different perspective. You’re sort of watching others,
you’re part of it, but you’re watching others at the same time. And it was a miserable day too, it
was a drizzly horrible day.
LRC: When you graduated?
CIU: No, when I was a class marshal. The day I graduated was beautiful, it was a day much like
this, very, very lovely.
LRC: And what’s the worst memory of Brown Pembroke?
CIU: I really can’t think of any. I know this isn’t very helpful, but I think if there were bad times,
time tends to soften all of that anyway. [18:00] So I don’t really even think of terribly bad times.
I’m sure that going through exams and waiting for the results is never a best time. I think things

8

that are part of a young person’s life, breaking up with a boyfriend, certainly are never good
times. But again, these are all things that you don’t really think about anymore. It’s in the past.
LRC: How are the relations between male and female students?
CIU: As far as I could see they were fine. The same that there’d be anywhere. [19:00] I mean
just as you meet girlfriends or boyfriends there are people who click and people who don’t. So I
mean it wasn’t so much the Brown student versus the Pembroke student, it’s just male/female. It
was always thought, at least when I was here, that the Brown students thought the grass was
greener up at Wheaton College than at Pembroke. But certainly there were many Brown
Pembroke marriages.
LRC: And then was there like a conflicts in the classrooms or like I mean in the –
CIU: I don’t think so. I don’t really think so. And I think many times the guys could be as helpful
as the female student. I think most of us at the time because they were coordinate schools rather
than co-ed situation, that it was more difficult to get into Pembroke than it was to get into Brown,
and therefore the Pembroke students were smarter than the Brown students. There again,
certainly there were many guys from Brown who were extremely bright and did extremely well.
But I think that very often, it seems that there were more girls who walked away with prizes and
awards than there were from Brown. Considering that there were three times the number of
Brown students than there were Pembroke students.
LRC: And besides Spring Weekend was there any other activity that was only for girls or for
boys?
CIU: Well, the Pembroke campus had its own senior prom, junior prom and a winter or
Christmas dance. [20:00] To which you could invite whomever you pleased, which very often
was a Brown student. But they were our own thing. And I guess we had our little tease,
especially our freshman week there were activities that were entire campus. But there were

9

things that were just Pembroke too, meaning various faculty members, administrators and so
forth that would be, we always had a Tea.
LRC: And, were women restricted from some classes?
CIU: No, I don’t believe so. None certainly that I ever knew of, no. [22:00] I never certainly ran
into any problem with anything like that. Gym was required, physical education was required.
And naturally that was separate. But we had four, I don’t know whether it was three terms of
four terms for gym. We had to pick a sport each time. And it was for freshman there were a
couple of required phys. ed. programs and one was dance and the other was what was called
Freshman Foundation.
LRC: What’s the –
CIU: Well, I think you were supposed to learn how to stand correctly. Have you heard of the
posture pictures?
LRC: No.
CIU: No. Well, each freshman female had to have a posture picture. And this was with
absolutely nothing on but underpants. And it was just the most dreaded thing. I guess that you
talk about something that is a bad memory, I certainly think that would have to be one of them.
[23:00]
LRC: But that’s only for females; right?
CIU: Right.
LRC: And it was like manners and things like that?

10

CIU: No, no. Everything it had to do with just the physical. I suppose mostly posture, how well
you stood and carried yourself. I guess we talked a little bit about health, that sort of thing. I
can’t remember every part of it, but it was required. And then I think that we had posture pictures
taken again as seniors to see if we had improved any. These were shots taken one from the back
and one from the side.
LRC: Oh, my God.
CIU: And I know that they don’t have that anymore. [24:00] And we alumnae have been told
that they have been destroyed.
LRC: Really?
CIU: We all hope so.
LRC: Wow. Did you take any biology courses?
CIU: I had one, Biology D-1.
LRC: Is that like the first, a general course?
CIU: Yeah. Right. Yeah, it was very heavily biochemistry as I remember it. And I had never had
chemistry in high school, so I found it difficult. Because you really, you know, high school
biology class is one thing. I’m sure you’re aware how different the high school biology is from
college biology, or high school chemistry from college chemistry.
LRC: I’m a biology major.
CIU: Oh, you area?
LRC: Yeah. Was the class co-ed?
11

CIU: Oh, yeah. It was a big lecture course, met three times a week and then we had lab twice a
week, I think. [25:00]
LRC: I’m a biology major and hopefully I will go to med school.
CIU: Ah- ha!Very good.
LRC: Yeah. Let’s see. Were there like any rules and regulations about the social life or the
dresses you had to wear, like dorm rules? What kind regulations?
CIU: Well, I know there were certain dorm rules, but since I didn’t live in I really can’t tell you
too much about them. There were a lot of regulations. Women could wear shorts and slacks only
on the Pembroke campus. You couldn’t come down to Brown at all with shorts or slacks, you
always had to have a dress or a skirt,suit, something of that type. [26:00] Except on something
like Brown Spring Weekend.
LRC: So you could come to participate to the Brown Spring Weekend?
CIU: Right. Well, basically if some guy from Brown had invited you, you know, it was pretty
much that you had a date in order to be part of this. And yet it was pretty much open. I mean
anybody can walk down at the river and watch the races. But generally you wouldn’t do this
unless you had a date. I know that they, you know, each house had a house mother. And there
were times you had to be in by a certain time. I think it was one o’clock generally speaking. But I
think if it were a dance you had to be in by 2:00. Something around that time.
LRC: Did you have to wear like a hat or a dress? [27:00]
CIU: No, No, No. I don’t go that far back. No. [laughter]
LRC: What are like the drinking regulations or like smoking?
12

CIU: A lot of people smoked back then. It was very in to smoke. So there really weren’t any
regulations about that. As a matter of fact cigarette companies were allowed to come on campus
and give out samples and that sort of thing. Yes, there was drinking. I don’t think there was
drinking really on the Pembroke campus, but it always occurred over here at Brown in the
houses, the fraternity houses. Whether it was supposed to be or not, I don’t really know. But I
know that there was. [28:00]
LRC: And did you participate for the May Day and the Ivy Day? What’s Ivy Day?
CIU: Ivy Day I really can’t even remember what it was. So I guess I didn’t really participate.
Now, whether that was something that was before my time or not, I’m not sure. I really don’t
remember anything about it. May Day, yes, I think freshman and sophomore years I did, because
I was in the Maypole Dance and then the sophomore dance. And when it came to junior and
senior year you had to be on the beautiful side, because it would be the really pretty girls who
were chosen for the Queens Court. And naturally a pretty girl chosen as the May Queen. So
that’s when most of us sort of dropped out of the festivities. [29:00]
LRC: Was it special for you, the May Day?
CIU: It was fun. For a friend and me it was sort of a laugh, because when we were still in high
school if we came over to this area at the right time we used to see the practice, the rehearsals for
this and we used to laugh because we thought it was hilarious. And the next year here we were
doing the same thing.
LRC: Oh, my God. Well, that’s funny.
CIU: Well, it was just, we just thought it was silly. Here they are just dancing around.
LRC: That’s funny. Do you remember the Sophomore Masque? Was that at your time?

13

CIU: Yes, yes, right. [30:00] As a matter of fact I had forgotten the name of it, but you’re right,
the Sophomore Masque. I just remember it as a dance, you know, fun to go to.
LRC: Do you remember anything more?
CIU: No, I really don’t remember anything more about it.
LRC: Here it says Spring Day. I guess it’s the same as the Spring Weekend; right?
CIU: I suppose so.
LRC: And then what do you remember about the commencement?
CIU: I’m trying to remember. It was very long. It certainly was a very colorful event. I never
really liked wearing those funny hats. I always felt it was going to slide off my head. The other
silly things that I remember marching down the hill my uncle was standing in the sidelines and
he called to me. And, of course, I turned to look at him and then I ran into the person in front of
me. [31:00]
LRC: Oh. Well, what’s the women’s place in the commencement march, was it different from
the boys place and the place of where you were seated?
CIU: Oh. This is why it’s good to do it with someone else. You know, I can’t remember whether
the girls were lined up together ahead of the guys, or whether we were mixed. I cannot
remember. I don’t remember who walked with me or anything.
LRC: It was like 30 years ago almost, right?
CIU: Right. Next year will be the thirtieth.
(break in audio)
14

Track 2
CIU: [00:00] I usually come to some part of it, usually the luncheon. But I’m not sure what’s
going to happen next year because up through our last reunion, the twenty-fifth, we had
everything separate. We were not a merged class. And at that last meeting there was a vote to see
if we should merge. And I know the offices of the class wanted the merger. I don’t think that too
many of the rest of us did and yet we all voted to do it. And then afterwards that, well, we just
sold ourselves down the river. (laughter) So I’m wondering now just what will happen next year,
whether we will still have our own luncheon or not.
LRC: Where was it like four years ago right, the last one? Was it in Pembroke?
CIU: It was on the [01:00] Pembroke campus.
LRC: And the men were here at Brown?
CIU: I assume they were. And I was on the Pops Concert Committee for many years. So I would
attend that as part of the Commencement.
LRC: What did you do for it, for the Pops concert?
CIU: Various things. I used to be involved with reservations and there were several years that I
and someone else would sit out on the campus, out on the main green on the day of the concert
and sell tickets. And then the last several years the concert has been sold out before time anyway,
so there was no necessity for doing that. And then I was a co-chairman of the concert one year,
and then I’ve been recording secretary.
LRC: Oh. [02:00] Are you participating of it next year, this year?
CIU: No, I left the committee two or three years ago.
15

LRC: Oh really?
CIU: And there were several of us who had been on for quite a few years then you figure, well.
You know, it’s someone else’s turn, you know. And then you want new blood on it, you know,
it’s good to have some consistency, but it’s good to have new blood too.
LRC: This is kind of specific – do you remember any Chapel or Convocation talk, like, that
really impressed you during your school?
CIU: Well there again, that’s something that probably now and then some particular thing will
come to mind and, you know, and couple years later something else will come to mind, but
[03:00] we did have chapel of course, twice a week. And there were various speakers, some from
within the campus, some from without, or perhaps were alumnae. And some were good, were
interesting.
LRC: All of the women had to go to chapel?
CIU: Yes, that was required. Attendance was taken.
LRC: So like everyone was Baptist or –
CIU: No, because it really wasn’t a religious chapel. It was usually a speaker. Now, we may have
started out with a prayer or a Bible selection, if I remember correctly, but then the tone of it was
not religious really – there was a speaker. And then I think that was the Tuesday, but then on
Thursday it was often run by the student government association. So that we knew what [04:00]
was going on and so forth.
LRC: And do you remember any talks about the liberally educated women?

16

CIU: Not specifically. And yet if one really thought about it we could see how various alumnae
had done and many of them had done extremely well career-wise. And I know one thing that
Dean Lewis said at one of the chapels was that if you graduated from Pembroke you could do
anything that you wanted to do. So I think she certainly was encouraging.
LRC: Did you [05:00] have, or maybe if you remember, a female role model?
CIU: Within the school you mean?
LRC: Within the school.
CIU: I don’t think so. I don’t think so There were certainty many – there were many women here
and there certainly many alumnae whom I think have done extremely well. You know, I don’t
say that they’re role models and yet I admire what they’ve been able to do. People from my own
class, I think, have done some very wonderful things, have done a great deal.
LRC: Do you remember, like, any of your [06:00] class – I mean your fellow classmates, or?
CIU: Oh, well, just ones who have perhaps gone on to advanced degrees. Others who have
headed up big projects, you know, done well with those projects and so forth.
LRC: How was the contact with the Pembroke Deans and faculty?
CIU: I tended to be on the shy side. So I don’t think that I pushed my way in to any great extent.
They were all certainly very nice, but generally you didn’t see them unless they asked to see you.
(laughter) So I think that most of us each year had a little conference with [07:00] somebody
from the administration, so that one year we saw, Mrs. Horton from one office. I can’t think of
the name of her office. And then we saw Dean Tonks who was the Assistant Dean, and we saw
Dean Lewis who was The Dean. And the woman who was in charge of jobs, what do you call.
personnel. That’s not really the term I’m looking for either (laughter) – who was in charge of job
placement. Happened to have been an Episcopalian and she was very active in the Canterbury
17

Club and there were several of us who were Episcopalians and who were a part of Canterbury
Club. And she was very, very nice. Would often invite us [08:00] to her house for supper before
going over to St. Stevens, which was where Canterbury Club met. So I think she probably is the
one we got to know better than any of the others. (laughter)
LRC: How did the years at Brown double up (inaudible) over all location job opportunities?
CIU: I think, at least for this area , if one can say he or she graduated from Brown it’s a door
opener, so to speak. I know that I really didn’t have any problem getting a teaching position and I
really had not planned on teaching in the community [09:00] where I grew up and so I had
applied for a position in East Providence and in Warwick. And I went as far as having an
interview in East Providence and in the meantime, the word was out that I was graduating from
Brown and, of course, I had gone through the Cranston schools, from junior high school on
through high school. And I got a phone call from the principle of the junior high school, and I
got a job just like that.
LRC: Wow. (laughter) And was there, like, any office where – okay there’s this office where you
can go, like, to get interviews here at Brown. Was it only for women or was it –
CIU: I think it was kept pretty separate. We had our own job placement and Brown had its job
[10:00] placement. But I think that the woman, Mrs. Irwin over at Pembroke, had access to as
much perhaps as over here. There weren’t as many girls then going into the types of fields that
they have the opportunity to go into now. We did have some girls who went on to medical
school. There were one or two girls in the engineering course, but other than that there were
many marriages that would take place within a week or two after graduation. (laughter)
LRC: Wow. Why is that? Why did that happen?
CIU: Then, again, it was sort of the thing to do. You met somebody at college and, well through
college, perhaps it was someone from another school. And I would say that a great many of them

18

got married as soon as graduation was over. [11:00] There were even girls from my class who
were married before graduation.
LRC: Really?
CIU: A very good friend of mine and then there were two or three or four others who were
married before graduation.
LRC: Did you get married around graduation?
CIU: Usually it was right after, but –
LRC: But like yourself?
CIU: Oh did I? No, I didn’t get married for I think it was about six years after graduation.
LRC: Did he go to Brown?
CIU: No. He had gone to Yale, but his sister was in my class at Brown.
LRC: Oh. And what are your feelings about the name change? I know that this is before, but the
name change of 1928 when the – [12:00]
CIU: I had always just known the school as Pembroke College until the merger.
LRC: What do you think about the merger?
CIU: I was disappointed.
LRC: Really?

19

CIU: Because it wasn’t a situation like Wheaton College, for example, which had no connection
with any other school it was just, you know, women’s college on its own. And I can understand
both sides of that kind of situation where they did go coed. But I think the girls had all the great
opportunities without the merger and I think they lost a little something.
LRC: Like what opportunities?
CIU: Well, just being on their own and having their own student government, [13:00] having
their own administrators. Their own sports, but of course, that still exists anyway, but I know that
shortly after the merger I was at something over on the Pembroke campus, there already was a
group of girls looking for their identity, you know, looking for their own thing. So (laughter) I
think it was important. I think we lost. I don’t see any gain through it really.
LRC: Really?
CIU: Except that more girls can go to Brown now. Because I guess it’s up to about fifty-fifty.
LRC: Yeah.
CIU: About that anyway. So it opened the door to more women. But I think Pembroke was
always a very selective [14:00] school.
LRC: So is it the same feeling for the merger of classes?
CIU: Yeah, I think a lot of us would rather not have gone together with the Brown class. I think,
you know, now that your numbers are more equal it doesn’t make any difference, but by merging
you’re going into a three to one, four to one situation. So it’s not the same and I think we were
better off having our own thing. You know, and have some activities together perhaps, but I kind
of like the – our own class lunch. It’s a smaller group, you get to see more and talk with more
people, [15:00] you know.

20

LRC: And, like, do you feel the same way about the collapse?
CIU: Well, (laughter) it probably for most communities away from the Providence area, once
you get away from the University, it probably is a smart move to join together. Unless you’re in
an area, you know, maybe the Boston area still has many, many women who would be interested
in their own club. But I know here we have a couple clubs. The one in Kent county, which is
very different from the Providence Club, but seems to be fairly strong and I think may even have
more young people. The Providence Club, I can see the day when it’s going to just be nonexistent, but yet we carry it on because there are certainly still plenty of older women who would
hate to see it go. And so we [16:00] carry it on and, you know, we do well for the University
because each year we give a substantial amount of money into the University and various areas.
But I don’t think that it’s going to really perpetuate itself.
LRC: After you graduated from Brown, did you find any obstacles institutionally or personally?
CIU: No, I don’t think so. I think I’ve actually been more active in University things since I
graduated than I was as a student. As a student I really wasn’t – I don’t really recall there were
many things that you could be a part of if you weren’t a part of the student government. I [17:00]
was active in sports. I was on the swim team during my senior year, but other than that my sports
were just requirements, fulfilling requirements. Which I didn’t mind because I’ve always liked,
you know, the outdoors and sports anyway, so it never bothered me. We had to pass a swim test
too.
LRC: Oh at the AC? Was it, like, the same or did you have to all the old gym?
CIU: Yeah, except the pool was the old pool right over here on the Brown campus.
LRC: The Brown campus

21

CIU: But you had four years in which to do it. Now, because I’ve always swam all my life, so it
was never a problem for me. But I can remember a couple of people who weren’t really sure that
they were going to graduate because they hadn’t yet passed the swim test.
LRC: Wow Did you have your own gym?
CIU: Yeah.
LRC: At Pembroke?
CIU: It’s right on Pembroke campus. [18:00] Right in back of Pembroke Hall and there was a
bowling alley downstairs, one single bowling alley, and then a good size gym. And then, of
course, we had the field house, which has now been taken over by the Brown Club. But we used
the field house and we used the big field, you know, right there.
LRC: How did your marriage affect your career?
CIU: It really didn’t. I continued to teach until I had my son. And then I stayed out of teaching
for most of those years, until he grew up. See, what I had said at the very beginning of the
interview about teaching, along with nursing, that it was a profession that one could go back to
after raising a family. There were a lot of changes in teaching, in education in general, over these
[19:00] last few years. And it didn’t prove that it was a profession easy to get back into. Because
what was happening over these years is unionization for one thing. The unions really kept people
who had experience out. And women would just have their babies and go right back to teaching.
They’d just get that leave of absence for a few months and go right back. So there were never the
openings. So it was not easy getting back in. So, I am back in now, but as I say it wasn’t the easy
thing that one would expect it to be. So in other words if women did stay home to raise the
children then as each woman’s children got old enough she could go back and there would
always be this sort of continuation and yet with different people. But now they – I hate to use the
expression – but they [20:00] sort of hog the job.

22

LRC: How many children do you have?
CIU: I just have one.
LRC: Only one?
CIU: One son.
LRC: Did he affect in any way your career, or was it just your choice?
CIU: It was really a choice.
LRC: Do you do any volunteer work?
CIU: Yeah, I think over the past twenty some years I’ve been involved in some kind of volunteer
project. I know one time I was part of a team doing patterning for a brain damaged child. So I
used to do this every Saturday morning. And then I worked [21:00] with a swim program with
people with multiple sclerosis. And currently I’m a docent at the John Brown house, so I do that
once or twice a month on a Saturday morning. And then I’ve been active, both in my church and
in things over here at Brown.
LRC: Why did you choose to do volunteer work? Was it encouraged at Brown or just a personal
thing?
CIU: No, I don’t think we thought too much of it at Brown.
LRC: It’s just a personal –
CIU: It just was something that maybe people from my time were expected to do. I just believe if
it’s at all possible, one should do some kind of volunteer work.

23

LRC: [22:00] Oh, I was looking at some newspapers and I found that there was a Pembroke
bookstore . I mean the guy’s had a Brown bookstore and the women had only a Pembroke
bookstore?
CIU: Right, now for textbooks, we had to come over to the Brown campus, because they were all
in the one area. That would have been rather silly, I think, to have had them spread out over two
campuses and, of course, they were Brown courses so they just might as well have been right
over here. But we did have our own bookstore for gifty type things or personal kinds of things
that particularly kids living on campus might need. That’s where you could get the sweatshirts
and the t-shirts and the mugs and plates and all of that kind of thing [23:00] that would say
Pembroke College or Brown University.
LRC: Where was it located at Pembroke?
CIU: Good question. It was on the Pembroke campus I think it was in Pembroke Hall, downstairs
in Pembroke Hall.
LRC: Again, I was looking at some newspapers and old pictures and I thought how everyone
had, like, short hair. Was it, like, the fashion or something?
CIU: For the most part. I think freshman year a great many had short hair. And then, if by
looking at the senior pictures, it was a lot of the page boy, not terribly long, but sort of medium
length hair. (laughter) I do have my yearbook with me so that you can take a look at it. [24:00]
LRC: Can I take a look at it?
CIU: One thing I did forget, I just happen to think of it now, was the freshman directory, cause
we all had our pictures in that. Then you could have seen all our hair styles from the freshman
year.
[Can hear pages of yearbook turning.]

24

LRC: Have they changed?
CIU: Yeah, and look at them there.
LRC: Are you on one of these pictures?
CIU: I don’t think I’m in any of these separate pictures. I know when I had pictures taken for my
wedding I had – I was over here. I came over here and used the circular staircase.
LRC: Oh. (laughter) Is this over at Alumnae Hall?
CIU: Yes, yeah. See most of us wore socks.
LRC: Socks, OK.
CIU: [25:00] (laughter) Which I think seem to be coming back.
LRC: Yeah.
CIU: Yeah.
LRC: And long skirts.
CIU: We had a few older women who were coming back to get their degrees. There were two or
three or four, you know, that I did meet over the period of four years.
LRC: Oh.
CIU: Oh yeah, lovely.
LRC: That’s you. Were they taking Spanish here [26:00] only in high school?
25

CIU: Did I take Spanish? Only in high school.
LRC: Only in high school. That’s my first language.
CIU: He might be Billy [Poor?]. These are all ads in the back. We’re probably sitting in chapel in
here.
LRC: Oh.
CIU: All the seniors walked into chapel together and we had to stand – the rest had to stand
when the seniors came in. And the seniors would be in cap and gown.
LRC: Oh really?
CIU: Yeah, that was just traditional.
LRC: Like all –
CIU: So in other words, you got your cap and gown either at the end of the junior year or the
beginning of the senior [27:00] year, and you would have that cap and gown for that whole year.
And you always wore it to chapel. And then we marched in, seniors marched in, and they were
the first to leave ’cause they all marched out and then everybody else could leave. (laughter)
LRC: I think that we covered all the questions.
CIU: Okay. I was thinking about a time that was not particularly pleasant. I think earlier on the
tape I mentioned that we had a dance and several of us ended up staying overnight. And, of
course, you were supposed to sign up ahead to do this and we simply didn’t have the opportunity
to, I mean we had to stay. And within about a week or so we all had to appear at student court,
because [28:00] we had stayed overnight without having signed up. So that was kind of nerve
26

wracking in a way. Even though we knew that there wasn’t any choice. And it just seemed so
silly that they would bring us before the court because of a situation that we couldn’t help, you
know what I mean. It wasn’t that we were sneaking this in sort of thing. (laughter) I did bring a
class ring, which definitely needs to be polished, but I got the pinky sized ring and that was a
Pembroke ring. Now, some of them got – the stone was a little bit larger and might have been
embedded in a gold instead of a sterling setting.
LRC: Everyone wore the same ring?
CIU: You didn’t have to buy one, but most of us I think did.
LRC: The same style and the same –
CIU: Yeah, it would pretty much be the same style. [29:00] It just that you might have gold
instead of sterling and the stone would be a little larger if you were getting it for a ring finger
instead of a pinky finger.
LRC: Oh, well, thank you.
- END -

27

