
Wendy Korwin: Today is Saturday February 1, 2014. This is Wendy Korwin, the
Pembroke Center Archivist. I'm speaking with Jean Miller, Brown class of 1949, in
Pembroke Hall. I'd like to start by asking you to describe your childhood.
Jean Miller: Well, I was brought up in a small town in Massachusetts, Easton. My first
recollections – first recollection I have is the day my brother, who's two years younger,
was brought home from the hospital. I can remember being in my crib, standing up as he
was being brought in and the curtain was down, and I was told I was going to have to be
a good girl. And that phrase was used a number of times as I was growing up. The ... I
had the unfortunate – well I guess obviously it's not fortunate – my mother was diagnosed
with tuberculosis when I was three. And I can remember the day she was going to the
hospital. We were in the car, at that point my brother was about 14 months old I think,
and I remember saying to my mother, well, “Where are you going?” I had no thought
where we were going. And she said, “Well, I'm going to take a long trip.” And she said,
“Someday, if you're a good little girl, you'll take the same trip.” And I thought to myself,
later, years, as I thought back on that, why would I have remembered that when I was
only three, three-and-a-half years old. And at that point, we were then, my brother was
put with my mother's uncle and his family, and I was put with another branch of her
family, briefly. And she then went off to the sanitarium at Bristol County Hospital.
And shortly thereafter, we moved in, my father and my brother and I, into the home of
my Scottish grandparents. And they had arrived in the states – well, my grandfather came
over in about 1907 to look for a job, and my grandmother was left in Scotland to sell the
house and pack everything up and bring the three children over. And just before they
were to leave, my aunt, who was then probably nine years old, came down with scarlet
fever, so that was delayed a bit. But anyway they got here in about 1910. So when my
mother died we moved in. And I mean literally, I moved into her bedroom; my father and
my brother apparently had the bedroom that had been my grandparents’. And I can

	
  

1

	
  
remember very clearly hearing the adults listening to the Lindbergh kidnapping, and the
thing that stuck in my mind to this day, I can see myself thinking, “They put a ladder up
the side of the house.” And my brother’s crib was right by the window in the bedroom he
was in.
So, from then until I was eight years old, when my father re-married, I shared a room
with my aunt. And to this day, if I had long hair today, I could put my hair up in a bun
exactly the way she did ‘cause I watched her every single morning. And it's very
interesting because I've just written a bio of her, but I'll tell you that later.
But in the whole time that she would get up and get dressed and ready to go to work,
never once – never once – did I see her bare skin. She would always do this under her
nightdress. And now as I look back on it, I think, I guess there's the extreme of modesty if
you will. But at the same time, I learned so much from her. I remember one day, had to
be a Saturday cause she was home. And a black woman came walking up our driveway.
Well that would be unusual, ‘cause we were out in the country, a mile away from the
center, and our driveway was quite long. And the minute I saw this woman coming I ran
into the house, and my aunt was there, and she greeted the woman and they talked for a
while. And then, looking back on it, I realize that she – the woman – was collecting
whatever. This was obviously during the Depression. I remember my aunt taking some
stockings and rolling up several pair and giving them to her. Then, she sat me down after
she had gone – had left, walking – and explained, there was nothing to be afraid of. That
people came in different colors, and this woman was doing [5:00] very good work, and
she was working for her church, which was one of the things my grandmother – my aunt,
did.
Probably the biggest influence on me in that period of time was my grandmother. And I
have to add, much to the consternation of my present-day nieces, we did not have indoor
plumbing. And we had a pump, in the sink, in the kitchen, and our baths were literally in
a copper tub on the kitchen floor every Saturday night. And my brother hated to have his
hair washed. And my grandmother was really something, and I can remember one time
very clearly he was screaming his head off. My grandmother leaves him, she goes to the
back door [knocking], “Oh, you heard him all the way down in the street, I'll have him
ready in just a minute sir.” Well my brother hears this and stops instantly, and my
grandmother just casually comes back and finishes up with my brother and then it's my
turn in the tub. But she, really, was a remarkable person.
My grandfather was a draper in Scotland he had his own business as a draper. And he
worked in Fraser's department store in Brockton, as a draper, as the head of the
department. And so he would go off to work every day, walk down our driveway,
somebody he knew picked him up and drove him to the next town, and he always was
impeccably dressed. On the weekends, however, he raised chickens. And, I can't say he
was impeccably dressed, he simply took the tie off, and the collar off his shirt, and
instead of wearing a derby hat he wore a cap, and he wore one of the jackets he wore in
the store when he went out to do the other work.

	
  

2

	
  
So it was from this background in 1936 my stepmother appeared on the scene. Edith
Goldthwaite, for whom the Edith Goldthwaite Miller [faculty fellowship] is named. And
she was a teacher, fourth grade teacher, and I remember being thrilled when I realized she
was a teacher. I didn't know too much about what was going to happen, I hadn't really
stopped to think that we were going to be moving when they got married. But the fact she
was a teacher was just...
Now my aunt had already taught me to read when I was very little, and I can remember
the first book I had was one that she gave me and so forth. So she had been much more
instrumental in my life than I had thought up until that point. So off we went to Whitman,
where I went through junior year in high school, and it was a very, well, a very busy time,
of course, because it was before the – during the beginnings of the war and so forth. And
I can remember Pearl Harbor because my cousins were visiting at the time, my mother’s
nephews, and their father was already in the service. And we went to school the next day,
this would've been my – let's see, '41 would've been my sophomore year I guess.
Anyway, went to school that Monday and we discovered that three of the senior boys had
already enlisted. Monday morning.
So then, I was pretty active, in high school. I was [laughing] I was always a very good
student except in Latin. And we had – the Principal of the school was our math teacher
because his son had gone through school with us, and he, somehow or other, decided for
every year in high school math he was going to teach whatever his son was taking, which
was either good or bad I'm not sure. But I used to get in trouble with him because I
would find – I would get up to do a proof and I would do it in about three steps, and you
were supposed to do it in 11, and he would question it. And I would say, “But it's the
right proof.” “Well yes, but,” and finally one day he said, “All right Miss Miller, since
you know so much about geometry, you can take a week off from class.” So when I went
home and told my mother. To this day, I think she was smiling at the same time she said,
“Why did you do that?” And she knew exactly why I did it, because that's the way I was.
And I was right. So a week later I go back to class, and they're having a test, so I just
breeze through the test as if I'd been there the whole – I hadn't touched a geometry book
the whole week. And I don't think he ever forgave me for the fact that I got an A on that,
right then and there.
But then, when I was a sophomore my father came down with tuberculosis, [10:00] and
was in the sanitarium in Hanson, and in those days, well, also when my mother had been
in the hospital. In those days it was fresh air, and you'd walk in to visit in this freezing
cold ward, all the windows wide open and you'd sit there with them. And finally,
probably it was the summer before my senior year in high school, my mother and our
family doctor, who was best friends with the family, decided that the hospital wasn't
doing – there wasn't much they could do. They had collapsed his lung. They did not have
the anti-biotics and the penicillin at that point, so, anyway. They decided to take him out
of the hospital, and we moved to Uxbridge, which is where my mother's parents lived.
And they had a farm. They had a big porch with screened windows [laughing], and so,
four weeks before my senior year in high school I was told I was leaving the school in
which I was going to be very active and so forth and so on and at first I can remember

	
  

3

	
  
saying, “Well I can live with Aunt Mertie and Uncle Howard.” That was the doctor and
his wife. “Well I can stay with so-and-so,” or “I can stay with so-and-so,” and finally it
dawned on me that my mother was going to need me. It wasn't just what I was going to
do. And I can remember riding my bike, the first day of school. I didn't know anybody in
the school, although we used to go there for vacations, but we always were with my
cousins.
So I can remember riding my bicycle to school that first day and thinking, “Well, nobody
knows who I am so I can be anybody I want to be.” And the first thing I did was to try
out for the choir. I had no voice. I had never tried out for a choir. I thought, what the
heck, and then I suddenly realized here – I had played basketball in Whitman, and all the
sudden here's a school that didn't have a girls basketball team. So I thought “Well, what's
going on here?” So anyway we started a girl's basketball team, and you know who ended
up as captain of the team. Well, to make a very good year, my mother went back to
teaching. They had consolidated the elementary schools in town but had too many kids
and there was one little one-room schoolhouse, so she ended up teaching there. She had
21 kids in eight grades, and so our whole family would go every time they had some kind
of a special event going on.
Anyway, in my senior year I would – notices would go up about different colleges. And I
would see one, and I'd come home and tell my mother about it. And I'd see another. And
I'd see a scholarship for here, or something and she'd say, “But what will do about the rest
of it?” So anyway there was – there is, still, I think – a scholarship, the Edwin C. Thayer
scholarship, which is named for a graduate from the class of 1815, I think it is. And I
think it was his son or grandson established this in the 1890s for a resident of the town to
come to Brown. And one day the – it had been given the year before – it was a four-year
scholarship. It had been given the year before, the class of '44, and the boy who got it
came in July, finished his first year in February, and then went off to the service. And, so
along about March, somebody – and I think it was my grandfather, my mother's father –
somebody thought, well there's three years left on that scholarship because the GI bill had
just been passed. So the next thing I knew, the Principal was calling me into his office
and saying “Well what would you think about applying to Pembroke College at Brown,
and there is a scholarship.” So the order of events – and I just came across all of this the
other day – I graduated from high school, let's see – what order? I have a letter that I was
accepted, I got the scholarship before I was accepted, and I had never visited. So at
commencement it was announced that I had this scholarship, and then I had already – I
did manage to take the SATs, and then one day in July my mother brought me down here
for an interview. And, so as I said, I guess it was when I got the Brown Bear Award, if it
hadn't been for my father getting TB, I wouldn't be here.
So, when I came that first year, there were more students than they had spaces [15:00] on
campus. So there were, I don't know, probably, maybe as many as six or eight or ten of us
who lived at the YWCA in downtown Providence. And I remember it was across from
the Narragansett Brewing Company cause you couldn't get that odor out of it. And we
would take the trolley up every day.

	
  

4

	
  
In the meantime, I got a job. Well, I would do babysitting and then I got a job waiting on
tables. For a while, I think we got 65 cents an hour or something like that. And then, I
babysat for somebody and then they asked the Placement Office could they find
somebody who would live with them, which I then did with this family for the rest of the
year. And at my sophomore year, I lived with two different families… well, they were
sisters. Both of them had gone to Pembroke. And one lived, well the house is no longer
there, it's just down from Braddock and the other one lived up here just past Bowen. And
then when Andrews was built, by that point I had saved enough money, my mother had
gone back to work, my father had gone back to work, my mother was much more
supportive than my father was of spending money on an education. And so, I moved into
Andrews. I can't remember – it was that year or my senior year I had the room right over
the front door, which was great for blackmailing everybody. You could see everything
that was going on.
But the – going to the academic side of things, I'd been very, very good in high school.
Except for the fact when I was in that senior year I was taking – I had this one teacher for
chemistry and trigonometry, and I was the best girl. I was the only girl in the trig class
and I was the best student in the class but he refused to give me an A. “Girls don't get As”
quote unquote. But he gave me an A in chemistry. And the reason was, “Well with
chemistry you can go into nursing.” That was kind of the attitude. And I remember not all
that many, girls, either, in either of my high schools went off to four-year colleges.
Several did go into nursing but I think was one of the first to go to a four-year college,
and… However, my record here was not stellar. I started out as a chemistry major, and
everything was fine until I hit physics. Now I'd gotten straight A in physics in high
school, straight A in chemistry. And I walked into the physics class first day, 150
students, three women, and out of the hundred and 50, out of the 147 men, I would say
probably 90 of them were Navy ROTC, and they had just spent the summer up at
Rensselaer Polytechnic.
So things went along well. I was in a lab group and we had math problems every week,
and I was doing – I did very well in all of that. And mid-year exam was okay. Then we
get to the final exam and I have used this – I tell you, I have used this so many times in
my teaching career. The instructions – there were 14 problems and it said “do 10” so I
thought, okay if I do seven and get them right I have a C, correct? So I did seven.
However, the professor slid the scale because the majority of class had done 14. So seven
out of 14 does not come out to be a C. So I ended up with a D, and the head of the
chemistry department was my faculty advisor, and I was also taking English with –
what's his name – Clarence Webster. And I swear the two of them sat down in the faculty
lunch one day, because Professor Webster wanted me to major in English, and anyway,
between the two of them they decided I probably should not go on in science. So I can
remember my advisor sitting down. He said, “Now Jean, if you were going to major in
chemistry you'd have six more physics courses to take, [20:00] and Professor Webster
wants you to take honors in English.” So, without too much ado, that's what I did. And
we had a language requirement in those days, and I was never very good in language.
And it took me three courses to meet the requirement in French, and in the last course
you just had to pass it. Well I passed it with a D, so there was my second D. And each

	
  

5

	
  
time I got a D, I lost my scholarship for a semester, which meant then I had to find ways
to be making more money.
Well, in the summer time, a whole group of us, probably 10 or 12 of us, went to work at a
resort hotel up in the White Mountains called Wentworth Hall. And in fact, I'm staying
with a college classmate this weekend who was with me there. And this was obviously
just after the war, and we were able to – I was able to make – well, tuition in those days
was $450 dollars a year. And I was able to make enough money to cover almost my
tuition, plus I had the scholarship, anyway. So I'm buzzing along with my English major.
And we still had distribution requirements, and philosophy was one. So I'm taking a
philosophy course and I can remember I was knitting [laughing] – I was knitting a ski
sweater, which I still own – it still fits – because I found I could pay more attention if I
were doing this. Well, of course you didn't take notes as well if you were doing that.
Anyway, the upshot of it was that was my third D. And someplace along the line, I turned
into a regular instead of honors, a regular English major. And two courses that I took in
my senior year, one was political science, and I can remember thinking, good grief, if I
had taken this sooner I think I would have majored in this. And the other was I took an
education course, and facetiously I said to my mother, “Well I suppose if I cant do
anything else I can always teach.” Famous last words.
So, I got myself very involved in extracurricular activities, particularly in sports. And
they had a point system. You can only do so many things, and you had to be
academically eligible. So when I got that D in philosophy, which must have been my
junior year, it meant that a couple of things that I really had wanted to do in my senior
year I wasn't able to do. I was heartbroken. I was still very active, but I couldn't have the
leadership positions. I can remember I was by then, once Andrews Hall had been set up, I
was waiting on table and by my senior year I was the head waitress. And I had lost the
scholarship for the first semester. And I'll never forget, I think I have the letter
someplace, the Dining Department – it wasn't Food Service then – sent me a letter, and
gave me an honorarium of – I forget whether it was 25 or 50 dollars, which was just
enough to make my tuition bill. And that was kind of typical. In other words, once you
were here they wanted to keep you here.
We got to the spring of our senior year, and obviously, on the days that we had
convocation, that we had chapel, those of us who waited on tables were already in the
dining room getting things set up. And I can remember someone coming over and saying,
“Jean, why don't you come to chapel today, things are fine right here,” and without
thinking I went. Well, it was a put-up job because that was the day they were giving out
the Pembroke keys. And I don’t know whether they still do that or not, but they're given
to – usually it goes to the people who are like the head of the Glee Club, the president of
SGA, the head of Brownbrokers – that sort of thing. And I was being given a Pembroke
key along with the others, even though I hadn't had that leadership position. So that was
another highlight.
So we get to, oh I can remember, being called into – I think it was when I got my D in
Physics, being called into Dean Lewis's office which is up there, which is up on the

	
  

6

	
  
second floor of Alumnae, and she was saying, “You know according to your testing,
[25:00] Jean, you should be doing much better than you're doing.” And she didn't say –
she didn't mention – the D or anything like that, she just said, “You know, you've got
more that you could be doing.” And then I remember when we got to our senior year and
it was: What are you gonna do? Where are you going next? And they were looking for
somebody to be, what was the title, Assistant Director of Student Activities, here. So I
remember two of my classmates and I all applied for the job. Well none of us got it. They
got somebody from outside.
So it was, “Well I guess if I can't do anything else I can teach,” sort of thing. So I
registered with this – what's it called – the Women's Industrial [Educational] Union in
Boston, which was a placement service. And it took me until… I guess it was like the last
week in July, I finally got a placement in a high school in Westbrook, Maine. So once I
got that, I then went back to Wentworth Hall for the last month of the summer. And then
I started teaching in the fall. And at that point I was only 21. And, Westbrook, well
there's a whole book in itself. Westbrook is a predominately French-Canadian
community, two textile mills in town. And quite a mixed population. So here I was,
barely making it in French here. I used my French probably more times than I had ever
thought I ever would. I mean there, the students I had their – French for some of them
was like running down the street, for some of them, kind of thing. But as the youngest,
newest person on the English ladder I had industrial arts boys, commercial program girls,
didn't have any college preparatory students. I didn't have any, I should say, I didn't have
any college preparatory classes, turned out I had some students.
So I go to my opening faculty meeting, and uh, all of a sudden the Principal is saying,
“Now who has Louie Agnello in English this year?” and I'm looking at my list and
looking at my list, and I had him for two classes, so I raised my hand, and I said well I
have him for two classes. Well the English department, who were sitting around me, they
all went [tsking noises], and I thought to myself, “Who is this fellow?” So we go off to
classes, and I had a sophomore English class, and I handed out some index cards, for
them to just jot down some information. And this guy's hand goes up, “Me, I ain't got no
pencil,” and I thought, he's pulling my leg, so I said, “Oh you ain't got one?” And I
handed him one. Well, by the end of the year, instead of saying, “Me I ain't got no
pencil,” he was saying, “I don't have none.” He had improved. So when that class was
over, this fellow who had been sitting in the back of the room with a pretty closely
shaved head, and he had a cane, it was kind of heavy weight, came up to my desk, and
said, “Well I like the way you handled that class, Miss Miller,” and introduced himself. It
was Louie Agnello. So he was in the next class, which was the junior English class. Their
philosophy was if you flunked a course you just simply moved up to the next one but you
had to repeat the one you'd flunked. Like if you flunked a biology course – a math course
– you'd move to the next level but you repeated the next one.
Anyway, he was a very good student and it turned out the reason he had flunked the year
before – his family owned a pool parlor downtown. One day – he started doing it
frequently – he'd walk into the study hall and with the keys he'd say, “Anybody want to
go play pool?” and they'd all skip school. And the English teacher he had was one of the

	
  

7

	
  
nicest, quietest calmest people. And so anyway, he failed English for that reason. So
came the first marking period, and they didn't have public address systems in those days,
so somebody would come around each day in the last period of the day, bringing a sheet
of paper with the announcements. And when it was time, when it was the honor roll
they'd hand you the paper with the names on it and you'd start reading it. And this was a
junior English class. And so I'm starting to read this and here is Louie Agnello on the list.
The minute I read his name, the class burst out laughing. He put his cane down [30:00] so
hard on that table, and he said, “I don't see anything funny about that at all,” and that was
not his usual. So, he also got an A in biology, and the biology teacher was the Assistant
Principal and the two of us put our heads together and said, “This fellow should not be in
a general course. He should be in the college preparatory course.” And so indeed, we
worked it out so that for his senior year, he would then be in the college preparatory
course. And of course he made the dean’s list and so forth.
And the rest, well, doesn't quite become history because the senior class and the faculty
had a banquet every year, and each chose a speaker, one for the faculty and one for the
senior class. And I hadn't been to one before, obviously, my first year of teaching. So, he
gets up and says, “Well, as I look around this room, hardly anybody in this had any
interest in what I was doing in this school, or where I was going. There are only two
people in here who paid any attention whatsoever.” And he said, “That's made all the
difference, and I think other people, other teachers should learn,” I forget how he... I
wished I'd had it, because he then went on to say something like, “Other teachers should
take a lesson, etc., etc.”
Anyway, he ended up going to the University of New Hampshire – ended up as, I forget
what you call it, but he worked for the Public Health department in Maine going around
to farms and certifying that they were, you know, what they should be. And a few years
ago, I happened to go back to Westbrook for the first time in fifty years, and was asking,
and I guess I had Googled and had found out that he had died, but I also found out that he
had a son living in Connecticut. So I got in touch with him. Well, this fella had gone on,
gotten a Masters, gotten a Ph.D., had gone to work for Union Carbide.
You're probably too young to remember the Bhopal disaster in India, when Union
Carbide clouds of chemicals were released and hundreds of people were killed. He was
the person sent from Union Carbide to deal with it, and when he retired, he was the
person that the U.S. government sent to Kuwait to be dealing with a lot of those things.
And his story – way back when, his father was in and out of mental hospitals in Maine.
And one time when he was home, he went to the local bank, took out all the money that
his family had, committed suicide by jumping off the bridge into the river in the center of
town as the people were coming out of the mill for lunch hour. And then when Louie had
been in the eighth grade, in elementary school, he'd been injured playing football, and
they treated it for his knee, and his foot, and this that and the other thing. Well it turned
out he had broken his hip and nobody noticed it for weeks, and he ended up in the
children's hospital in Boston. The whole time he was there, nobody from the school had
ever had anything to do with him.

	
  

8

	
  
So, you can see what he was bringing into his schooling as he started high school, which
was just horrendous. So he's always one of my – I mean, well – when he was a senior I
would come home to my apartment, which was just a few houses down from the school,
and he might be sitting on the steps saying, “Well you know, Miss Miller this is my essay
for Miss Chick for tomorrow.” That was this college preparatory English teacher. He
said, “Would you just take a look at it?” This kind of thing. But I had a very good time
there. I also coached girls’ basketball and tennis. And have kept in touch with some of
those. But then my mother died suddenly, and I mean suddenly, of a heart attack in the
second year I was there. And the boys’ basketball team at Westbrook was always very
successful, and in fact they won the state championship both years that I was there. Went
to the Boston Garden and all of that.
My mother died in early March, and so I was home. And when I got back the school had
made all arrangements [35:00] – to make sure that I had a seat – to make sure that I was
going with the team, you know all the usual kind of things – so then I had to think about
– at that point my brother had received his draft notice, for the Korean war. That was
1951. So anyway, I went home and my grandfather – by then my aunt had died – my
grandfather, my brother and my father – I went home to keep house for them, and get a
new job. So I got a job in Marshfield, Mass. And at that point I had never learned to
drive. My father's attitude was, “Well, you don't waste gas during the war teaching
somebody how to drive.”
So I ended up going to Marshfield, which was about a half an hour drive away, I'd say,
and had five very interesting years there. Very interesting. Last year I went to the sixtieth
reunion of the class of 1953, and I had been invited to their 40th, 20 years ago. And then
two or three of the classes in between said, “Well you know if you're going get Miss
Miller, then we're going to get her,” kind of thing. And some of those people I
communicate with almost every day by email, it's interesting. In fact, I just got one
yesterday that said, “You know my friends can't believe that I'm still in touch with my
English teacher.” And well I said, “I can't believe I'm still in touch with a student who
became an English teacher!” Which she did, and was teaching in California when I was
out there.
But anyway, five years in Marshfield – and I don't know how much detail you want on
this – but I taught English, Problems in Democracy, I was the - -I helped coach
basketball, I was the guidance counselor, college counselor. And, when I went there, the
preceding summer, I'd been at graduate school at Middlebury and I'd been a passenger in
a fatal automobile accident. So I arrived using a cane. And it turned out, it turned out a
couple of times I pulled a Louie Agnello with a class, used that cane effectively.
But it was an interesting experience because the town had a mixed population. There
were a number of families from the Cape Verde islands, because of the cranberry bogs
down below. And there were children, students, of varying colors, there were a couple of
black families in town, but there were also families where they might have three different
shades of children. I mean, one set of parents, but... and the study hall, the library and the
cafeteria were all one room. And one day, I was in charge of it. And some kids were

	
  

9

	
  
talking and I told them to be quiet, and then they start up again, and I did the second time.
And one of the girls, who I had in my Problems in Democracy class piped up, “Well am I
the wrong color or what?” This is 1952 or ‘53 I guess. So I walked over as carefully as I
could, not one touch of my finger was on her, but I pulled her chair out so carefully, and I
said, “You will go to the office right now, please.” Well, sitting in the study hall
happened to be the president of the student body, who also went to the office, to make
sure the straight scoop was told. Well the worst of it was, that same girl had to come to
my class the very next period. And I don't know who was more uncomfortable, she or I.
In this Problems in Democracy class I taught, it was broken down to sections on poverty,
prejudice, etc., etc., and I had put down as some supplementary reading, a couple of
novels of Richard Wright. And one day I was teaching an English class and the student
who was on duty in the office knocked on the door and said, “Mr. Romeo wants to see
you. “That was the Principal. Well as soon as the English class heard “Oh, Mr. Romeo
wants to see Miss Miller, what's up?” And this was a fairly small school, so I get to the
office and there in his office is Colonel William Blass, retired, U.S. army, whose
daughter was a senior who I had in this class. And he was – the Principal didn't know
what to do – the father was objecting to the reading [40:00] that I had given. And I said,
“Well it's not – first of all it's not required reading, it's optional.” And the only thing I
could think to say, Wendy, was, “Well, if your daughter didn't understand them.... You
don't need to worry cause your daughter wouldn't understand what those words meant
anyway.” Well, of course she did, and that bothered him more than anything, and I
thought the Principal was going to fall over. But the colonel walked out and we never
heard another word about it. But it was that kind of... and, in those days you still had the
commercial course, the industrial course, the college preparatory course.
And I was teaching Shakespeare, and everybody in all those courses had done – what had
we done? Let's say Romeo and Juliet, or Julius Caesar. Romeo and Juliet, I guess. And
then for the college preparatory we would do Macbeth. Well, all of a sudden a couple of
the boys in the industrial arts said, “Well how come we're not doing Macbeth? Are we
too dumb or what?” and I thought, “Hmm, ok,” and I thought, “Now how am I going to
handle this, because I don't think they're going to be able to just sit there with the text.”
So anyway, there was a terrific recording that had been made, and so I got the recording
and I brought it to class. And for the next two days that's all I did, was that industrial arts
class. It was a general English class there were both girls and boys in it. They were
mesmerized. They just sat there and absorbed this whole thing. Then the college
preparatory kids started saying, “Well can we listen to that record too?” And it was – it
taught me that you don't underestimate. I mean yes, you are told, “This is the curriculum
you have” and so forth, and in those days when I went to the Principal and said, “Well,
what books do I have?” And he said, “The English closet is over there, whatever's in that
English closet is what you have.” Not, “You can sit down and order.” And finally one
day I did go to him and say, “I think we need something more modern than this,” and I
remember being allowed to order a set of books – one set of books, for drama. And it had
Sherwood Anderson and O'Neill, it had all the contemporary writers.
That was a very good experience, because in that small town after – let’s see, the first
year I was living at home, then my brother – he had got an extension on the draft, and he

	
  

10

	
  
was drafted and went on to Korea. And actually, he was wounded in Korea. And in the
meantime, my father had remarried, so I was – and my father had – we'd been saying
“Okay, after my grandfather had gone to his other brother, his other son,” we'd said,
“Well, we need to find another – we need to find an apartment, not a house,” and he
wasn't. So anyway, I went off and found an apartment. And low and behold, the day I
was moving into the apartment a whole bunch of kids from Marshfield arrived to help me
move, that sort of thing. And then my brother was wounded in Korea, in 19... the fall of
'51, and I can remember when I got the telegram from the chaplain, he commented that
they had flown him to Seoul. And when he came to, his first question was: “Who won the
election?” Which was when Eisenhower was running for President. So he was in a
hospital in Pennsylvania, so I decided to go down and see him, but, I was also – that was
the other thing, I was also directing plays each year. I would direct a play. And so we had
a play on a Friday night, the after party and then some of the students drove me to South
Station to get the train to go to Philadelphia to see my brother.
It was that kind of a school. At least I found it was that kind of a school. It is interesting
how many of those former students of mine I'm still in touch with. So then, one of the
other faculty members and I were on a committee studying benefits, salary scale and all
that sort of thing. And that particularly – this was my fifth year, and I can remember I got
a pretty good raise, but it was nothing out of the ordinary. And as you can hear I was
doing all kinds of things, and so I was still registered with the women's industrial thing in
Boston, and out of the blue I got a thing from them. I got a couple of things from them.
One was for a boarding school in Maine, and one was for [45:00] a girls’ school in
Washington. And I thought, “Hmm.” So anyway I investigated, one was a school called
Mount Vernon Seminary, just out from Georgetown. And I remember going to New York
and having an interview with the headmistress, and coming back and thinking, “Oh, this
would be interesting.” So, I go in to the Principal to tell him that I'm going to leave after
five years, and the next thing I know I'm getting called in to the Superintendent’s office,
and being offered double the raise that I had been given, and I said, “Well, that really
wasn't the reason that I was looking.”
So, I kept an apartment in Marshfield, and on vacations would come back there. So I
spent two years at Mount Vernon Seminary, which was another interesting experience,
because it was my first experience with southern girls. And it was a combination of junior
college and a prep school. Which is now out of business, as a matter of fact. I remember
one day some of the – I was teaching English and living in a dorm, and I remember one
day a group of girls are in my room and they pulled out a Marshfield yearbook, and as
they were looking through it they said, “Oh, you had negroes,” and they were pointing to
one of the Cape Verdean girls, and I said, “No, no, she's not,” but then I did point out
somebody who was. Well in the room at the time there were a couple of girls from
Massachusetts, as well as some from the south. Well, I wished I had a tape recorder for
that conversation, because it went on the theme of, “Well if you look black you're black,”
on the part of the girls from the north, that's who they were. Well the girls from the south
said, “Well you know, it's only,” and I forget what it was, I want to say it was 1/16th or
1/8th. I remember they always had those, but that was a very telling incident.

	
  

11

	
  
On the campus was a snack bar sort of place, and the college girls could smoke but of
course the prep school girls couldn't, and one weekend when another faculty member and
I were on duty, word came back that some of the prep school girls were smoking. So we
got hold of the two girls and we said, “You know, this is a major rule, and when Mrs.
Lloyd–” that was the Headmistress “–gets back on Monday, you'll have to be reported.”
Well the irony of the situation was, when Mrs. Lloyd got back on Monday, her comment
was, “What business was it of ours?” To the two of us on the faculty, because when I
then realized whose daughters these two people were, she was, you know, concerned.
And I thought, “Huh.” So from then on – the other gal taught Biology and the two of us –
it was wild because when it came time for faculty contracts next year, which was within a
month or so, they didn't all come out at the same time. A few people would get them,
then a few more would get them, and then this other teacher and I noticed we weren't
getting them. And then finally I got mine, and it was to teach English and Religion. Cut
back on English and add Religion. Which was not something that I... So anyway I went in
to talk to Mrs. Lloyd about it and she said, “Well you know,” she said, “I think you
would do much better if you were in a larger school, and had like a Dean, or something
like that.” She said, “I think that's what you really” – So anyway, irony of ironies, one of
the girls who had been a student at Dobbs, was at Mt. Vernon, at the time. She and her
mother had been on break, in New York. This was like February, March, and she came
back and she said, “Miss Miller, Miss Miller, why don't you apply to Dobbs?” She said,
“They just fired the two heads of the school,” and I didn't know the students, the students
didn't know about any of this sort of thing, but it was just out of the blue. And, so I
thought, “Well, why not?” So I wrote a letter, to the woman who was appointed the
Acting Head, who had been there for years, and said you know, “With this background,
would there be anything of interest?” And, in fact, she invited me to come – I was going,
I was... I was going home to Massachusetts [50:00] for spring break, or at Easter time, so
I did stop. And her first words when she walked into the reception room and saw me, she
said, “Well, I had expected somebody older to apply for the job.” I had just turned 30,
and I said, “Well, I can't do anything about that.”
So then she took me all over the campus. It's an old school, down in Dobbs Ferry, New
York. And, we were up and down, third floor here, fourth floor there, so forth, and about
the second, she said, [laughing] “Maybe a younger person would do better at this,” so
anyway. I was interested in the job, so I said, “Should I have Mrs. Lloyd write you a
recommendation?” and her answer was such that I – the inference was, she wasn't going
to be listening to Mrs. Lloyd anyway. And I later found, well, anyway...
By the time that I got into that job, I realized, I had sort of said to myself, “I can do a
better job than the Principal in Maine.” There were several things I could tell you about
him, “…better job than Mr. Romeo, better job than Mrs. Lloyd, why don't I give it a try?”
So I spent five years as the Assistant Head of Dobbs. And then, again, circumstance, the
head of the Ellis school in Pittsburgh had been let go, and a member of our Board, and
the husband – her husband was the head of the board at Ellis, and they had a daughter in
the school that I had been teaching, and they said, “Oh, would you be interested – why
don't you come and talk to us?” So I was flown out to Pittsburgh, and... I can remember
us sitting there. It was at the Chancellor of Pitt’s house, and this search committee is – I'd

	
  

12

	
  
never gone through something like this, you know I'm sitting there thinking, “These
people are listening to me.” Which was more than my current Headmaster was doing.
And uh, so anyway, I enjoyed myself, and the president of Chatham College was on the
Board but hadn't been at that meeting, and I went to see him the next day in his office,
and he said, “Well, just a cautionary word, Jean, you know, this Board has just taken this
action against this Head, so just, you know, think about it.”
He assured me he thought I would be a good candidate. So about... three weeks later I
hear from the Chairman of the Board, whose daughter is in school, he said, “Well, the
Board has decided they want somebody older and they want a man,” and I thought, “Well
I can't do anything about either of those.” And what they did was they ended up hiring a
retired English teacher for a year and then they went on from there. So that got me
thinking. So I sat down, and I wrote 20 letters, and… including, I wrote one to Hotchkiss
and another boys’ school, and then I wrote all to women's colleges, and said, “Is there
any kind of an administrative opening for somebody of my background?” Well I
immediately got a letter back from the boys’ school saying, “There must be some
mistake, we're a boys’ school.” ‘Course they're not anymore. But the upshot of it was I
was offered the job as Associate Director of Admissions at Smith, and Director of
Student Personnel at Bennington. And by then, while I was Dobbs I had bought a house
in Arlington, to go skiing.
So I had interviews in both places, and meanwhile I'm still at Dobbs, and Tom
Mendenhall was the president of Smith, and he said, “Now, what do you see yourself
doing eventually?” He said, “Associate Director of Admissions is, you know–” And I
said, “Well, someday maybe I'll have my own school.” I hadn't really given it much
thought. And then I went off to have the interview at Bennington and I got to thinking.
These were the interviews, and then I was offered both jobs, and I decided on the
Bennington job because I thought, “If I'm at Smith I'm still going to be dealing with high
school students through Admissions. If I go to Bennington, I'm going to be dealing with
college students, which will be something different.” So I accepted the job in February. I
was due to leave Dobbs the end of June. Yeah, that's exactly how it happened.
So, about... beginning of April, I get a letter from the search committee, at St. Timothy's
school, saying “You're name has been – our headmistress is going to retire next year,
after 28 years or whatever, and you're name has been given to us as a potential
candidate.” [55:00] Who gave the name? Tom Mendenhall at Smith [laughs]. So, I
thought, “Well, this will be interesting for future –” You know, I wasn't thinking the next
year, I was thinking, you know, sometime in the future. And it's always interesting to talk
to people in other schools, so I went in and I met with a small group first. Then I went in,
I was invited in for a dinner. And the day I was invited in for the dinner, as I got into this
apartment, there were a whole group of people leaving, and I was sort of introduced to
them as they were going. Well later, it turns out that was the search committee that had
been having a meeting, and the people with whom I was having dinner were on the
search committee. I mean, I knew that. So anyway, and so came the first of July, and I go
off to Bennington. And, I don't know, sometime in August, this... one of the people I'd
met through St. Tim's, those meetings, and his family were driving through Arlington,

	
  

13

	
  
Vermont. On their way to Maine. Well, you don't drive through Arlington, Vermont to
get to Maine. And they were interesting, I enjoyed them. In fact I just heard from their
daughter just the other day.
And so anyway, I start the job at Bennington – it was a fascinating job, and one of the
first things I had to do, they had a system, you won't believe this. They sent a letter out
after the class had been accepted, and after they had taken their places, like the first thing
I had to do in July was to send a letter, and the parents in those days filled out an
extensive form themselves. You sent a letter to the parents, saying, “Is there anything that
we need to know about your daughter before she actually arrives on campus?” Well, let
me tell you, some of the kinds of things that hadn't come up in interviews or all the rest of
it were, very, very interesting. So that's how I started. So about the first week in
September, I got a phone call.
Oh, I know – no, I take it back. I had been down to visit, yes, I'd been down to visit, St.
Tim's, I get a phone call the first week in September, ‘cause I said, “Well I'd love to see
the school sometime when it's in session.” So the Headmistress is calling me, to see when
I could come. And it was only one weekend that I was free, ‘cause my job was very
interesting at Bennington. As the President told me, he said, “We have 350 students and
fifty faculty members, and it's your job among others to know where they are, 24 hours a
day.” So anyway, I get this phone call, and I say, “Well, I'm going to come the last
weekend in October.” So I go down the last weekend in October and ahead of time I'd
said, “Well, I'd like to sit in on the class of a male teacher, a young teacher…” And so I
did, and I'm getting ready to leave and come back, and I get a phone call at the cottage
where I'm staying that Mr. Calloway, the Chairman of the Board, wants to see me before
I leave. So I'm walking up the path, he's coming down – this is on Saturday morning. He
said, “Well, Jean, the search committee has just met. We're going to make a
recommendation to the full Board tomorrow morning that you be appointed Headmistress
of St. Timothy's School.” My jaw dropped. I said, “You've got to be–” He said, “No, no,
just keep walking.” I could not believe it. And so anyway, there it was, and I, you know, I
went back to– I guess I had flown down. I went back to the airport, picked up my car in
Newark, drove to Vermont, and then of course the first thing I had to do Monday was go
in and talk to the President. And he was – I went in and had this lengthy conversation
with him.
He started out by saying, “Now, this –” I was on their Admissions Committee at
Bennington, among other things. He said, “Now this is what we're going to be doing next
year with the admissions committee.” And I could see what was happening, you know,
we're constructing a job out of what you have now, and so forth, And then finally he said,
“You know, I think you probably want to take this job, and I said, “But my conscience
tells me I haven't even been here – I should be here at least two years, there will be other
opportunities.” And he said, “Well let me tell you, I'd been Provost at Columbia one year
when they offered me the presidency of Bennington.” And ironically, I did take the job at
St. Tim's and ironically, within a year and a half, he had died of leukemia [1:00:00] at the
age of 44.

	
  

14

	
  
So, this is 1964 by then – fall of '63. So I'm at a wedding in April, and the second floor
deck of the couple’s house where we're having the reception collapses. And yours truly
ends up in the hospital with 11 broken bones. Break this wrist, my right ankle, my knee,
my jaw… so I arrive at St. Tim's in a wheelchair. For my first board meeting. By the end
of the summer, I've come home and they've taken the pin out of my leg, I'm using – am I
using crutches? I think I'm using a cane at that point. No, I'm using crutches. So, off I go
to St. Tim's. Well, here I was going to Marshfield having had an accident. And St. Tim's
is one of the older boarding schools in the country; it was founded in 1882. But the
interesting things that started happening from that October – all of a sudden I get a phone
call from Wheaton College, from a student, former student of mine from Dobbs. She said,
“I have somebody I want you to talk to, Miss Miller.” Well, it was the daughter of the
Chairman of the board at St. Tim's. And word had gotten to Wheaton, through her,
through the Dobbs – I mean, everybody there knew that I was about to be the head of St.
Tim's. And that winter, I was skiing at Stratton one day and I'm down below the chairlift
and all of a sudden I hear these two girls’ voices up there: “Oh, there's the new head of
St. Tim's down there.” I mean, these were these same girls, I mean it was... and my life
has never been the same since, I have to tell you.
So, I went off and it was an interesting beginning because, as they say, the headmistress
had been there for 28 years. And people were immediately: “Are you going change this?
You going to change that?” Well I wasn't going to change anything. And it was an
interesting time to be there. I was there from '64 till '77, and in that time, well, we
integrated the school the second year I was there, because I raised the question with the
Board as to where did they stand on it. And the Executive Committee had already said,
“We would look to you for whatever advice,” because when I'd been at Dobbs, we had an
– in one year, we had the daughter of a black family, but she did not look black, she had
freckles, light skin. And an Indian student on exchange. And at Christmas that year the
Indian student had been unhappy. So I had called AFS and she changed schools, went to
Princeton. When she was at Dobbs, she had to wear a uniform like everyone else. When
she went to Princeton she could wear her saris, and so forth. So that meant, when we got
back after Christmas that year, there was not a brown face in the student body.
We got to – Lincoln's birthday was when we had Parents’ Day at Dobbs. And this girl’s
father was Ethiopian. He was the head of the African American institute, and his wife
was light, and I don't know whether she was white or light-skinned. So I had seen them a
number of times; they'd come to evening events. And I had this girl in my class, and I
was sitting in my office after class, and all of a sudden the French teacher comes charging
in. I had parents sitting there waiting to see me, she comes charging in my office, “You
did not tell me, you did not tell me!” And I looked at her, and said, “Well, what did I not
tell you?” “Well, you did not tell me she was black!” She could not believe that she had
had this girl in her class, from September to February, and she didn't know she was black,
and all of a sudden this is making a difference. So, when I got to – and the next year,
Dobbs was going to host on an ABC program, I think it was a Native-American girl from
someplace in the Dakotas.

	
  

15

	
  
So, when I got to St. Tim's and we started the conversation, I said, “Well, my suggestion
would be that it needs to be somebody from the Baltimore/Washington area, who's going
to have the support needed.” And St. Tim's was only boarding students at that point. So,
in the fall of '67, we interviewed [1:05:00]and... '68/9... yeah, the fall of '66, we admitted
our first African American student. Who graduated the class of 1970, applied to
Pembroke College, came to see, all upset, because she'd been accepted at Brown
University. And while she was here – she's somebody that has to be interviewed – while
she was here, she did a semester in Washington working for the Socialist Workers' Party.
And worked at the AAUW to support herself. She called me up to tell me that. When she
graduated she ran for mayor of Washington, on the Socialist Workers' Party and I think
she got like, two percent of the vote or something. Since then, she worked in a meat
packing plant in Nebraska, she worked for Boeing in Seattle, on the line, she worked in a
garment factory in L.A. She now lives in L.A. She has sarcoidosis and has been waiting
for years for a lung transplant. And has been an activist, mainly doing a lot of writing. An
amazing person. And she's about four-feet-eleven, and when she...
The interesting picture in Baltimore at that time, there was a woman who – I don't know
what you would call it, but, anyway, she was a do-gooder. And she had accomplished a
couple of things. At least she takes credit for integrating a couple of the boys' schools.
And I get a call from her one day. I never – I'd seen an article in the paper – but I get this
phone call and she said, “I have two girls that would just – just St. Timothy's girls.” Well,
I had been at St. Tim's a year and a half, I didn't know what a St. Timothy's girl was, you
know in that sense of the word. And I said, “Well fine, leave their addresses and their
parents, and I'll get in touch with them.” “No, no, that's not the way I operate,” she said.
“I will bring them out.” So, anyway, out she came one day with one of them. Tall, lanky,
gum chewing, stereotypical from one of the public high schools. And what I always had,
two girls take a family on tour, one to sort of get the girl’s attention, and the other to keep
the parents occupied. And so when she was in my office by herself, ‘cause she had come
with this other woman, and I said, “Well what do you think about Mrs. so-and-so's
program?” “Oh,” she says, “My mother thinks it's great but I can't stand opera.”
And anyway. Her papers were submitted. Another girl's were submitted. And meantime,
the previous spring, in those days, both when I was at Dobbs and St. Tim’s, if a boys’
school had black students, then they were among the first, and you were going to have a
concert, which meant a social activity after, it was like a dance or a dinner. They would
let you know in advance, so that when you were pairing people up and so forth there
wouldn't be any uncomfortable situations. Well, we were having a concert with the
Gilman school, which is a boys’ day school in Baltimore. And there was a black family in
town whose son, two sons, went to Gilman. One was in their select octet, had a fabulous
voice. So sitting in the audience at St. Timothy's school, founded by two southern ladies
1882, is this black family. It was a terrific concert, they had a dance afterwards, et cetera.
The next Monday morning, one of my staff – thank god it wasn't a faculty member – one
of my staff comes to me and says, “Never in my life have I sat socially in the same room
with a black family and I hope I don't have to again.” And I said, “Well, one never
knows.”

	
  

16

	
  
And the following September, I get a call from the headmaster at Gilman, who's on my
Board. His wife is an alum. And he said, “Jean, Anne Emery was just in my office.” She's
the mother of the boy. She's also the Principal of Lamell Junior High School in
Baltimore. And he said, “She came in and said, ‘You know, I don't have any daughters,
but I have some very sharp girls in my school,’” [1:10:00] and she said, ‘I felt so
comfortable when we were at that concert at St. Timothy's, do you suppose St. Timothy's
would be interested?’” Well, long story short I called her up, she invited me to do the
school. Ithink it was one of the first of the times when I was the only white person in
sight. And we had this long conversation with a group of faculty who had decided what
they wanted was this to be thought of as an honor for the school. Because we would offer
– there was a scholarship, that somebody could apply for.
So anyway, I get this application, for Nan Bailey and as they say, she's just the tiniest
thing. So, ironically, the two seniors who took her around, one was the daughter of Scott
Paper, and the other's daughter was Olin Mathson, and I say that because, there's another
reason in here. So anyway, they go off on the tour. And they always, it was such a – it
was set up in such a way that they could have the students – student guides could poke
their head in and say either “yes” or “no” or some comment. And they poke their head
around and they say, “Miss Miller, she writes French poetry!” and I thought, “Oh-ho.”
Which, I don't know how they – anyway. Well it turns out that Nan's father had been in
the army, and they had been stationed in France for four years or something like that.
Then, he had retired, when she was in the sixth or seventh grade. And moved to
Baltimore. He was now working for the Post Office. The following Monday morning
after that had taken place, knock on my door, and there stands our black chauffer. And
his cap tucked under his arm, he said, “Do you have a minute Miss Miller?” I said,
“Always do, Fred, come on in.” He said, “Well I just want to say I liked what I saw on
Saturday morning.” ‘Cause he'd been there, and he had seen this family. And I said,
“Well, I'm glad to hear that, Fred, because that little girl might be coming here next
year,” “Oh!” He said, and, it was – it was just... so, I accepted her. This was the one who
ended up coming to Brown.
And, normally in those days we sent a letter to the school, the family… in this case we
sent one to the school, and to this, whatever-her-name-was, I find that interesting, I can't
remember her name. And, she could hardly have opened the envelope but she's on the
phone, “Well there must be some mistake.” And I said, “Well what do you mean?” “Well
they're such qualified students.” And I said, “Well, it was pretty stiff competition this
year.” “Yes, but –” And I said, “There was such stiff competition among black students”
– dead silence, end of conversation, never heard from her again. And that was the – so
then, here we are, we've accepted one, so then my friend who's the Chairman of the
Executive Committee says, “Now what do you do? What are you going to do about
rooming?” Because we had no single rooms. That was the philosophy of the school. And
I said, “Well I guess what I'll do is I'll call around to my friends in New England who
have done this” – who have integrated their schools.
So I called about five, well, either they had single rooms or they'd accepted them as day
students. So I said, “Well, we're in this on our own, where do we go?” So she and I sat

	
  

17

	
  
down, and we looked at who else was coming into the school. And every year we sat the
students down and they made out a list, the ones who were in the school, choosing
roommates. And in the ninth – she was coming in the tenth grade – and the ninth grade
class, I had explained to them that she was coming. And there was a girl in the class who
had specifically asked to have her. And also was a girl, nobody else in her class had
asked for her, as it turned out, so I thought, “Alright, we'll start with a four-girl room.”
So, Nancy Harvey was Trustee and I sat down, and two of her classmates from St. Tim's
had daughters coming, the next year, and she knew them very well. And they were both
from New York City. As I looked at their interests and backgrounds, I thought, “Okay.”
And they were quite liberal, I knew they would be accepting. So anyway, we put this
room together. Opening day, Nan is the first to arrive, and lo and behold, she's down and
gotten settled, I look out on the terrace where there was a reception for incoming parents,
and there are the Baileys, and the two families of the two girls who had been her guide,
who were all in conversation. [1:15:00] And all of a sudden at my door appears the
parents of the girl who had been in the ninth grade. “There must have been some mistake,
Miss Miller. Our daughter needs to have her room changed. And I said, “Well, we don't
change rooms until January.” And they said, “Well…” And they went on like this and I
said, “Well, you'd be interested to know that your daughter asked to room with this girl.”
“Well that was just to get back at us.” And I'd forgotten they lived on the eastern shore of
Maryland! I mean, I don't know why that thought hadn't crossed my mind. Which is a
pretty racist – it was in those days – this remember is the middle ‘60s. Yeah, early ‘60s.
So anyway. He goes on and says, “I am going to call you on Friday and I expect to have
you tell me that she –” and I said, “You can save yourself the call, because there will be
no change right now.” And I thought, “Oh my, what's gonna happen now?” Nobody
prepares you for these things!
So anyway, he did not call. And about a week later, as his daughter is walking into the
dining room, and it was set up in such a way that kids could poke their heads in and talk
to me and everybody didn't know they were talking. And she said, “Well, could my
roommate and I see you after lunch?” And I said, “Sure.” And then afterwards I thought,
“Okay, here it comes.” Well who arrived with her as her roommate? The African
American girl. And what was their complaint? “Well, these two girls from New York
have so many friends that we can't get any work done,” and so forth and so on and I
thought, “Phew.” You know, you just never know.
Well that little girl ended up, yeah, that's exactly what I would... she ended up as
President of her class on the day that Martin Luther King was assassinated. And we'd
been in chapel that evening. We came out of chapel and there stood Fred in tears, waiting
to see me. To tell me. And then to ask, could the staff have a memorial service the next
morning in the chapel. And of course immediately, some of the seniors said well they'd
help out too. And then it went from there because Baltimore erupted. As did Washington.
The young woman – well, she wasn't so young – the woman who looked after my house
came to me and said, “Could we bring our children to school tomorrow, and for the next
several days?” So immediately, senior class rallied around. They took one of the
recreation rooms set up as a childcare center, set up a schedule for taking care of these,

	
  

18

	
  
probably I think eight different children came. It was a trying time. And they all
remember it. They all remember it. So the – that was April. Yeah, April of '68. We get to
graduation that year. Oh, I've forgotten. Going back, away from the integration situation.
In the summer of '67, the girl who would have been head of school was killed in an
airplane crash coming back from her college interview at Duke. Which had been a great
shock to that class, and they had had to restructure, and so forth. And Johnny Walker who
was then the Episcopal bishop in the National Cathedral, but had been up at – I'd known
him a number of years. Anyway, he came over on a couple of Sunday evening services
and stayed to talk with the senior class and help them through the whole thing. So when it
came time for graduation speakers, he was their choice. So we get to the morning of...
June 8, 1968, and there's an outdoor commencement, student body sits here, faculty here,
guests there, and the senior class and I are sitting down here. And the choir is up sitting.
And all of a sudden I hear this strangest sound [banging] like this. Now I thought a girl
had fainted. And all of a sudden the girls just all went back, the seniors to where they
were, the underclassmen and two parents who were doctors in the front row came up. The
choir director had had a heart attack. And you're not going to believe what she was
conducting at the time. [1:20:00] I have it on the program, called “The Gates of heaven”
and it was her last performance. She had retired. This was her final one. And all of a
sudden, off to my right, I thought I heard a sob and I thought, “Oh what do I do, I'm in
charge what am I going to do?” So anyway, I got up and I just told the underclassman,
‘cause they were right in – she didn't die immediately that was the thing, so they were
right in a line watching this. Anyway, they took her to the nearest dormitory. So here I
am with I don't know how many hundred people sitting there.
So I go over to Johnny Walker and I said, “What do you think?” And he said “Well, for
these girls its the most important day of their life so far,” and he said, “I'm ready if they
are.” So then I had to go and say to the seniors, “Okay?” And they were all ready. So he
gave a fabulous speech, which I have a copy of. And his whole message was, “You learn
through suffering,” and of course this class, starting out the previous fall... So meanwhile
my Business Manager dropped a note in my lap to tell me that Mrs. Shipley had died,
‘cause they figured we had to let people know before they dispersed. So, the minister
who was in the church where she also directed the choir was giving the benediction. So
the two of us made the announcement.
Then following the procession we always had a lunch on the terrace. So people had
pulled themselves together, and I'm standing there talking to somebody and all of a
sudden this white-haired woman about this tall came up to me and looked up, and she
said, “Miss Miller that was a remarkable performance.” it was Helen Hayes, who was the
godmother of one of the seniors. I'll never forget about it. So by the time we got in touch
with Mrs. Shipley's family, everybody left, somebody took me out to dinner that night, I
went home and got into bed and turned on the TV for the news, and there was Bobby
Kennedy saying, “And now it's on to Chicago.” And I turned it off right then, thank god,
and when I woke up the next morning and turned it on all I could think was, “Thank
goodness all of those girls were with their families.” They just could not have taken
another thing. Particularly the seniors.

	
  

19

	
  
So that particular class of '68 is extremely close. And three years ago, they got in touch
and they asked, did I know if – where Cindy – the girl who had died, where her mother or
family might be? So finally they tracked down her mother and two sisters, who live in
Georgia. Had them come to commencement because what they had done, for their
fortieth reunion, they raised a half a million dollars to establish a three-year scholarship.
And so they invited her to come. They had given it the year before, and I had been there
when they gave the first one. And then they invited her to come, and she and her daughter
had not been on the campus since 1967. And I have these fabulous pictures and I've
gotten in touch with her and we've had many – she's now 93, I think. But this was the
kind of relationships that came about.
And then, as far as faculty relationships were concerned, I mean it was – I think we did
some very innovative things there. Well, they're doing even more now because they have
the International Baccalaureate program there. International attending population is up.
Their total enrollment is up. Yet there are, as I say, this class of 1965 that was my first
class. All this week, I've been hearing from all of them, trying to get themselves
organized for their fiftieth reunion.
So anyway, after I'd been there 13 years, I finally decided, we had accomplished – we'd
merged with Hannah More Academy, we'd done a whole number of things. Built a
performing arts center. Anyway, I thought it's time to stop 48-hour days and eight-day
weeks, and I ended up getting a job with the American Field Service, in Manhattan. I
lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, commuted in. And that came through a friend who was
Director of Admissions at Vassar at the time. That was a very interesting interlude.
[1:25:00] I stayed there for seven years. When I first went, one of the assignments I was
given was to be the sort of coordinator. They had an exchange program with the –
teachers’ program – with the Soviet Union. And then we established one with the
People's Republic of China. So I was involved in the orientation and the debriefings and
all that. And I got to run a national – international conference down in Texas. It was very
good. Got to travel. All of the international students, wherever they were going or
coming, had to be escorted. So there was always a list that would go around the world:
“What do you want to do?” So I went to Yugoslavia, I went to Greece, I went to Egypt,
taking students back.
And then, there was an opening in the Administration, and I applied for it. And of course
I was much more experienced than most of the people that were just above me in the
organization. Anyway, I applied for it. It was Vice President for the U.S. And [coughs] I
was told that I was the leading internal candidate, et cetera et cetera, and they ended up
giving it to a young man. They gave it to a Hofstra professor at the time. So I thought,
“Okay, this is not the place for women in leadership, at AFS at this point.” So I got in
touch with a friend of mine who was a headhunter for independent schools, and I ended
up – this is when I ended up going out to California to the Vivian Webb school, which
was a new girls' school. So here I go from, you know from 1882 to one that was only
three years old. And the Vivian Webb School was just day students on the campus of a
boys’ boarding and day school. They wanted a girls' boarding department. They were
thinking two or three years down the road, and the first year I got there, the Chairman of

	
  

20

	
  
the Board was in conversation and he and his brother had some money they needed to get
rid of in December of that year. So they decided, “Why wait? Let's do it.” So we started a
girls’ boarding program, which has become very successful.
There was a head of the boys’ school – Headmaster of the boys’ school, I was
Headmistress of the girls’ school and there was a President. And the President had once
been head of the boys' school but had not been very good at it. So it was one of those
situations. So the third, or was it the fourth year? Third year I was there, they decided
they needed to make a change. And the head of the boys' school had applied at another
school to be head, but he hadn't gotten it. So they decided, “All right, what we need is
somebody to head the whole thing, and not have heads of the schools, but have a Dean at
each school.” So that year, I'm off in Scotland at spring break and get home to find out
that I've been fired. And they’re replacing me temporarily with somebody from the
faculty. And they gave me a year, and they said, “We've just had to make these shifts,”
and so forth and so on. I protested, as you can imagine, and wrote letters to the Boards, I
have a file this thick to the Board members, and parents, etc., etc.
The upshot of that was, I was then hired by the Palmer school in Miami, Florida. This
was a coed day school, which was only about 18 years old. I think it had started out as a
segregationist school but it wasn't by the time I got there. What they wanted was
somebody who could sort of professionalize their whole Board structure and all of that.
Well I professionalized it so much that they decided to fire me after two years. That was
when I first came on the Pembroke Center Council. It was an interesting school.
Little things add up. I found myself saying – they would tell me how something was done
or whatever, and I'd say, “You’ve got to be kidding, I can't believe it.” Well I guess that
got to be a mantra, because there were so many things they were doing I just couldn't
believe that this was the way they had done things. I remember one discussion I had.
Here was the Athletic Director, who was the baseball coach. Here was the Guidance
Counselor, College Counselor, who was a lacrosse player and wanted [1:30:00] to start
lacrosse. I had them both in my office because the Athletic Director said, “We can't have
lacrosse, that will take people away from baseball.” And these two guys sat there it was
like two little kids, and I thought, “Wait a minute, folks.”
So then, our enrollment wasn't looking too swift at one point. We had a board meeting
and people said, “You're going to have to cut faculty, Jean.” I said, “I can't do that. They
have signed contracts.” And I can't remember why, but I had not signed my contract yet.
There was something I was waiting to have. So I go off to Vermont for a month, and I’m
using the school car, and I find out on the eighth of August, which is three weeks before
school's due to open, that they've decided I'm not going to be the head anymore. And I
learned one lesson. Though they learned a lesson – I had not signed my contract, so they
were saying, “In view of the fact that on such-and-such a date you returned an unsigned
contract to us...” The other thing, five of the parents on the Board were lawyers [laughs].
The upshot of it was, there I was for the first time in my life applying for unemployment.
I can remember I'm home in Vermont, thank goodness I had my house in Vermont, but I

	
  

21

	
  
first had to tell my tenants in Vermont, “Sorry, folks.” In the interim, I put in the form
that you use for unemployment, and I get this call from Tallahassee. I did not realize that
you fill out a form and then it goes to your former employer. And this woman said to me,
“Miss Miller, the letter we have from the school says that you resigned.” Well, of course
I'd written a letter of resignation. I said, “Let me explain what resignation means in the
independent school world.” She said, “Not to worry, you will qualify.” So then, I went to
friends of mine who were consultants, and I said, “I don't need to be a head again, but
head of a division, or something in fundraising, or whatever, but closer to Vermont.” So
these guys go out, they were all former school heads and I knew them well. I'd been on a
NAIS board with them. And I'd been the first woman Chair of the board. First job they
thought about was in Chicago. I said, “Folks, that's not nearer Vermont!” The next one
was in North Carolina. I said, “Come on!” So that's when they ended up with Poly Prep
Country Day School in Brooklyn. He was looking for a Development Director. They
were about to launch a major campaign.
At that point, at various jobs I'd been looking at, one of my first questions to each of them
was: “How would you feel about having me work under you?” ‘Cause I figured I'd better
get that squared away right away. In two instances, one was a woman one was a man,
they each said, “You know I think it would be uncomfortable Jean. It would be difficult.”
I recognized that it probably would too. Well, Bill Williams at Poly said, “Oh my God,
Jean, it would be great,” and I said, “Oh?” He said, “You would know all the crap I have
to put up with.” So we hit it off beautifully. So I spent five years there, and we raised –
well we got going on their 25 million dollar campaign. We did a lot for women. It was
the 15th year they had been coed. So he put me on this gender committee that they had,
and I went to the first meeting, and I remember saying, “Well now, tell me about your
dance program.” And these people looked at me, both men and women, said, “Dance
program?” I said, “Well you've been coed for 15 years.” Well that was the beginning.
And, there was a Trustee at the time who had a son and a daughter in the school who
picked up on that. The next thing we knew, the school is getting a million dollar gift to
build a fitness center and dance studio. Well, if you're going to have a dance studio, then
you’ve got to have a program.
So I did a little bit of research among my friends in the New York City schools, the dance
theater of... no Alvin Ailey – wanted to have some kind of a program in Brooklyn. For an
after school program, whatever. So I can remember sitting at the same table with Judith
Jameson and a couple of other people, and as we described what we were doing,
[1:35:00] they said, “Well you know...” So they ended up running the program the first
year they had it at Poly Prep. Since then, it has blossomed and they have their own
instructors and so forth. But that building remained anonymous until his children
graduated. In fact, I'm not sure if their father has his name on it now or not.
But my five years there were great fun. We did a lot. I learned... God, the kinds of things
you learn. How important middle names are. There was a service... what was it called? I
suspect that Brown has used it too. You search... you send them your donor list – Don't
worry, I don't have to eat. The meeting starts in 10 minutes, right? – What was it called?
A search, that they can do for you. You send them your donor list and they will send back

	
  

22

	
  
the public information that they have. So of course, this fellow who had given us the
million dollars was on the list, we knew that, and we saw several others. But at the top of
the list is this fellow named, Irwin W. Uran. I had all the yearbooks for Poly in my office.
They started in 1855. So I pulled out [coughs] yearbook, the one person named that was
in the class of '43 but he didn't have a middle name. And so then we looked around and I
went to the Business Manager and he said, “Well you know there's some more files Jean,
under the stairs, we have all the admissions files.” This fellow had gone to the school
from the fifth grade on. And, “Ah!” All of a sudden I get a call in my office and it's the
Business Manager. Irwin Wayne Uran – this man is still a multi-b with a b, owns no
property, has never been married, and he traveled – very interesting. All of the material –
this was in 1993, which was his reunion year. All of the material to him had gone off to a
business address that had never been returned. So we knew it was a working address. He
worked for a company named Guardsman. They make commercial cleaning products.
Anyway, I hired this woman to do some research for me, she was terrific. She called me
one day, she said, “You'll never guess where I am, Jean.” I said, “Where are you?” She
said, “I'm in the Brooklyn Public Library,” – she lives in upstate New York. I said, “What
are you doing there?” She said, “Well I just discovered, Irwin Wayne Uran's parents – or
his father, was both a doctor and a lawyer, he was indicted for ambulance chasing or
something like that.” Anyway this fellow had had a very unhappy time at Poly. And
somehow or other, I finally got in touch with him. And at that point he was living in San
Jose, California for part of the year. The rest of the year he was in Middleburg, Virginia
area. So I was out there visiting friends one Thanksgiving and I called, I gave him the
number and he called. And, he always, he had nothing to do with the school. So anyway,
the long story of it was, I met him, we had a conversation, I actually took his picture. And
probably the following spring, comes an envelope like this, newspaper clipping, from
Virginia. He had just given a million dollars to a little church down there. So I said to the
business manager, “Well at least it makes a philanthropist out of him.”
So then when I was getting ready to leave, in '96, I wrote to him. And I said, “You know,
I think it's about time for you to consider a gift to Poly.” And I had written up a proposal
for a scholarship fund in the name of his mother and so forth. And I added the thing –
“And maybe as a favor to me as I'm leaving the school or something like that.” Well, it
didn't come through. However, since then, he married a woman who was a graduate of
Harvard Divinity School. [1:40:00] Well, I had made some reference to the fact of his
being Jewish and maybe that's why he had such a hard time – cause there was a lot of
anti-Semitism at this school at one point, and he said he was not Jewish. Well, I knew he
was. So here he was marrying, and they had a child. And at his next reunion, he came to
the school, and I tell you, the Trustees all were sending me letters like, “Jean, you'll never
guess who showed up!” Now, to this day, I don't think he's given anything. He had given,
at least one million, to Harvard Divinity School, for the study of Judaism and Christianity
I think or something special. So, if we hadn't known his middle name, these other things
might not have happened and he may yet – you know, but anyway....
So, as I think about it, it was when I was in Florida when I came on the Pembroke Center
Council, and you know, people... I mean, Brown has such a different reputation today
than it did when we were here. And when we were here, it was always: the women were

	
  

23

	
  
brighter than the men. And I've had men who've agreed [laughs]. You know, I don't have
to tell you how involved I've been since then. But I think that it delights me, I must have,
I don’t know, 15 or 20 former students who have come here from the various schools that
I've been at. And I've had one, two… at least four that have worked for me at various
places that I've been. And it's the thing I use whenever I moved any place. Well, when I
moved to California I had just run into Chris Dunlap who had been a friend of mine in
college. And she knew I was going to California so she said immediately, “Well you need
to get in touch with the Brown Women of Southern California.” Which I did, and of
course that was the summer she was killed, so we started from there. So I got involved in
that crew, because one of my college classmates happened to be the head of it. The next
thing I knew I happened to be the head of it, the next thing I knew we were giving gifts to
the Pembroke Center. Then, when I went to Florida, first thing I did was to get in touch
with them, and I did some interviewing. Well, I did interviewing in both California, yeah,
and in Florida. Then when I was at Poly, no, it was when I was working for the AFS,
which was when Chris was running whatever in New York City that she got me back in
to phone-a-thons, and fundraising events, and things like that. But I don't think I would
have if it hadn't been a specific person that I knew. I mean, I think that's what makes the
difference. So where do we want to go from there?
[End of Part 1]
[Begin Part 2]
WK: Today is Friday, October 31, 2014. This is Wendy Korwin with Jean Miller. We’re
continuing her oral history.
JM: Well, we left of when I was still at Poly Prep in New York City. In Brooklyn, excuse
me. And I tell people that I blame the Pope and the UN for my leaving Poly and moving
to Vermont full time. In the fall of ‘95, the Pope had come to New York, and the next two
weekends were the big celebration for the U.N.’s anniversary. And the route I would take
from Brooklyn out of the city up to Vermont almost every weekend, usually four hours
door to door, those three weekend six to six-and-a-half hours. So on third weekend, and I
don’t know why I waited so long, I went in to the headmaster, and said, “You know, Bill,
I think I might like to talk about [going] part-time.” He said, “Well, let’s talk about it,”
and he goes off someplace for a week of conferences. Meanwhile, the next weekend, in
four hours, I get to Vermont and we have this little news guide, which has all kinds of
local information and ads in it. And here sitting is a little ad: “Wanted: Part-Time
Fundraiser, Stratton Mountain School.” Which is a boarding/day school for skiers,
snowboarders, cross-country, up at Stratton Mountain. So, I went on up, talked to the
people up there, and the then-headmaster said to me – they wanted somebody right then,
this was end of October, beginning of November – and he said, “Well if you want” – and
it’s the funniest interview I had because he said, “If you wanted to come to work for us,
when would you be available?” And I said, “Well not until the end of the academic year.”
So, they proceeded from there. They hired a person from November to June. So I came
back to Brooklyn and I went in to talk to Bill. I had tried this, two years before, when we

	
  

24

	
  
had just launched the $25 million campaign and he said, “Jean, the trustees will not let
you go.” And I said, “Well, here’s what the scoop is now.” And he said, “I think we’re
far enough along, this looks fine.” So, I moved back home, and my commute when I was
in Brooklyn was a mile. My commute was probably 21 miles from my house to the top of
the mountain. And somebody once said to me, “What do you miss most, you know, about
not being in the city?” I said, “I don’t have to listen to any traffic reports at all. You
know, it’s just up I go.”
So it was then – Stratton Mountain School was then – in an old ski lodge. And up
on the second floor were the dormitories and the boys’ dorm was right over my office,
and the girls’ dorm was on the other end. And the resident was in the middle. Her room
was in the middle of these two wings with the boys and the girls. And the school was
getting a little bit larger. It had a very good reputation. They already had, I don’t know,
six or seven Olympic skiers. And they were going to the Dartmouths and Colorados and
so forth, and Williams of the world, and the mountain decided that they wanted to build
some condominiums right at the foot of the mountain. Well, we could sit in our dining
room and we could look at the ski slopes, maybe, however far away they were. So, big
time, the mountain decided they would give, I think it was 10 acres, and I can’t remember
the amount of money but let’s say it was a million dollars. They’d give us 10 acres and
million dollars to move from what we had and where we were. Of course, what we had
and where we were was probably worth a lot more than a million dollars! So in Vermont
you have to have what’s called an Act 250 review before you do any building because
heaven forbid that something on your property would run into the Battenkill River, which
is the best trout stream in the east. So that’s where it all started, and then it’s to take care
of all of the people that live below you. So we went to this hearing, and there were all
kinds of people there, including people that were going to be living down below where
the campus was going to be and so forth. Anyway, somebody said… [5:00] “How big is
this?” And I said – well, I think it was going to be something like, I don’t know, let’s
figure 60 feet high. So I said to the then-headmaster, “Well let’s get a hydrogen balloon
that’s 60 feet long and we’ll anchor it out there so we’ll get some idea of what’s going to
be blocking while we’re still having the school.” And so the thing got approved, they put
up a fence, the students went out and painted the fence with all kinds of scenes on it, and
then we sat down with an architect to design the buildings. And my experience in
boarding schools came in very handy – and particularly, girls’ boarding schools, because
as they built the design for the dormitory they said, “Now do you see anything here, Jean,
that we need to worry about?” And I looked and looked and I said, “Yes, as a matter of
fact, the boys’ dorm looks right into the bathroom of the girls’ dorm.” [laughs] Which it
did. So anyway, they ended up building a dormitory with dining facilities below, and they
built a building that was classrooms, library, offices, and that sort of thing.
But I left after the second year that I’d been there, because I hit 70 and I thought,
“Okay, enough is enough.” Well, “enough is enough” turned into a very active – more
than a decade, now – of volunteer and leadership kinds of things. When I had first
indicated that I was going to be moving up there, one of my friends who was on the local
library said to me one day in the spring, she said, “Jean, would you mind giving up golf
on a Saturday and come tell our board how to build a new library, and raise the money
for it?” So I did, and needless to say, ended up on the library board, and we did build –
the town of Arlington, Vermont is 2,400 people and we built a magnificent library. We

	
  

25

	
  
didn’t get any state funding. And then one day I was in the library – this is where it gets
really complex, Wendy – a 90-year-old volunteer who had come from Marshfield,
Massachusetts, where I used to teach, whose son had been a student of mine, happened to
be working in the library on the day when her daughter-in-law from Burlington came in
the door. And the elder woman said to the daughter-in-law, “You know, you ought to get
hold of this woman. She’s just retired. She’s got lots of free time.” Well her daughter-inlaw was then the Chairman of the board of something called the Governor’s Institute of
Vermont, which is a summer program for well-motivated kids in all kinds of programs.
So the next thing I knew, there I was on that board. And we would have meetings
primarily in the northern part of the state and then someplace along the line in the process
of recruiting new members, we recruited a woman who ended up as – who was about to
be head of the new K-8 school in Manchester, Vermont. And the next thing I knew, she
said, “How would you like to have lunch with Janet Irving and me?” Janet and John
Irving were the couple who had couple who had really gotten the school started, and I
thought I could see what was coming and sure enough now I am still on the board of the
Maple Street School. [laughs]
In the meantime, I had to go off – term limits operate in some places – so I went
off the board of the Governor’s Institute and onto the board of the Vermont Women’s
Fund, and did that for several years, and that was very very fulfilling work. And its only
object is to provide programs for women and girls in Vermont. And they are probably a
prototype of the best way to get things going, because they spent time – I think they spent
two years – they went out and raised a million dollars, did nothing except raise month.
Then, they started giving grants. And they’re celebrating their…20th this month, next
week. And then as a result of that, I then moved onto the council of the Vermont
Humanities Council. [laughs] And that has been – they had just hired a new Executive
Director, and that has been again an extremely active organization in Vermont. [10:00]
They run what they call First Wednesday programs. At the time I was on the board I
think we had five. There are now nine in different places around the state. And they get
college professors or experts in one thing or another to come in, and while I was on the
board, they were looking to have one in southern Vermont, so one ended up in
Manchester, and it has become the most popular – I mean, more people come to that, on
average, than each of the others. And it’s been a really very big part of the local
community. So to go from classrooms and administration into volunteer work, and I seem
to have in the time that I was doing the volunteer work, it certainly got me all over the
state and another whole network of friends, but I kept running into Brown people here
and there and I keep running into…. It must have been… I moved to Vermont in ‘96, and
it was the summer of ‘97.
I’d been playing golf in Dorset, Vermont for years and there’s a theatre there, a
playhouse that is owned by a local community players group. But there was a
professional summer theatre group that also worked there from June to September. And I
was asked if I would be interested in going on that board, which I am still on. [laughs]
And we have been through, we’re on our third Artistic Director. It is a fabulous, it’s
really… well that’s another whole story. But the part of the story that’s important here is
at the time I went on the board they had just renovated the theatre, which we did not own.
But the Dorset Theatre Festival agreed to raise the money, to be responsible for raising
the money to do that, in exchange for a 45-year lease at such-and-such a rate. And it was

	
  

26

	
  
probably my third year on the board. The architect said it would cost $2.1 million. So
they went out and raised $2.1 million from 44 people. One big million-dollar gift. When
it came done, it was 3.2, which meant the local bank gave a $1.1 million loan for
something that we didn’t own – an unsecured loan. And it was the third or fourth year
that I was on the board, the President or Vice President of the bank came to our board
meeting and said, “You know, you’ve been paying interest every year since you’ve had
this loan, but you haven’t made any dent in the principal, and we think it’s time that you
did.” So, there were two women on our board who were terrific. So they started a
program that was called Summer Swing. And it has now become your typical dinner,
dance, silent auction, live auction event. So when we sat down to figure out with the
committee, okay, best bet, what can we net to go to the bank? And they said, “Well, let’s
set a goal of $50,000.” And the group had never raised, other than the building, had never
done that sort of thing. Well that first event raised net $107,000, and when that money
was taken to the bank to put into that account, the bank knew we were serious. So then
we did it the next year, and I think the next year we probably raised 90-something. Then
we took a year off because it is an incredible job, because you’ve got to approach all
these people, and so forth. So, the third one we had, they had also said, “Okay, if you” –
and at that point I think we owed, give or take, maybe 900 – and they said, “You know, if
you would go out [15:00] and have a small capital campaign and raise $250,000 and do
your event this summer, then we’ll call it quits. That’ll be it.” Well, we didn’t raise the
250; we probably raised maybe 230 and we did go out and have a successful event again.
And the bank said to us, “Okay.” So I was able to stand up that night and say to the
assembled group of people, “Guess what, folks, as of tonight, this is the end of our loan
from the Factory Point Bank.” When you could have heard them in Boston, everybody
was so excite. [laughs] And we happened to have – somebody had known Skitch
Henderson, so he had come as a special guest that night. So there we were, debt free at
that point. But anybody who knows anything about nonprofits, especially theatres, it’s
constant [taps table] fundraising.
So at the moment, I’m on the board of the Dorset Theatre Festival and the Maple
Street School. And the Theatre Festival Artistic Director, and the head of the Maple
Street School, and Janet Irving, who is the Chairman of the board of Maple Street School
and has a son who is very active in the theatre, the three of them sat down with me one
day and said, “You know, there are all kinds of programs in Vermont for talented
children in music, for example, there are math contests and so on. But there’s nothing in
theatre. So they put their heads together and they decided they would come up with a
young playwrights’ competition, which they didn’t tell me, they have now named “The
Jean E. Miller Young Playwrights’ Competition.” [laughs] And we just had the third this
past summer, and it is incredible. They provide college staff and playwrights go into the
schools that are interested, meet with a group of students, go through the process: how do
you write a play, etc. etc. And then, they say, “All right, go to it.” And they choose both
middle school and upper school and they have two in each category. So playwrights that
are there in the summer read these plays, judge them, and pick the winners. And then in
September, professional actors act out the plays that these children have written. And I
tell you, it is amazing. It is amazing. And there have been a couple that have won a
couple of years in a row. There’s one boy, one African American boy, who, his parents
are very well known in town. And his play, this year, was called “You’re Driving Me

	
  

27

	
  
Nuts.” And it was the story of a Driver’s Education class that was taking place near a golf
course. [laughs] And I tell you, the audience was in stitches. It was, you know… He was
saying, “No, you don’t drive on the greens. That’s not what you do.” It has prompted
some good interest among the schools and faculties. And as I said, the very first time, I
don’t know many places where somebody could walk into a faculty, and the first year
they did it they walked in in February and said, “We’d like to come in and take over your
English classes for three weeks in March and do thus-and-so.” Now, many schools,
particularly public schools [taps table]... “We don’t have the space where you can do
that.” But it’s been interesting to see what has happened because the teachers who have
agreed to do this, it’s just helped them so much. It’s helped the kids. And it’s helped the
theatre.
So the other thing I find myself doing in so-called retirement is a lot of, well I’m
in two book clubs, one of which is a history book club. We have about 19 members; I
think there are only five or six of us women. And it’s a very stimulating group of people.
We meet at the Northshire Bookstore, which is one of the top independent bookstores in
the country. And just recently, I bring this up because just recently we decided three
months ago, [taps table] “All right, it’s about time we did some books about women.”
[20:00] And, because we had done some pretty hefty tomes, and pretty soon we said,
“You know, our choices should be governed not only by what’s in paperback, but how
long are they?” 600, 700 pages is a lot. So anyway, the first book that we did was Kirstin
Downey’s book on Frances Perkins, which was introduced here the first year it came out
because Leah Sprague is involved with the Frances Perkins Center up in Newcastle,
Maine. And it was an interesting combination. Now we’re doing one which is The Girls
of Atomic City, and that’s the story of the women who helped end the Second World War
because they created the city of Oak Ridge, Tennessee. And it was a secret operation.
Nobody who worked there knew exactly what they were doing [taps table]. And it was
not until the day until the bomb was exploded out in Los Alamos that the President said,
“Thank you, Los Alamos. Thank you Oak Ridge Tennessee.” And all these people –
there were some 60 or 70,000 people, and suddenly they thought, “So that’s what we’ve
been doing.” It’s as if you and I were sitting there and you’re working on something here
and I’m working on something there and somebody upstairs on something else, and
nobody knew what the combination – what they were doing. But they knew it was
important. So, and our next one is Empress Dowager, written by the same woman who
wrote Wild Swans… about Chinese matriarchal [unclear].
But the other thing that keeps happening: I’m in touch with many of my former
students, and my first class at St. Timothy’s School is having its 50th reunion this year.
And the gal who is the – who was the President of the class, they’ve just electronically
elected her, which she was loathe to do, but she’s right in there doing it. So they’re trying
to get as many people back as possible. So she sent an email out, must have been about
this time… last year, and she said, “I’m going to include Miss Miller in all of our emails
from here on out, so watch what you say,” or something like that. So I immediately
emailed back and said, “There’s no Miss Miller around, but there’s a Jean around, if
you’re interested.” So again, they’ve started, and the Alumnae Office just sent out the
normal thing that they would send to reunion classes. That just got circulated to
everybody, including me. And what happens is [that] individual students start responding,
and of course it goes to everybody. Well, lo and behold, here’s one of the girls in the

	
  

28

	
  
class that I would never have thought this of, and she is now in… Afghanistan, and I
think she works through the State Department, and it’s something like her 10th or 11th
assignment. And this would have been as far from what she probably thought she was
going to be doing. The gal who’s President of the class lives in Aspen, Colorado, and is
very involved with the Aspen animal shelter. Very involved. And after [Hurricane]
Katrina, she and I think three of her friends went down [taps table] to Katrina, where in a
huge empty warehouse, they had all these abandoned animals. And one of the friends was
recovering from breast cancer, and she has written a book about this experience and what
this did for her. So what they managed to do, first of all, they said when they had walked
in, nobody had organized this place at all. So they began to do that. They managed I think
for the four of them, I think, let’s say, 70 dogs, they managed to find owners for at least
half of them. I mean, literally reun[it]e them with them. And they took a whole batch
back to Aspen, found homes for them, and proceeded again to find [25:00] their original
owners. And again, you just think, “Who would have thought?” There was a necessity
and somebody stepped in to do it.
But I find that it’s – well, one of my alums just sent me an email this past week
and commented on her time here at Brown and I’d completely forgotten, because I think
had about 15 or 16 who had come here. And I think that – so I am going to be going to
their reunion next June. But I do hear, and I think this is probably I’m guessing that any
teacher anywhere probably has had the same kind of experiences that I had, because you
just keep running into people, you keep hearing from people. Although I do have to say
that my friends in Vermont who are my age or younger – there aren’t many my age
[laughs] – keep saying, “But Jean, how do you keep in touch with all these [people]? I’ve
never known anybody whose former students keep so much in touch.” Well, to start with,
there are about 11 of them that live within about a half an hour of where I am right there.
And I think that, well, this is the thing about boarding school… when I was at St. Tim’s, I
can remember among other things saying, “You know, what you have to do is, you have
to learn to live with yourself for the rest of your life, no matter what you’re going to do
with your life.” And I’m finding that the students, depending on if they have children or
grandchildren, if the grandchildren are going off to college, there they are, suddenly
thinking [taps table] back to when they were that age, etc. So I think it’s an evolution of
what was important at the time you were a teenager and how much of that still remains
important. And I think that one of my alums who lives right down here in Jamestown, I
think, is the one who keeps bugging me, over and over again, she keeps saying, “Well,
what were you thinking when you were trying to run a school for teenage girls in the
1960s? [taps table] What did you think you were going to accomplish?” And I think that I
wasn’t thinking about it at the time. I knew what I had to do, and I did it, and I was me, I
was not my predecessor. And I think I may have mentioned, I think all I had to do was
walk into school on the first day, because I was [taps table] not quite 35 years old and she
had just retired at 65. So of course now these alums in several classes are saying, “Oh
yeah, we’re as old as our headmistress was when she retired” [laughs] And it suddenly
clicks.
But I think one of the things that I find extremely interesting at my age, and lots
of other people do to, is family history and genealogies and making contacts. And I’m
just back from a week at the end of September in Scotland. And some [unclear], “Why
only a week?” and I say, “Well, I had two board meetings on either side of it, so that’s

	
  

29

	
  
what I could do.” And as I looked and listened to… I got there the day after their vote for
independence, and it was interesting because the family was divided right down the
middle: those over 60 voted “no”; those under 50 voted “yes.” And all of these people, by
the way, have all been to visit me in Vermont at some point. And even on the under-50s,
one in particular who had just finished working with the John Muir Trust said, “You
know, I came out, and I was wondering: Is that what I should have done?” So what the
younger group are now very pleased with is the percentage of young people who voted,
and the fact that they know they’re active people, that they can get involved in their
endeavors. I have one young cousin – what is he, 45, I guess – who is in sustainable
energy – alternative, wind power, solar. Another one is into permaculture and
sustainability. So they see, you know, if there’s an interest in young people and young
people voting, they can rally around [30:00] in the causes that mean something to them.
So I didn’t get into – people over here kept asking me, “Well, what do you think should
happen?” I said, “It’s not my country. Not quite.” But I also had a chance to meet and
really get to know the two newest members of my family: one little two-year-old and her
five-and-a-half-year-old brother. And they’re like two-year-olds and her five-and-a-halfyear-olds with endless energy and I watched their parents traipse after them. They’d be
on bicycles or scooters and their parents would be running and I thought, “Well, no
wonder you’re in shape.” But it’s an interesting perspective, because as they say, one of
my young cousins – the one who’s interested in horticulture and landscaping – has a
Green Card. And she’s spent a considerable amount of time in California. First in
southern California, then in northern California, with one of my former students who
lives in San Francisco who is in landscape architecture. [laughs] Got her introduced to a
number of people and next thing I know I’m hearing from both of them: “Guess what?
I’m going to housesit for them for two weeks while they’re back east.” You know, it just
goes on.
But I think that the other thing I find myself doing, and every time I come down
to [Pembroke Center Associates] Council meetings, I stay with a classmate down in
Bristol. And there are three or four of us that have been friends since – what – we were
17 years old when we started at Pembroke. And I realize, as I look around, I have a
distinct advantage because – a couoke of people said this to me this summer – because I
get to come here three times a year. I listen to what’s happening with the Council. I see
undergraduates and young graduates. And I realize that that gives me a whole different
perspective from a lot of other people. They only see a college through their own children
that are going there now, and they kind of think, either this college is good or not because
of the experience my child is having. And there was a period of time in the ‘70s in
particular, I can remember when in the summertime when I was off playing golf, I
remember one time in particular and this fellow – this group of men were sitting there
having lunch and they said, “Jean, come over here. We need your advice.” Well, one of
them had a son, who, I forget where he was in college but he was a sophomore. And I’d
seen him that summer. And he had long hair. And the group was saying, “Well now Jean,
what would you do about that? What can we do about that? He can’t have long hair.”
And I said, “He’s got long hair.” And they said, “But what do you do?” I said, “What’s
underneath the long hair’s what’s important,” you know. But I think there is… I don’t
know, more tolerance, perhaps.

	
  

30

	
  
Because I think people who’ve had children go through college, and see their
friends and what they’ve done of a certain age – now I think the kids who went to college
prior to the year 2000 – I’m just pulling this out of the air – and think of the age they are
now, I think probably had a somewhat easier time than the ones that are getting out of
college now. And I think I look around and I see, you know, people trying to figure out
what kind of a job – Must I go into science, technology, engineering, and math, if I’m
going to do anything? Where can I best satisfy my own interests and do something, you
know, for other people? And I see in this little elementary school that I’m involved with,
the encouragement that’s given to doing things for other people has become incredibly
important.
And I’m sure that school is – well, I know it is different from a lot of other
schools – but I’m sure there are many who do the kind of thing where it’s the kids who
clean the school, instead of, “Well, you can’t do that.” I mean, one of the local public
schools, they were talking about something and I said, “Well why don’t you just have the
kids do it?” “Oh, we can’t do that?” I said, “Why not?” “Well, we have a janitor, and he’s
in a union.” And I thought, “Heaven help us.” You know, there are other ways of
handling situations. And I think that the concern that young people have for younger
people – I mean, even eighth-graders are looking after the kindergarteners, first, second,
and so forth. Now, I don’t remember, [35:00] as I think back to when I was in elementary
school you didn’t think about that. I mean, you were just doing your thing, so to speak.
But as I think about the people that I’ve known – former students of mine in particular –
both the ones I’ve had at St. Tim’s, the ones who’ve come from there to here – I see
again there’s something there that’s different. And I think that’s what has helped. And I
think that, well, there are still enough people who still refer to “Pembroke,” and I think
that it’s what you take away from that experience in the most positive way, I mean I can
think of some situations that were pretty negative for me, like the three times I lost my
scholarship because I got poor grades, but I think that – and I’ve used that with students
of mine. They say, “You mean you didn’t get all A’s?” I said, “Get all A’s? Go on.”
[laughs] So I think that what you can move to one generation to another, or even a half a
generation, makes more of a difference than you really think.
And I think that that’s one of the things that I love about coming to the Council
meetings. Because I look at these people and I listen to them and I think, “God, she’s just
as narrow-minded as she probably was when she was in college.” Or, “She probably
turned the world around when she was here.” I mean, there are certain characteristics that
you see there. But I would certainly applaud anybody who – well, for doing the kinds of
things you are doing. Because the only way you know is to see what went before you
And I think people think, “Oh, well we don’t have to worry about that.” But it’s not that
you worry about it, but you suddenly see what’s the foundation on which this has all been
built. And I know that when, for instance, when our book club was reading the book
about Frances Perkins, I was able to slip in the little comment that she went to Mount
Holyoke College. And of course, who was the first woman graduate of Brown
University? [taps table] Who then became the President of Mount Holyoke College? And
these men in the room: “Well how do you know that, Jean?” And then one of the men
said, “Where do you think she went to college?” [laughs]
But I think that history does play a role in personal lives as well as it does in the
public life, and I think that what can come out of a project like this, and I see this all the

	
  

31

	
  
time – I started to tell you earlier, I’ve just gotten wrapped up with, as I’m going through
boxes and photograph albums and finding stuff, and I think, “Oh I wonder whatever
happened to so-and-so?” And I can tell you, in the last – well, when did we sit down, last
spring, in the last six months – I have probably been in touch with at least eight alumnae
associations of other colleges where friends of mine from years ago went. Particularly the
people who worked with me for the four summers that I was here at Pembroke, up in
Jackson, New Hampshire. And it’s very interesting, because I get answers. And I just did
one yesterday, and they said, “Well, we’ll send your request.” I sent it to the only thing I
could find when I Googled this tiny little town in Maine. They said, “Well we’ll send it to
our historical society.” Well, there you go. And I think that it may just come of age that
you’re trying to pull – you’re not so sure what lies ahead but you’re sort of pulling
together the past so somehow or other, other people will remember some of these things.
And everybody says to me, “Well, I hope you have a niece or a nephew some place who
has as strong an interest in family history.” I sa[y], “Yes I do, as a matter of fact.”
[laughs] And I do think that it’s not about you, it’s about what was your life like. And it
becomes about you when somebody wants to know: well how come? In other words: why
did I manage to do what I’ve done? When I look back on it, well, I had no plan. And I’d
look at these people and see: well, I want to do this; then I want to go to graduate school;
then I want to do this; then I want to do a post-doc. And somebody says, “What was your
plan?” I said, “My plan was [40:00] to support myself.” [laughs] “And have fun in the
process.” And, as I think you will see, Wendy, when you look through, none of it was
planned. I mean, it goes all the way back. You know, I guess if my mother hadn’t died
when I was three, we wouldn’t have lived with my Scottish grandparents; we wouldn’t
have had that kind of connection. If we hadn’t had to change high schools from my senior
year, I never would have ended up at Brown probably. So you just don’t know.
I think that memory is an interesting thing, because you find you remember more
things than you think you do. At least, that’s been my experience. And I guess I have a
good memory because people say, “How do you remember those details? How do you
remember that person?” And it’s not because – I mean I have however many years I’ve
been in the school business, I have this [gestures widely] many yearbooks downstairs in
my bookshelf, which I occasionally look up somebody in, but I think that you need to feel
what you yourself have accomplished can have some effect on, not the way people are
going to remember you, but the way people are going to remember the people around
you. And I look at what has become of St. Timothy’s school, and it’s gone through some
rocky times, it’s in a very good particular position right now, and I have people giving me
some credit for that. And I think, “Oh, I hadn’t thought of it that way,” because, you
know, 1978 was a long time ago. But I think that as long as you have – and this would
apply to my friends that have children – as long as you have children who are out there
doing things reflective of what you’ve taught them, as long as you have students that are
out there doing that, there is a way to have a bigger impact than anybody could possibly
imagine. That’s the way I look at it.
So, what’s next? Hmm. [laughs] I still have not been to Alaska. I still have not
been to North Dakota. And I still have not been through the Panama Canal. But I guess
the Panama Canal I almost did, but I sat on the tarmac in Albany, New York, while a
blizzard raged in the New York metropolitan area so flights were cancelled so there was
no way I could get to Miami to get to the Panama Canal. [laughs] That was six years ago.

	
  

32

	
  
But I also find, I don’t know what would happen if I did not have a computer, I do
have to say. I really don’t. I mean I read up a storm as it is, but good Lord, the fact that I
can sit there [taps table] and come up with something, and press a button and it’s gone to
21 friends that I went to Antarctica with, just like that. Or that I can hear from somebody
in Scotland that, “Yeah, you know the storm that you had over there in Massachusetts
and up the coast the other day? We had it today.” It’s mind-boggling. And I only have a
desktop. I do not have all the other little gizmos, and I still do a double take when I go to
a meeting and people pull them out, and there they are, sitting, paying less attention to
what’s being said than to [taps] how they can put it down in front of them… I don’t
know. I was trying to think the other day: when was the first time I had ever used a
computer? And I guess it was back in the late ‘70s, maybe? I think. But there’s going to
be something new coming along, I’m sure, and I worry about these chips that they’re
going to put in you, or that sort of thing. But as long as there are people who appreciate
what you have done, and give you opportunities to do more things that will help other
people, to me, that’s where we are. [45:00]
[End of Part 2]

[Part 3]
WK: So one thing I’m wondering is that you’ve described things in your so-called
retirement that “keep happening” to you. Which is that, it seems like you’re approached
to become part of organizations.
JM: Right.
WK: You’re someone who finds yourself enmeshed and someone who really makes
connections. And so, I’m wondering why the personal connections have been so
important to you over the years, where you’re having all these students contact you and if
you could just talk a little bit more about that and whether – You said that this is true of
all teachers, and I’m not sure that it is. And what it is, let’s say that your former students
are remembering or what they’re telling you when they make contact with you once
again?
JM: Well, for example, just yesterday morning, Class of 1965, a gal who was from
Tennessee responded to this big email that went out to the entire class, including me. And
I had responded by saying, “Well, you’d all better be there, ‘cause I’m going to be there.”
And she sent back just a couple of sentences, one of which said, “Well, I still remember
when you gave us the five year talk.” Well, my very first year there, each Sunday night
we had chapel. Informal kind of chapel, not religious chapel. And then the senior class
would come to my house and we would talk about whatever. And that very first one, I
thought, “What are we going to talk about?” And I said, “You know, I really don’t care
where you all are going to be a year from now.” And of course all of them are seniors,
and college and that was all that was on their mind. And they looked at each other and

	
  

33

	
  
they looked at me and I said, “No, I want to know who you’re going to be five years from
now.” [taps table] Well, I can’t tell you – and I’ve used that every year since – and I can’t
tell you how many would let me know. Because I wasn’t just saying, “Okay, where are
you going to get into college?” [taps table] But, five years, all right, maybe you’re
through college, maybe you’re not, what are you going to do? And people would write to
me and tell me what they were doing. And that’s the kind of thing I think that caught
their attention. Nobody had ever said that to them before, I gather.
And then, it’s things like we were having a discussion – they’d had a lot of
religion in that school, a lot of chapel and so forth. And I think it was the first year,
maybe the second year, probably the first year, and somebody on the faculty said, “Well
let’s come to some conclusion here. Let’s discuss this.” And I said, “Okay, let’s just take
a morning, however much, out of classes, and we’ll just sit around and discuss this. And I
remember going to sit in. I was sitting on the floor off in the corner. It was down in the
chemistry lab. There were a group of students there, and they were talking about [taps
table] different chapels during the week. And I had one, the religious teacher had one,
somebody else had one, etc. And somebody said, “Well, we’ve got to have Wednesday
chapel.” They didn’t know I was sitting on the floor. “Why?” “Well, that’s when Miss
Miller talks about Emerson and Thoreau, don’t you know?” And I did. I mean, none of
mine would be thought of as religious, in that sense of the word. They were always
philosophical. There were always things I would find to read that would pull things
together. And I think other times, it blows me away when somebody says – one time, it
was when I was working for the Vermont Women’s Fund – and one of my former
students is a very affluent, successful businesswoman in Vermont, and one of the other
board members and I were going to talk to her, were going to have lunch with her. And I
hadn’t seen her in probably 10 or 15 years at that point. So I had looked her up in the
yearbook [laughs], which I always do, and so we went and met for lunch. [5:00] Well, I
mean, we met like old friends, which this other person was surprised at, in a way, and so
then my former student said, “Do you remember when you said in chapel… and do you
remember in your English class when we were discussing…” And I’m thinking to
myself, “Oh, my, I don’t remember that, particularly.” And this other gal who had once
lived in the same town, she said, “Holy cow.” And it’s that sort of thing. You have no
clue sometimes where the impact is going to come. All the things that somebody is going
to remember. And I think I surprise people by some of the things I remember, which then
triggers other responses from them. I think that’s the way it goes. But I can give you a lot
of examples of that. [laughs]
WK: And when you reach out to some of your former classmates, when you contact
historical societies, what do you say, to remake –
JM: Well, for instance, the one I just sent the other day, there were two sisters who came
from – I knew they came from Maine [taps table]. I knew exactly where they’d gone to
college. One had gone to Chamberlain School of Design. One had gone to Sergeant
College [unclear] education. And I knew they’d come from a small town in Maine but I’d
happened to find an old address book of mine, and there was their old address. And so I
Googled this little town Ridlonville, Maine, which happens to be next to Mexico, Maine,
so I started from there. And so I just sent off this email to the administrative assistant in

	
  

34

	
  
the town and said, “I’m trying to find somebody who can tell me something about a
family named Murphy who lived on 17 Granite Avenue in Ridlonville, Main [taps table]
in the late ‘40s. And she emailed back this morning and said, “We’ve passed it onto the
local historical society.” Now, who knows what will come.
And it’s like – there were two girls who – there were 10 of us from Pembroke
who went to wait on tables at that hotel in Jackson, New Hampshire. And there were
several girls from Smith, from all over… there were two girls from Iowa. And I came
across a picture of the two of them: hats, gloves, dresses, ready to go back home at the
end of the summer. And I thought, “I wonder what ever happened to them?” So I sent it
off to the University of Iowa Alumni Office and the next thing I know, I’m getting back,
“Well, we can tell you that Ruth [Rokey?] lives in Turlock, California. Here’s her address
and phone number; here’s her email address. But we don’t have any record on the other;
she might not have graduated.” I mean I had explained enough [about] why I wanted to
know that they felt it proper to tell me. When I said how far back it was, I think they
figured I was old enough that it was safe to give me the information. But I just explain
what it is and why I’m interested.
WK: And from your end, is it that? Is it curiosity? “I wonder what happened to so-andso?”
JM: Yeah. Well, I did that, in fact it was two years ago when I was down staying with my
classmate Anne Archibald and we got to talking about what we did [over the] summers.
And we didn’t do anything together [over the] summers. And this was all to earn our way
through college, in the days when you paid $450 a year for tuition. And that got me
thinking. So when I went back home. There were four of us: two from here, two from
Smith. The four of us were notorious, I should say. So I thought, “I wonder.” And one is
the classmate I see and talk to here. One of the gals from Smith had died, and the other
one I didn’t know, but I did know she had married one of the fellas that worked with us.
So I Googled his name. Well, he had died in 2000 – middle 2000s someplace. They’d
lived in Portland, Maine. He had been in the CIA… and included in his obituary were a
list of his children, his home address, and telephone number. So I picked up the phone
and just called her and we’ve seen each other several times since. We keep in touch
probably at least once a month. You know, it’s just interesting to me to see the path. You
had a shared experience, and then what happened to that? And I think that it’s not, “Did
you do the same thing I did?” [10:00] But it’s, “What did you do, and what are you
doing?” And it’s astonishing. I mean, well I guess it’s networking at its best, [laughs] is
the way I look at it.
WK: That seems true. When you mention your classmate who you stay with, do you
know, what did other students at Pembroke do over the summers to make their tuition
money?
JM: A lot of them waited on tables. I think she was in a group that went up to Maine. I
think basically, the ones I knew, anyway, that’s basically what we did. And then we all
ended up waiting on tables in Andrews Hall when it opened. And I remember working in
the Gate at 65 cents an hour. [laughs] But it seems to me that [for] those of us that needed

	
  

35

	
  
to work, it was that kind of thing that we did. And it was fun. I mean, here we were at a
hotel in Jackson, New Hampshire with 200 college-aged kids, you know, what could not
be fun about that?
WK: I wonder, too, based on your current experience and your networking and
fundraising, what would that be like if you didn’t live in a relatively small town in New
England? How much of where you are now is geographically suited?
JM: I suppose it has something to do with it, but I think of when I lived in southern
California, well of course I immediately got involved with the “Brown Women of
Southern California,” as they’re called, and that was at the suggestion of Chris[tine]
Dunlap Farnham, who’d I’d seen here – hmm, that was ’84, so that would have been a
reunion year for me. So I’d seen her and she’d said something like, “You’re going to
Caifornia, well be sure to do thus-and-such.” Which I did. And same thing when I went
to Florida. I had done that when I was in Maryland, and I did some interviewing when I
was there. And it’s interesting because I say to people, “Wherever you’re moving” – and
I’ve been saying this like for instance to this young Scottish cousin of mine who has a
Green card and when she first went to St. Andrews [taps table] “Well there’s got to be a
St. Andrews group someplace.” So I don’t know, I mean if I were currently living in a
city I would probably be doing the same thing but not being as successful. Well I don’t
know. If it was living in a city they’d be right there, not just on the other end of an email.
[laughs]
But I think it’s part of keeping busy, for one thing. Keeping in touch and
spreading news, which is one of the things we’re trying to do with our class of ’49,
sharing news that we get. I’m not sure would have had as many opportunities to be on
important statewide nonprofit organizations as I’ve had if I were living, well even if I
were living here, maybe, or if I were living in the New York again. Well, it’s different
through, because the three times I lived in the New York area I was working, so I didn’t
really have the same kind of opportunities. I mean, the things that I did were
professionally related. Professional organizations. So when I had a chance to do things
that had to do with education, that had to with women and girls, that had to do with
literacy, there they all were. So I think probably. But I would urge anybody anywhere to
get themselves involved.
WK: And to do successful fundraising for education and the arts, what do you think are
the keys for that?
JM: They are two different worlds, [15:00] because in education, you have a built-in
constituency: you have the parents of your students, the grandparents of your students,
and eventually your alums. With a theatre you’re starting from scratch, and you have to
identify… well I can give you an instance. People who go to the theatre either buy
individual tickets or they buy a subscription, and in our little theatre in Vermont, which
now seats… 299 people so it’s not so little anymore, there’s a couple who’ve had
subscriptions for years and several years ago, at that point I was the President of the
board so I would give the curtain talk on each opening night so people knew me by name,
and we were doing Waiting for Godot. And at intermission, this bearded fellow, no jacket

	
  

36

	
  
or tie on, came up to me. He said, “Jean, this is not one of your better plays.” And I said,
“Oh, really?” He said, “No.” He said, “In fact, the couple sitting next to us are going to
leave at intermission.” He identified himself as a subscriber. And the people sitting next
to him, I said, “What’s their name?” And he said, “I don’t know.” They’ve been sitting
next to each other for years and they didn’t know each other. And so I said to him, “Well
what have we don’t that you’ve liked?” And he mentioned Noises Off, which was a huge
success, and then he said that play about the dog. It was an A. R Gurney play. And I said,
“Well tell me, do you get a chance” – because there are four other theatres within 40
miles of us – I said, “Do you ever get a chance” – Before I could even get the words out,
“Oh I can’t do that. I have to get up and milk my cows at 5:30 every morning.” So here’s
this farmer, who’s been sitting in our front row for years [taps table] with his wife. And
she’s been going longer because her parents used to take her. So now I make a point,
every time I see him, and he’ll tell me what he thinks. And someplace along the line, he
and his wife started making a contribution to the theatre, and I think they gave $100. And
then one time we did a children’s play. We did Charlotte’s Web, and here we go, the gal
who had the lead was the daughter of a St. Tim’s alum and her husband. Anyway, he and
his wife brought 20 elementary school students from his town of Wells. And then one
night – oh this was the funny part – I was sitting out there. It was before the last play of
the season and we had this young man from New York City as our director. And I’m
writing away and he came and he said, “Boy, Jean, you give great parties.” I said,
“What?” He said, “Yeah, I heard it on the police scanner.” Now we’d had some problems
because there was a big house in the center of town. Dorset was as a small town and the
noise from the young people, etc. But this particular night it had been the director and
some of his designers, etc., so people had called the police. And that’s the kind of
connection with that particular person. Now somebody would say, “Well, Jean, you
know, what about people who are going to give me $50,000, instead of somebody who’s
going to give you 100.” I said, “Yes, but he’s also bringing younger people, etc.”
And what we have found is the quality of the plays that we do in the summer is as
good as anything you’ll see in New York. So you don’t have to go to New York to see
good theatre. We also have play readings from new playwrights – that’s a big part of our
program now: new plays. And they’ll do a reading. Several actors. And afterwards they’ll
have a discussion with the audience. So people can say, “Well why do you so-and-so be
that kind of a person?” Or, “Don’t you think that actress overdid that? Was she supposed
to be that good, or that bad, or whatever.” So they have a feeling – you know, they’re
involved. Maybe this will get changed. Well the classic illustration was one that was done
two years ago, and it was so exciting when it was – what was it called? – The Rabbi and
the Burglar’s Daughter or something like that. Anyway, at the end of the play, which was
just one act, everybody said, “Well what’s going to happen?” I mean, it had been such –
so, the playwright and her collaborator [20:00] decided to sit down and finish the play.
Which they then presented, two years later, so everybody who’d been there the first time
thought, “Oh wow.” So they were involved in it. So then you get people who want to
support that program. You get people who want to support the young playwrights and
then the biggest thing we have. Well, not the biggest, but one of the give-back. A
fireman, a policeman, an EMT, a veteran, a serviceman all get free tickets. We do a twofor-one for teachers, So we have this whole batch of things that somebody can sponsor,
and I forget how many hundreds of tickets we give. But that means this fireman who

	
  

37

	
  
comes is going to bring his wife and son. Somebody else is going to being their friends,
and they’re going to say, “You know, this is better than the movies.” You know, and
that’s exactly what I heard from one couple as they were going out. He said, “This is
better than the movies.” And I said, “Yeah. It really is sometimes.”
So I think then you’re building support. People are supporting not just the whole
concept of theatre but very specific programs. And I think that we were in real trouble a
number of times. E were still raising money in December and January for last summer’s
productions when what you should be doing is what we’re doing now: we’re raising
money now for next summer’s productions. And I think there is a difference, I’ve said
that all along. Schools and colleges have a built-in community to start with, and you
don’t with a theatre. And the same is true, for instance for the Vermont Women’s Fund.
When they first started, it was: how do you convince people that this is important? And
then once they saw what would happen, there it was.
WK: What kinds of programs would the Vermont Women’s Fund do?
JM: Well, let’s see. One they call Rosie’s Girls. And that was a program that a group of
women who were carpenters, plumbers, electricians, etc. would run a program in the
summer to teach girls these skills. And then, well, [laughs] there’s one that I’m benefiting
from now. There was one called Bum Builders. And I think it was a program started by
Tufts School of Medicine. And so an organization in one town applied and what they
needed money for was to get some – it was going to be an exercise class to help prevent
arthritis. And so they wanted to start a group of 15 people, so they needed 15 sets of
weights and they needed some training for one of the directors. I forget, it was probably
$400. Well, holy Toledo, that is now all over the state of Vermont. It’s now being funded
by the Retired – whatever RSVP [AARP?] stands for – now I’m in two classes a week
myself. Then they’ve done a number of things in school settings. They’ve sponsored
bookmobiles in very rural communities. They started just covering the waterfront in ages,
for women and girls. Now they’ve decided it’s probably the most effective way to deal
with it is to take girls and women from about 15 to 28, and they’re concentrating
specifically on programs for those age brackets. And the interesting that made it
successful right from the beginning was that they used to run workshops on how to write
proposals. Which is something that many people don’t know how to do in nonprofits.
And often, the thought is that, well, you need to hire somebody to do that. But we’ve
found that by training people in these individual organizations themselves to do it – so
there’s one program called PAVE [25:00] – what it is, Protection Against Violent… I
forget what the “E” stands for – but anyway, it’s a domestic abuse type program. And we
would provide funds for training the people who were going to be on the hotline, just to
do something as simple like publicizing the fact that whenever you had an extra cell
phone around, donate it, because then you can give it to a woman who’s never had a cell
phone before as an emergency.
The ones that got me – and what we would do is go around, members of the board
would go around each summer or during the year – we’d have certain assignments to see
how these were working, and I think the classic illustration was one up in Burlington.
And there are so many refugees in the Burlington area, particularly a lot of them out of
African countries, out of Bosnia, Serbia, etc. And so somebody thought, “Okay, there

	
  

38

	
  
needs to be a program to integrate those women into the community.” And so a proposal
came in and they set up the funding for it. Well, the next thing they knew, nobody was
coming, because nobody had bothered to consult those women. So they had to give the
money back. So then they decided, all right, maybe we’d better sit down and see what
they need. Well what they needed was: how do you do your grocery shopping? How do
you let the school know your child can’t come to school? They didn’t need to know: how
do you relate to the bigger community, but it was the everyday kinds of things. So I think
that…
There are now women’s funds throughout the country. I mean, there’s probably a
women’s fund in almost – well, I don’t know – almost every state. But I think that the
idea – I mean, there were other funds, the Vermont Community Foundation has a lot of
funding, but this was the only one that was just for programs that were for girls and
women. And I think it really had an impact because many of the people that were
involved within those programs have then become the people sustaining the programs.
[coughs] And I don’t know, do they have something like that in Rhode Island?
WK: I don’t know of one, but it might just not be on my radar.
JM: Mm hmm. And these were – there was a pretty wide variety, now that I think about
it. And they weren’t big numbers, either, that you were giving. I mean sometimes a $500
grant will do a lot.
WK: And what about the other schools and arts groups? What appeals to you, or what
gets you to become a board member on these organizations?
JM: [laughs] I guess the fact, first of all, what’s the vision for the organization? And I
think, secondly, the fact that somebody thinks that I have something I can bring to the
organization [taps table]. And I happen to be on two governance committees right now,
and I think that’s it. I think the key, on any organization, is what are the needs of the
organization? Here’s your board or your council or whatever. What are skills these
people have, and what’s missing, that will help you accomplish your goal? And then
there are a few little things like the fact that the board of the Maple Street School, until
two weeks ago, had one man on it, because the other one retired. Now they have two. We
now have a very sharp young businesswoman on there. I think that, well, in the state of
Vermont, well I guess it’s true everywhere [that] all of your records are available to the
public when you file your forms and everything. [30:00] And I think there was a while, a
few years back, this was when I was still at Poly I think, that there were a number of
scandals in major national nonprofit organizations. Of people mishandling funding. You
know, embezzling, whatever. And I think that the focus then became: okay, wait a
minute, I’m not sure that I want to be on a board because I have fiscal responsibility. And
that was one of the things, for example when we were going through our debt process,
there were some people – I can remember one person in particular – who had been on the
board, and then she said, “Well I can’t go out and ask people for money. That’ll ruin my
reputation.” Because we were only doing it to pay off the debt. And I thought, “Well, if
you’re only worried about your reputation you shouldn’t be on the board in the first
place.” And I think that gets to some people too. I look around. I always read

	
  

39

	
  
membership on boards of every report I get and see where they’re from in relation to the
rest of the state, in Vermont for example. And I think that, well, as they say, individual
donors give more money than corporations, when you get right down to it, percentagewise. But it’s not easy, and I think that so much of it just depends on people giving to
people, when you get right down to it. And letting people know that no matter what they
can give, it counts. And the first producer, the founder, of the Dorset Theatre, was into
big donors. That’s why they got the million dollars. And I looked at – when I first went
on that board I looked at it – here they were, they’d raised $2.1 million. They’d renovated
this theatre; it was gorgeous. All the professionals who come think it’s great. And I said,
“Yes, but you know let me tell you, when I was in St. Tim’s, we raised a million dollars.
Our largest gift was $45,000, and we had 450 donors.” Now that million dollars meant
more to me than the million dollars one couple gave to the Dorset Theatre. Because now
that couple are divorced, they’re away from the Dorset Theatre. I’d look at the annual
giving list at St. Tim’s every year and here are some of those parents. Not only the
students, but some of the parents, who were involved back then when their daughters
were students at the school – still involved.
And I think that that’s the kind of loyalty you can build with a school or a college
or whatever. But I think the biggest negative – and this you have to watch out [for]
particularly in small towns. Well it’s probably true at a big university, too – when it looks
as if you’ve got somebody on the board because they have money. [unclear] That’s the
only reason. And it’s very interesting because all of a sudden we have an extremely
wealthy couple on our board at Maple Street and you wouldn’t have a clue. [laughs] You
would not have a clue, which I think is very helpful. But you can look at someplace else
[taps table]: “Oh yeah. Oh yeah, I can see why they have so-and-so on there.” But that
may do the person a disservice because the person, they have a very clear personal
interest in whatever the vision is. But it’s different, as I say. Hospitals, as somebody
pointed out, you’re dealing with a lot of memorial gifts in hospitals.
But I look at, just yesterday in the mail, I got three thank yous for gifts that I had
given. One, I made a point – it’s Planned Parenthood of Northern New England – and I
had a friend who was very involved, a St. Tim’s alum [laughs], class of 1934, a real
character. She was one of the best… I forget what you call people who are into ferns. But
she was one of the best in the country, and people from New York Botanical Gardens
[35:00] would come up and have her give them tours, and so forth. Anyway, when she
died the first gift I gave after she died, I put it in her memory. And I still do. And just
yesterday in the mail came the acknowledgement for that and embedded in the body of
the letter was the fact that I’ve done this since 1999 and the person, the Director, knew
her when she first started working for them and so forth. And it’s that kind of connection
that says, “Yeah, and I want to keep doing that.” Whereas if you just get the standard
letter of thanks and that’s it, you think, “Well, it doesn’t seem to make a difference.” And
I think if you really want to the bottom line in fundraising, stewardship is the answer. I
think. Because if people know how you are handling what they’re giving and what it is
doing for the organization…
And you know , there are some advantages of living in a small state. There really
are. I was blown away. Do you know of FINCA, which is an international foundation for
financially helping women in undeveloped countries around the world start their own
businesses? And I’ve been supporting it for a number of years. All of a sudden, I go to

	
  

40

	
  
my Bone Builders class, which is held in [laughs] the hall adjacent to this little tiny
church in Arlington, Vermont, and here is a picture taken. I had seen it in the newspaper
before, but here’s the newsletter for this international organization with a picture taken at
the Federated Church in East Arlington, Vermont when that church gave them a $5,000
gift this year. And I had no idea. However, beside that person was the person from the
Vermont Women’s Fund [taps table] because when I was on the Women’s Fund, one of
the men in town decided, “This is a pretty good organization, Jean. I think we should start
supporting it.” And here they are, and I’ve been off that board for, gosh, probably six
years now. So I think, well, stewardship is a big part of it. I think that any good fundraiser
will tell you that.
WK: At what point in your personal career, your teaching career, did fundraising –
JM: Come into it?
WK: – start? Yeah. Start being a factor.
JM: Well, let’s see. Probably, hmm. Well certainly when I got to St. Tim’s. And I don’t
think it was… for instance, when I was in public school and we had teams and you were
raising money for things, but that was a different approach. But I think it didn’t become
part of my professional life until I think I got to St. Tim’s. And then – I was just about to
say – and then the elderly Alumnae Secretary, who at that point was 84 years old, used to
meet with the seniors each on Alumnae Weekend. She’d have a meeting with them the
day before the alumnae arrived, and she said, “All right, I just want to tell you, when you
get off to college next year, I want to hear from every one of you. You just put a dollar or
two in an envelope and you send it to me. And remember that.” And of course these are
the girls that are giving thousands of dollars to the school. But they used to do exactly
that. She would come in and she’d say, “Well, here are five of them, Miss Miller.” And
she’d have this list of five girls who had sent a dollar or two here and there. Then she
said, “Then they learned how to write checks.” [laughs] That was her funny line.
WK: And if you had stayed in public schools, it would have been completely different.
JM: I think so. It’s interesting. When I went to… I went from Marshfield down to Mount
Vernon in Washington, and from there to Dobbs, and I guess it was when I was at Dobbs,
somebody who’d known me quite well said, “You know, Jean, I thought by now you’d be
teaching in an inner city school someplace. And really turning a school around.” And I
said, “Well, I’m Assistant Head at a fairly affluent girls’ boarding and day school and I
think I’m making a difference, because the gals” – and I was teaching then too; I always
kept teaching except at Stratton – “because they’re going to go out and change the
world.” [40:00] And I never, it just didn’t occur – I think of my experience in Westbrook,
and what happened to some of those students that I had and what’s happened to them
since and so forth, and you know, all you would have to do is multiply that experience by
a thousand students and you’d have an inner city school. But it was just interesting that
people had that attitude. They thought, “Well, [unclear]…” And now, once in a while I’ll
run into one of those friends in whatever context and they’ll say, “Oh, you’re still at it,

	
  

41

	
  
aren’t you, Jean?’ [laughs] And I say “Yes,” because now you can change the world with
whatever you’re doing in a voluntary organization.
WK: Why do you think they said that to you, initially, about the inner city schools?
JM: Oh, because I think they saw that I wasn’t going to take any guff from any principal
of a school. [laughs] Now, as I think back on it, unfortunately, the first principal I had –
did I tell that story? I think I did – about the basketball player and his grade, yeah. And
then the one in Marshfield, who when I had given, as I was sitting in English class one
day and a knock came on the door: “Miss Miller, Mr. Romeo wants to see you.” And I
had an English class in the room. They went, “Ohhh!” And in his office sat the father of
one of my students. I also taught a course called “Problems in Democracy.” And this was
the Colonel brass retired. And here he sat with the principal. So the principal said, “Well
Miss Miller, there seems to be some problems with your reading list in your class.” I said,
“What do you mean?” So the colonel pipes up and he said, “Well” – I had put Native Son
and Black Boy on an optional reading list – and he was, “Well, the language in those
books” – I said, “Well, your daughter probably doesn’t understand the language.” End of
subject. [laughs] The principal didn’t have a clue as to how to deal with him. And I
thought, “Oh my gosh.” So, you know. But I think it was because probably because each
place I was in, I did something that was not the usual thing.
WK: And did many of your students go on to be teachers?
JM: Several did. One I hear from almost every week. [laughs] And she’s out in – well
she’s retired now – and when I was in California she was still teaching, and she was
taking a graduate course in Claremont. It was funny. Several did, yup.
WK: And from your students, when you were teaching students who were thinking of
applying to Pembroke, do you remember what you would tell them about school here?
JM: Well, let’s see. For the ones that were applying when it was Pembroke, the first order
of business was: it’s a separate women’s college with opportunities for women in
leadership positions. And the fact that it has its own, you know, organizations, and let’s
see… that applied to the class of 1970 in which Nan [Bailey] was a member. And then,
two years later, yeah, because between 1970 and when I left there in ’77, I think I had
two or three more apply to Brown as Brown. Well, of course, she’s the one that said to
me, when she got her acceptance letter it was from Brown University. And she said, “But
I applied to Pembroke College!” I said, “Yes,” and then I had to explain to her. But I
think primarily that’s what I was saying, because I was in girls’ schools at that point. And
I saw that as a good next step for quite a few. And it’s interesting now, well the guy
who’s the arborist who does my trees has two daughters in high school. One’s a senior
this year and they were around looking at places and always, I don’t say, “Did they look
at Brown?” But I say, “Where are you looking?” And they’ll start out with the University
of Vermont. [coughs] Then they’ll start, “Well she’s looking at – we went down to
Providence.” And I didn’t say a word and he said, “Yeah we went down and we looked at
this place called Brown.” I said, “That’s interesting. [45:00] And how interested is she?”

	
  

42

	
  
“[unclear] I think she liked it.” Then I let him know that I was an alum. But I think that
the thing I hear from – and it’s not just girls that are applying, but families that have sons
who are applying, too – I think they still think of freedom to choose your curriculum.
And I guess that’s what’s still being emphasized. Now where’d you go?
WK: I went to the University of Virginia.
JM: Oh did you? And what was your major?
WK: Cognitive Science.
JM: Hmm. And then?
WK: And then I worked at a public library for a little bit and I decided I wanted to go to
library school.
JM: Oh, and where’d you go? Simmons?
WK: Yeah.
JM: Which hasn’t changed its reputation over the years. Even when we were here,
that’s… yeah.
WK: What was its reputation there, compared to Pembroke?
JM: It was more special – In my own mind it was more specialized. Because I did have a
friend who went for library science. Now I’ve a niece and her husband, both of whom
graduated from UVA, and she had made the waiting list here. And it was really funny
because I can remember, it was the only time that I wrote a special letter for anybody
here. I mean, I wrote the references for the girls from St. Tim’s who were coming but it
was just at the time that UPS – for which her father, my brother, worked, he just retired –
they were using as their slogan that year, “What can brown do for you?” So I wrote a
letter to the Admissions Office and I said, “Well, I have that question: what can Brown
do for me this year?” And I have this niece, etc. etc. on the waiting list. But she was
accepted without any question at UVA. And they had an engineering school. They still
didn’t have an engineering school here, so off she went. Did very well.
WK: And the students from St. Timothy’s who would come to Brown. Were there certain
characteristics in students that you would think would make them like it here, do well
here? Would they come to you? Would you sort of have students in your classes that you
would think, maybe Brown would be a good place for them?
JM: Not really. I mean, I was more concerned with what was the right place for them.
And the girls who came here were all very different. And as I think back on it, the other
thing, too, I had of course Leah [Sprague] was on the faculty at St. Tim’s, and then an Art
History gal, Jane Nash, who was a Brown graduate, so they had some other contacts. But

	
  

43

	
  
I don’t recall ever sitting down with a girl or her family, because they had a good college
counselor. So it would be after the fact of, okay, what are they looking at, sort of thing.
And then when I went to California, I was there, I was the second head of the school out
there. Let’s see… I went in ’84, so they’d had their first graduating class the year before
and lo and behold, there was already a gal who had come here, and another who’d gone
to Smith, and it was a class of… very small class, about 12. But it’s interesting. I look at
that school now and holy cow, they have four or five girls going to Bryn Mawr, three or
four going to Smith, several going – I mean, it’s a coordinate set-up, but they have this
raft and once somebody starts, there it goes.
WK: Has it become a lot more competitive, at all the schools that you taught at?
JM: Well, St. Tim’s now has [an] International Baccalaureate program. And the school
now has the largest enrollment it’s ever had in its history. It’s pushing 200. And there
were times it was about 110. And I think of [50:00] several classes there in the ‘60s, and I
remember, well again this gal who – God, I wonder if I have her phone number, I need to
call her today – her daughter is now at St. Tim’s. She went to Hollins out of St. Tim’s,
which was not her cup of tea. And she transferred to the University of Pennsylvania. And
at that point, now she was the class of ’68, right, so that was the only Ivy league [school]
that was taking women at that point. No, I can’t think of times when I would say to
people – students – “I think you’d be a good [fit].” If they had the interest, then I would
get in on it. And I think, I guess that’s the better way to do it, as I think back on it.
Because I was in a completely different role at that point than I am now. Now I will say
to somebody, “Well, has your daughter every thought about Brown? Or your son ever
thought about Brown?” But it was a different role. That’s when I would pick up the
phone and call Dartmouth, or Williams, once they started taking girls. [laughs]
Now that’s another whole… Somebody said, “Oh, you’re doing an oral history.
Does that mean you’re going to continue your memoirs?” Which I do have to do, one of
these days, Wendy.
WK: You’ve already started?
JM: I probably – Well, when I went to Vermont to work at Stratton Mountain School,
they were offering a memoir writing course at the Northshire Bookstore. So I went to two
sessions the first year, and two sessions the next year, and I think I probably have 14
what you might call chapters. They’re not chronologically related or anything. They’re
just people, or incidents… I mean there’s a lot of the stuff that’s in here, but elaborated
on. So, when I try to piece it together….
WK: What draws you to the Panama Canal?
JM: Just because I hadn’t been there, and I had read a couple of books about it in our
history discussions. And I thought, “Okay, I’ve been to Costa Rica,” and I enjoyed the
fact that it’s ecologically – I mean, other friends of mine go to Costa Rica to play golf.
[laughs] They couldn’t believe that I went on the trip that I did do. And no, I just thought

	
  

44

	
  
it would be an interesting experience to actually see the length of time that it takes to do
that and how much – because I had read two or three different things about it.
WK: Just curious. And how long have you been playing golf?
JM: Oh my gosh, I learned here, out on the Pembroke Fieldhouse. Well no, I shouldn’t
say that. I learned at Wentworth Hall in Jackson, New Hampshire, the second year I was
up there. And then we started here. And then I didn’t when I was teaching in Maine, I
didn’t. When I was teaching in Marshfield I did. In fact, I was just talking to one of my
former students about it the other day because one summer, I was going to go to work in
a girls’ riding camp in Vermont which had a golf program. So I went to the golf pro at the
Marshfield Country Club, who was later a successful professional golfer, and said, “Now
what do I need to know to teach golf?” So he gave me a few clues. And then when I
bought my first house in Vermont, it was when I was at Dobbs, in the fall… November of
1960, and a house mother at Dobbs who had a place in Dorset, Vermont said, “Oh, you’re
buying a house in [unclear], you need to play golf at the Dorset Field Club.” And I didn’t
think a thing about it, and the next thing I know, I’m getting a letter from the President of
the board of the club saying, “Welcome to the Dorset Field Club, and when you get here,
in June, you will get a bill for $90.” I’d hate to tell you what the bill is now. And people
just can’t believe it. [55:00] So now, this is my 53rd year playing there. Which is another,
you know I watch friends of mine and where they retire to, and I think the distinct
advantage that I had, even if I hadn’t taught at Stratton Mountain School, I hadn’t even
thought about where I was going to retire. I have to admit, I just never thought about it. I
just knew I had this place to go in the summers, or winters, whichever. And I think the
fact that I have so many friends there of different ages, they’re not all my age, and I see
them in all kinds of contexts, of course, has made it a great place to be retired. But no, I
just watched one of the women in our fitness class leaves tomorrow to go to Arizona for
the winter and somebody else has already left to go to South Carolina… I mean I like to
play golf, but not all year round, thank you. There are some other interesting things to do.
WK: What about drama and the theatre? When did you start becoming really interested in
that?
JM: Probably when I had to direct plays in Marshfield. Just part of –
WK: So after Pembroke.
JM: Oh yeah. Well, let’s see. I did work on a stage crew at Brownbrokers one year,
because somebody else was doing it, but other than that. And when I was in Marshfield,
as the newest youngest member of the English faculty there were certain things you had
to do and one of them was you had to direct a play or two a year. And then, well, let’s
see. Well then when I went to Dobbs, it was great, because there were families from all
over the country who felt, well, if their daughter’s going to be at Dobbs, she’s got to take
advantage of New York City. And so frequently they’d get tickets, and the girls would
need to be chaperoned. So you’d get to go to the theatre and opera. And then I had
several friends on the faculty, and I have seen more second and third acts of plays than I

	
  

45

	
  
can count. In other words, if you wait ‘til after the first act is over and simply go in, there
are plenty of seats. And you don’t have to pay anything. [laughs] So I’ve missed the first
act of quite a few plays. And I had the reputation of being the person who could find a
parking space in New York City. But then I think that, and then from various courses I’ve
taught over the years. In fact, I go back to Marshfield because I remember saying to the
person who was then the head of the English Department, “Okay, now what do I have for
books?” And she said, “Well there’s the English Department closet, and what you have is
what’s in there.” Period. And I remember thinking I would like to do a series of
American plays and I wish I could find this book, because it was so great, and this had
really contemporary plays. This was in the 1950s, so it had some of the original scripts
from the ‘30s, ‘40s, and ‘50s. And I remember I had to really put in a request to the
Superintendent’s office to buy a new book. You know, to get a set of whatever for the
school. And that was a very successful course, and the kids loved it. And then doing the
plays, and then…
The second year I was there I became the senior class advisor and all of the
money they raised was to take a trip to New York City, which was to include two plays.
And then it’s been funny, Wendy. When I was in high school, we didn’t have much in the
way of theatre, music, and I mean there was something there but it just was way off here
someplace. But somebody has pointed out to me that I have made a point, in all of the
schools of which I’ve been the head, that those become things that become very
important. And it has, because when we built the theatre at St. Tim’s, we had been using
the second floor of what had been a cow barn. The second floor was the hay loft, was the
theatre. And downstairs, what had been all of the stalls, had been turned into music
practice rooms. [1:00:00] And you should see the facility that we built. So I would say –
and then, of course, when I started going to Vermont in the summertime – up ‘til then I
used to travel every summer, and then I thought: “I don’t need to travel, there’s so much
to do here.” So I used to go down to Williamstown to the plays down there all the time,
and then I started eventually going to Dorset, and as I say, there are five [playhouses], so
you don’t have to go to New York.
WK: When you would teach the plays, like in Marshfield, when you started teaching sort
of contemporary American drama, were there lesson plans you would follow? Or how did
you develop your teaching style?
JM: No, you just kind of did it off the top of your head. At least I did. [laughs]
WK: So like where would you start? What kinds of –
JM: Well, for example, I was always big on character. So I would say, if we were
reading, well, Robert Sherwood’s Abe Lincoln in Illinois, or Glass Menagerie, and I
would say, “You, you, you, and you. You’re going to read these parts.” And so they
would just read the parts. And then, I would progress to the next play, and I would write
on a slip of paper the names of the characters. And I would just say, “All right pick one.”
And then that’s who you were. And then everything we’d discuss in the class – and I used
to do this with novels, too, particularly when I got to St. Tim’s. So we’re sitting there and
you’ve drawn a name. All right, everything you say in class today, you have to say it as

	
  

46

	
  
that person, regardless of whether it has anything to do with the play, the novel,
whatever. But you’re sitting there as that person today. And if somebody says, “What are
you going to do this afternoon?” Then you will say, in character, “Well I don’t believe
that I will be able to do thus and such, because I’m due to do,” you know, whatever
whatever. And it was always – it as a good gimmick, if you will. I mean you got some
very interesting classes out of it. And then they’d realize that what they were doing was
acting. And they hadn’t thought about that, you know. And we did a lot of – well I would
have them do a lot of research, too. I mean, I would [ask], “Why do you think the
playwright wrote this play?” For example. Or, “What do you know about this author that
you could see reflected in this novel?” Or what have you.
And then, it was while I was at Marshfield that I went to the Bread Loaf School of
English. And, as one of my colleague said, “Yes, we could always tell what your
curriculum had been at Bread Loaf because all of a sudden, these courses began to appeal
in your English classes.” I mean, that was where I was first exposed to Russian literature,
so the next thing you know, and somebody’s saying, “Who’s teaching Russian literature
in a small country high school in Massachusetts?” I said, “Well, it’s great literature, and
it’s touch to learn.”
And it’s interesting, as I’ve said to my friends this year, “You do not go to your
basement and open a box unless you have at least an hour.” You see, my basement was
flooded in one room last winter, and I was looking in a box, the top of which said, “JEM
Childhood.” I had never seen the box, and I can’t remember where it came from. I think it
came from my father’s house, via my half brother. And on the top was a photograph
album, okay, I could deal with that. So I took that up. But underneath, all kinds of things.
Baby clothes. Pictures. And I had opened another box, and I had found a folder of papers
that former students had written. And I keep thinking, “You know, I think I’ll send a
copy of this off to them.” [laughs] Well, I do this – I shouldn’t be telling you all this – I
thought, all right, I’m a great one for saving Christmas letters from people, and Christmas
cards that have family photos. And I thought , “What am I going to do with these? I can
just throw them away.” So I decided about four years ago, I started – let’s say I got a
picture of you and your family when you were 15, so my Christmas card to you that year
would send you the [laughs] I figured, well, this is, you know, in case you hadn’t seen it
recently.
WK: I really like putting people in touch with [1:05:00] memories.
JM: Yeah, yeah.
WK: Even if it’s themselves, right? Send you your high school paper so that you’re –
JM: Yeah. Do you remember writing this?
WK – put that person back where they were.
JM: Yeah. Well, because I find them asking me, “Do you remember?” And so I’m
saying, “Well, what do you remember?” And it’s fun. I mean, it really is. And it gets rig
of stuff. I don’t know. I mean, the fact that the archives are sitting here, it’s a temptation.

	
  

47

	
  

WK: What’s a temptation?
JM: Well to just keep adding to it.
WK: Oh yeah.
JM: But I mean, how much do other people, like people on the Council, do they have
stuff in the archives?
WK: I don’t think most people, yet.
JM: Really?
WK: I know Nancy [Buc] has given some of her papers.
JM: Okay, I was going to say, she must.
WK: But definitely, I know the University Archivist is very keen to get materials from
people’s Pembroke years – specifically their times in school, you know.
JM: Well, you’ll get that photograph album of mine.
WK: And what’s in the photograph album? Is it you and your friends? Is it –
JM: It’s four years here, and four summers in New Hampshire. Everything, Let’s see,
what did I see in there? A picture when Henry Wallace was here speaking. A whole
variety of things. And they already have, in fact, the first thing I gave, it was a scrapbook
of four years here, with everything in it, from, I think it had my admissions letter and all
kinds of stuff like that. And I remember, somebody said, “Well, you’re putting it in the
archives, Jean, but how are you – suppose you want to use it.” I said, “Well, that’s what
it’s for. You go and look.” But I did make a photocopy of one thing out of it. Our
freshman year, the Convocation. I don’t think it was the first one, but it was early in the
year. We didn’t start ‘til like October because it was a semester that went July to October,
October to February. It was on three terms.
And Dr. Lise Meitner had come to speak. And she was the woman involved at the
time they split the atom. And she was with the group of people and she said, “Do you
realize what you have done?” They didn’t know that they had done it. And she was about
five feet tall, spoke with a heavy accent, somehow or other, I forget where Dean Morriss
had met her someplace. She was in this country for some reason. Anyway, she came and
spoke. And I can remember her standing up. This was when I wanted to be a science
major. I was going to work in a lab and all the rest of it. And I can remember her standing
up there and saying, “You girls at Pembroke are so fortunate. You can be anybody you
want to be.” This is the fall of 1945. This is not the 1960s, Gloria Steinem or anybody
else. And there was a newspaper clipping, so I did make a copy of that, which I still have
at home.

	
  

48

	
  
But I think -- and I’ve given stuff to – it’s interesting, because our local library
has a very good archival collection on the state of Vermont. It was given – there was a
doctor in town and actually this is second only to the University of Vermont in terms of
what’s there, because he used to keep, you know, all of these records. It’s not just for the
three towns that the library serves, but throughout the state. And it’s just interesting
because I’m finding, and I have friends who are feeling the same way, you have stuff but
you don’t want to just throw it away. So what do you do with it? And that’s how I came,
when I was here. It was last spring when I was here. I had these two scrapbooks my aunt
had kept from the Second World War. And let me tell you, the Easton Historical Society
was over the moon when they saw those. So that’s a story that I keep telling people: look
to see what you have, give it to somebody who can make some use of it. And they say,
“Well, they won’t...” and I then say, “Yes, they will. You know, there are loads of ways.”
WK: When you were a student here, how aware were you, of, sort of the history of
Pembroke and Brown? Did you always have that curiosity?
JM: I can remember there was school stationary that always said, “Pembroke College in
Brown University.” [1:10:00] And in fact I was looking at the St. Tim’s catalogue for the
first or second or something year I was there and in the listing of the faculty it was listed:
Pembroke College in Brown University [taps table] B.A. Bread Loaf School of English,
Middlebury College, M.A. Not just “Brown.” [laughs] Yeah, I think so. And I think it
was because, well, I don’t know. I think it was because I was more, I mean, I had no
problem with men. I think I told you I think I was one of three women in our 150
[person] physics class. The only classes we had that were segregated, English, it was all
girls, met here. And there was another one that we had that was all girls. And I
remember… are the deans hanging up over in Sayles, or is it just the presidents?
WK: I think it’s just the presidents.
JM: Where would pictures of women deans be? Were they in Alumnae? Where were
there some pictures? No, can’t remember. But I remember thinking, I guess primarily
because when I got the scholarship to come here and later had my admissions interview, I
can remember part of it was because my mother had wanted to come here. And couldn’t
afford to. So she had gone to what was then Rhode Island College of Education, and that
was funny. That photograph album of hers that I sent down, I wrote a note to the Alumni
Office over there, and said it was here, and what it had in it. And ever being… they said,
“Well, you might be interested in endowing something in your mother’s name.” I didn’t
say I already have, over here. [laughs] And speaking of it, I was afraid I was going to get
caught in the President’s motorcade today. As I was driving down, I heard his speech was
on WPRO.
WK: Oh, were you coming by Rhode Island College?
JM: So I was coming down, you know, 14—
WK: 146

	
  

49

	
  

JM: And I thought, “I wonder where the traffic’s going to be.” So, no I think we were,
well I remember there were girls who lived in what had been one of the fraternity houses.
Yeah, I think certainly I was very conscious that I was in the women’s part of Brown
University. In a positive way. Now, I don’t know whether – I hadn’t really thought about
it with some of my classmates.
And I think the other thing was, you were working like crazy and you were busy
all the time. I mean, there was, as I tell all of my bridge-playing friends. Did I tell you
that story? It started when Andrews opened. And the library did not open until 7:00 at
night. So therefore, when you got through dinner, a whole bunch of girls would go to the
various lounges. And Andrews and Miller, Metcalf, whatever, and played bridge. And I
would only get asked if people were desperate for a fourth because, as I say, bridge has
become – half the people I know play bridge three days a week. I can’t believe it. And
half of those are now in an independent living facility but they don’t have a house and
garden and everything else to take care of.[ laughs] But no, I did not get asked very often,
because my idea was, “Well, let’s just go straight down the middle. Why not bet no
trump every time?” [laughs]
WK: Wait, so the library would have evening hours, but wouldn’t be open before –
JM: It wasn’t open during dinner.
WK: Okay.
JM: So it opened up at 7:00. And there was, yeah, right next door here was East House,
[1:15:00] which is where the day students spent their time when they were on campus.
Yes, one of my favorite pictures – who picked it out? One of my nieces one time was
looking through something – it’s a picture of me up in the library with my head down on
the table and my knitting on the table in front of me. I knitted my way through my senior
year. I think I still have the ski sweater that I knitted. Knitting and the Avon Theatre.
But now, I think that well going back to your question about however you
encourage – did I encourage people to come [to Pembroke]. I don’t think I personally did,
but as a couple have said to me, because you went there, we were interested in going.
And I think that had something to do with it. I know that was the case with Nan. She said,
“I wanted to go to your college!” I said, “Well you’re going to my college, and you’ll get
a degree from my college.” [laughs]
WK: Well I hope we can catch up with her soon.
JM: I hope you can. Yeah. And I’m very pleased that she would consider it. Because at
first I thought, “Maybe she won’t.” But when they did a history of St. Tim’s a few years
back, I said to the person that was, you know, doing the interviews, I said, “You need to
pick up the phone and talk with her.” And so they did a full segment on her. And that’s
all… Now here’s what happens, you see. All of a sudden, one day when she and I are
back in communication, she says, “By the way, what’s the story of my coming to St.
Tim’s.” So there’s another whole chapter. You know, of sitting down and explaining. So

	
  

50

	
  
I have that as an email back and forth. That’s why I couldn’t do without my computer, oh
my God. [laughs] So anyway, this has been fun.
[End of Part 3]
[Begin Part 4]
WK: Today is May 22, 2015. This is Wendy Korwin, the Pembroke Center Archivist. I’m
continuing the oral history of Jean Miller. So, as you began in 1945, I wondered if you
could comment a little bit about how the campus felt directly following World War II and
the changes that you might have seen take place with the return of men to campus.
JM: Well 1945, my senior year in high school had been an amazing time, as you look
back on it. Because it was the end of the war in Europe, it was Roosevelt’s death, it was
the dropping of the atomic bomb – both of them – it as the end of the war in Japan, and
then we arrive on campus the end of October.
In the middle of all that, in early July, I came to the campus for my very first
interview. I’d already had a scholarship to Brown, but I had never actually applied.
[laughs] The whole process started in Pembroke Hall, and there I was. So I remember
going into two classes in particular. One was my physics class, which had 150 in it. I’d
had physics in high school, I’d had chemistry in high school. In this class of 150, there
were three women. And of the men in there, I would say at least half of them were
ROTC. They had spent the summer up there at Rennselaer Polytechnic, studying the
radio whatever whatever. So there we were. So that was my first introduction on that
level. Then I go to my French class, and languages were required at that point. You took
an entrance exam, which I didn’t pass. I’d only had two years of high school French
because when I changed high schools my senior year, they did not offer third year
French. So the idea was that you would take French, this particular course, and if you
passed it with a B, you fulfilled [the requirement]. Anyway, I got in the class, and the
professor had just returned from the Marines in the war, and there were several fellows in
the class, and I remember it was a literature class – well, I wouldn’t call it “literature,” we
were learning to read French, is what it really boiled down to – and as we were going
along, this certain word, I can’t remember the word, but this certain word came up. The
fellow next to me was reading in French, and the professor said, “Non, non, non, non.”
And the fellow looks up, and he pronounced it a different way. The fellow sitting next to
me said, “Well when I was in Marseilles, in the war, this is how we pronounced it.” And
the professor said, “Well I was in whatever, this is how we pronounced it, and since I’m
the professor,” and I thought, “Oh my gosh. What kind of a situation have I gotten myself
into?” So those are my first two introductions to having veterans back in the classes.
And the only all-female class that I had – I think it was the only one – was our
English class, which met here in Pembroke Hall. And we had this Professor Sobol S-OB-O-L. He almost had a lisp, and it was – we had all we could do to understand him. I
mean, it was really interesting. But I wasn’t aware, I mean ‘cause we were on this
campus, most of my friends were waiting on tables in the dining rooms or working in the
Gate, so that was what we were doing. Occasionally we would mingle when we went to
fraternity parties or something like that, or football games. But I think that as I look back

	
  

51

	
  
on the coursework and the courses that I took, they certainly were a mixture. In my entire
four years, there are only – twice that I had a women. One was Janice… Van der… vere
WK: Water?
JM: Van der Water, who taught speech. And there again, this was a requirement for
graduation, so you were given a speech test. I had never been recorded and suddenly I’m
listening to this and it sounds just like my brother. [laughs] And she began to pick my
New England accent apart. And there was another gal there from New England, and you
know, here we were, and what we later found out was she was from Brooklyn, New
York. [5:00] And then the other requirement that we had was in the Phys Ed department.
And before you graduated, you had to have had, a team sport, an individual sport, you
had to pass a swimming test, and you had to pass a dance test. Well I didn’t have any
trouble with the first three but I kept – and I remember there were a group of us, and we
thought, “This is ridiculous, as far as this dance was concerned. And we’re only in our
first semester, so if we wait it out, certainly by the time we’re seniors, it will be all gone.”
Well, we arrive at our eight semester, and it’s still there. So here we were. There were
three of us, and the class was held in what was then – let’s see, it was after Andrews had
been built, so what had been the Metcalf dining room, which was for the dance class. So
here we are. The three of us go in, and I tell you, I got through the first class. I have never
been so lame in my life. And I can still see the three of us – three seniors and everybody
else in the class is a freshman. And the three of us are walking out. We all lived in
Andrews, and we’re going to the stairs that go from Metcalf to Andrews just – it was just
killing us. [laughs] Well we made it through the semester, but I tell you, I’ve never had so
much strenuous exercise in a concentrated period of time.
So those were the requirements that you sort of had to get out of the way. I think I
spent a good deal of time – well, I mentioned that the library used to close during dinner
and then we’d be off to our work. And I had, well that physics class, I think I’ve told you
about this. It was my downfall, because we had – the grade was made up of math
problems that we did every week, lab work that we did every week, midterm exam, and
final exam. And going into the final exam I probably had about a C+/B-. So, we go in.
There were 14 questions, and it says, “Do 10.” And I figured if I do seven and get them
all right, I have my C. Which is exactly what I did. Did seven questions, got them all
right. The majority of those guys did all of them. And the professor used the sliding scale,
and of course seven out of 14 doesn’t come out to a C. And whenever I got a D, I lost my
scholarship for a semester. And I think I’ve mentioned this before, my English professor
and my advisor sat down in the Faculty Club and decided this is the time for me to
become an honors student in English. And there it was.
So, as I moved along, thinking – because I was going to be another Madame
Curie, and I was going to be in a lab and I was going to be away from people and not
have to deal with people. And here I am, however many years later [laughs] having dealt
with people my entire career. The first job, well, at the time of graduation, there was an
opening in the Student Activities office for an assistant, who would be involved with
planning activities on campus and so forth. And a classmate and I applied for the job.
Neither one of us got it. They hired somebody from outside. So there I was. It was June
of 1949, so I had to start working, figuring out what was I going to do. So I applied to

	
  

52

	
  
what was then – I think it’s still in existence – called the Women’s Industrial Educational
Society of Boston. Which was a placement... so through them, I ended up getting my first
teaching job in Maine. And at that point, yeah [taps table] that summer my parents had
been on a vacation up in Maine and on their way back they had [10:00] town to see what
kind of a place it was going to be and they said, “Oh it’s not such a bad place at all.” And
anyway, to make a long story short I spent two years there, and I think I talked about that.
Then where my mother came up to visit – she was a teacher and she had some time off, I
think Columbus Day – so she came up for the weekend and it was clear at that point that I
loved teaching… I was so glad that she knew that I loved teaching, because she died in
the spring of 1951. And so then I had to come home, change jobs, and so forth. But there
was no question. Once I had started, it was just, you know, it was amazing.
WK: So you’ve mentioned your mother – this is your stepmother? – and your
grandmother as being both mentors for you. And I’m wondering if you can say a little bit
more about that. Or, about other mentors you’ve had.
JM: Well, my grandmother came into my life after my mother died when I was three-anda-half. So for the first few weeks, while my mother was in the hospital, arrangements
were made on both sides of the family of what was going to happen to me and to my
brother. And the upshot was that we wee going to move in with my Scottish grandparents
and my single aunt. So we did. And I’ve often looked back on it and thought, “What an
upheaval, for my grandmother, who – she wasn’t that old, but she must have ben in her
middle ‘50s at that point – and here she is, suddenly, with a three-and-a-half year-old and
a one-and-something year-old, and she ran a household. My grandfather went off to
work, my aunt went off to work, my father went off to work. She kept they house. They
had chickens as a side feature. She was the one that, when the chicks came in the
incubator, she was responsible for them We had vegetable garden – this was from 1931
til 1936, so it was right in the height of the Depression. The depths of the Depression.
And she was always helping other people and the kinds of things I remember: I’d go to
church with her. Not that I paid much attention to what was going on in church but I just
would sit next to her, and she always had a paper bag of mints, and if I’d get a little itchy,
she’d put the bag in front of me and that would take care of that for a few minutes, and
we’d go on from there. And she had a great sense of humor. And I remember one day,
my brother, who at the time might have been a little over two, but he hated to have his
hear washed. And I can remember that I’ve told you, but we lived in a house that had no
indoor plumbing, and there was a pump in the pantry and we had this big tub in the
kitchen floor, in which we took our baths on Saturday nights. So one night, my brother’s
in there and he’s getting his hair washed and he’s screaming like nobody’s business. And
my grandmother goes to the back door [knocks] knocks on the door, “Oh mister, oh you
hear him all the way down on the road? I’ll have him ready in a minute.” So of course my
brother just shut up like this, you know. And she came back in and she said, “Oh, you’ve
changed your mind,” she says to him. And of course, I’m sitting there observing all of
this. I have one of my favorite pictures. It’s a picture I took of my grandparents at my
father and stepmother’s wedding. And of course they were old country – Scottish – and
they always were well-dressed. And they were sitting there and I can remember thinking
at the time that they got married that my grandmother and grandfather were losing a son.

	
  

53

	
  
Was the way I thought, in my own little mind. I was eight years old at the time. I didn’t
stop to think that she was losing two little children, too. And that very summer, after my
parents got back from their honeymoon, my grandparents went off to Scotland. And I
think it was the year of the inauguration [15:00] of the current queen’s mother. And then
we would often go to visit. And it was years later, it was my senior year in high school
when my grandmother died, and I can remember we drove down. And this was in the
days when wakes were held in the home. So there she as in the parlor. Not the living
room, but the parlor, and my grandfather was standing there talking to somebody and I
notices the nameplate said, “Isabella Anderson Wright Miller,” and I’d only known her as
Isabelle Miller. And the man was saying to Grandpa, “Well she was such a thoughtful,
caring person in the community. Anybody [who was] in trouble, she was there. And my
grandfather said, “Yup, she was pretty independent. Mind you, now, this is December of
1944. He says, “I think she even voted for Roosevelt this time.” This is in a Republican
household. And I bet you she did vote for Roosevelt as she went along. And it’s very
interesting, the times that I’ve gone to Scotland – I’ve gone loads of times to visit cousins
– and her niece on her side of the family, was one of the favorite people I used to see, and
she was, oh, she was always talking about Bella. And I did not know my maternal
grandmother because she died in childbirth, and I didn’t know my maternal greatgrandmother but she was still alive when I was born, which is where I get my middle
name. So that’s where she came into the picture.
WK: I know you were young at the time, but you mentioned that your father would go off
to work and your aunt would go off to work. How aware were you of the Depression.
JM: Not. I mean, that was the way you lived. And, you know, we had what we needed,
and a few other things. One day, it’s the first time I ever saw a black person – I don’t
know whether I’ve told you this – and I think probably was the only I was aware that
there really were people who were very badly off. I think that would be it. But I didn’t
have any real sense, and I started school. I don’t know whether I’ve ever told you about
that, have I? The… in those days, they didn’t have kindergarten, and my grandmother –
Well, these are the other things about my grandmother. She was the one, for example,
when I had to have my tonsils taken out, she was the one – she drove. My grandfather
didn’t. So she was the one who took me to Newton-Wellesley Hospital – I don’t know
why we went all the way up there, but we did – where I was going to have my tonsils
taken out. And it must have been a clinic or something, because there was a room with
like a sandbox and some playthings and several children. And a doctor or a nurse would
come to the door and say somebody’s name, and one of the children would get up and go.
And somebody came to the door and said, “Jean Miller,” and I just kept doing what I was
dong. And finally, that was a nurse, then another nurse came and did the same thing, and
I just kept doing, and finally the doctor came. He came over to me, and said, “You’re
Jean Miller, aren’t you?” And I said, “Yes.” He said, “Why didn’t you answer?” I said,
“Well, every time somebody’s name comes, they don’t come back.” [laughs] And I can
remember, this was in the days when they had – ether was given to you with, I don’t
know what you call it, sort of a funnel thing that they put over your nose. And I can
remember – I don’t know if my grandmother was around there or not, or whether she was
allowed to be with me or not but anyway, I just [swoosh] threw the thing across the room.

	
  

54

	
  
And then, at other times, well she took me to the school because I was going to take a
test. My birthday is in March, so I was going to take a test to see if I could go to the first
grade. And I can still remember it. They put down a nickel, a dime, a quarter, and a
penny. No. They started out with a nickel and a dime, that was it. A nickel and a dime,
and which did I want? Well I immediately went for the dime. Most kids [20:00] went for
the nickel because it was bigger. [laughs] And then they gave you a lined index card, cut
diagonally, and it had your name printed on it and they handed you the two pieces and of
course what you were supposed to do was match it up. Then they asked you to write your
name, which I could do, so I picked up a pencil or a pen – pen, must have been. And I’m
sitting there, writing, and I wrote it out: Jean Miller. And I didn’t put a dot over the “I.”
And I said, “Do you want a dot over the I?” [scribbles on the table] And I went like this
and like this and like this and like this. My grandmother almost died. And my educational
career sort of started out that way, because it as while I was in a schoolhouse that had
first and second in one room, third and fourth in another, and friends and neighbors were
always a grade ahead of me. But it was probably when I was in the second grade, I got a
low grade in Conduct. And everything else was fine. And so I thought, “Oh, Grandma is
not going to like this.” So I can remember, Wendy, sitting on the back seat of the bus.
[picks up a piece of paper to gesture] Here’s the panel for the window. And I’m sitting
here holding my report card like this [waves] and it drops. So I lost it. Didn’t have it to
take home. [laughs] And you know, my grandmother didn’t have any other children
around, but she then heard from my cousins or my uncle, that they’d gotten report cards,
and she wanted to know where mine was. I said, “I think I lost it on the bus.” And she
never – you know, she didn’t say, “Why’d you do that?” But when she saw it, she knew
why I had done it. [laughs] But she was really a character, in many many ways, and yet
she was – first of all, she was a lady, she really was. And I’ve written quite a bit about her
and it’s several parts of my memoir.
WK: I want to put two pieces together, maybe. First of all, you sound like you’ve been a
pretty independent person from a young age. But then, now I’m also remember what you
said a little bit earlier about how you thought you would go into science, in part because
you didn’t picture yourself as someone who would deal with people. Which, knowing
you a little bit now, seems so completely foreign. And I wonder: were you a lonely kid?
Were you independent? How –
JM: Well we had to be independent because we lived out in the country and as I think of
the things that I was able to do, I mean, there was a road that went in front of our house
with a fair amount of traffic, and there were neighbors maybe a quarter of a mile away or
something like this, but there were woods, and streams, and I can remember we were just
free to go, roam around, do whatever. Climb trees, what have you. And then the school
bus would let us off and I had a mile to walk home, but I think the – well I liked labs,
when I was in high school. And I liked math and all of that. And I think that’s what
prompted me to think in that direction. However, I do have to admit that when I was in
high school we were – what was the name of that – Kuder Preference Test? Yeah, I think
that’s it. I forget what it is, but it’s a psychological test they give you. Would you rather
do this or this? This or this? Anyway on that, when I took it in high school, and I think
maybe I took it my junior year, I’m not sure when I took it but anyway, maybe senior

	
  

55

	
  
year, and I think I have it still, but when I took it, it showed of the various categories,
sciences didn’t come up on it. Instead, it was things like: counselor, dean, something like
this. And I’m thinking, “What is this?” And then when I got here and took exactly the
same test in a psychology class [laughs] it came out the same way. And as my friends
who knew me, have known me since, said, “Well you may have thought you wanted to
do the science, but there was something clicking, you know, as you were looking at
preferences and so forth.” And that’s the way it turned out. However, if anybody asked
me how did I come to be an administrator, well I think I’ve told you. The pattern was just
primarily because I thought I could do a better job than the person who had been the
principal in [25:00] each of the first three schools I’d been in. And then opportunity just
appeared, and it really, I guess I just have to say it did. I didn’t say to myself, “Now I am
going to go and become the head of this,” [taps table] or “I’m going to go and become
Principal of that.” I think I could say I was in the right place at the right time with the
right kind of pizzazz. I guess.
WK: And once you found yourself in these positions of authority, I guess I’m curious,
were there particular moments where you ever struggled with that?
JM: You mean with the decisions I had to make?
WK: Yeah, but also interpersonally. I suppose, being a relatively young administrator,
and being a woman in these different contexts, what challenges you faced.
JM: Well, my first administrative position was – well, I guess in a way, when I was in
Marshfield, Massachusetts, my second teaching job, by then I was in my late 20s, mid
20s, and I became the college counselor because they didn’t have one. But that was not
administrative in the same way. The first administrative position I had was Assistant
Head of the Master’s School in Dobbs Ferry, NY, and that came about in…. I don’t
know, have I told you about schools that I’ve been in? I’ve forgotten. Yeah. This is the
one where the head of the previous school had gotten ticked off at me and said, “Well
you should really be, like a dean in a bigger school than this one,” or something like that.
And there it was, the circumstance presented itself. And I wouldn’t say I was
uncomfortable. I would say I grew into the job, in a way. My primary responsibility in
that job was to work with the faculty and the students. If students were having trouble
with faculty members, faculty members having trouble with students, the head had an
administrative group, and he actually came the second year I was there, and the school
had never had a man in their administration. He had never been in an all-girls’ school and
he had never been in a boarding school. And there were some pretty sharp female faculty
members, and he was having a hard time in many ways, and students got wind of the fact
that you could wrap him around your little finger on certain issues. And I can still
remember, it’s probably the first time that I – well, one of the first times – that I asserted
myself. We were in an administrative meeting and students had asked if they could do
something. And most of us thought, “No this really wasn’t a good idea.” And I in
particular did not think so, because it would lead to something else, I forget what it was.
Anyway, he said, “I think that’s what we should do.” And the other people just said,
“Okay, we should.” And I said, “Okay,” and went back to my office and started working,

	
  

56

	
  
the next thing I knew, he was in my office. And he said, “Well now, what do you think
here?” You know, why do you feel this way? And I said, “Well here’s why I feel this
way, and I think, you now, you should not do it…” so then he changed his mind. And
then there was a second particular issue with a faculty member or something and I
thought, “Get your act together.” [laughs] Is what I was thinking. And it was about that
time, that somebody who was on the board who came from Pittsburgh’s husband was on
the board of the school in Pittsburgh, that they were beginning to look for a new head,
and one thing led to another. I didn’t get the job, but I went for the interview. And that
was the first time I can remember sitting there – and the interview was being held at the
home of the Chancellor of Pitt – and all these people were sitting around and somebody
said, “Well, Jean, what’s your philosophy of education for girls, anyway?” And I thought,
“Holy Toledo.” And so we talked and talked, and when I got out of there and was going
back, I thought, [30:00] “These people were really listening to what I had to say.” Which
was not the case with my current head. And that I think then, one thing led to another and
I thought, “I am going to take the initiative, I’ll send some letters out.” Which I did, to
schools and colleges, thinking, “All right, what else is there that I might do?” I had been
there for four years so this was my fifth year.
And when it came to real conflict with decisions, well I guess they usually center
around when you have to discipline a student. And you have parents to deal with, faculty
to deal with, and their friends to deal with. And I seemed – my decisions seemed to go
pretty well with most faculty members, when I made them. Didn’t always go well with
parents, I must say. But I had support from faculty members. And I had two – I was just
saying this about another incident that just happened this week. One of my mantras in
life, is, whenever I hear something: consider the source. That has become the bottom line
for me. Well some will say, “Well have you heard….” And I’ll say, “Consider the source.
And the other is, if dealing with a boarding school, if you don’t have the girl in your
school, there’s nothing you can do for her. In other words, if somebody has transgressed
in some way, all right, if she’s there, there may be a way you can help her. If she’s not
there, there’s no way you can help. And until that reaches the point where it is not good
for her or for the other students for her to be there. And I’ve had several Trustees who did
not think that was the best philosophy, but they came around when they saw, you know,
what would happen. And as I think of students – the few, and it is a few, as I get around
to it, that I’ve basically had to expel, if you will – invite to leave, or not invite to return,
or whatever – it’s been very interesting to see the reaction of those students afterwards.
[taps table] Not their parents. Because I can remember in one case, it was my very first
year and I had to let a girl go, because she had stolen something, and the first thing I did
was to pick up the phone and call the school from which she had come. And I knew the
head quite well, and asked her, you know, “You know, what do you think?” etc. etc. So
that by the time I then had my next conversation with the student, I could say, “Well, I’ve
talked with Mrs. ___ and she feels that she’d be willing to have you.” And this girl just
looked at me and she said, “Why are you doing this to me?” And I said, “Well, this
particular thing I’m doing for you, not to you.” And she said, “Why do you care? I mean,
you’re letting me going out of the school.” I said, “Yes, but more importantly, there are
some things you need to learn from this process, and I think maybe this will help.” And
to this day, she’s had that feeling.

	
  

57

	
  
WK: You’re still in touch with her?
JM: Oh, I haven’t been in touch with her, but I’ve heard from several of her friends in,
probably the last 10 years or so. But I think that the hardest thing is when things get
going along pretty well, and then somebody else gets an idea that’s something [like],
“Let’s change this,” or “Let’s change that,” and you have to decide, all right, is this
something I can live with or not and is it time? You know, and then there are times when
you don’t get a choice, like when I was at the school in Florida. Did I tell you about that?
[laughs] And now, in my role as a volunteer active board member, there are a lot of
issues that have to do with leadership and support and so forth, that they are lessons that
you learn all the way along. I mean, if anybody had ever told me that I’d spend so much
of my time volunteering at this stage in life…
WK: Do you consider yourself a caretaker [35:00] for people? For your students, and for
communities?
JM: No, I don’t really. In what sense do you mean caretaker?
WK: I suppose somebody who leads groups but who also provides some stability and
support to people who [need it]?
JM: Oh, okay. Well I do know, for example, that the young woman who is the Head of
the school, the woman on whose board I serve, really looks to me as her mentor. And I do
know that the Executive Director of another organization on whose board I serve really
looks to me as her mentor. And they’re both – one is in her 40s, one is in her 50s, I would
say. Yeah, I would say that’s…. And it was interesting, I was just asked recently – I used
to be on the board of the Vermont Women’s Fund, and they were kind of giving a little
summary of the time I was on the board, and they said, “Well, how do you feel about –
why to you volunteer?” Well, of course for two reasons: one, because it’s needed, but
also, I think I need it. And I think you get to a certain point in your life where what you
can contribute becomes even more important than you think it’s going to be, when you
see that indeed, you can still make a difference in people’s lives. And I see too many
people who – well, this is stereotyping, I suppose – who spend most of their time either
playing bridge or golf or mahjong or whatever. [laughs] And I’m not one of those people.
WK: I had asked you to think about a series of, sort of, more personal, or emotional,
questions. And I thought I’d throw some of them out, if you had memories about, let’s
say, a specific time when you might have considered yourself the happiest, or the most
fulfilled, you’ve been in your life. Or, on the other hand, if there were times were –
JM: This was – Well, all these topics of depression that people were talking about today
[in the student presentations from graduating seniors], I was a little surprised at that.
Well, I can remember when my stepmother died and I thought, “This is not fair.” I mean,
she died of a heart attach at 48.
WK: How old were you?

	
  

58

	
  

JM: Twenty-three. So by the time I was 23, I’d lost two mothers, is the way I looked at it.
And I thought, “This just isn’t fair.” And then, well, then the very next year, my brother
gets wounded in Korea. He comes back, and I’m thinking, “What’s going on here?” And
then, shortly thereafter, my father remarries in a very unpleasant situation. The my
brother gets out of the service and he and I are living together for a while. And then we
go our separate ways and he gets married. And then, let’s see, when I was – well it was
when I was at St. Tim’s, by then he’d had four children and he and his wife divorced, and
so when my oldest niece – actually when I think she had started first grade I had written
her a letter and said, “If the day comes for you and you want to go to college” – and I had
started a fund for her. So after they divorced, I helped pay her – and she had scholarships,
but I helped her through college, I helped the next two nephews through college.
Well, I had three nephews. The middle one I helped first. The oldest one, college
was not going to be for him. And so he was… but he had a very interesting situation. He
had a high school friend who was paralyzed as a result of a neck injury from diving in a
swimming pool, and my nephew used to take him everywhere. And they were very close.
And among the places he would take him would be to Sunday night services to the
Baptist church. And they were lapsed Catholics. And one night in the Baptist church, the
Admissions Director from Bob Jones University in Clemson, South Carolina, happened
to be the speaker. And this was at the point when I was working in New York at the
American Field Service. And I get a call from [40:00] his younger brother, and said,
“Guess what, Auntie Jean? Mark is going to go to college.” And I said, “Oh? Where?”
“Have you ever heard of Bob Jones University?” I said, “Yes. Put Mark on the phone
immediately, please.” [laughs] And he came on the phone and it was very interesting,
because he hadn’t been in trouble, but he could have been, and he was, you know, not
doing what his mother really wanted him to do and so forth and she was not helping. And
so I said, “Well tell me about it.” And he said, “Well, I think I need it,” he said. “I gather
it’s a place that has a fair amount of discipline.” And I said, “Well, yes.” You know. This
was just after they had lost their federal funding because of their stand about racial
dating. And I said, “Well, there are two things you need to know about it. One is that they
may try to convert you. And Number two, they have a very strong feeling” – and I
mentioned the racial situation. “However,” I said, “I think it’s probably a very good idea
for you to get started.” So I went, it was probably – well no, this is in the summer, and in
September, I get a telephone call from him. Now this is – there are several members of
my family that are very reticent, you hardly get into conversations with them – he’s on
the phone, it’s quarter of 10 at night. I said, “Well, how are things going?” He said,
“They’re going fine, Auntie Jean.” And he said, “You know, I don’t get the feeling
anybody’s trying to convert me.” And he said, “And besides, there’s a black fellow here
from Chicago, great opera singer, and….” We go on. And then he said, “Well I’ve got to
go. We’ve got prayer meeting at 10:00.” [laughs]
So later, when I was – as one of my jobs for AFS I was responsible for the
southern part of the country and I had been in Atlanta at a meeting so I decided I’ll go up
and see him. And sure enough, he said he had to go to class, he said, “but I’ll take you to
the dating parlor.” I said, “The what?” Well here was this big room, and scattered all over
the room were the loveseats set up like this with a little table in between. There must have
been 15 or 20 of them around this huge room. And there was somebody at a desk as you

	
  

59

	
  
came in, and he said, “Well this is where, if you want to talk to a girl, this is where you
come.” Well I looked around the room and here are a couple of faculty members, malefemale, doing the same thing. So anyway, I had some work to do. And he came back for
chapel, [which] was going to be at noon. And their chapel is not in a chapel; it was in a
building. But, men went in this door, women went in this [other] door. And he had tried
to get permission to come sit with me in the guest section, but he couldn’t. And they said
alphabetically. And I’ll never forget, it was Bob Jones Jr. [who] happened to be speaking
that day. And he said, “You know, there are some people here who have had so many
temptations in their life already, at a young age, that they are better suited for life here
than others who’ve been through our…” well, what he was saying, through our schooling
all this time. And of course that was my nephew. Well, right now where is that nephew?
He’s married to a young woman who went there. He has an older son who’s now two
years out of college. He and his wife have adopted another one. He’s teaching history in a
school in Jacksonville and very happy in the teaching profession. So, you know, whereas
his younger brother, who was a big football star in high school got a football scholarship
to a college in Connecticut, and in the fall of his senior year decided he’d had enough of
what the coach was trying to do to them an [taps table] quit. And he’s been married twice
and he has one, two, gosh, I have to keep counting up how many great-nieces and
nephews I have at this point, but I think it’s been interesting, as I’ve put all of that side of
my life together, because I am the matriarch on both sides of the ocean. And it’s very
interesting to see similarities and differences in the age groups in both places. [45:00]
‘Cause I have cousins over there who were in their 40s, and then their parents, and then
there’s a generation in their early 60s, and then in their late 70s and 80s. Whereas over
here, except for my own brother, who’s two years younger than I am, everybody else is
50s and [younger]. So when people say to me, “Well how come you never got married?”
I said, “Well, I’ve been dealing with other people’s husbands and other people’s children
all my professional life.” [laughs] And I think that, oh that’s my other mantra.
I think that as I look at what this place [Brown] did for me, and continues – I
mean, I look at a number of college friends – granted, I mean, many of them are dying –
but there are at least a half a dozen – well, I just heard from one in California the other
day. And there are at least a handful of us that are in touch pretty regularly. And I think it
was a combination of things. Not just because we went to college together, but for three
of us in particular, it was because we waited on table together. And I don’t know how
much a difference that makes to students these days, you know?
WK: Well I was going to ask you about in your days. Because you have spoken about the
friendships amongst students who you worked with here, or in New Hampshire. And I’m
curious if you remember, were there kinds of divisions between students who worked and
students who didn’t? Were most of your friends other people who were working as they
were going to classes?
JM: Uh huh, I would say. The other distinction was between day students and boarders.
And until Andrews was built, I lived off campus, so I got to know a variety of the day
students because where this empty spot is [next to Pembroke Hall] used to be a place
called East House, which was sort of the headquarters for the day students. But I did
know a few others, well, there was Bates House, was down on the corner the next block

	
  

60

	
  
as you go down that way [points toward Brown Street] and I knew several girls who lived
there. I didn’t know many girls who lived in Miller and Metcalf before Andrews was
built. And I think it was because, well, between going to classes and when I lived off
campus, I had other responsibilities, and then I was also waiting on table here at the same
time, so it was pretty busy days. And I think –
But again, I became very involved in extracurricular activities, but there was
always hanging over my head, when I got a D in a course, which I did three times… and
it became a real issue by the time, let’s see, in my junior year I was due to be, I forget. I
was due to be one of the editors of the yearbook. I was on the Athletic Council. I was on
four different things. And was told, because I had that D, I needed to eliminate a couple
of those. And I remember, one of the awards that was given every year was a Pembroke
key for extracurricular participation. And of course, we would have, you know, what they
were called? It wasn’t called “chapel,” but it was Convocation, school meeting,
whatever. Every Tuesday. And yet, so we would immediately go over to Andrews and
get into our uniforms for waiting on table, and never got to go to chapel. And one of the
chapels in the spring, somebody said, “Oh Jean, come on, let’s go. We’re not in any
rush,” or whatever. Well of course when I got over there the reason I got over there was
because they were going to give me the Pembroke key for participation in extracurricular
activities. [50:00] But I wouldn’t say there was that kind of – well, as I start to say that,
then there was the French House up on the corner here. There were a couple of girls in
the class, whether they should have or not, had cars on campus. But I wasn’t, I don’t
know. You just weren’t that aware – I don’t know whether they are today or not. Are
they?
WK: I really can’t speak for the undergraduate population here.
JM: Yeah. But I don’t think of it as – I never felt excluded, let’s put it that way. If I
wanted to be involved in something, I was, whether it was sports, which I was very
involved in…. I was so involved in sports one year, I was on both the tennis and the
softball team, and we went to Wheaton to play, and I can remember the two coaches
putting their heads together and saying, “Now wait a minute. You’d better put her in
whatever tennis match is first because I’m going to need her in the softball game later
on.” So that was a whole group of friends that I had as well. And now I can see, as I think
back on it and think of – Well, it’s interesting. There are people I know better as a result
of reunions, that I knew when I was in college. And I think that’s true for a lot of people,
when you see who comes back. And having lived in several different parts of the country
and been involved in alumnae groups there, well of course that goes across class lines.
It’s not just your own class.
WK: And do you feel a sense of kinship or affiliation with some of the, let’s say, much
younger alums?
JM: A few. Well, oh Sophie [Waskow Rifkin ‘07] wasn’t here today [at the Pembroke
Associates Council meeting].
WK: No, she wasn’t.

	
  

61

	
  

JM: It’s her birthday. [laughs] I was waiting. With a few. And right now, I’m already
starting, I’ve got two friends at home who have daughters who desperately want to come
here. And I used to do, I mean when I was in Baltimore and when I was in Miami, I can
remember doing interviews. But the only real contact I’ve had with younger alums would
be through the Council, as a matter of fact. Yeah. Because there aren’t terribly many in
my section of Vermont, as a matter of fact.
WK: You mention Miami, and that reminds me just how much moving you had done
across the country. You know, I can’t picture you in Miami. Just [laughs] – there’s a
dissonance for me. But I wonder if I could ask you about that. You seem to be the kind of
person who was just up for trying it.
JM: Oh yeah. Well, I’d been – well I’ve traced my whole pattern of how I got from
where to where, and when I went to Roland School in Miami, they thought they wanted
somebody who knew enough about independent schools to really get them organized,
better than they were. Which I succeeded in doing, but to the point where they fired me,
because they realized that one of the things that they had to do was to balance the budget.
And they had said to me, in the spring of my second year there, “Well, you know
enrollment isn’t looking that strong. Maybe we need to let some faculty members go.”
And I said, “Well we can’t do that, because the faculty’s contracts are already in.” Mine
wasn’t, and I forget why. There was something about it that wasn’t. And so I’m sitting
home in Vermont in the first week in August – and apparently, whatever it was, when I
came home there was a note on my back door from my next-door neighbor saying that
the Chairman of the board was trying to reach me. And I think we’d had a storm and my
phone was out of order. Anyway, I thought, “Oh that’s interesting.” So instead of calling
the Chairman of the board I called my secretary and said, “What’s up?” “Well, you’re not
going to like this, Jean, but,” and I said, “Well go ahead and tell me. I’d rather hear it
from you.” Well they had decided at a board meeting to days before they were going to
let me go, and they had already [55:00] appointed one of the men on the faculty to be the
acting Head, etc. etc. So, I got an official letter – so anyway, meanwhile I have the school
car up here and I’m renting a house down there, and renting my house in Vermont. So I
had to go back – did I tell you all this before?
WK: You’ve told me some of it.
JM: Yeah, well I won’t repeat it all.
WK: Well can I ask, so Vermont was home for you?
JM: Well, because when I was at Dobbs, I bought a house to go skiing, never knowing
that’s where I’d end up. Yeah, I had no idea that’s where I’d end up. I mean, I hadn’t
even given it – well, that’s what we do in our lives. Nobody gives any real thought to it. I
mean, some people do. But I did feel able to do the moving around that I did because I
was single, I had no financial obligations, and it was interesting. Which again, I guess, is

	
  

62

	
  
why I’ve done as much traveling around the world as I have, too. Which I’d recommend
to anybody. [laughs]
WK: What’s a favorite place of yours, maybe apart from Scotland?
JM: I’d have to say New Zealand, I think was very interesting. Costa Rica. And I did not
go, as I think I mentioned, I did not go to play golf, which other people do. It’s probably
the most ecologically active place I’ve been. It was really, really very interesting.
[coughs] Excuse me. Well, there were places in Africa that were fascinating. They’d all
been. But I’d have to put [one at] the top of the list, I’d probably put New Zealand….
And, well I’ve just finished reading a book called The Failed Empire, about the
decline of the Soviet Union, and we just had a meeting this past week in our book club.
And we ended up discussing the kinds of experiences we’d each had at various stages in
the decline. And I was there the year before the wall came down. And God, I can’t
believe, I mean the differences. I happened to have a couple of letters from people that I
met, talking about the changes and – did we do any of this? This is at the school in
Florida, we took a trip, and it was faculty, some parents, and a few students. It was a
small group. Well, I was very interested in Russian literature, and therefore I was
interested in, you know, all those places, and the guide we had was not so interested, so
finally one day he said, “Well Jean, I’m going to take you to where Tolstoy did this.” We
were walking down an alley and here’s what looks like a warehouse, but on the side of it
is a plaque about this big [gestures roughly eight inches] and I said, “What’s that say?”
He said, “This is a school.” I said, “Let’s go in.” “Oh,” he said, “we can’t do that.” I said,
“Why not?” So in we went, and it was the top math high school in the city of Moscow
and they had – this was kind of late afternoon – and the day before, they’d had a parents’
thing. And as we walked into the reception area, there was a well-dressed businesswoman
standing there who hadn’t been able to come the day before but she was there to see some
of the teachers that day.
Anyway, the Principal came along – a woman who spoke very good English. So
she took me into her office and we sat and had a great chat. And somebody kept coming
in and whispering to her. And I knew she had to be someplace else. [laughs] So finally
she said, “Yes, I have to go to a faculty meeting.” She said, “You’ll understand that.”
But, she said, and she had gotten a student to show us around the school, and he was –
this was in 1988 – and he could have looked like any kid walking in New York City. You
know, he thought he knew… and he seemed to be so bored. And the walls of that school,
Wendy, were lined with – it was historically an old school – and they were lined with
[1:00:00] these fascinating photographs. And he said, “Oh yeah, this is just the history of
the school.” You know, that sort of thing. Then we came where a stairway went. Here
was this big marble plaque, all kinds of names. And he said, “Oh yeah, but there.” And
Khrushchev’s son had gone to the school. So he was the hero for this kid.
So we get to the next floor up and school was out, but various things were still
going on, and all the classrooms had glass windows along the side, and we came to this
one classroom and here’s a teacher probably with six or seven students who look like
they might be maybe eighth or ninth grade. They were fairly young. “Now there,” he
said, “that fellow is teaching them the Old Testament.” And he said, “We don’t have
religion here, you know, but he’s getting away with it.” [laughs] It was the way he looked

	
  

63

	
  
at it. And then we went down the hall and into this room with a couple of computers –
[coughs] excuse me – but this high school had a connection with the Bronx High School
of Science in New York City, and – let’s see if this will do it [takes a sip of water] – by
email, the two schools were sending school newspapers with stories and poems, and then
they would translate for the other. And [clears throat] I mean it was amazing. So when I
went back and I was talking to the Principal again she said, “Oh yes, we’ve been doing
this. This is our second year now.” Well I have a letter that she wrote me the following
year, after the wall had come down, a group of students from Bronx High School had
gone over with a group of that school and the two groups had traveled together through
what was no longer – well, it was still the Soviet Union – and I thought, “God, here in the
middle of, you know, what do you know?
And then I remember meeting a woman when we were in East Berlin, that I just
happened to pick up in conversation. Well the next thing I knew, she came to Miami. I
forget how we arranged for her to come. She was a teacher also. College teacher. And
anyway, she came to Miami for a visit, and I have the letter she wrote me afterwards was
after the wall came down, and she was telling me how she and her daughter, who was
also a teacher, had traveled to Munich and to other places in West Germany, and how
hard things were because they were expecting – you know, they were hoping they would
get one-for-one for their currency but it wasn’t, and so forth. But it was just
happenstance, that I happened to have this conversation with her.
So I guess if somebody thought I was shy when I was a freshman and sophomore
in high school, they would not believe it. [laughs] Which is the reputation I had at that
point. Believe it or not. I know. But that’s what the years do to you, so be careful.
WK: Is there anything else that you want to touch on?
JM: I think we’ve hit a lot. [laughs]
WK: We have. I get the sense that there’s a lot more. I will want to see the memoirs,
because I love your stories, but while we still have the recorder running, if there’s
anything…
JM: Well, I think I’ve told you about my experiences with the American Field Service.
And that came up again the other night at our book club, because when I first went to
work there in ’78, they already had – how they did it I don’t know – but they had a
teachers’ exchange with the Soviet Union, and I went there having been Headmistress, so
I had administrative experience. And so they asked me if I would take this on as part of
my responsibility, and what that meant was sort of, doing an orientation with them when
they came in and a debriefing when they left. And it was very interesting. They were a
group of maybe, I think there were 12, 14 of them. But there was one that was obviously
their keeper, who, you know, was just kind of controlling. And I remember on of the
things that happened is that one of the women went to a high school in Houston that
every year had a faculty talent show. And she participated in this, [1:05:00]and somebody
in the school sent me a photograph that had made it into the local newspaper. And there
she is in a top hat, you know, just the thing you would see an American teacher doing
this. And I thought, “I hope that doesn’t get over there.” [laughs] And then, either the

	
  

64

	
  
next year or the year after, we started one with China. And my responsibility, because
that was just starting, was to locate schools in the country that would be willing to host –
well there were a lot that would be willing to host, but that had some connection. Either
they had a course in Chinese or a course in Asian Studies or something. And that was
interesting to find schools that were willing to host and so forth. And at that point –
because I didn’t go to China – I went to China in ’87. Well, I went to China the year
before Tiananmen Square. I mean, when I think of the opportunities that I’ve had… you
know, and most of them have been work-related, in some way, shape, or form. So if
anybody wants to go into teaching… [clicks]
WK: One last one: do you have any goals for the upcoming year?
JM: [laughs] Well, let’s see. What do I have for the upcoming year? Well, to see a little
bit – I have a half-brother and he has three daughters, one of whom, the only time I’ve
had a family member apply to Brown, and she made the waiting list. She graduated in
engineering from UVA, as did her husband, and they have two little children. They’re
coming to see me this summer and I’d like to see more of them. I still haven’t been to the
Panama Canal. I still haven’t been to Alaska. Alaska and North Dakota are the last two,
and I would like to get to Australia, even though I’ve been to New Zealand. My friends in
Australia say, “Okay, Jean, you can say you’ve been to every continent, because you’ve
been to New Zealand, but [taps table] you’ve got to come.” So whether I’ll get to do that
this year, I don’t know.
WK: Wait. You’ve mentioned this before, and I apologize for saying that was the last
question, but when were you in Antarctica?
JM: Must have been in 2006, maybe. Yeah. Well, here we go. Now, this won’t help. I had
been to Africa. Well, yes it will. Well my 55th reunion here, one of my classmates, Phyllis
Morton, who lives in Ohio, couldn’t come because she was still working and she at that
point was the supervisor of an assisted living facility. And she said, “I only get one
vacation during the year.” And she said, “And I’m going to southern Africa. Why don’t
you come?” So I did. And that was the end of June. So let’s see, our 55th, that would have
been 2004. Yeah. And on that trip, there were only about 18 of us, and we were
obviously the two oldest. [coughs] And everybody was saying to each other, “Where are
you going next?” [taps table] And the next thing I know, I’m saying to her, “Well, you
know, where would we go?” And I said, “Well let’s think about Antarctica.” Which I was
prompted to think of from my visit to New Zealand, because there’s a fantastic museum
there. Anyway I hear from her, and she says, “Well look, if we’re going all the way to
Antarctica, let’s go to Argentina or someplace in between,” so that’s how we ended up
going. So I think it was 2006 that I went to Antarctica.
WK: What does one do there as a visitor?
JM: A lot of looking. [laughs] A lot of listening. A lot of wading through water. And if
you’re not too – well, the Drake Passage is infamous for being very very – and I hadn’t
even thought about being seasick, you know, just didn’t think about it -- and each day….

	
  

65

	
  
Well, you travel by ship and then you get to certain areas where you can get into what’s
called a Zodiac – a big rubber boat – and they land you [1:10:00] and you see various
areas. I mean it’s the one place in the world you go and there are no natives. And you see
lots of penguins. You talk to lots of scientists. It’s amazing. You look at a lot of icebergs,
and they’re flat. You know, usually you think of pictures of icebergs with big peaks on
them. They’re flat like this [runs hand on the table]. And you do. You do a lot of looking.
And I don’t know if I ever told you when I was at Bread Loaf School of English
getting my Master’s, the night I graduated in ’53, Robert Frost was there and he was
sitting next to me and he said, “So, well what’s next?” And I said – and I was about to go
to Europe for the first time the following Sunday – this is a Saturday, the following
Tuesday I was leaving – and he said, “Well let me give you some advice.” He said,
“You’re going to be seeing things you’ve never seen before.” And he said, “Don’t just
say, ‘Oh, isn’t that wonderful?’” He said, “Look, and keep something in here” [taps
chest]. And I’ve remembered that every time I go anywhere. And I’ve said that – I can’t
tell you how many times I’ve told that to students of mine, too. Because you hear people,
nowadays, [taps table] it’s [pretends to take a photograph] and I think he would turn over
in his grave if he saw people just, you know, this is the first thing you do [pretends to
take out a camera]. You don’t look. You’ve got something up in front of you looking. So
I think, you know, as you go to these various places, you just need to – I mean yes, I have
photographs that I took, but I think most of it’s in here [taps her temple], which is I guess
why I find it easy to remember it, you know, as you go along.
[End of Part 4]
[End of Interview]

	
  

66

