
Miriam Dale Pichey: This is an interview with Elissa Lynne Beron, now Arons, on
May 18, 1992. She is class of'66, and we are in West Newton, Massachusetts. Why
don't you start off by telling us a little bit about your family and your background?

Elissa Lynne Beron: Yeah, that's what I was going to do. I grew up in Atlantic City.
Both of my parents were ﬁrst generation American born. Both of their families had
been Russian Jewish immigrants in the early part of the century. My father had gone
to college, had worked his way through college and then law school. My mother, as
typical of her generation, her father felt that one shouldn't educate women. And so
she went to a two-year business school, though she was very bright and capable.
You know—it was a waste to educate a woman who was going to marry and have
children. So during my growing up years, although she had worked as a bookkeeper
brieﬂy, once she had children she stayed home and was a homemaker. She did
volunteer activities, was a very energetic, very capable woman in a number of
spheres. And I took many of my traits and talents from her. My father was a very
successful businessman in his community, and it was just assumed that my older
brother and I would go to college. We were both very good in school and both quite
motivated. And my brother, who was three years ahead of me in school, went to
Princeton. And so that's when I was getting my ﬁrst exposure to what college
possibilities there were in the world. I went to a summer camp for many summers,
and one of the things they did—at this overnight camp in New Hampshire—and one
of the things they did is they took us on a college tour in New England, the summer
we were—I don't know, I guess fifteen or something. So I first set foot on the Ivy
League campuses, and I was just blown away by this whole other world. I had gone
to Atlantic City high school, which was a big, urban, suburban high school, very
mixed ethnically and economically. I don't know what percentage of the kids from
my high school went to college...maybe a third, maybe more than that, maybe up to
ﬁfty percent. But anyway, most of the kids went within the New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, New York realm. I loved New England from my camp experience, so
seeing the New England college campuses certainly sold me.

PICHEY: Did you Visit Brown at that time?

BERON: At that time, yep. We Visited Tufts, Wellesley, Radcliffe, Pembroke—so
that was my ﬁrst exposure to Pembroke, I had never heard of it from Atlantic City
High School certainly—and I loved all these places. What then happened is that I
was a very good student, and it was suggested to me that I skip my senior year in
high school. And there were only a few colleges who accepted applicants from their
junior year in high school—I guess it was called junior year admission.

Beron Arons 2

PICHEY: Early admission?

BERON: Junior year admissions, I guess. Anyway, you essentially would apply as
though you were a senior and skip your senior year in high school. So I applied to
Goucher, Jackson—which was Tufts—Wellesley, Radcliffe, and Pembroke. And
uh...let's see if I can even remember what happened...0h, Wellesley, it turns out—I
was interested in Biology I thought—Wellesley had only Zoology and Botany, or
something like that, and so I eliminated that. I can't...it’s so funny, it's very hard to
remember where I got in. I know I got into Goucher. I got waitlisted at Radcliffe. I
don't remember whether I got into Jackson or not. And I got into Pembroke, and I
was thrilled to go to Pembroke. It turned out, ironically, that there was another girl
from my high school applying as a junior the same exact year I applied. It was very
unusual. She also came to Pembroke. We hadn't known each other very well. She
was a very shy, quiet girl, very studious. Anyway, we both went to Pembroke and
both did quite well there, both loved it.

So one of the things that was interesting about it was that when I ﬁrst went,
the Dean ofAdmissions, I guess, warned my parents that it might be a greater
adjustment for me than for people who had gone through senior year, and not to
expect too much academically from me. I don't know what kinds of experiences
they had had before that. But I was ecstatic about getting to college. I really felt that
the high school arena and the cultural arena of Atlantic City was confining to me. My
parents had exposed us to a lot ofthings [5:00]. We knew about, you know,
classical music and things like that, and we were just ready for a larger world. My
high school was one where itjust wasn't cool to be smart, and so I had to play the
very typical game of, you know, not letting on how much I actually enjoyed my
schoolwork—I mean, it was clear I got very good grades, but you had to pretend that
it wasn't as enjoyable or as important as it actually was to me. So it was a relief to
get to college, where I felt I could really just dig in and enjoy, and other people
seemed to be doing a lot of the same, although there were certainly people who
were fooling around and not working hard.

I think one of the interesting things between the dichotomy between
Pembroke and Brown then, because cause at that point we were still around 225
women per year, and around 550 or 600 men. So there was this numbers gap, and
the feeling on campus was, in that era, that it was harder to get into Pembroke than
it was to get into Brown, and that the girls were smarter than the guys, and so to
some extent there was this same gender issue that still existed. That it was assumed
that the girls got better grades, the girls had better notes, you borrowed notes—I
just ran into somebody at my 25th reunion that said, "You had the best biology notes!
I always knew I could borrow your notes and get everything I needed from biology
class!" However, it was still just much more acceptable to be intellectually excited
about what you were studying, and so I just sort of leapt in with all four feet and
enjoyed the academic atmosphere. It was also fascinating to just be with kids from
other parts of the country, kids who had very different backgrounds than my own.
Even though I was in a fairly mixed high school, the mixture was such that the kids
who were like me were still very much like me. And this was just a much broader

Beron Arons 3

spectrum, which was very interesting for me. My roommate my ﬁrst year was from
West Virginia, and she was really...not a hillbilly, that's an exaggeration...but her
values and her style were so different from my own. We managed to get along,
partly because if] went to bed at a reasonable hour, she would stay in the closet and
study because there was a light in the closet.

PICHEY: What dorm were you in?
BERON: We were in East Andrews.
PICHEY: Oh, so was I!

BERON: I loved it. And I was across the hall from—oh God, all these funny little
things that I did. I was tall and thin, I wasn't particularly beautiful, but I was tall and
thin, so I wore clothes well. And I dressed well. And I made it to the Mademoiselle
contest; I don't even remember what it's called anymore. It was, you know, a
contest for the well-dressed college girls, the best-dressed college girls. They had a
contest on each of the campuses, then finalists would get in the magazine. And I was
one of the ﬁnalists, which was totally exciting. And I lived across the hall from the
young woman who actually won and was all over the pages of the next year's college
issue. It must have been Mademoiselle. That was quite exciting. The things one
remembers... You know, the dress dinners and the sherry hours—

PICHEY: What was it like when you first arrived on campus? What was your ﬁrst
week?

BERON: Well I remember bringing the trunks of things up, and I remember all the
guys being very eager to help unpack us. And this was very, you know, there was
going to be this whole new social arena for me. I had always been tall, and so not
particularly popular. Too tall, too smart, too ﬂat chested. So there was this whole
new world opening up, where guys might be interested in me even if I was smart.

So it was kind of fun being looked over in that way, because the guys I'd gone to high
school with were people I'd known all my life. And they were boring and they
weren't interested in me. So it was just this whole world opening for me, I can't tell
you—I was just extremely enthusiastic and excited. I remember liking the classes,
liking the teachers... I was just, you know, almost like a farm kid.

PICHEY: Did they have any special programs to welcome you?

BERON: Oh yes! Well we had the Dean's reception, to which we were supposed to
wear white gloves and hats. I know I didn't own a hat, but I think I probably brought
white gloves because I was told to. And I remember a sort of garden tea party kind
of thing. Most of that is actually quite blurry. We had our junior councilors, which
was wonderful because I remember meeting in the lounges in the evenings, and they
talked about dorm rules and social life, and it was just a much more concrete,
intimate description.

Beron Arons 4

PICHEY: Did you have a Big Sister?

BERON: I probably did. I don't remember... I don't remember who that was. It was
amazing to me, looking over the things that I've kept from undergraduate years—
the newspapers and clippings—it was amazing how many things I'd forgotten
[10:00]. Social kinds of things that I participated in, extracurricular stuff that I did,
which I didn't even recall until I saw my picture in the paper or whatever. That was
interesting to me. I think that's sort of typical of my memory. I tend to remember
the concrete academic stuff more.

PICHEY: What kinds of...well, we want to talk about your academic record, but also
about your social activities.

BERON: Well... I guess freshman year I just sort of did mostly academic stuff. I
remember, you know, the football games—going in high heels and cocktail dresses,
getting my first black cocktail dress to go away to college. And I can't imagine sitting
at a football game now in a dress and stockings and heels, and then going to the
fraternity parties afterwards and out to dinner and stuff. But you know, that's the
way you did it. And things like you didn't go out if you didn't have a date on
Saturday night. A bunch of girls just didn't go out, and you stayed in the dorm, or
you went out of town or something. All these things that feel archaic now—felt
archaic felt within a couple of years of that. It was the end of an era, really, I think
when we were there.

PICHEY: Did that continue through from '62 to '66? What kinds of changes did you
see between '62 and '66?

BERON: Well there was just more agitation. I think when I came in, there was this
presumption that this is the way it is. By the time I left, there was agitation about it:
it must change, it's unrealistic—you know, the dorm hours. I was actually admiring
of girls who would ﬂagrantly ﬂaunt this stuff, and find ways around it, and weren't
apologetic.

PICHEY: Tell us about the dorm hours. What were they and how did they operate?

BERON: Okay, well just reading my booklet here, which I saved from freshman
year.

PICHEY: What is that called?
BERON: It's called Inklings. It was September 1962.
PICHEY: And who is it put out by?

BERON: It's probably put out by the Pembroke Social Organization... Freshman

Beron Arons 5

Handbook it's called. The Inklings staff was a separate publication staff. And it was
sort of all the aspects... there's Barnaby Keeney on the first page and a photograph
of Rosemary Pierrel on the second page... and it had the calendar and it had just all
these aspects of social life: organizations, things about academics, but mostly about
student life and student activities. Oh, it was Glamour magazine, I saw a thing here
just now—it was Glamour not Mademoiselle that had the college girls. You know,
meals and how to dress for your meals. All right, here we are. It says, quote,
"Dormitory rules are quite liberal. Although all freshmen must be in the dorms by
ten, each girl has a specified number of lates each month during the ﬁrst semester,
one third of the number of days you were at college. Sunday through Friday nights,
a student taking a late may stay out till 12:30 am. and on Saturdays until 1:30 am.
Overnights are counted as lates. This curfew is extended on Friday, Saturday, and
Sunday nights for seniors and all students when special events are planned." Well
that just feels archaic now, it's really quite humorous. And you know, we abided by
it, and there was this great scene on the Andrews terrace every night at curfew, with
the huge clock looking at you and everybody kissing their dates goodnight, you
know, and the door closing behind. And you just sort of accepted that that's the way
it had to be. You know, and the telephone was down the hall.

PICHEY: What about Visiting hours?

BERON: Visiting hours, you know: Sunday afternoon, three feet on the ﬂoor and the
door open.

PICHEY: Same time, but three feet on the ﬂoor?

BERON: Three feet on the ﬂoor means that if somebody looked in your room, you
and the guy who were there, there had to be three feet on the ﬂoor—so somebody
could have a leg crossed, but in other words no one could be horizontal on the bed

together, and the door had to be open. I think it was from two to four or something
like that, two hours.

PICHEY: And those were the only times that men were allowed in the dorms?
BERON: Yeah, upstairs in the doors, absolutely.

PICHEY: Did they have Visiting hours downstairs in the lounges?

BERON: Yeah, now that's going to be vaguer. But yeah, guys could come and let's
see, yes down in the lounges I think the guys could be down there, I don't know,

maybe till eight or nine at night, I just don't remember.

PICHEY: They used to page us, I remember. If it was a girl it was one thing, if it was
a boy you had a "caller."

Beron Arons 6

BERON: Right, that's exactly right. You have a "caller," that's exactly—oh that's so
funny. Yes, you have a "caller." So then you would go downstairs and see who it
was. But you know, we just sort of accepted it. For me actually, as a freshman I
didn't have a whole lot of dating experience. I had one serious boyfriend in high
school. I was actually relieved to have rules that I could rely on to get me out of
sticky situations that I did not know how to get myself out of [15:00]. And in fact, as
a first semester freshman it was terrific—until I sort of learned how do you turn
dates down, how do you get out of uncomfortable situations—I was grateful for the
rules because I just didn't have much experience at handling unknown guys and
unknown situations. So it wasn't such a terrible thing in the beginning for me. You
know, I was going to study and do my homework in proper order anyway, so it
wasn't a matter of getting me in to do my homework, it was a matter of having a way
to get out of social situations that I didn't like or was uncomfortable with. So that
wasn't such a bad thing.

PICHEY: What other kinds of restrictions or obligations were there that might not
exist today?

BERON: Well, we had a dress for dinner. We always had to wear skirts to the
dining room for dinner. But two nights a week, I think it was Sunday and
Wednesday night, were Dress Dinner, which means you had to wear stockings and
heels with your skirts, no knee socks and no tied shoes. And they inVited professors
to dinner. There was sherry hour in the lounge and then the professors would sit at
the tables with us and talk. And then there was demitasse in the lounge afterward.
And that was nice. Again, getting to meet professors informally was interesting.
The discussions were fun. I remember taking an exam, and I placed out of freshman
comp, which was terrific, so I got to go into a Comparative Literature seminar on the
Nature of Tragedy, which was just a fantastic course. And you know, there were
maybe twelve or ﬁfteen of us in the course, so that was just a great academic
experience, and I was grateful to get out of English Comp. I was grateful for some
extra help I'd gotten in high school, which taught me how to write decently. I went
into college thinking I was a Biology major because I love the life sciences. So I took
Biology in the beginning, and I took Math—was it my ﬁrst year?—I took Biology and
English...I actually don't remember all my courses. I must have taken Math my first
year. And by the end of freshman year, I realized that if I wanted to be a Biology
major it meant I would spend my life dealing with test tubes and graduate school.
And I knew it was people I liked, so I figured well maybe it must be medicine that
I'm interested in. So I changed my major to English Literature and was pre-med, so
that I could take as much—I loved English Literature and Art History. And so I just
took my pre-med courses as electives. One lab course a semester, which was very
reasonable. And loved the literature major, and loved all my art history courses.
Let's see, Oh I know what I did—I didn't want to waste...I hadn't taken Chemistry in
college because I skipped senior year. And I didn't want to waste time at Brown
taking Chemistry, which I thought would be kind of boring, so I went to summer
school after my first year of college, at Harvard, and I took a year of chemistry there

Beron Arons 7

to get it out of the way. And then I took Organic second year, which was hard but I
actually liked it a lot.

PICHEY: So you spent your summers in Massachusetts, in Boston?

BERON: That ﬁrst summer. I wasn't from here, remember, I was from New Jersey.
But I spent that ﬁrst summer at Harvard summer school, which was another great
scene. That was really fun. Then I took Organic. And then, at the end of my
sophomore year, after taking Organic, and all my friends were Humanities majors,
and I was the only taking all these labs—I thought to myself, "Do I really want to do
this? Do I really know what I'm getting into?" So I got myself a job in a surgical lab at
Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia that summer. Just to see, did I really want
to go to medical school or was this silly. And it turns out, it was really funny, the
surgeon who ran this—it was a kidney transplant lab. It was in the early stages of
research into kidney transplants, and we were doing dog surgery. And my parents
had actually told the surgeon to work me to death because they really wanted to
discourage me from what I was doing. But they wouldn't tell me that directly. They
never would have said that. They were very proud of my accomplishments. And of
course, here I was assisting in surgery and doing all the blood chemistries—I was
ecstatic. It was one of the most exciting summers I've ever spent, and it confirmed
that I really did want to go to medical school. Although I still had no real inkling of
what I was getting into. Let's see, it seems like I've gone off on the academic route a
little bit—

PICHEY: Well that's okay! So that was your junior year?

BERON: That was the summer after sophomore year [20:00]. And thatjust
confirmed, yes I did want to go to medical school. So let's see, what'd you have to
do? You have to take Chemistry, Organic Chemistry, I had already taken Biology
freshman year. You had to take Physics! I put Physics off till senior year because I
was really scared that that was going to be hard, and I didn't want it to ruin my
grades for applying to medical school, so I left that one till senior year. So maybe I
didn't have a science junior year, cause I'd taken Chemistry in summer school. My
friends all thought it was a little odd, but they just sort of accepted it. There were
not that many pre-meds...pre med women in those days. And in fact, when it came
time....

[Tape paused then resumed]

BERON: Oh anyway, there were very few women pre-med students then. And I
remember this so clearly, when it was time to apply—now I'm jumping ahead of
myself a little bit—senior year in college, they had absolutely no track record for the
women. And so what they told us...their advice to us was apply to as many medical
schools as you can afford to, because we had no idea where you can get in. It was a
really interesting experience because my grades were terrific, my board scores were
terrific, and it was clear that I was a good candidate, but the experience of applying

Beron Arons 8

then—when they limited the acceptances to strictly ten percent—was just a very
interesting time in terms of the interviews, in terms of what people could ask you
because you were a female applicant. You know, what people expected you to be
like. And it was interesting.

PICHEY: What were their expectations?

BERON: Well, you know, for example my parents were dying for me to go to
University of Pennsylvania because it was close to home. And I interviewed at
Penn—It wasn't an interview! The guy just talked to me about the medical school.
He asked me barely anything about myself, and I then got a rejection notice. And my
parents knew somebody whom they could ask, "Would you please find out what this
is about?" Because there just wasn't a good reason for it. And the word came back,
which was the interviewer took one look at me and said, "She's never going to finish
medical school." Because I was dressed nicely and I had a nice appearance. And so
they turned me down. And you know, that was not a particularly unusual thing to
take place in those days. At Harvard, if you're a woman you were interviewed by
two different people. If you were a man you were interviewed by one. And
inevitably, people ask you "how are you going to manage raising a family?" and all
those kinds of questions. At Cornell...no I guess it was at Columbia...at Columbia I
was asked, what if I didn't get in? Which I hadn't actually considered, this was
interesting—the nai've confidence of youth. He said to me, "Well what happens if
you don't get in?" And I hadn't thought about this, I hadn't prepared myself for
various interview questions, and I said, "Well, maybe I'll go into the Peace Corps. Or
maybe I'll go to graduate school in English," because I, in fact, was loving my English
Literature. But clearly that was not the right answer! That meant I wasn't a
dedicated enough...

PICHEY: Scientist.

BERON: Scientist! Or physician. I got my rejection letter from Columbia within a
week of that interView. You know, I slowly learned the tricks of the trade. After my
interview at Yale, the guy who interviewed me turned to the young woman medical
student who was doing research with him at the time, and he said to her, "How’s a
young woman who looks like that going to run a syphilis clinic?" And she turned to
him and said, "she doesn't have to run a syphilis clinic!" But, you know, nobody
knew quite how to deal with some of these issues then. And nobody was holding
anybody accountable for what they were thinking and saying and how they were
dealing with it. At all. It was really a free-for-all.

PICHEY: Yeah, these days there'd be a lot of lawsuits.

BERON: Absolutely. Absolutely. So we were strictly ten percent—I'm getting
ahead of my story. But anyway, it was just a small group of us applying.

PICHEY: So you knew pretty much all the women in pre-med in your class?

Beron Arons 9

BERON: Yeah. Yeah, I guess so. In fact, one of them ended up at Yale Medical School
with me. Anne Weissman. We hadn't been particularly friendly. She was, I think,
more of a science major than I. You know, I always took this stance—you know, it
was from the early days in my high school, where it was important to pretend that
school wasn't so important to you—I took this stance of not being a nerd even
though I secretly was. You know, of caring about my appearance, of caring about
social life and other kinds of things—I was interested in artistic things. I did a
variety of extracurricular activities, which I can talk about [25:00]. But it's
interesting because I think I sort of distanced myself from the students who were
more obviously science majors.

PICHEY: Right. Now I think that there were a lot of "Penny Pembroker," "Penny
Lollipop" and "Penny..." there were all these various Pennies, do you remember
anything about that?

BERON: No, I don't. It sounds familiar but I just don't remember.
PICHEY: Right. I know that that was before my time, but...
BERON: Yeah. No, I think it was before my time too.

PICHEY: Yeah, okay. Well, forget that then. Tell us about some of your
extracurricular activities.

BERON: Well, I'd always liked to draw, so I did some cartooning for the Pembroke
Record. Its fun looking back over them because they feel very time-bound, you
know? Well, maybe some of them aren't, as I'm thinking about it. Father-Daughter
stuff, Mother-Daughter....I mean we had a Father-Daughter weekend, a Mother-
Daughter weekend. Actually when my kids saw that they said, "Gee, that's a nice
idea! Why did that go out?" You know, that feels like an antiquated notion. You
know, cartoons about drunkenness at Spring Weekend, I don't know how much
that's changed. It was all pretty light-hearted and demure, I think, the cartooning. I
ran for president of the class one year. I had no recollection—I obviously didn't win!
[laughter] But I saw the article in the newspaper.

PICHEY: What about the Record? How many people were on the staff, and how
often did it come out?

BERON: Every week. It came out once a week. I can't tell you how many people
were on the staff. It was a small, dedicated group. There were some people who
really wrote with great speed and facility, and there were some—I wrote only a few
articles. I wasn't, sort of, the inner circle. This is a great...actually I saved this Brown
Daily Herald. This was from the Spring Riots in 1963, when the guys walked up
through the bus tunnel from downtown. And panty raids, and invaded the dorms.
There were riots at Yale, too, on the front page, I'm not sure what was going on...

Beron Arons 10

PICHEY: What was the cause of the riots?

BERON: It was just Spring Riots! It's frolicking. Nothing.

PICHEY: Oh. Notpolitical.

BERON: That's right, it was not a political protest! That's what's so funny.
PICHEY: It was just youth letting off steam?

BERON: Yes, absolutely! And that's the difference because shortly thereafter the
rioting and demonstrating had some purpose. So this feels like the fifties in a way,
that kind of thing taking place. Oh that's right, the other thing I did—I did some
acting. I'm looking here at a playbill. I did some acting.

PICHEY: So what kinds of productions were you in?

BERON: I was in Production Workshop, and that's student written dramas. These
were some one act plays. So it was minor stuff, but it was really fun. Actually, it was
fun, I was in one with Kathryn Fuller, who's now head of the—what is it, one of the
biggest international environmental group—the World Wildlife Fund! Yeah! She
was in the play with me. I have little, you know, banquet invitations, schedules for
Father-Daughter weekend, it's just all very nostalgic, you know. A Hootinany! A
Hootinany was a folk sing! I couldn't even remember that name until I saw it in the
newspaper. And we had themes.

PICHEY: And where did they have that kind of thing?

BERON: That was actually on the Pembroke Campus, I think. Where was it held...it
was Theodore Bikel, Jack Linkletter, Marlene Sanders, 1963... ]ourneymen, Clancy
Brothers, South County Singers. You know, it was the real time of folk singing.

And I'm not sure exactly where it was, but it was big. It was campus wide, and
everybody was very excited. Norman Thomas discusses U.S. radicalism and
socialism—he came to campus, he was already an old man by then.

PICHEY: Did you go to that?

BERON: I don't remember that. I probably wouldn't have. I was not somebody
particularly concerned with political movements, it's interesting. I was interested in
things that were more literary or artistic, not political at all. It's interesting, I look
back and I'm comfortable with how apolitical I was. How naive and apolitical I was.
As I got into medical school and things became more and more upsetting about
Vietnam, I participated in some protests.

Beron Arons 11

PICHEY: But were there any protests on... [30:00] You were, for example, at
Pembroke during the height of the ciVil rights movement. Did that have any impact
on campus?

BERON: Yes, there were absolutely—there were student demonstrations. I mean
it's that kind of thing that I look back on and I think, "Where in the world was I?
Where was my head?" You know, I was busy getting good grades and being active on
campus. But I was not a participant in political movements in the wider world, and
sort of the more important stuff. And there's something—I think I'm left with some
discomfort about my lack of participation. I'm sort of sorry that I was so focused on
getting good grades and doing just everything right.

PICHEY: Do you recall there being any demonstrations on campus?

BERON: Yeah, there were demonstrations on campus. I remember kids marching
down to the State House in Providence.

PICHEY: Were there blacks attending the school?

BERON: Yes—in fact, there was a kid from my high school, actually. It's amazing,
thinking of Atlantic City High School sending this many kids. There were...one black
young man who eventually taught at Brown, Barry Beckham, was from my high
school. There was a very small... I guess we had two Black women in our class,
Dorothy Fonda, and Paula Williams. I'm trying to think if there were any others. But
I had this terrible sense of how isolated and lonely they must feel, how different they
must feel, how hard—I mean, I felt slightly different because I was Jewish, and it was
such a predominantly WASP institution. And I imagined how hard it must have been
for them. How lonely and disconcerting. I didn't know either of them well at all.

But certainly the Blacks were a great, great minority then. You know, again—and
they held together. I remember Barry and a few black guys that he was friendly
with. Again, it was the beginning of all that stuff stirring up and changing. It was the
tail end of the '50s. It was just starting to open up with all the ciVil rights stuff.

PICHEY: Were there any other kinds of student movements on campus? For
example, the curriculum reform?

BERON: That came right at the end. The New Curriculum came right after, Chuck
Bast [7] was involved with that. You just said something that set off another
memory... I can't remember what it was. We created the first women's college ice
hockey team. I was a senior, and we made all the papers because it didn't exist
anywhere! Again, it's so funny to think of now. A bunch of us got together—I don't
even know how it happened, but a couple of the underclassmen, a couple of
sophomores and juniors, had come from high schools in New England and had
played ice hockey all their lives, and they wanted to play. So we said all right. And I
had done figure skating all my life. I'd never played hockey, but I was born with
skating in circles. So a bunch of us got together—I don't know how many of us,

Beron Arons 12

enough to form a small team. We got ice time at something like 6:00 or 6:30 in the
morning. It was the only time they would give us ice time. And one of the guys from
the Brown hockey team coached us. And we became the Pembroke Pandas. We got
ourselves named. We had no uniforms or anything when we first played—I guess
we wore cast—off stuff from the guys. We made the Providence Journal with
photographs. We found a team of wives of one of the professional Massachusetts
teams, and we played them. We took a bus up here once, and I guess up to Boston
once, and Walpole. And they came down to our place once. We didn't do
particularly well, but it was very exciting, and it was the beginning of what became
absolutely a terriﬁc ice hockey team. You know, eventually, with full uniforms and
full ice time and everything else. But it was fun—my friends, again, thought I was
totally nuts, to get up at this ungodly hour in the morning and go ice-skating every
day. It was very exciting! And what's a joke is that some of us actually played in our
ﬁgure skates because that's all we had. It's so funny to think of it now. We didn't
play particularly rough. I got checked—my picture was in the paper because I got
checked into the boards and got a mild head injury. So there was a big picture of me
in the Providencejournal. It was very exciting at the time.

PICHEY: How did boys react to female athletes?

BERON: Well, there wasn't a lot—there wasn't the kind of support and
appreciation, I think, that there is now. It was this mixture of things. Girls could
play field hockey, and you could admire their prowess. There wasn't support. I
mean, people didn't stand in line to watch the girls play anything [35:00]. There
was some—

PICHEY: But they didn't avoid you?

BERON: No, no. But again, it would have been something I would have avoided. I
wasn't a jock. Yes, I played ice hockey, it's because I loved to skate and skated well.
I'm not particularly a jock at heart. I just like to stay ﬁt. It was fun! I was impressed
with some of the girls who were really good hockey players. I mean, they really
knew how to do it. I just felt of myself as a joker out there on the ice. When we
started, there was a lot of humor about it—the guys came to watch just to see this
because it was sort of a strange spectacle. But it was good-natured. It wasn't a
tough time. Certainly, the feeling about the Phys. Ed. department was that the Phys.
Ed. teachers were of a certain type—you know, we had posture pictures when we
came in freshman week.

PICHEY: Why don't you describe what those were?

BERON: Oh, my God. They were this very crazy thing where you strip to the waist,
and a picture of you was taken of you by the Phys. Ed. department to see what your
posture was. And if your posture wasn't good enough, you had to take a Corrective
Posture course for your Gym during freshman year! And you sort of had to pass

Beron Arons 13

your posture pictures. And we all had concerns that it was really—there was
something uncomfortable about this whole thing.

PICHEY: Perverse?

BERON: Yeah, yeah. I think the feeling was that the gym teachers probably were
homosexual. It was just a type of person that became a Phys. Ed. teacher at college.
And it was just known, it was just sort of—you just felt it. But there was just sort of
a whole type of culture around Phys. Ed. and the feeling was that they promoted
this, and it was this very uncomfortable thing. And of course the terror! Everybody
lived in terror that the guys were going to get a hold of the Posture Pictures, and
there was always this terrible threat. I don't know how long they continued the
Posture Pictures business; did they have it when you were there?

When I entered in 1968, they still did it. But I think within a couple years after that
they—by the time the campus was up in arms about the war, and curriculum
reform, and everything else, I think that Posture Pictures sort of went by the
wayside.

BERON: Yeah, I think that it was one ofthe last remnants of Pembroke as sort of a
Finishing School for ﬁne young ladies.

PICHEY: They taught us a whole series of exercises that you could do, supposedly,
to eliminate cramps, and how to set a table correctly, and a lot of other things.

BERON: Oh gee, I don't remember that. Isn't that funny, I must have totally
repressed it. I don't remember that. I remember one of the things that was great
was I took horseback riding for Gym one semester. I forget...we had to take a lot of
Gym. And I remember one semester I did that. That was fantastic—I got off campus
and out into the countryside. That was just terriﬁc.

PICHEY: Where did you ride?

BERON: I don't remember. It was a farm somewhere nearby. Nice horses. And I
remember some ofthe girls I rode with clearly had a lot more riding experience in
high school.

[doorbell rings and dog barks, tape paused then resumed]

PICHEY: Talking about sports and you were talking about horseback riding—were
there any other Gym programs that you particularly enjoyed or were found
unusual?

BERON: Hmn, nothing that I remember particularly.

PICHEY: I took fencing, which I enjoyed.

Beron Arons 14

BERON: Yeah, yeah. That's right. I don't know whether I actually took fencing. I
remember I had learned to fence at camp in the summer. I don't remember whether
or not I took it at Pembroke. But I remember that we were required to take Gym
many semesters. I don't remember how many, but maybe even six. It was a lot of
Gym.

PICHEY: What about the Deans and others who ran Pembroke College itself? Do
you have any recollection of them?

BERON: Well, Dean Tomkins—Gretchen Tomkins—just that she had a lovely sense
ofhumor and a warmth about her. I remember liking her. I was somebody who
didn't get into trouble, so I didn't get to see the other side of things.

PICHEY: Were you on the Dean's list?

BERON: I'm sure I was. Yeah, I'm sure I was. I don't remember anything specific
about that, I don't remember.

PICHEY: Who were your favorite teachers, do you remember? Or favorite classes,
do you have any that particularly stand out?

BERON: Oh God, certain Art History courses—it's funny, I still have my notes in a
big box in the basement. I love taking good notes in classes. It's interesting, I took...
well the seminar on Tragedy was Mr. Montero, who was a junior faculty member; he
was not a full professor at the time [40:00]. It was a fantastic seminar. We read,
you know, Greek Epics. I may be confusing, I think I'm confusing two different
seminars—one on the Tragedy and one on the Epic. And John Shroeder in English
was a great, dramatic professor, but he just wanted you to parrot back his notions
about literature. And so, in the end, that was not a particularly intellectually
edifying experience. Because that was an easy kind of course to get an A in; you just
had to take notes and memorize them. And that's dumb. Kapstein and Romanticism
was wonderful. Barbara Lewalski, my only woman professor. I mean, that's what's
so dramatic when you go back to campus now—there's so many women scholars
there! Barbara Lewalski taught 17th- and 18th-century literature. She was terriﬁc!
And it was just such an unusual experience to have a woman.

My most gender-dysphoric experience, I'd say, in the classroom, was an
Economics course I took. I'm somebody who was bound not to understand or like
Economics anyway. We had a black, Caribbean man—I don't know what his rank
was, you know, in scholarly levels. But what was abhorrent was, ﬁrst of all, he didn't
lecture, he just read from the Samuelson textbook. Second of all, he arranged the
class—there were about five women in the class—and he had all the men sit up
front, and he had the five women sit in the back row. And he took attendance.
Remember we had limited cuts, we could only cut three times a semester or we'd
fail a course.

PICHEY: Was that in all classes?

Beron Arons 15

BERON: Yes, all classes. Limited cuts to three. He sat the women, and he counted
female heads. He knew the men by name, and he counted female heads. It was
disgusting. I mean, again—it's the kind of thing you think about now, and you think,
"How could anyone get away with that kind of outrageous behavior!" He was awful.
I hated that course. That was my most hated course in all of Brown. I mean, there
was not a redeeming thing about it! He was a terrible teacher, the subject was
appalling, and his behavior was, you know, out of the dark ages. But certain Art
History courses were fantastic.

PICHEY: Were there any female graduate students?

BERON: Maybe... I don't know. Oh yeah—let's see, I had one section leader in
English Literature who was a woman. God, it's really hard to even come up with
anybody else. There had to be some, but again it was really sparse. Greek History of
Architecture course... the Intellectual History of the United States was McLoughlin, I
was afraid of that course. I ﬁgured, "Oh, my God, that's so much heavy reading, I'll
never get a good grade again." I was just geared to making sure I had good grades
for medical schools, which again I feel sort of bad about, looking back. So I waited til
senior year, and I took that course—I guess I audited it, so I didn't have to worry
about the grade getting. That's why that whole business of being able to take things
pass/fail was such a great idea. Because that was such a thrilling course, I loved it.
No, I must have taken it for a grade because I remember writing a paper that I spent
weeks and weeks on, looking at primary sources down in the Providence State
House Library or something. No, I guess I did take that for a grade; I just took it one
semester. No... no other... were there any other women instructors? I can't think of
any. Phys. Ed., the administration, Barbara Lewalski. Ithink that's it. And, you
know, we just accepted that. We just took it for granted—that's the way it was. It's
terrific to go down there now.

PICHEY: Well, some people would say more needs to be done yet!

BERON: Yes! Oh, that may be true, but the dramatic difference between what it's
there now and what it was like there then is just astounding.

PICHEY: Now, did you date very much when you were?

BERON: Yeah! Um, yeah. I went out, went to fraternity parties, you know. What a
ridiculous scene, fraternity parties.

PICHEY: What was that like?

BERON: Well, a lot ofloud music, a lot of beer. I hated beer! I always hated the
taste of beer, and everybody trying to get as drunk as they could.

PICHEY: Did they rush the freshmen?

Beron Arons 16

BERON: Yeah.
PICHEY: Explain what that was like?

BERON: Well, yes. There was this book, this Blueprint, which was the pictures of all
the freshmen coming in. And, you know, the guys would look everyone over.

PICHEY: Nicknamed?

BERON: The "pig book!" Of course. I guess I just assumed everybody knows that.
And then the upperclassmen would come—the guys would get to school freshman
week to just look over the girls and inVite you... that's right, you got inVited to the
fraternity houses freshman week. Yeah, and you got inVited so they could look you
over [45:00]. And check you out. And so in the beginning it was very exciting, being
asked out by upperclassmen. So I dated some, and then I eventually by spring broke
up with my home boyfriend.

[tape pauses then resumes]

BERON: Yeah, I broke up with my boyfriend from home because I realized that
there was a wider world out there that I wanted to experience. And so I think I had
a fairly average kind of social life. I was not particularly a social butterﬂy, but I went
out some. I guess sophomore year I went with a guy for a few months, a football
player in the jock fraternity—I don't even remember the name of it now. It may
come back to me.

PICHEY: Beta?

BERON: No, it wasn't Beta. Actually, no that wasn't a jock house. Beta was sort of, I
think of Beta as sort of decadent... wealthy, decadent drunks, but I may be wrong.
Isn't that funny, maybe it was D Phi. I can't remember actually, but it was the jock
house. And then junior year I dated some people. I guess I dated a guy that was a
year younger, and that extended into my senior year. A variety of things.

PICHEY: What was sex like on campus around '62 to '66?

BERON: Well, you know, people didn't talk openly about it. I remember going into
one of my friend's rooms and seeing her birth control pills. Actually, there had been
a great story about that. First there was this whole issue about not being able to get
birth control easily. Some of the girls...

[End of Part 1]

PICHEY: We interviewed Elissa Lynne Beron Arons on May 18, 1992

Beron Arons 17

BERON: All right, so it was hard to get birth control. It was difﬁcult to get
abortions. People were coming up to Boston to get illegal abortions.

PICHEY: Do you know where they would go?
BERON: I don't. But, you know, there were—
PICHEY: How did you know?

BERON: You just knew. People talked about it, and you knew somebody was sort of
away for a few days, or... You just knew. You knew through someone's roommate—
the grapevine would go out that so-and-so had just had an abortion.

PICHEY: Did women ever get septics?

BERON: I didn't know anybody who got into real trouble with it. One girl, in my
class, had to drop out of school because she got pregnant, and the guy who got her
pregnant—her boyfriend at Brown—was in ROTC, and ROTC guys were not allowed
to get married. And it was this horrendous thing. She came from a very prominent
New England family, and they had to get dispensation from the Pentagon for him to
marry her. It was this whole big thing because then they had to live off campus, and
of course none of the Pembrokers lived off campus. They would not let her walk
down the hill at graduation time because she was about eight months pregnant.
Other girls, when they got pregnant and or married—in whatever order they did—
dropped out. People just didn't finish school because of pregnancies or marriages.
It just wasn't done. Anyway, back to things like birth control and sex. It just wasn't
as openly talked about as it is now. You know, you'd see somebody's birth control
pills, you'd hear how she got them—

PICHEY: How did she get them?

BERON: She—this is a great story! She was home in New York over Christmas
vacation, she looked up in the yellow pages the name of a gynecologist. She went in,
and he said, "Oh, Miss X! When I saw your name, I took out your mother's folder!"
Out of all the gynecologists in New York, she picked her mother's gynecologist—isn't
that wonderful? Needless to day, he'd said he'd be discrete, but... There were very
funny stories like that. There was a gynecologist right near campus—I do not
remember his name, but I know somebody who went to him when she missed her
period after haVing her ﬁrst sexual encounters. And he gave her an injection—you
know, after a sort of a slight moral scolding—he gave her an injection which he said
if she were pregnant, I forget what the story was, but she was supposed to get her
period—she would get withdrawal bleeding if she were pregnant. And it turns out
she wasn't pregnant, she was just scared to death. But, you know, nothing was
straightforward about how to get yourself taken care of, how to get information. It
was just a lot of sneaking around, and hoping, and people not being very honest
about things.

Beron Arons 18

PICHEY: I just wasn't that type to just—

BERON: Girlfriends. People didn't talk openly about their sexual encounters. They
just didn't. I'm sure there were some groups who were doing that, but we were not.

PICHEY: Do you know where people had sex? There wasn't much privacy.

BERON: Well, oh—in the fraternity houses. Upstairs, in the guys' rooms. People
would sneak upstairs, that's for sure. And some of the guys had cars. And I'm sure
some people went to motel rooms and didn't tell the truth. And some guys had
apartments off campus. So there were some possibilities—they were restricted, but
they were possibilities. I'm sure that people got inventive, as they do in those
situations. I'm trying to think about other aspects of it. It was sort of a big deal,
when somebody started sleeping with your boyfriend. It was taken seriously, it was
kind of a grave and serious matter, at least among the girls—

PICHEY: Was it the first step to marriage?

BERON: Not necessarily, but it was a serious relationship, you know? At least
among my friends, people would go with somebody for a while, and they were
sleeping with them, and there was just the sense that it was a serious relationship.
But not necessarily leading to marriage. I don't think that was a presumption. The
other thing I ﬁnd myself thinking about now—the other thing, of course, was
marijuana, which was starting to be used. In my experience there, only kids who
really had access to it were the kids who were into acting. And even though I had
done some Production Workshop stuff, I was not in the inner acting group. I was
not, you know—these were kids who were sort of a little bit more bohemian. And it
was just known that they had pot, and they smoked pot. I'm trying to remember—I
think I had the opportunity [5:00]. I think I smoked pot once or twice during my
undergraduate years. But again, it wasn't rampant—it was exciting, it was a little
unusual, it was hard to get a hold of. I mean, everybody could get beer and alcohol.
But pot was more unusual, and it just was not as widespread as it then became.

You know, I think I said to you before the tape went on that there were some
girls who—there was a rule that you were not allowed to stay in a motel anywhere
within X miles of Providence, I forgot what it was. And there were a bunch of
terrific, honor student—type girls—head of the Pembroke Social Organization, etc.,
head of the, I don't know, Student Government—and a bunch of them stayed in a
motel somewhere outside of Providence on a weekend. And they were found out,
and they were all—I don't know what the proper word is—but they were
suspended for a year. They had to leave campus for a year and graduate a year late.
There was a lot of anger about the way that was dealt with, that it was just
ridiculous. Because they had been honest about where they were, and people were
furious about it. But a couple of them, I think, were Chattertocks, people who are
always very upstanding members of the community and representative of a great
Pembroke tradition.

Beron Arons 19

While I was an undergraduate, Kennedy was killed. And, as everybody else, I
remember—I was going to or from an English class. And there were some kids, I
guess, carrying transistor radios. Or somebody had just heard about it. And it felt
like the opening line of a joke, you know? You're just walking on a college campus,
and somebody, "Did you hear the President's been shot?" And so you figure, "Okay,
what's the punch line?" And then people started confirming that, in fact, it wasn't a
joke. That it really happened. And It was just awful—it was just awful. Actually,
that's right, the other thing that was before that was the Bay of Pigs. People calling
home, wondering whether we should all go home. Everybody was worrying, what
was going to happen? Was there going to be a real confrontation? Would there be a
war? People were making plans to go home. Some kids left campus. I remember
calling my parents and staying at school.

PICHEY: So during the Bay of Pigs some people left campus?

BERON: Yeah, I think so. But I know we were all very jittery. Yeah, people were
really worried it was going to blow up. The whole thing was going to blow up.

PICHEY: So, it sounds like you had quite a busy life, with the combination of the
strong academic interests, and starting the Pembroke Pandas, and doing some
acting and cartooning. Are there any other things you should tell us about your
years at Pembroke? Do you have any lasting friendships that came out of it?

BERON: Yeah, I stayed in touch with about three women closely, predominantly.

It's interesting, it's fascinating because we stay in touch by mail! We write letters!
It's such an unheard of thing—we write letters. We rarely call each other on the
phone. We just write letters, and I cherish those letters. It's so interesting, and it
really is unusual. I have absolutely wonderful memories of Pembroke. I think it was
a terrific educational and social experience for me. If I have any regrets about it, it's
that maybe I should have partied a little more. My kids certainly tell me I should
have [laughter]. That I was so concerned about getting good grades and getting into
medical school, but I probably studied too much. I remember junior or senior year,
my boyfriend, who was a year younger, played on the lacrosse team. And he
couldn't understand—he was kind of hurt that I didn't go stand on the sidelines and
cheer. And yeah, I just wasn't that type to just, you know, be a little loopy for a
sports team. It just wasn't my thing. But I also realize, as I look back, that I probably
spent a good chunk of my weekend studying! I mean, I just did my work like a good
girl.

PICHEY: Sounds like you were grind!

BERON: I know, it really does. It's amazing to think about. A couple things I
remember: some people played Bridge. I remember we used to get puzzles—
terrible jigsaw puzzles, thousand piece jigsaw puzzles—during final exam week.
And when we took study breaks we'd do them. And it was crazy because it's
addictive behaVior. Once you're into it, you can't stop [10:00]. And I remember the

Beron Arons 20

fun, the craziness of that. Losing sleep over a jigsaw puzzle when you've got a big
exam the next day. Or writing papers and staying up all night to type a twenty-five

page paper!
PICHEY: Oh, God.

BERON: The word processors now of course make all of that obsolete. But, you
know, you'd have to write things—I'd write my papers in longhand and correct
them in longhand, and then you wouldn't type it until the absolute ﬁnal copy. And it
would take you all night long, really, to type it out with footnotes.

PICHEY: So how did Pembroke prepare you?
BERON: How did Pembroke prepare me...

PICHEY: For what was to come. You got into Yale Medical School—and how did
you ﬁnd yourself prepared, academically, socially?

BERON: You know, it was pretty good. Again, I wasn't a science major. I was
clearly a Humanities major that did well enough in science to get away with being
able to take as little as possible [laughter]. Yale was a peculiar medical school to
choose in that it was very small, eighty students per year, and it had no exams. So it
was a very atypical kind of medical school. It was great for me because it meant I
could ignore the subjects I didn't like, and run to New York—some of us used to go
run to New York and get return tickets to the Metropolitan Opera. Knowing that we
were going to have to take boards, and we going to have to learn the stuff anyway,
but not necessarily have to do it in a grindy manner. In some ways, it's interesting,
haVing been such a good kid in undergraduate school, I was a little bit more
irresponsible in my early years of medical school because I found a lot of it boring.
A lot of straight sciences in the beginning. How did Pembroke prepare me? I think
that even though the social mixture was not a full demographic mixture, I think that
meeting kids from all over the country with lots of different interests, the late night
discussions, the dorm life. I loved it. I really loved liVing in a women's dorm,
actually. I wouldn't have traded that for the world. I think that the kind of
discussions and life that went on were just wonderful. I did not like dorm food. And
I think the range of academic and intellectual challenges were wonderful. I mean I
really loved my years there. I look back on them as quite idyllic. As I say, in a way
too much so because I sort of kept myselfwith blinders on, to some extent, to some
ofthe things going on in the real world. But as I've gotten older, I'm a little more
nostalgic when I go back. I really enjoy it. I've been on the Pembroke Center
Associates Council, and I've kind of enjoyed that—connecting with some people I
knew then, or didn't know but now have more reason to connect with now. There
was this series of lectures this year in the evening down at Brown, Legendary
Females, given by all great women professors. It was an extraordinary show of
brilliant, scholastic lecturing style, as well as fascinating topics. It's the kind of thing

Beron Arons 21

that never could have taken place then. Oh, my goodness, what was it called—Noon
Meeting, Wednesdays at noon...

PICHEY: Convocations.

BERON: Convocations! And they had to outlaw knitting because we would all be
knitting furiously. Everybody was knitting. And people would drop metal knitting
needles in the middle of some grand inVited speaker's talk. So they had to outlaw
knitting. God, that's so funny.

PICHEY: Did you have the cards? That had to be punched? You had to go to so
many Convocations during the course of the year. Or you get demeritted.

BERON: I don't remember that. No, I don't remember that. Probably, we were
goody-goodies enough that we went. Why did you—

PICHEY: No, no, no, I think that—
BERON: Was that earlier or later?

PICHEY: Maybe they instituted it later because it couldn't be expected that
Pembrokers would attend.

BERON: Would attend, yeah. No, we all went. We enjoyed it. They always had
wonderfully interesting speakers. You know, there was a certain specialness about
some of the things that took place that were just Pembroke. You know, we felt really
good about the identity of the school and ourselves. The times that were hard were,
you know, when the guys would dump us, or you would hear about "who would
want to go out with a Pembroker?" and the guys would run to Wheaton for their
dates. You know, that was a problem, being seen as sort of ugly and smart. It's
something many of us had dealt with a lot in our lives. And that was not pleasant.
Oh God, that's right, other things—"street meat" [15:00]. "Street meat" was the
term for local town girls, driVing by in cars on Saturday nights. And the guys would
stand, drunk, on the corner of the fraternity quad and pick up girls to take to bed.
God, "street meat," what a disgusting name that was. But it was a very real
institution.

It just was an idyllic time. It was a wonderful place for me, you know, coming
from a small town with cultural limitations to it. And despite the biases, despite the
gender difference and everything else, somehow in my academics there I got the
confidence that I could go to medical school. That I was getting a first rate
education. That I could do whatever I wanted, even if it wasn't common or
particularly acceptable in certain quarters. I never questioned it. And although the
support was ambivalent in that they didn't know where we would get in or how
we'd do, there was support. It was the beginning of the stirrings about Brown
creating a medical school, and there were a couple of us in a seminar, I guess junior
and senior years, with Dr. Barnes, one of the founders. And we were sort of the

Beron Arons 22

beginnings of medical education at Brown, just meeting in a seminar and talking
about medical education. So it's fun looking back on the beginning inklings in things
that we participated in.

PICHEY: So after you went on to Yale Medical School, and then you went to
Harvard?

BERON: I transferred in the middle of medical school because I got married in the
middle.

PICHEY: You met your husband at Yale?

BERON: I met my husband at Yale, and he was three years ahead of me. And I was a
ﬁrst year student, he was a fourth year student. We started dating at the very end of
the year. He came up to Boston for his training, and we continued dating the next
year. We got married in the middle of medical school for me, so I finished my
medical school education at Harvard, and then continued my post-medical school
training at Harvard Hospitals. Residency in Psychiatry. During which time I had
two babies, during residency. But Psychiatry residency—the program I was in was
very civilized, and they let those of us who had babies ﬁgure out how we were going
to do it. And I was very lucky. I took an extra year to complete my residency. I
didn't have to work full time after I had a baby. I had a very civilized head of my
program. So I've been very, very fortunate. On the one hand, choosing medicine
feels like this enormous undertaking. On the other hand, picking a career where you
can be independent, earn enough money to sort of carve out your own niche and
determine what kind of working life you're going to have is a fantastic luxury. And I
really feel like taking great advantage of that. It's only in recent years now that my
kids are older that I'm really working full time. And I have always very much been
my own boss.

PICHEY: Do you travel much?

BERON: No, I do not travel much. I'm a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst in practice,
which means I am seeing a lot of hours of patients a day, and my patients need me to
be around. So I do not travel much. I'm not an academician at all. I'm very much a
clinician. I'm not particularly in academic research or anything. I'm just interested
in seeing patients. I've done psychoanalytic training in more recent years, and will
be doing some teaching. I've been teaching all along, teaching residents a little bit,
and I'll be doing some psychoanalytic teaching now too. But again, it's all primarily
clinically oriented. And I would guess that that will continue. But my work life has
just been enormously rewarding. Very interesting. And, you know, it feels like a
continuous line—the evolution from a Biology major to a Humanities major. Going
to medical school and ending up in psychiatry. It's all part of the same thing. The
interest in how people work and think. And talking to people—when I was a
pediatric intern at Children's Hospital, some of the most powerful moments there
had to do with dealing with families with terribly ill or dying children. That was

Beron Arons 23

what was most compelling for me. And part of my pediatric work that was the
hardest was haVing dying children on one's hands and not being able to do much
about it. You know, depending on the illness. I hated haVing somebody's life in my
hands like that. I was very relieved to be out of that situation. I didn't want
somebody's life or death to depend on whether I had read a certain formula or
remembered the exact dose of something. I mean, I was very idealistic at the time,
and very altruistic. Psychiatry just felt more, I don't know, it was more interesting
and more comfortable. I really loved my work.

So I have three daughters. One's in college already, one's heading off to
college next year, and the third one is a ninth grader. And, you know, it feels like the
world's at their feet. They are just dealing with such a different world in terms of
what's open to them.

PICHEY: Think any of them will go to Pembroke? Or, I guess it's no longer
Pembroke, It's Brown!

BERON: It's Brown! Well, the only possibility is the third one, and actually she has
an inkling towards it. The ﬁrst two—the first one's already in college, she's a
sophomore at Barnard, the second one's going to Yale next fall. And the third one—
maybe we'll get the third one to Brown. We'll see, it's hard to get in. It's a very hot
school now. That's the other thing that's so funny. Watching the evolution of the
reputations over the years. Brown being such a hard school, such a hot school—

PICHEY: I ﬁnd it quite amusing. When I went to Brown it was where people who
couldn't get into Harvard went.

BERON: Right! That's right, that's right. And now people are turning down
Harvard to go to Brown, it really happens. Um, I don't know, are there things I
haven't covered?

PICHEY: Well I think you've done a good job. Thanks very much.

BERON: You're welcome.
