
Barbara Raab: If you could just introduce yourself, and just give us like a little bullet point run-down of
the different positions that you’ve held here at Brown.
Elizabeth Weed: I’m Elizabeth Weed, and I came to Brown in, I actually got my PhD at Brown, but after
that, I came back to Brown in 1977 as the Director of the Sarah Doyle Women’s Center. And then I was
founding Associate Director of the Pembroke Center, and a… also founding editor of differences, a
Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies, and a faculty adjunct in Women’s Studies and in Modern Culture
and Media.
Raab: And then you were Director of the Pembroke Center for a while.
Weed: Oh yeah, I was, I was with the Pembroke Center forever. From 1981 until I retired in 2000. So, I
was a, I was—what, Associate Director, I was Acting Director, I was Associate Director, I was Acting
Director, I was Director, I was Director for ten years.
Raab: Okay and now just officially you are retired from Brown, is that…
Weed: I am retired, yeah. This is the first year I’m not teaching, so I’m really retired.
Raab: So I just want to, just, ask you a couple of other things kind of, chronology-wise just to be sure
that, that I understand this. So you came to Brown as the part-time Director, or the first Director—
Weed: No, full time.
Raab: Not the part-time Director of Sarah Doyle, initially?
Weed: Full time.
Raab: Okay.
Weed: I would not have come for a part-time job, right?
Raab: In ‘77.
Weed: Mhmm.

1

Raab: What was the year that you received your PhD from Brown?
Weed: ‘73.
Raab: And so then in those ensuing years you were teaching at Wheaton.
Weed: I was teaching at Wheaton from 1970—
Raab: But, continuing to live in Providence?
Weed: Yeah, why?
Raab: Well, I’m just trying to get a sense of whether… when you came to Brown as the Director of Sarah
Doyle, you had still been living in the community and you knew people here. You weren’t coming back
sort of with no community, right? You were here that whole time.
Weed: I knew one or two people.
Raab: Okay. So, when, did you know Louise Lamphere?
Weed: Not until I came back.
Raab: So, can you just talk a little about how you first met her? When you first met her?
Weed: I don’t remember exactly our first meeting. But… So was Louise here in seventy—when the
Consent Decree was signed in ‘77, where was Louise?
Raab: She was not here in ‘77.
Weed: Right, so I didn’t meet her then until she came back.
Raab: But that’s why I was wondering since you had been here as a student and then continued to have
your home base here, whether she and others—
Weed: No.
Raab: …in her either professional or social circle…
Weed: No. I didn’t know her. I mean, graduate students didn’t know people in Anthropology. I was a
graduate student in French; I didn’t know people in Anthropology. You know, it’s not the way it worked.
So I really didn’t know her until… I came back as an employee at Brown and then she, and when she
came back. And I don’t remember the exact year when she came back. But then I, then I was, you know,
2

with her all the time because she was very much part of the feminist community and we were working on
developing Women’s Studies. And yeah, and we became good friends and so forth.
Raab: So we’ll get to all that in a minute. But, one of the things I’m curious about is when you were
teaching at Wheaton, the lawsuit at least during part of that time was under way. Were you aware of it?
Weed: No.
Raab: Did you know about it?
Weed: Not much. I mean, I followed it somewhat. But, it was not something, you know, I lived in
Providence but my professional life was there. And I really wasn’t paying that much attention to the
lawsuit.
Raab: And then when you, well how did it happen that you actually ended up coming back here to be the
Director of Sarah Doyle?
Weed: Because the outlook for French Studies was not terrific in those days. And I had, actually while I
was at Wheaton I had been doing some feminist development. Working on developing programs in
feminist theory and so forth. And this job was open and I first looked at it and said, “I don’t want to run a
women’s center. I have no interest in that whatsoever.” But, it turned out that the description of the job
was a feminist research center. So the people—and I want to talk about where that came from. But it was
the, it was developing the Women’s Studies, developing feminist scholarship and so forth part that
interested me. So that’s why I took the job. Because I saw that there might be some interesting future.
And there was.
Raab: So you, you know, answered an ad kind of thing? It was just a job that was posted and you said,
“Oh, that looks interesting,”? Or was it that you knew it because you were friends with some of the
people who were also interested in that kind of scholarship.
Weed: A person, a friend of mine, brought it to my attention. And said, “Listen, this is something you
should look at.” So.
Raab: And so when, I’m assuming that when you applied for this job, it was probably sometime in 1976ish, [5:00] right?
Weed: I guess.
Raab: And the case was not settled by then. The case was ongoing at that point. So I was just trying to
get a sense of when you became really—so here you’re coming to, to do what you thought was start a
feminist research center at Brown, and yet there’s this kind of raging sex discrimination lawsuit under
way.
3

Weed: Yeah, which was a good thing. I mean by the time that I figured out that it was happening and so
forth, I thought, “No, this is excellent. This is excellent. This is a good sign; things are happening at
Brown.”
Raab: A person could have thought, “Oh my God, I don’t want to go there.”
Weed: That’s not me.
Raab: What—Talk a little bit more about what made you say, “Excellent. Good.”
Weed: Because I thought the job had potential, and I wanted to be in Providence.
Raab: But you had no concerns about coming to a campus where…
Weed: No, on the contrary, if you’re going to go to a campus—a university and try to change the way
people think about the production of knowledge, you want somebody to be suing the university for sex
discrimination. I mean this is a good thing, not a bad thing.
Raab: Okay, so you come here in the fall of ‘77.
Weed: Yeah, in August, actually. August first, yeah.
Raab: And by this point there is a Consent Decree.
Weed: Yes.
Raab: And I’m assuming you were aware of that?
Weed: Yes. Oh, very much so. Yes.
Raab: Talk about that a little bit. Did you, do you, I know it’s a long time ago, but do you have, do you
remember kind of what your reaction was to the fact that now there was a settlement of this suit, which in
many ways did a lot of great things for women at Brown. But, there was no trial.
Weed: Let me just tell you… let me just tell you—there was no what?
Raab: No trial.
Weed: Oh no, that was… the fact that it was a Consent Decree was a very good thing. And, you know, I
just, I have, I was thinking about what was it like when I came here in August of ‘77. And there were
three things going on in my—three things that I was, I was attuned to. The first thing was that Brown had
4

become a hot school. From the time I left to the time I came back, Brown was a hot school. The reason it
was a hot school was because of the New Curriculum. Period. And so all of these exciting academic
things were happening. And that, I was very attracted to that. So yeah, so so the whole, the whole world
of, of the university was beginning to change. And Brown was at the forefront of these changes. And so,
you know, there were things like modes of thought courses and independent studies and so forth, but
there—independent concentrations. There were also in the departments, you know, various faculty,
particularly in the humanities and in Anthropology, faculty, and Anne Fausto-Sterling as a, as a one
exception for the sciences, you know really beginning to question the foundations of their disciplines in
exciting ways. And so, the kind of feminist scholarship that was going on in that context, that was just
beginning in that context, the kind of courses that Louise and Anne Fausto-Sterling were offering were
sort of part of that whole thing.
Okay so that was one thing that was going on. Another thing that was going on was institutional
feminism. And that was because of the merger. So in 1971 there’s a merger with Brown and Pembroke.
And the most important thing in my mind that happened from that merger was the Minority Report. It was
a Minority Report signed, in particular by Sophie Blistein who became a friend, I knew Sophie quite well.
That really called for some serious attention being given to women. Because they assumed, and they were
absolutely right, that once Pembroke College, which was actually a more exclusive, selective college than
the university, than Brown, than the Brown college, and that was extremely well respected, that all of the
strengths and the wonderful uniqueness of Pembroke would just be folded into Brown. And of course
everybody wants to be a man, right? We all want to just be Brown. And they were absolutely right to have
that worry. Because I saw that happening in a number of different places in my little job that I had. So
what they called for, and I brought this along because I, it, it it was so, it’s about—it’s connected to the
Consent Decree. So the majority, the majority report on the merger recommended the merging of the
offices of all college offices, which did not happen. The increase of the number of women students, which
did happen. And an increase in the number of women faculty. Now, that did not happen until the Consent
Decree. There was no—between 1971 and 1977 there was no increase in women faculty. It was the last
thing on people’s minds [10:00]. The, the Minority Report, that was the Minority Report, this is wrong,
that’s a typo. It’s the Minority Report that recommended that, and the Minority Report also recommended
the establishment of a Women’s Center to be charged with the development of special programs for
women and to act as a research center and data bank for special problems of women in society. And that
Minority Report kind of laid the groundwork for the institutional feminism that became stronger and
stronger during the late seventies and into the eighties.
Raab: Did you notice, you were, so you were a student here in the early seventies and you came back in
‘77. I’m curious whether—
Weed: I came as a graduate student in ‘64, and I left in ‘70.
Raab: So what was your experience, just as a graduate student? A woman graduate student? And then
coming back in ‘77. Just curious if you felt the atmosphere, the ambiance on campus for women was very
different. Maybe talk about each of those periods of time. When you were here as a graduate student…

5

Weed: I was teaching, I was teaching undergraduates and I saw the dynamic that was going on between
the men and the women. The men used to go to Wheaton to get girlfriends because the Pembroke women
were too smart. You know, it was as simple as that. I mean there was this, there’s this real tension
between the Pembroke women and the Brown men. And I don’t know if that was, like, everywhere. But
in my French classes, I saw it. And, you know, they were, they were, it was hard times. The late sixties
were hard times to, to be an undergraduate at Brown because they were struggling against the parietals,
they really wanted, the women really wanted to get rid of it. Rid of the parietals, rid of the whole, you
know that sort of constrictive system. And, you know, historical change was in the air, so. And that’s
what I knew, that’s what I saw. And then when I came back I saw that things were changing. Things had
changed quite a bit, yeah.
Raab: So you said you wanted to return to what you mentioned about what seemed appealing to you
about coming here.
Weed: Well, no, I want to return to what I was saying. There were three things; I didn’t get to the third
thing.
Raab: I’m sorry.
Weed: There were three things. The one was that intellectual excitement. The, sort of, change in the
whole way that we think about the production of knowledge. Two, was institutional feminism thanks to
the Minority Report. And three was this other thing, which was what happened after the Consent Decree.
So I come in; I have a job in a brand-new little Women’s Center. Not totally brand-new, it had been in
existence for a couple of years. And I have only an adjunct faculty appointment. I am, I am dog shit,
right? [laughing] As far as a lot of these faculty were concerned. I was nobody. I mean, zero. Next to
nobody. Beneath nobody. And I had to interact with all these faculty about promoting feminist
scholarship. What a great job, right? And so I was very, very attuned to the atmosphere after the Consent
Decree. And of course this was, I’m sure this had been building up all those years that I wasn’t there. And
I think there, again I think there were three different reactions. Now I’m, I don’t want to give the
impression that the entire faculty and administration were this way. There were many wonderful fellow
travelers among the men, and so forth. But there were certain quarters of the university where there was
intense displeasure about the Consent Decree. And the three reactions were—one was anger. Because you
have to understand that up until the Consent Decree faculty departments did whatever the hell they
wanted. It was total autonomy. All the business we have now about, you know, procedures in order to
guarantee transparency when it comes to recruiting, and hiring and promoting and tenuring, nothing like
that existed. A guy in Brown called up his friend at Princeton and said, “Send me your best graduate
student.” They hired him. And if the guy got along with everybody and fit in and if they thought his work
was good, they gave him tenure. You know, I mean, it was just outrageous to these people that, that an
outside body, a court, would have anything, could interfere with their autonomy. So that was anger. There
was also fear or apprehension. And that was that this whole process was going to bring in hordes of
inferior people, women, who would ruin the university, and undermine [15:00] academic freedom.

6

Raab: So this was a misunderstanding of what the Consent Decree required. It did not require accepting
anybody with credentials that were less.
Weed: Right, well you just try to convince people of that, right? Because, and this, this brings me to the
third thing, which is contempt, there was in a lot of people’s minds no way on earth that a woman’s
credentials could be equal to men’s. Period. That it doesn’t matter what it says on paper, it’s not the same
because it’s a woman. You have to understand this deep, deep misogyny. And so I, I just, I sort of
absorbed, I mean I just was fascinated by the sort of intensity of the contemptuous dismissal of the
possibility that women could work on an equal footing. So, I mean, they didn’t, for example, there would
be these excuses “Well there’s no pool of applicants. There’s no pool.” It would never occur to them that
there was no pool because there had been systemic discrimination against women in engineering from the
beginning and therefore there’s a very small pool. And that, if someone emerged at the top of that pool it
was probably because they had worked harder than anybody else, and they were probably better than
anybody else, right? That was beyond imagination for a lot of these people.
Raab: Can I just ask, how were you hearing these things? How were these things coming out?
Weed: They were said, they were talk. I mean many many different venues. And I was, you know, my
job was going around to various departments and talking about encouraging people to bring in feminist
scholars for, to give lectures. Because one of the things we were trying to do is to get some of these more
recalcitrant departments like Economics and so forth, to just invite one feminist scholar in the field, and
just sort of let them get a little more acquainted with the idea of a woman speaking about their field. So, I
came into contact with people in all different contexts: In faculty meetings—I mean, you know, I…
Raab: And so people really had no shame or embarrassment…
Weed: No. Absolutely not. Absolutely not. And there are still quarters in the university where a certain
kind of contemptuous dismissal of a woman in a field would still happen.
Raab: Can I ask you—
Weed: It’s very—I mean, did you hear just what I said? This is 2014. There are still places where this can
happen today. It’s much much rarer. And it’s probably a lot harder to get away with, but it still happens
and I know that for a fact.
Raab: At that time, I know there were not a lot of women faculty on campus, but was there any
consensus among the women faculty who you met, and spoke to or heard from, about their feelings about
this Consent Decree? Was there unanimity that this was a terrific thing?
Weed: Yeah I mean all the women I dealt with were feminist types. So I don’t know about the others, you
know. I mean, I suppose some people felt a little threatened. Because it’s very hard when you have the
powers-that-be believing that women scholars are inferior, to then be outed as a woman, right? [laughs]
7

And, so, I mean here’s some poor woman who’s trying to make your way in Geology or something and
suddenly you’re a woman! And, you know, it’s a very difficult situation. But of course, the people I
worked with were, were, were not people who felt like that. But I mean Louise was considered by… I
don’t know, I can’t say percentages, but a significant percentage of the people at Brown as inferior, and
totally unworthy of having gotten tenure. And because it’s not only that she was a woman, but that she
was doing feminist work, which was absolutely beyond the pale and made people throw up. So these,
these were very primitive times. And you know, you have to understand the passion with which people
had these feelings. I mean it wasn’t just abstract. They were angry, they were apprehensive, and they had
enormous contempt. And it was enough people so that I have vivid memories, okay? And it was not just,
it was not just faculty, there were also some administrators. And fortunately I have a very thick skin, and
a sense of humor, and I know how to [20:00] be insincere and ingratiating and so forth and so on. So I got
along fine. And I think all of us had strategies for dealing with these creeps.
Raab: What do you mean by that?
Weed: Well you all have your strategy, you know?
Raab: Well here you came here to, what you thought was build a feminist studies center—
Weed: I knew, no I knew what I was getting into. I mean, I, the thing that I did—look I had, I had done
some of this work at Wheaton trying to have a program of fem—a yearlong program of feminist
scholarship, right? And even though Wheaton was a women’s college, there were plenty of nervous
people at Wheaton. It didn’t come as a shock to me that there was this enormous contempt. No, I just…
you know it’s… Brown is bigger and the stakes were bigger. But it was fun because we were all working
together, you know? I mean, Louise was, Louise was a terrific person to have done this because she
assumed leadership without, you know, without it being explicit. I mean she was, she was just a terrific
political person herself, and a very easy person to work with.
Raab: I know you weren’t here when she went up for tenure, and you didn’t actually come here until
after the Consent Decree was signed, but is there, do you have any sense that when she—first of all
initially, and again you weren’t here, but she requested to go up early for tenure and I believe that request
was just out and out turned down. And then she went up for tenure on schedule—do you think she had
any sense at that point, one: that she was going to run into trouble, two:
Weed: I can’t speak to it, I don’t know! I didn’t know Louise at the time!
Raab: I thought maybe you’d talked about it since.
Weed: All I know is what I’ve heard—you know, what I heard afterwards. It, I gather that, I’m sorry to
interrupt you, but I mean I just don’t know any of the answers to those questions. I’m the ambiance
person, right? I just, I think from listening to Louise at the time and then more recently, that if she had not
started doing feminist work she might have had an easier time of it.
8

Raab: And is it, well, I know you weren’t here but even in your discussions with her, do you think she
kind of knew that in real time? Or kind of after the fact.
Weed: I don’t know, you have to… I’m not the person, I can’t answer question that I don’t know.
Raab: So one thing we talked about on the phone was I think what you talked about as a rich network of
support for her on campus, and I’m really interested in that. Can you talk about that? When you say a rich
network of support, what do you mean?
Weed: After that wonderful minority report, after the merger, there were a number of people on campus
who got to work right away and made the Women’s Center thing happen. The two people I remember
very clearly because they were there for me to work with when I arrived, was Karen Romer, who was the
Associate Dean of the College, who’s fantastic and really one of the great architects of the New
Curriculum and all of the things that went, like feminist studies and women’s studies. And Kay Hall who
was a sociologist and, and was terrific about, you know, getting the statistics that we needed, the data that
we needed, the proof that we needed about, you know, what was going on, where. And they and a number
of other people, faculty, people like Louise and Anne Fausto-Sterling and so forth, started a group of
faculty, administrative group. And they got to work right away. And so before I even came to the job, I
was getting memos from, we didn’t have email in those days, I was getting actual memos in paper from
Karen Romer saying, “Here’s some good things for you to know.” And so I came into a community of
people who were working to build a feminist program at Brown.
Raab: And when you say you would get memos, you know, “Here’s some things you should know,”
meaning what? About what we’re thinking about with respect to…
Weed: Yeah, what this faculty group has done and the kinds of courses that we’re trying to work on. And
just anything that was relevant. And so I really came feeling that, you know, I had a great group of people
to work with. And it was true. And then of course, excuse me, the faculty and administration are there
over the long haul, and then there are students who come in and out. And there would be students who
would be very interested in some of the programs that we were doing and were very helpful. So yeah, it
was a terrific [25:00] group of people. And then, and then the, what was interesting was this same group
had convinced the administration to revive the Nancy Duke Lewis Chair which is the first chair, and only
chair that had been established for women, and it had been defunct because ever since Rosemary…what’s
her name…
Raab: The Dean of Pembroke.
Weed: No, no, not Rosemary Pierrel but the first person to hold the Nancy Duke Lewis Chair. I’m sorry,
she died. And then after that it just disappeared. And they convinced the administration to revive it in this
context of this sort of institutional feminism. So this is, so things are sort of percolating, so. What they did
at the beginning, because it wasn’t funded, it wasn’t fully funded by any means, was agree to bring in a
9

visiting faculty person for a semester. Just one semester. To be a visiting person in the chair. And the first
person who came in was Lynn Aston. Absolutely amazing woman. A psychologist who did educational
psychology from UCLA, a Greek woman who was so seductive. None of the administrators could resist
her; I mean she was so incredibly wonderful. And she was the one who worked with the group of us, I
mean, say, bring in this distinguished person from outside, and she’s able to have a certain kind of
leverage with the fac—with the administration that some of the people who had been working here for a
long time didn’t have. And so she really was instrumental in convincing the people to, the administration,
the upper administration, to get serious about the Nancy Duke Lewis Chair.
Raab: What year was this, about? ‘79-ish?
Weed: Yeah we’re talking late seventies. To fund the Nancy Duke Lewis Chair and to hire a permanent
person.
Raab: And that’s when Joan Scott…
Weed: And this is a huge thing, right. And then the second person came, who came in, the next year, I
think it was ‘79, was an economist Ann Seidman. And Ann Seidman and I worked on this, and a team of
students and faculty, worked on this program of having a, throughout, I think it was spring semester,
having a program in every single department on campus that was appropriate (I mean it wasn’t, we didn’t
have anything in Physics) that had a feminist speaker, a feminist scholar speak. And that was huge. I
mean, you’re talking about every single department including Economics, including, you know,
Mathematics.
Raab: So it, while all this is going on, you have this parallel track happening sort of writ large, which is
the implementation of this Consent Decree. First of all, for you, were you at all involved in anything the
AAMC did?
Weed: No, no, because I was not a regular—I was an adjunct faculty member.
Raab: So you’re doing your stuff that you’re describing over here, and at the same time you have, kind of
at the university, there is this whole new system now for evaluation, for hiring, for promotion, for tenure.
Weed: Right. And so these departments are, some of them, pissed as hell, because they’re having to take
their candidates for jobs and so forth to the committee, and at the same time I’m going in and saying,
“Wouldn’t it be great [laughing] to have a feminist scholar come and give a lecture? We have money,
we’ll give it to you,” and so forth and so on. We had a little bit of money that we were trying to…
Raab: So how’d that go?
Weed: Yeah, well, it was great! It succeeded. And we had this program that went on all semester. And
every single appropriate department participated in one way or another. But, yeah, I mean, you know, the
10

actual, as you said, I mean, the Consent Decree was not about to destroy academic freedom. It was not
about to force people down people’s throats. It certainly was not intended to take jobs away from people
of color. I mean, you know, Louise had tried to get that in there, that there would be an exception for any
man of color who was offered a job, but that was not accepted. So, I mean, the, certainly the intention of
the Consent Decree was very positive, very creative. But, it was not perceived that way.
Raab: And did you find over the decade—
Weed: If you’re the chair of a department, you do not think that this is a good thing. I mean you’re just,
you’re just infuriated. And especially since you’ve had to, you know, had it your own way for a long long
time. Now, again, I’m just talking about, and maybe I’m exaggerating the resistance, maybe it’s not as
great as I thought. People like [30:00] Karen Newman and so forth can talk about the reality of, of what
people, you know, what the various department heads were like and so forth.
Raab: But from where you sat, over that, let’s say decade or a little longer.
Weed: Yeah, the absorber of, of contempt. I was the absorber of contempt.
Raab: Yeah, did you notice over that period of time that maybe, you know, people realized that it, wasn’t
what, as terrible as they thought. Did you get a sense over that period of time, let’s say, I’m calling it ten
years, it was a little longer. But when the, when the Consent Decree was in effect, had not yet, you know
gone, I forget the exact legal term, but, was in effect and was governing all of these procedures, that
people over time kind of softened their position about what a disaster it was, or did you feel the whole
entire time—
Weed: I mean yes, I mean there was a softening. There was a softening. You know people get used to it.
They actually hire a woman and she turns out to be, you know, not as castrating as they were afraid she,
or not as stupid as they thought she would be. You know, all these things. Yes, of course things got better.
Raab: And one other question: at that period, during that period of time, or even maybe when you first
came here, do you remember whether undergraduates, undergraduate women, even undergraduate women
who were very involved in the things you were working on, were even aware of this lawsuit, of the
Consent Decree?
Weed: I don’t think they were very aware. I don’t know, I don’t know, were you?
Raab: Well, I worked on the paper and I was, because…
Weed: So you were on the paper, yeah I don’t know. I mean they were very involved in their own
projects. I mean, the students helped a lot with this year long, or this semester long extravaganza of
programs and so forth. And they were certainly aware that not all the male faculty were thrilled with
feminism [laughing]. You know, I mean they were a group of wonderful students, I don’t know, I never
11

remember when, but it was probably in the eighties, who, yes it was definitely the mid-eighties, who,
who, went to department chairs and asked to speak to departments about sexual harassment. Which I
thought was incredibly ballsy. I mean they’re going, these are undergraduates speaking at a departmental
meeting explaining what sexual discrimination, sex discrimination was like in the classroom. And I
thought that was wonderful. They were terrific.
Raab: Do you, so, but most of the undergraduates were not explicitly aware that there had been this suit,
that there had been, that there was this Consent Decree, so—
Weed: No, nor should they have been, really.
Raab: To what degree, looking back at it, to what degree do you think its existence, the lawsuit, the
Consent Decree and the things that went on because of it, had any effect, or maybe had none?
Weed: It totally changed the university. The university was never the same again. It changed everything!
I mean, it changed everything. Now, I’m a little biased. I suppose that if I had been in… you know, a
certain area of physics, or something, I might not have noticed that anything changed. But it changed
everything. And, I was fortunate enough to find this morning this chart that shows the percentage of
tenured faculty women at various institutions, and this is from 1976 to 1986. And Brown is way on the
top.
Raab: And that is, I would presume, the direct effect of the goals and timetables for hiring, promotion
and tenure.
Weed: That’s exactly right. Exactly right. Because if you look at Columbia, Harvard, and Yale, you’re
seeing a very very different story. And of course these are tiny numbers, too. We’re not talking about
huge numbers; we’re talking about having gone at Brown from three percent in 1976 to eleven percent in
1986. This is not huge. But, those numbers are really great. And other institutions really paid attention to
the Lamphere suit.
Raab: And you are persuaded that the line would not look like that had there been no Lamphere suit?
Weed: Oh, it’s absolutely, it’s a fact.
Raab: Despite the other things that were going on on campus, that we’ve talked about?
Weed: Campus things had, would have had no effect whatsoever. And that’s why I mention that the
Minority Report had, had demanded or whatever that there be more women on campus. That would never
happen! I mean where was this impetus going to come from?
Raab: And the undergraduates would, their actions [35:00] would not have made that happen?

12

Weed: Undergraduates are going to get the departments to—no. I mean I think that this idea that
somehow it was in the air and it was all going to change, I think it’s a fantasy. I’m sorry. I mean, I hate to
be hyper realistic, but these departments, these academic departments, are powerful and entrenched. They
have certain notions about what is good, what is acceptable, and how business is done. And there was no
way that they were going to change the way that they did business just because a thousand undergraduates
demanded it. Or just because Gloria Steinem is making speeches, or because even, even because some
maybe law was being passed federally. I’m sorry. It’s about, it’s about your work, about your profession,
it’s about the way you think about the practice of history or the practice of chemistry or whatever. I mean,
you’re not going to be, say, “Oh, you know what, I really ought to give some thought to the fact that
we’re all white men.”
Raab: Well, along those lines, and I don’t know if you’re in a position to speak to this, but I’ll ask
anyway. Judge Pettine was, was pretty out there, for a establishment, Rhode Island, downtown—
Weed: God bless him.
Raab: Do you have any sense at all, again, I don’t know if this is like anywhere near your circles of
experience—
Weed: All I know is he is a saint. Saint Pettine. And I know that, yeah.
Raab: But, in some ways… looking at it before it ever happened, one could have thought that he would
have the same, he’d be kind of like one of these department chairs. He kind of came from that world.
Weed: No, he was at, he was a judge and he was a lawyer. And I don’t, I have no idea what –
Raab: He belonged to the University Club
Weed: Okay.
Raab: Was part of that establishment. And so,
Weed: But do you, are you saying that he made his decision because he was a good guy?
Raab: No, I’m not saying anything. I’m saying what was your perception, was it surprising, and again I
don’t know if this is a part—
Weed: I think if we had waited around for the good guys to come along and change things, we wouldn’t
have seen anything yet… I mean, good guys, it’s nice to have some good guys, there were good guys.
Yeah, there was Judge Pettine, who read the law in a certain way, and I don’t know his formation, and I
don’t know what got him to read the law the way he read the law. And we certainly had wonderful, as I
said, male fellow travelers on campus. But, that would not have been enough to change.
13

Raab: Well what about some of the things I’ve heard about for years that I don’t really have first hand
knowledge of but maybe you do. These so-called “smoking guns” or the so-called “smoking gun” that
may have made a big difference. Do you—
Weed: Yeah, God bless the “smoking guns,” too.
Raab: Can you talk about those?
Weed: No.
Raab: Why not?
Weed: Because it’s not my position to do that.
Raab: It’s forty years later.
Weed: No, it’s Louise’s choice to speak about smoking guns, not mine.
Raab: Okay.
Weed: I certainly know all about smoking guns. But, I think—
Raab: How smoking—well let me ask you this—
Weed: I mean the thing is look, if, if someone is going to write something so egregious in a letter or in a
memo, or whatever, that it could be used as a smoking gun, it just demonstrates what I’m saying about the
contempt for women. I mean it doesn’t even occur to the person who does this, that this might be an
actionable act. That this, this might not be something that should be written down. So there wasn’t even
that sense of propriety, which now of course there is. I mean people know they have to, you know, have
to avoid using certain words, and avoid saying certain things. I mean, there’s propriety now. But there
wasn’t even propriety in the old days.
Raab: Well, was it your sense, and again, I know you don’t want to get specific about it, but based on
what you know, that had those things been made public for a trial or some other way, that at that time,
they would have been smoking guns to anybody who were to see them, or read them. Or were they—
Weed: I think people would’ve thought that, “I would’ve said the same thing but boy, was that stupid to
write it down!”
Raab: Were they things that had this, had this case gone to trial, probably would have sunk the
university? Or maybe not so much?
14

Weed: What would sink the—I don’t understand what are you saying?
Raab: I don’t know what was in those papers, but I suppose if there were explicit—
Weed: Look it, if the university [40:00] was concerned enough by the smoking guns to go for a Consent
Decree…
Raab: Is that you sense of why that happened?
Weed: You’re asking the wrong person. I’m not, I am not going to just, you know… I don’t know. Talk
to other people. Talk to Don Rohr, and talk to Maurice Glicksman if you can, and talk to Louise, and the
people who really know. So, yeah.
Raab: Other things that you may want to say about kind of the case’s effect on the university, we’re now
in 2014, here’s the state of Brown. Just to kind of, kind of step way back and talk about the legacy.
Weed: I think, you know, I mean, I really do think that feminist, organized feminism and academic
feminism did a number of good things, in the seventies and eighties. And some things not so great. But I
think that this very careful choice of whom to sue and when, whom to bring a Consent Decree—I mean a
class action suit against, and when, is just brilliant feminist strategy. You know, I mean, Louise gave a
great deal of thought and strategy to this suit.
Raab: I haven’t heard that before; can you just explain a little bit more?
Weed: I mean it was part of… institutional feminism, or, you know, feminists working within institutions
at the time were trying to figure out, “How do we change these monoliths?” I mean, what do you do? If
you’re going to wait around for the good guys to recognize that we are also smart, you know, we’ll all be
dead. So, so, Consent, I mean, why do I keep calling it consent—class action suits are, is a strategy. I
mean Louise isn’t the only one to have done it. She’s one of the few to succeed. But, so these were, I
mean, so, so, so it wasn’t, you know, Louise didn’t pull it out of thin air. It was a, it was a strategy
available to people and I feel, I always, I was just always in awe of how skillfully and carefully Louise
and her team did it.
Raab: Well, and I know you said earlier, you weren’t here earlier when those decisions were made.
Weed: No, but I was here, I was very much a pa—privy to the personal team after the Consent Decree.
And at that point, there were still things that needed to be done. And things that needed to be worked on,
and fine points and so forth. And I saw how these people worked. And they were serious, really serious,
principled and enormously smart.
Raab: And when you talk about the team, are you talking about the legal team?
15

Weed: No, no, no. Well, I mean I’m talking about Louise’s group of friends and then also the way they
worked with their lawyers, yeah. Yeah. And, it’s sort of a personal team and an extended team, yeah.
Raab: So on the issue of, of making this a class action, or attempting to and succeeding in making it a
class action, again I know you were not here at the time but from what you now know, was the impetus
for that from the lawyers, was it from Louise?
Weed: I don’t know, ask Louise. But I do know that it was a feminist move. I mean this is how you do
systemic change, right? It’s not individual; it’s systemic. And Louise was all about the systemic and had
the analysis of the systemic and you know it was…
Raab: Well and as you probably know, there came a point just sort of before there was actually a Consent
Decree, when, if I have my facts straight, I think Howard Swearer offered three or four of the women in
the case, you know, an opportunity for their tenure cases to be reviewed if they would drop the suit. And
they, if I have this right, said “No.” Which is part of what you’re talking about, which is this isn’t just
about give me mine.
Weed: And it is very much a feminist strategy that was available to people. And they used it. And they
used it well, and they used it with principle. And they, you know, it was just a great example of, of a
certain feminist success. I mean there are other things I think have not been so successful in feminist
efforts. But that, that use of the, of the lawsuit I thought was terrific.
Raab: Anything else that I should have asked you and it didn’t occur to me to ask you that you’d like to
talk about?
Weed: Well no, I mean, I was thinking back aways when I was talking about the contempt factor.
…We’re so used, now, to the [45:00] … identity politics, which I’m not thrilled with, but you know we’re
so used to being sensitive to questions of gender and questions of race and so forth. And, these were not
questions that… came, these were not sensitivities that came natural, naturally to people. And I’m
thinking, just to use the example of race: Howard Swearer was a terrific president, and as I’ve said
elsewhere and as I will say over and over again, none of the great things that happened at Brown could
have happened anyplace but Brown, and we were very lucky to have Howard Swearer as President
because he was enlightened and he was terrific and he was very helpful in many ways. But, he, he also
needed to be brought along in terms of his sensitivity regarding things like gender and race. And I think
about the race thing in particular because it was… and I don’t remember the time, but Joan Scott was still
here so it must have been the early eighties when some kind of egregious racial attack had happened or
something and there was, you know in those days there were always these wonderful “community
meetings,” and I remember Joan Scott being on stage saying, “There is racism on the Brown campus,”
and Howard Swearer being on stage saying, “There is not racism on the Brown campus.” Because you
didn’t say that, that our wonderful institution was racist. That was unthinkable to even say that, you
know? And I thought Joan was incredibly brave, saying, “There is racism on this campus.” That even,
16

even just to think that way was revolutionary. And this is, let’s say, 1984, ‘83, ‘84. So, I think that one
has to imagine what the mindset was in those, in those days.
Raab: Well what’s interesting about that when you say it, what jumps to my mind is, Louise Lamphere
said, and brought a lawsuit to say, “There is sexism on this campus.”
Weed: Exactly, that’s why I’m saying it.
Raab: And the Consent Decree, at the end of the day… one of the things that happened because there was
a settlement, and a settlement extremely favorable to the plaintiffs, was nonetheless, nobody had to
officially, legally, admit that there was sexism on campus.
Weed: Exactly. Exactly. Exactly. And that’s exactly what I’m trying to say. So, now, we’re very very
familiar with things like racism and sexism and homophobia and all that stuff. But, this was not the way
people were, were accustomed to thinking, in the eighties. At least, not everybody.
Raab: Or in the seventies.
Weed: Of course, our little—of course, certainly not the seventies. Our little radical groups, you know, of
feminists and so forth, of course we were. I mean we were, we were thinking in those terms all the time.
You know, we were thinking of systemic femi—systemic sexism, systemic racism. But, the very idea of
systemic anything was just not in the air. So.
Raab: For anyone to, so for Louise Lamphere to say, “There is sexism in my department…”
Weed: Absolutely. Absolutely.
Raab: “…on this campus,” was a really radical act.
Weed: Huge, huge! So yeah, so she was incredibly brave and smart to say that in 1970-whatever the first
time she said it. And, and yet in 19, let’s say 83, I remember very distinctly going down to Joan’s office
after she stood on stage and said that, and said, “You’re brave Joan. I’m proud to know you.” So, how
many years later? It’s still scary to say there’s racism on campus—so, you know, so, yes. Yeah. They
were very different times. And I, and, I, there’s no way of understanding the magnitude of that suit
without understanding the difference of those days. And, you know, there’s no nostalgia for them, I’ll tell
you that [laughs].
Raab: Let me ask my compatriots here, including you, Michael. Anything that I haven’t covered that
struck you as we were talking?
Female Voice: Just a couple things. So when you were talking...

17

Raab: Wait, wait, let me do it so Elizabeth is looking in the right place.
Female Voice: So when you were talking about the mix of negative reactions, the anger and fear and
contempt mix.
Weed: Yeah.
Female Voice: How did that play out in the Anthropology Department, that Louise had come from?
Weed: How did it play out, oh, in Anthropology?
Raab: Let me rephrase this for the transcriber. So, the three factors that you talked about that were sort of
playing out on [50:00] campus generally from the Consent Decree—
Weed: Anger, fear and contempt.
Raab: Anger, fear, and contempt, the three horsemen. Do you have a recollection of how those were
playing out specifically inside Anthropology where really this all had started?
Weed: I wish I could answer that. But I really can’t. Not because I know and can’t tell you, I just don’t
know. And I would say, I mean just from my experience working with departments trying to get those
little programs going, that it probably was hard to generalize in any department. You know, you’d
probably get a range of attitudes. And if you were lucky, the chair would be pretty enlightened. But I just,
I’m afraid, I wish I could, but.
Raab: Along those lines, as you know, this afternoon, we’re going to be interviewing the former chair of
that department, and we have lots of questions. But are there any that you might suggest, that maybe we
haven’t thought about, that we should ask?
Weed: Oh, I’m sure you’ll have plenty, you know.
Raab: But any, in particular that you want to make sure we asked?
Weed: I would, I would be interested to know if there would have been less resistance to tenuring her if,
had she not undertaken feminist scholarship. As I said earlier.
Raab: Yes, her scholarship had changed.
Weed: I mean, I think she seemed to have been acceptable as an Anthropologist for a while in the
department, and considered one of the boys. And then all of a sudden, well I don’t know all of a sudden,
but then when push came to shove, she was, her work was not worthy of tenure. And I wonder if it hadn’t
been contaminated with this contemptuous feminist stuff, if maybe it might have been an easier decision
18

on their part. That’s what I’d like to know, you know. I’m sure Louise also has an opinion on that, so,
yeah.
Raab: Were there other things from this interview you wanted to follow back on?
Voice: So the gang of women, Karen Romer and Kay Hall and faculty members who were beginning to
do this hard work of questioning the institution, so what was the difference between what they had gotten,
and what they couldn’t do on their own, that could only be done in a lawsuit. I’m talking about gathering
statistics and documenting disparities. But how far did they get and what was the work left to do?
Raab: Okay so let me see if I can rephrase that slightly. You spoke about the women on campus who
were, even before you got here, in fact, trying to push some things along with respect to women on
campus, and feminism and feminist studies. Were there things that the lawsuit and the Consent Decree
ultimately allowed them to do in those efforts that without a lawsuit, they might not have ever been able
to do? For example, now there were numbers being gathered about exactly what the situation was for
women faculty.
Weed: Right. These people like Karen Romer and Kay Hall and various faculty, Anne Fausto-Sterling,
Louise Lamphere and others, were quite knowledgeable about the situation, the data, the numbers, but
two administrators I referred to were in the Dean of the College office. And there is no power in the Dean
of the College office to do anything about hiring and tenuring of faculty. And the faculty, for the most
part, who were involved, were not chairs of departments, and were not in positions to do hiring and so
forth. So you had people who were working very hard to build an atmosphere in which this could happen,
but none of the changes could have happened just from their work. I mean you have to be in a position of
power. You have to be… in a department, tenured full professor.
Raab: So they would have absolutely hit a wall, and this profoundly changed that. I mean you’ve said
that.
Weed: Absolutely, absolutely. It was very exciting. That’s why, when you said that the beginning, why
would I come when there’s a Consent Decree? Why wouldn’t I come when there’s a Consent Decree? Oh
my God! It’s just, it’s magic. It’s fantastic! Goals and timetables for the hiring and tenuring of women?
Ha! [laughs].
Raab: Well, other things, Wendy had a question, too. Let’s finish Amy and then we’ll…
Voice: A little bit more personal question. Elizabeth talked about having been an absorber of contempt,
and I’m just wondering maybe whether she could, you know, maybe not naming names, to not name
names, just think about that to a couple of specific instances in which she was sort of on the firing line as
that absorber of contempt.
Raab: So I think, let me just rephrase the question—
19

Weed: Yeah I know but I don’t have any examples.
Raab: Well, can I? You talked about being an absorber, a sponge, an absorber of contempt when you first
got here in particular, because of the Consent Decree. I’m just wondering if there are any particular either
anecdotes, stories, instances, people [55:00], that you might want to mention, or be willing to mention, as
examples?
Weed: You know, absorber, that’s really the wrong metaphor. I shouldn’t have used that metaphor
because I, I wasn’t a sponge in the sense that I took it in and kept it. So what is the biological—osmosis?
The process where you take it in and then it immediately goes out? [laughs]. That’s more of what I was,
you know? I, I was the recipient of contempt but I certainly didn’t internalize it in any way. You know, I
wish I had an example, I really, it would be fun if I had an example. Because how can you, how can you
communicate a certain sneer on somebody’s face, or a certain discomfort even being in your presence, or,
you know, a certain look of incredulity when you ask if perhaps they’d like to have some money to bring
in a feminist scholar. So, I mean I don’t. I mean the only… the only story I have was not about contempt,
it was just about, it really doesn’t even fit in any of those categories. It was just a very very very high
placed administrator who, with whom I got along very well because as I said, I, I have very thick skin,
and I have a sense of humor, and I just would cajole people and flirt and do all sorts of things to make
friends, right? And to relieve the anxieties. And this one person, as I said, was enormously high placed,
asked me to come over and have a drink with him. And I did, and then asked me what he could do to get
Louise Lamphere off the back of the university. And I thought that was..
Raab: And asked you this, as though you would be an ally in that?
Weed: And I, and I thought that was really funny. Well that’s how… we had a good relationship.
Raab: What did you say?
Weed: I laughed, because I said, “What makes you think, number one: I would know? And number two:
that I would want to do that?” And I managed to get the person to laugh. But he wasn’t, he was
disappointed, you know? So…
Raab: What would that have looked like, anyway? By the time you were here and that drink was had,
there was a Consent Decree. What would it look like to get Louise Lamphere at that point off the back of
the university?
Weed: Well at that point apparently there were, and I don’t even know what the issues were that were
being discussed at that time, but it was definitely in the eighties, in the early eighties. Maybe very, maybe
seventy-nine? I mean, whatever, whatever kinds of fine-tuning of the Consent Decree that were going on,
there was frustration.

20

Raab: Do you remember, by the way, there were a couple of efforts, at least one, maybe two, to have the
Consent Decree vacated before it actually was. And I should have asked you.
Weed: Again, I’m the wrong person to ask.
Raab: You don’t really remember anything like that?
Weed: Yeah, no. I’m really, I’m just the ambiance person, that’s all.
Raab: I understand. Wendy, did you have a question?
Wendy: Yeah, it’s not ambiance, but, personal. I’m, so the flipside of being excited to come to campus
and thinking that … this environment of the Consent Decree is a good environment, what had you been
thinking as a graduate student and an early faculty member about, you know, coming up for tenure
yourself, or a professional... What that argument could have been like if you had not, you know, switched
and come to Sarah Doyle but continued to be full-time teaching faculty, and how you were to trained to
think about—
Raab: But just to be clear, Elizabeth was teaching not here at that point.
Wendy: Yeah, but teaching anywhere.
Weed: I was teaching adjunct.
Raab: At Wheaton you were teaching adjunct?
Weed: No, no.
Raab: Well, so, if I’m phrasing your question properly: so, before you did come back here, you were in, I
assume, a tenure track position at another university. Had there, just for your own career, were you—you
said earlier that French Studies was perhaps not, not going to be the thriving industry that you had hoped,
but even there, I mean you were a junior faculty member in a tenure track position, did you have your
own concerns, anxieties, that went beyond the field itself, but just, being a woman who wanted…
Weed: Yeah, I know what you’re saying. I think, I think that, French Studies in those days and probably
still now was a fairly feminized field, so I don’t think I would have run against the kinds of things that
Louise did. But, Wheaton’s a small school. And I was very excited about the intellectual changes going
on at Brown, about the Semiotics Department, and all that stuff. I used to come to conferences here while
I was teaching at Wheaton. And I [1:00:00] just couldn’t see myself staying as a tenured faculty
member—I don’t want to say anything against Wheaton College, I mean. But I just wanted a bigger pond,
and I wanted to be in on all these great intellectual changes, and I was ambitious to, to start this research

21

center that we eventually started, the Pembroke Center. You know, I just, sort of had my eye on the prize.
I never knew it was going to be as great as it was, I mean, that’s thanks to Joan Scott coming.
Raab: But at that—
Weed: So at that time, I didn’t, I didn’t experience that myself. And then the whole time I was here I was
just an adjunct, so I didn’t, I was not part of that, of that whole business. And so I didn’t have to
experience that myself. It’s a good question, but I didn’t have to experience it.
Raab: But it seems as though the opportunity to come here might have come right around the point at
which you might have reached a crossroads. If you, if you already knew you wanted a bigger playing field
and a more dynamic environment, then it sounds like you probably would have tried to look for that next
place, even if it had not been here.
Weed: Yeah, this is just very, it was serendipity that this job opened, yeah. It really was. It was great. I
was very lucky.
Male Voice: I have an ambiance question. One last question. Can you talk a little bit about the buzz in the
air the end of the eighties, in academia, across the country because of this? So here you are at Brown, you
must have been talking to colleagues at other universities, and when we look at that graph and, and we
talked about this in the previous interview too, that it was many many years later that other universities
started to fall in line and those numbers started to go up. Did you get a sense from talking to other
colleagues at other universities that this kind of buzz in the air, that things were changing?
Weed: Absolutely.
Male Voice: I mean did people really want to come here because of that?
Weed: We were famous because [many voices] Yeah, Brown was famous, I mean. Shortly after we
started the Pembroke Center, we became… a member of the National Council for Research on Women,
and that’s where people, these fabulous people like Lynn Aston, and so forth, would be there, all these,
you know. Women administrators from all over the country who were working on institutional feminist
change. And we were like stars because we were from Brown, and—
Raab: But that was not really about Lamphere, right? That was more about Pembroke Center—
Weed: No, it was about Lamphere. Yeah, but, Lamphere, Pembroke, it was all—we were considered a
great success. Because of the Lamphere Consent Decree.
Raab: And what about, I mean besides being considered a great success, I would also imagine that the
other universities that you mentioned, and maybe beyond those, the Ivy League and beyond, were pretty
frightened by what was going on.
22

Weed: Absolutely. Which is why another reason why it was so wonderful. Yes, but I mean, I do have
very strong feelings of being in that nice atmosphere with all of these terrific and smart and competent
feminist administrators and faculty, that they looked to Brown with envy. Because we had had all of these
good things happening, you know? We had, after the Consent Decree we were able to do so much. But
you can’t build a major, an important research center with no feminist faculty. You know? We had, what,
the first seminar of the Pembroke—the first Pembroke seminar, which was in the fall of 1982, we had just
started the Center with funding from the Ford Foundation and NEH and it was very exciting and
successful. Louise Lamphere was, was one of the faculty fellows. So, I mean there she was. It was our
very first year, our very first seminar, and Louise Lamphere was the very first faculty fellow.
Raab: Which reminds me of something that I actually meant to ask, and this will be my last question, but
many years later, she also turned around and gave the million dollar gift.
Weed: Oh man, that’s, that’s so fantastic.
Raab: Can you just talk about that for a second?
Weed: I mean, I just couldn’t stop smiling when I heard that Louise had given a million dollars to endow
an assistant professor position in, in Gender Studies, or Feminist Studies, or whatever it’s called, and
Anthropology. I mean that is such, that speaks to Louise’s feminist heart, and an incredible generosity. I
mean what, what, what a tremendously uplifting thing to do. To turn around to the institution that gave
you a very hard time, and endow a chair. And, you know, the university, okay, one thing I didn’t, I didn’t
tell you, maybe this is a little bit of an example of contempt, but. When Louise had got her ad eundum, I
don’t know if other people have talked about that [1:05:00]. Okay, so when Louise came back and she got
her tenure, after you get tenure, you need to receive your ad eundum, which is the degree that you get that
makes you also an alumna of Brown University. So, all tenured, recently tenured people at
commencement receive their ad eundum degree, and they’re at the front of the, you know, well the people
sitting there on the green. And their names are mentioned. And when Louise’s name was mentioned,
people booed. And somebody said to me, they don’t know if Louise remembers that. I remember it very
clearly, because some of the people who were booing were corporation people. And I don’t know who
else, maybe faculty? I don’t know. But, this was a horrible thing. Horrible thing. But, you know? It
wasn’t everybody. And a lot of other people were cheering. And I think, if you can say I have thick skin
and I just go on, Louise’s is ten times the bigger person. You know? She just would never let something
like that get to her.
Raab: I’ve never heard that before.
Weed: Yeah, I’m not sure that, it’s now on the record. I had told, I had told Nancy.
Raab: You must have been shocked.

23

Weed: I don’t know, shocked is too strong a word. I was disgusted. Remember me, I knew about
contempt. So I wasn’t shocked.
[End of Interview.]

24

