
Interviewer: [00:00] June 14th, 1988. Why don’t we start out talking about where you grew up?
AP: All right. I was born in Medford, a suburb of Boston, and spent my childhood, almost to the
age of nine in Wollaston. Very, very idyllic, happy childhood. Everyone knew everyone.
Everyone was in and out of each other’s houses all the time and we celebrated May Day with
May baskets hung on the door and you know, it was wonderful, (laughs) it was just terrific. I
remember the hurricane of 1938, very vividly, as we huddled in the cellar and watched the trees
blown down all around us. We had our sidewalks plowed by a man and a pony pulling a wooden
plow. I mean I realize this sounds a little medieval, but it was really (laughs) lovely. Absolutely
marvelous. We had very low-key neighborhood. [01:00] Very pleasant. And we would come
home in the wintertime and change into our snowsuits and go sliding with our sleds down the
street, we were on the side of a hill there and we had our toboggans and just had a grand, grand
time.
Q: And when you say “we”, do you have siblings?
AP: My brother David and sister Lois are twins and they’re 18 months older than I am. Mother
had three children in 18 months, although I don’t think she was planning on having (laughs)
three children -- birth control wasn’t working too well. (laughs) My father, Charles Palmer, was
a writer. He was one of nine children from a very poor family in Boston. The only one in his
family to finish high school and as soon as he graduated he got a job as a copy boy on the Boston
Transcript and then became a writer. He was their travel editor. [02:00] He was aboard the first
1

commercial transcontinental flight in the United States and got on a lot of good trips. And then
he became a movie critic, which meant he had to see as many as three movies a day. So when I
knew him as an adult he would never go to the movies, (laughs) said he’d seen everything.
He eventually lost a job when the Boston Transcript went under during the Depression.
We really went through a very, very bad time. So much so that at one point my parents were
thinking of hocking the furniture, I mean, it was really tough. But then he went to New York and
got a job on the New York Times and he wrote the News of the Week in Review for the Sunday
paper for many years. He was an editor on the Sunday Magazine. Wrote stories, mostly on
military and space. He wrote the first story ever written on nuclear submarines. And he also
wrote a book called Slightly Cooler in the Suburbs, which is a humorous collection of along the
idea of [03:00] Robert Benchley and James Thurber. And he was very fond of sailing and always
took us sailing when we were children.
My mother was from Skowhegan, Maine, the youngest of three children. She went to
Pembroke, class of ’27. Got a degree in economics, which I think was splendid. Considering the
times. Got a job at Filene’s and then got married, had three sudden children. (laughs) They got
married September 1929. Just before the stock market crash and so things really were tough. We
moved to New York in 1940 and at that point my childhood got very difficult. Just before we
moved it had been discovered that I had a heart murmur, probably as a result of (inaudible) heart
fever. [04:00] So I was not allowed to roller skate, ride bikes, skip rope, play hide and seek or do
anything, you know. Which probably wouldn’t have mattered too much if we’d stayed in
Wollaston, because I had a nice little circle of friends and we could have found other things to
do. But just at that point we moved to a fairly large suburb on Long Island, Lynbrook, which is a
totally different kind of community. People didn’t know each other very well. It was a
commuter’s haven for New York City.
All of us children had the typical Boston accent and we sounded then as the Kennedys do
now. I’ve lost most of it, (laughs) you can hear it occasionally. And we were teased and razzed,
not only by the kids, but by the teachers, which I still think is a rather rotten thing to do. So I
closed in on myself and mostly just read. I would read as many as 10 books a week. And my
brother and I were very close and we had our little scientific laboratory in the basement with a
Bunsen burner and all that sort of thing. [05:00] Microscopes, telescopes. And so it was mostly
just staying at home and staying within the family circle. Which had good impact and bad
2

impact. The good was that it taught me to be very self-sufficient and not to need other people and
to be able to find my own entertainment. The bad, of course, was that I became very poor at
socializing, I still am. And very shy. And just didn’t get along with people very well. So that was
that. Then I went to high school in Lynbrook. Won a Regents’ Diploma and a Regents’
Scholarship, which entitled me to go to any New York State university for free for four years.
And I was -Q: That’s a lot more than it is now. Now you get $250.
AP: That’s it?
Q: Yes. I had a Regents’ Scholarship. And it was $250 a year for four years and my father said,
“That won’t buy your books.” [06:00]
AP: That won’t buy you postage stamps. What happened? I guess they -Q: They ran out of money, I guess.
AP: Isn't that amazing.
Q: But it's so, still, in all the schools there are so cheap. You know, SUNY Albany’s a very good
school. And that’s where I got my graduate degree and so that was certainly equal to going to
Columbia, I felt, so you paid $270 a credit as opposed to Columbia, you know, thousands
(inaudible) relatively but you know, the Regents’ Scholarship is kind of, just like an empty honor
at this point.
AP: Isn't that awful. Oh. Because it was great when I got there, it was marvelous. (laughs) So I
was accepted at Cornell and I also was accepted at Swarthmore and plus I was accepted at
Pembroke and obviously I thought about Pembroke because mother had been there and she not
only said it was a good college, but she also said that she believed that preference was given to
scholarship applicants who were daughters of Pembroke.
3

Q: Legacies, yes.
AP: So that’s how I ended up at Pembroke. [07:00]
Q: Did you visit there before you came?
AP: No, I didn’t. I was interviewed in New York by someone from the admissions office. And I
guess after I was accepted for admission, I was then interviewed by a scholarship board, also in
New York somewhere. And I had gone down to Swarthmore to be interviewed by their
scholarship board and I hate to say this, but I never wanted to go to Pembroke and I didn’t enjoy
(laughs) being there, so this may be one of your more interesting reactions from Pembroke
alumni. I wanted so much to go to Swarthmore. I don’t know if you've ever been on the campus
there -Q: I’ve never been there.
AP: It's lovely. You know, it's out in the country and there’s green hills and lovely buildings and
sweeps of campus lawns, you know, everything that Brown and Pembroke didn’t have when I
was there and I haven’t been back but I can imagine -Q: It's a city campus.
AP: Yeah, exactly. Oh, I wanted to go to Swarthmore so much. Anyway, I got the notice from
Pembroke that I had won the scholarship [08:00] and I guess March of ’49. And my parents did
not put any pressure on me at all. My brother, who was two years ahead of me was at that point
in the middle of his sophomore year at Union College. And of course, we’d always known that
there would be a time when he would be in his junior and senior years and I would be a freshman
and sophomore, which was going to be really tough on the family, as far as finance is concerned.
Q: Your sister wasn’t in college?
4

AP: No, she had had a very, very hard time in school. She has a disability and she was not
allowed to start school with my brother, her twin started first grade, which had a terrible impact
on her self-image. And then when she got to third grade she was still struggling so much,
especially with arithmetic, but they held her back again, which meant poor kid. So from third
grade on with her kid sister, two years younger, was sitting next to her in class, because we were
seated alphabetically. And her twin brother was two years ahead now. [09:00] Brother doing
very well, sister doing superbly, you know, A, A, A, 100, 100, 100 and poor Lois is getting D, D,
D and the teachers would say to Lois, “Why don’t you work hard like your sister?” because I
wasn’t working hard at all. I did my homework as it was being assigned in class, you know, if
they said, “Learn 20 words of French,” I just learned it as it was dic-Q: My sister had the same thing happen to her. She’s five years younger than I and we’re very
different. I happen to be good basically in everything but I liked the humanities more than the
sciences and math. I don’t have to work at them, I can still get the A by not working. My sister,
on the other hand, is very artistic and I have no claims to being artistic or creative with poetry,
she writes very good poetry. And but she hated math and she did not like sciences. On top of
that, when she was in school it was the new math, where don’t memorize multiplication tables,
learn the theory behind them.
AP: Oh lord, yes. [10:00]
Q: So to this day she can’t do 3x3. And so by the time she got into high school, of course, new
math was forgotten, no one was doing it anymore so she couldn’t do it. And I can remember
being there actually one day, going to pick her up and my geometry teacher, now Kelly’s, was
saying, “Well, your sister never had any trouble. Why do you?” and my sister said to her,
“Because I’m a different person.”
AP: Good for her. You would think that teachers would understand that. Well, my sister’s like
that. When she finished high school, that was a real struggle for her to get through, she studied
modern dance for several years and was good at it. I still think that that was a basic mistake by
5

my parents to let her do that. She started much too late to have a career in it. You have to start
young and really work at it and practice and all that. And the end result was that she was not able
to be self-supporting. Every job she got she lost, was fired from, whatever, couldn’t do it and
[11:00] eventually she married and had a very unhappy marriage. But anyway, that’s (laughs) the
way Lois was. During all this. But anyway.
When it came back to deciding where to go to college, if, I think I might have gone to
Swarthmore anyway and hoped to pick up a scholarship my second year, but my dear brother
had just flunked out at Union. For getting Ds in everything first semester sophomore year, so he
was home and taking a few night school courses at CCNY but it meant he had to repeat his entire
sophomore year, which meant five years in college. I have never told this to anyone, but that was
the reason why I bit my tongue and said, “OK, I’ll take the scholarship and go to Pembroke,”
I’ve never said that to him, I’ve never said it to my parent. (laughs) Anyway, so I went to
Pembroke and I don’t know where we are on our questions.
Q: Do you remember your first day?
AP: [12:00] Not particularly well. (laughs) I can remember dri-- my mother drove me up here
with the usual carload of stuff. That was the first time we ever had a car. Being a journalist is not
very rewarding, however prestigious and I should have said somewhere in this, my mother
became a teacher and was working fulltime as a teacher to help out with the finances. So we
drove up stopped in front of I think Sharpe House was my freshman dorm and you know
(laughs) it's not a very pretty building. (laughs) And we trucked up the stairs with our suitcases
and -- so there we were. No, I don’t remember much about my first day or my first week or
anything like that. I had planned to go into journalism and so I was an English major. Previously
I had planned to be a meteorologist. I still can’t remember why I wanted to do that. But my
parents were always very supportive [13:00] of whatever, there was never any question of my
not going to college and they never said, well, women can’t do this or women can’t do that.
Looking back at it, I don’t think they ever said, I don’t think they consciously knew about
discrimination against women. I mean, my mother and my father were very literate, you know,
well-rounded people. But and you know, we looked around and the women were wives and
mothers and teachers and nurses. We did have a woman pediatrician. And working in stores. You
6

know, the sort of, women went to college and then disappeared, (laughs) you know, just
vanished off the horizon. And yet, you know, I sort of wish in a way that my parents had known
about this and that perhaps had said something to me about it, so I could be better prepared for
when it started happening to me, but you know, it just strikes me as so interesting [14:00] that
not a word was ever said. I don’t remember reading anything about women having a hard time in
the professions or anything like that.
Q: Do you think they expected you to do that, to go through college and get married and then
disappear? Or did they think you would have a career?
AP: I think they expected me to have a career. I had never had the slightest inclination to get
married and -- although I will say I’m a very good cook and I can also sew but still -- (laughs)
Q: Is that why you get married?
AP: (laughs) So I didn’t get married. My sister had always wanted to get married and have
children, so there we were. So no, I think they expected me to have a career. I had gotten a job at
Oxley University Press during the summer while I was at Pembroke and you know, I intended to
go into journalism, so I was very much for that. So to say, I don’t think they consciously knew
that women had to struggle [15:00] and that it was very difficult to get (inaudible).
Q: But your, to digress a little bit, your mother was a teacher then during the Depression?
AP: No. We sort of skipped over her career. OK. With her three tiny children (laughs) in the
Depression, until we moved to New York, we were still living in Wollaston and she was just at
home, struggling, and really struggling. And then we moved to New York and I guess when I
was about the fifth or sixth grade, a friend of hers had started a little nursery school in her
backyard and Mom went over as an assistant teacher and helped her. Then started going, taking
the train into New York at night after my father was home to go to the Bank Street School in
New York to get her teaching certificate. She worked in private nursery schools for a long time,
first as a teacher and then as a director. At one point she was director, sorry, [16:00] president of
7

the New York State Association of Nursery School Teachers and she really had a lot of
leadership qualities. Well, we moved to New York as I went into the fourth grade and when I
was in the fifth grade my mother had not only founded the Parent Teachers Association in the
elementary school, but was its president. And I think that’s pretty darn good. She was a stranger.
We didn’t have a car and yet she just, you know, went in and did it, so she was a real
dynamo. She also reviewed books for the New York Times, a little bit of nepotism. (laughs) And
anyway, then she realized, as fun as it was working in private nursery schools, you didn’t get
pensions and medical benefits and other things, so then she became a teacher in local public
schools, a kindergarten teacher. And even there, showed her independence. At one point it was to
create that no child could move up to first grade if they didn’t know the alphabet and couldn’t
count to 10 and she thought that was a lot of nonsense and she had children [17:00] who didn’t
make it and so she just certified that they did and then they would go to first grade and then the
first grade teachers would stop her in the car and say, “Lois, see how these kids, you know, they
don’t know,” and she said, “They must have forgotten it (laughs) over the summertime,” and she
felt, you know, that kindergarten was not where you should be putting on the academic pressure.
Q: So I guess by the time that you were going through college when she herself had not really
experienced discrimination because she was a woman.
AP: Right, and because she was in the typical woman’s field and had been able to, you know,
like the PTA and the Nursery School Association had risen in women’s organizations, where
women were expected to be leaders.
Q: In separate groups.
AP: Yeah, right. There was no, nothing ever said about that.
Q: Was there any kind of career counseling at Pembroke? Did they know, did you have to say
anywhere that your career goal was to be a journalist or anything like that, do you remember?

8

AP: I assume [18:00] so. You know, I draw a complete blank on you know, how we chose
courses. I know I arrived there with credit in, college credit or whatever it is, passed in chemistry
and in Latin and English, so I didn’t have to take freshman English, which is fine. And I could
take geology and you know, I moved ahead in that regard. But I don’t remember any particular
(inaudible). Maybe this is a point to say that as much as I didn’t like being at Pembroke, I feel I
got absolutely superb liberal education and I’m very much in favor of required courses. This
must sound very old fashioned. I don’t even understand the new curriculum, or the new-new
curriculum. (laughs)
Q: New-new, yes.
AP: Whatever. I sort of lost all hope in understanding this but in my era, of course, we had to
take the so-called distribution courses. And I think that was great. I took [19:00] two courses in
art history, I took two courses in music. I took a whole year of drawing and sketching at the
studios. I took two courses in geology, two courses in astronomy. You know, I just had a
marvelous time. Of course, lots and lots of Latin, I’d had a marvelous high school teacher in
Latin and found John Rowe Workman, a marvelous (laughs) teacher. Which I have to leap
ahead and show you something. I think this is unique. Years later I was at Boston University at
the African Studies Center getting my master’s degree in African Affairs, courtesy of the State
Department, which had sent me there at government expense and to get a master’s degree, of
course, we had to present in foreign language, a language other than English, so I had planned to
offer French, which I had learned at the State Department Foreign Service Institute. But my
faculty advisor looked over my transcript from Brown and said, “Well, you've got an awful lot of
Latin. [20:00] Why don’t you offer Latin? So I must be the only person in the world who got a
degree in African Affairs with Latin as the foreign (laughs) language. Isn’t that great? And I
wish now I had written Professor Workman and told him because I think he would have loved it.
Q: That’s hyster-- I’ll have to tell my husband that. I took Latin in high school and my mother
had taken it and she thought, you know, it would help everyone’s vocabulary (overlapping
dialogue; inaudible) -- which was fine with me, because I, the only language that I, I’ve taken
three languages, the only one I could ever speak with any degree of ability was German because
9

it's so similar to English. Spanish and French I just, bleh, I could not do. And so I took Latin and
I loved it very much. I just had a great time with it and my husband has always thought that that
was the stupidest thing on (laughter) the face of the earth and what could you ever do with Latin,
so I’m going to remember this tale and tell him. (laughs)
AP: I took Latin because I really enjoyed it. I really took it just for fun, in college and had a
grand time with it. And I still think that’s hilarious. I just think it's wonderful. [21:00] Anyway,
really -- and I took the usual elementary political science course and liked it and then I took the,
two terms of international political science, which was a help when I moved over to the Foreign
Service. So you know, I really feel that the education is terrific. The art history has always stayed
with me and really given me a great enjoyment of galleries and painting and -Q: Was that taught at RISD or at Brandon?
AP: At where?
Q: At Rhode Island School of Design. (laughter) We call it RISD.
AP: (laughter) Thank you. I thought you were saying Risten and I’m like, what hall is called
Risten?
Q: No, at Brown.
AP: Now I have another negative comment to make. My first week or so at Pembroke I was
assigned a faculty advisor and I went over and met this person, whose name I’m happy to say I
really have forgotten, [22:00] it's probably just as well. But anyway. So we had a pleasant and
you know, meaningless chat and toward the end of this sort of 10-minute conversation he
something to the effect, “Well, my wife and I are having a little gathering of the students that I’m
an advisor to Tuesday night. If you want to come over, come, if you don’t feel like coming,
that’s OK, too,” so I said, “Right,” and had no intention of going because I was shy and didn’t
like going to social functions. So a few days later I get called in by the dean, Nancy Duke Lewis
10

and she said, “Professor Whoosy has called up and complained about your gross discourtesy to
him and his wife. They had a seated dinner table with place cards and you were not there and you
didn’t call up to say you weren’t coming, you didn’t call up afterwards to explain why you
weren’t (laughs) there and you will apologize,” and I, you know, I gave my version of it and
clearly she didn’t believe me. And I was really very [23:00] angry. First because she seemed to
think I was lying and secondly, she seemed to think I’d been extremely discourteous and I was a
very well brought up young lady and I would never have done something like that.
So I wrote a letter of apology and I’ve often thought about it since, every time I think -the monthly magazine for Brown and see all the latest hoop-dee-do about student riots and I
think nothing like that could have happened, nowadays I’m sure the dean would think five times
before you know, calling in a student, I assume, on this sort of thing. Probably wouldn’t call
them in at all. But you know, it really did not sit well (laughs) with me.
Q: That sounds like kind of close supervision over students’ lives the way it was when you were
there. (laughter) So that was your first meeting with Nancy Duke Lewis?
AP: Yeah. (laughs) Rrrrrrrr. So with not wanting to be there in the first place and what with this
happening the first week, I enjoyed my courses and I enjoyed my professors and, but other than
that [24:00] I didn’t do any extracurricular activities except at that time I was a Christian
Scientist and so I was active in the Christian Science student group. But I worked. I had all kinds
of jobs. I got three jobs my first week there. And continued to work all through college and my
father used to say he was, I was the only student he ever heard of who sent money home from
college, (laughs) which is probably true. And so (inaudible) pretty seriously. But the last two
years, well, I had, truth say that I had single rooms in my entire four years.
Q: Oh my gosh.
AP: Exactly. It was probably a record of some sort. But in each dorm that I was in there was one
single room and I always requested it and I always got it so I didn’t have to struggle with a
roommate, which is probably just as good for both of us, because I couldn’t possibly have

11

adjusted to (laughs) being with somebody. The last two years I was in Banks House. Is Banks
House still going, the cooperative dormitory where they -Q: No.
AP: That’s too bad because that was a lot of fun. You know what Banks House was. [25:00] OK.
Fourteen of us and a housemother and we did all our own cooking. And saved money that way.
You would have had a good time. The only close friends I made at Pembroke were from Banks
House. [Lucy Lamerthal Brody?], class of ’52. And [Asong (inaudible)?] class of ’52. Were both
in Banks House and we did a lot of cooking and washing up together and scrubbing out of
garbage cans and all the rest of it. And so we had, I kept in touch with both of them for a while
and then when I went overseas in the Foreign Service I sort of lost that -- Lucy’s parents lived in
Washington and she would often come down to visit them and every time she did we’d get
together and so we have kept in touch and she’s been here visiting and so forth. But basically,
much lived the life of a hermit. At Pembroke.
Q: Mm-hmm. When you were in your classes, [26:00] were they all co-ed classes?
AP: I think so. I note there’s a question here about classes at Brown and classes at Pembroke -- I
never understood what the rationale was for this and that. I had signed up for a Latin class with
Workman and I don’t know, it was 1:00 in the afternoon which fit it into my schedule. And so
I’d registered for it and the first day came and I went over there and sat down and noticed there
were all boys in the room and (laughs) then Professor Workman came in, he was so sweet. He
went over and whispered and he said, “This is only for Brown men, but you could take the other
version of it,” so I took the other version of it, which was co-ed, exactly the same course with the
same textbooks and the same curriculum and everything and I still, you know, I just never
understood how this whole system worked. I must not have read the catalogue properly when I
was registering but, you know.
Q: It would be one thing if you were [27:00] in the men’s class and then there was a
corresponding women’s only class, but if the other class was co-ed, then what difference did it
12

make, right? And then they can both co-ed.
AP: I know. Like I say, I just never grasped the principle but as far as I can remember,
everything except gym, which I loathed (laughs) was co-ed. The reason I loathed gym was
primarily because I had recovered from my heart murmur after my senior year in high school, so
I had never played any kind of game. I couldn’t catch a ball, you know and you know -- hated
the whole idea of group sports. And so when I went to Pembroke and had to take something I
usually took volleyball and I’d get in the back row and hope that nobody would (laughs) throw
anything at me. If they did I would miss it or duck it or drop it, (laughs) (inaudible) plus the gym
uniforms, which I don’t know whether you've seen any of those, oh god. Have you seen?
Q: I have, (laughs) but why don’t you describe them.
AP: Well anyway, it was -- we weren’t wearing bloomers but we were wearing the next thing to
it, we were wearing [28:00] ghastly khaki, not even khaki, khaki’s a respectable color, but
muddy-colored cotton shorts and then we had a tunic which buttoned up the front and had a little
thing that you tied with a bow (laughs) and it was the most horrible looking outfit I have ever
seen in my life. (laughs) And you know, Brown being what it is, Pembroke, you had to wear
these things more or less on the public street, at least to get from A to B sometime, you know.
Ewwww. (laughs) The only thing I will say for the athletic course there is that you were required
to learn to swim, to float and to tread water and I’m very much in favor of water safety. We also
had to take first aid and I’m very much in favor of that, so you know, I don’t want to make all of
this too negative. It was some very good things going there.
Q: Did you have to take a posture picture when you got there?
AP: Oh yes, that’s the first time I’ve thought about in years. (laughs) Boy, that was (inaudible). I
think they, somebody finally resisted that and got it stopped, didn’t they? I thought I read about
that somewhere. [29:00]

13

Q: I don’t recall how it was stopped. So what happened with the class picture? Would you get an
appointment that you should show up at such and such a -AP: Yeah, I think it was in the gymnasium and you know, groups of 20 or however they did it,
you know, and so you lined up there and I guess you changed into a robe and there was this
screen or something and the instructions were you go up, step behind the screen, take off the
robe, stand there and then when you're given the OK, then you pick up, put on the robe and
depart, you know, but it was -Q: And you were nude under the robe.
AP: Yes. And you were nude when the picture was taken. (laughs) And I don’t think they could
ever hope to get away with anything -- in a million years. But I thought I had read something
about somebody who objected to that and she -Q: I’ll have to look that up. Because I don’t know when they stopped doing that, but that’s
always, that you know, the question here, what’s your best and worst memory, 99% of the
people, their worst memory is the posture picture.
AP: Yeah. (laughs) Well, my worst memory is the Dean Lewis faculty advisor [30:00] -- whoop
dee do. (laughs) Though I didn’t particularly like the posture picture then but anyway. My best
memory, my two favorite professors would be Professor Workman and Sharon Brown, whom I
thought was marvelous. And if you want to know why this house is called [Westward Look?]
and there’s a sign out there, outside the window which says “Westward Look” that is because I
took Victorian Prose and Victorian Poetry with him and both courses were magnificent and in
Victorian Poetry, my favorite poem was this one and the last words down at the bottom saying,
“Westward look the land is bright,” you can read that at your leisure but I think it's a great poem
and it was just something that stayed with me.
Q: So when you're going through college and you're thinking that you want to be a journalist and
your senior year [31:00] is rolling around, now you've had jobs all along the way to help pay for
14

college. Were any of them geared towards, you know, helping a résumé? Or were they strictly
student jobs?
AP: Let’s see. The first summer I worked in the laundry at home from, for nine hours a day
running the dryers in an un-air conditioned locale.
Q: Prepared you for Africa.
AP: Right. (laughs) And then I got a job on Wall Street, which was that same summer, which
was much nicer, air-conditioned and all that. Second summer I had sent out -- [31:45]
Track 2
AP: [00:00] -- applications to every place I could think of and gotten accepted at Oxford
University Press in New York as a file clerk and that was OK. That was the summer that Rachel
Carson’s The Sea Around Us hit the best seller list, published by OUP and so it was a lot of fun
just to work there and see all these orders rolling in and they were completely baffled by it and
they weren’t ready at all, the publishing company, because they expected this to just sink as
most, you know, scientific stuff, (laughs) as you know, sell a few copies or maybe become a
textbook or something and so they were scrambling. Anyway, that was my -- junior year my
sister and I went to a costume (inaudible) lots of fun, oh, we had such a good time. And -Q: Was that the first time you’d be overseas?
AP: Mm-hmm. I’d visited Canada for two days once with some relatives but other than that -and we went over on the Queen Mary. Came back on the United States [01:00] in a hurricane, so
that was exciting and we picked up bicycles in London and cycled around and we went to
Cambridge and Oxford and Durham and York and Glasgow and Edinburgh and took the ferry
over to Dublin and came back again and down the other side and Cornwall, Devon and then we
ended up with three weeks in London, so we really had ourselves a grand time. It was -- I had a
grand time. (laughs) My sister, bless her heart, you know, I never think of these things ahead of
15

time, but you know, I was all in favor of going to cathedrals and museums and historic places of
interest and they didn’t mean an awful lot to her and so sometimes we went to do what she
wanted to do, which meant that we spend many an afternoon in a movie house watching an
American film, you know, which really (laughs) seemed kind of (inaudible) -- so you know, ever
since then I’ve traveled along. (laughs) I find it much simpler. [02:00] But in spite of that we did
have a good time. And we saw Winston Churchill. We saw Anthony Eaton. We saw Princess
Margaret. And so we had a grand time. Anyway.
Senior year I applied to the Christian Science Monitor and was accepted and so I went
there to work right after I graduated. I think there were a couple of other -- can we stop for a
second?
Q: Sure. (BREAK)
AP: One more negative comment about Pembroke. I think the whole idea of hazing freshman
should be abolished and I trust it has been.
Q: Mm-hmm.
AP: Good.
Q: What happened?
AP: Nothing much. I just didn’t like it. I was still extremely shy. And self-conscious and all that
sort of thing and you know, you wear your freshman beanie and you're called a “scat” and you’re
assigned to somebody to do tasks for and you know, sort of harassed by seniors on campus and
things like that and then you're dragged out at 6:00 in the morning to go [03:00] run around the
field or something and I didn’t understand the point of it then, I don’t understand the point of it
now. It did not engender any feelings of class solidarity (laughs) with me, probably because of
my nature, I just hated the whole thing. I was scared and resentful and there we have it so I hope
that that’s gone by the board.

16

Q: No, they don’t do that anymore. Freshman week now are a lot of courses designed to orient
you to a new environment, that kind of thing. There’s none of this -- I had a terrible time when I
was a freshman so you're going to have a terrible time, too, (laughter) kind of thing. But I know
when I was going to college my mother completely terrified me because she had gone to nursing
school and nursing students tend to be very obnoxious and very gross. And they use parts of
bodies and what not and she told me all these horrendous tales (laughter) and I was just terrified.
I think I’m kind of like you are, being thought of, you know, scrubbing someone’s floor with a
toothbrush is not going to engender class loyalty in me. [04:00] It would make me want to leave.
And I was terrified and so I was very glad when I went to school that of course, it was nothing
like that. We just had a bunch of parties and stuff.
AP: Good. (laughs) Oh, amazing. I don’t know. Even now I don’t understand it. I suppose it's the
same idea as fraternity hazing, which I also think is horrendous, aside from the fact that they kill
people doing it. You know, I just feel there must be another way of bringing people together.
You know, do something constructive. Go out and you know, build a home for a homeless
person or something, you could still suffer and sweat and grunt and groan and you know, if they
feel that suffering builds character, (laughs) but have a positive purpose to it.
However, while we’re still at Pembroke, I feel that the -- rules and regulations were very
appropriate. You know, twice a year men were allowed [05:00] upstairs in the dormitory from
4:00 to 6:00 but you had to keep the door open. I was all (laughs) in favor of that. And you had
to be in by 10:00 or sign the book and go up (inaudible) student council and all that sort of -- it
was great. We had to dress, when was it? Wednesday night and Sunday lunch? That was good.
We weren’t allowed to wear blue jeans on campus or smoke or anything like that. I’m all OK
with that. Archaic as it may sound. I have no recollection of a single chapel talk. (laughs) So
that’s that. There were no female role models that I was aware of at all. I did not develop a sense
of appropriate jobs for women at Brown. The Foreign Service was never mentioned. I don’t
think I ever went near the Career Counseling Office, which may be why I didn’t get (laughs)
counseling. I think the merger of ’71 was a mistake. I’m sorry that that happened.
Q: Why do you think that? [06:00]

17

AP: I think it is good, for the, to be places where women, especially young women, girls, can
compete and develop their strengths without worrying about men. I think there is a, it is difficult
now, maybe a few generations from now we will have overcome all of this business about men
are better and women can’t do business over, but I think right now we’re all, and even girl babies
born this morning are still going to be subject to that influence, which means that when they’re in
a group with men and women it's going to be hard for them overcome that. I think an allwomen’s college with some all-women’s classes is helpful to women. That’s how I feel about it.
Q: So in retrospect, do you think then the Pembroke system, the (inaudible) system was good?
The young separation. And yet the availability of the [07:00] university curriculum.
AP: Yes. It's just as I said earlier, I can’t remem-- I must have taken some all-girl courses, maybe
freshman English, I don’t know. But I think it's just helpful to be where there are all-girl
organizations. You can be president of the Pembroke Student Body and so forth, you can
develop skills and confidence without having to compete with men. Let’s just say, this may
become obsolete, obviously since they’ve merged two groups, it has to become obsolete, but I
think it was premature. That’s what I really want to say.
Q: OK. When you graduated, did you have an idea in your mind of what you thought your life
was going to stretch out to be in five or 10 years or whatever?
AP: I was going to be a foreign correspondent. The fact that I didn’t know of any women ever
having done [08:00] this didn’t cross my mind (laughs) at all. So I wanted to be a journalist and
then I was very much interest in foreign affairs, I really don’t know why. It may be just that -my father, being on the Times had of course, a lot of friends from the Times who had come out to
Lynbrook to stay for the weekend and go sailing and so forth. So I met a lot of journalists and I
just liked the whole idea of -- so my thought was that I would work on The Monitor and become
a writer and then a foreign correspondent. My job there was in the, what they called the
“research library” and any other newspaper it would be called the “morgue”, but Christian
Science being what it is, they couldn’t have a morgue (laughs) -- it took me an awfully long time
to figure out what this was all about. But you know, they didn’t have a morgue, but it was the
18

research library and they had all of the clippings and they had all kinds of [09:00] books and so
forth. And my particular responsibility, the first year that I was there, the Army-McCarthy
hearings in Congress were going on. So I had to read not only everything that The Monitor said,
but all the other major papers said and file it and cross reference and then if the journalist for The
Monitor wanted to find out about something he could call me and ask was I able to put my hands
on it and of course, this was long before computers had even been thought of, so it was all done
by hand, it was amazing. And I enjoyed that very much.
And I loved living in Boston. I got tickets to the Boston Symphony and all this other
thing, I really enjoyed it tremendously, but The Monitor being a religious organization, didn’t
really have to pay minimum wage. So when I started out -Q: Oh, that’s right.
AP: Started out making about $28 a week, me with my Cum Laude and Phi Beta Kappa, oh,
come back to Pembroke a minute. My greatest moment at Pembroke was when I learned I’d been
elected to Phi Beta Kappa my junior year. [10:00] I still remember that very vividly. I was lying
on my bed in my room measuring about four feet by six feet, (laughs) I heard somebody
pounding up the stairs and it was someone who had just come from the committee to tell me.
(inaudible) Anyway, $28 a week and at the end of the first year I was raised to $30, $31.50 I
think. And it was a struggle for everybody. I mean, how people with families survived I had no
idea.
Q: Were you living alone in your apartment?
AP: Of course. (laughs) I had a nice little one-bedroom apartment in the Back Bay in a kind of a
slum, it really wasn’t a slum but it's a very old building with rats and things like that, paint
peeling off the walls. After I’d been there a few weeks one of my aunts, my father’s family was
scattered all over the Boston area, called and asked if I was all right, I said, “Certainly. Why
not?” he said, “Well, in case you don’t know it, in the apartment just below you a woman was
murdered last week,” [11:00] I said, “Oh, I don’t read the Boston papers,” (laughs) but anyway.

19

No, I enjoyed being there but the pay was bad and also looking around the monitor, I did not see
any women journalists.
Q: You noticed that.
AP: Yeah. And it still didn’t click. I thought, well, you know, maybe it's just, The Monitor you
know, so I went to New York and applied and got a job on the New York Times, which was fine
because of course, I adored my father and it was fun being in the same building with him and so
forth. I worked in the Women’s News section, which handled, what was our title on (inaudible)?
Food, Fashion, Fun, (inaudible) -- isn’t that cute? Yes. (laughs) And so I was the
receptionist/typist which was a step down from being a researcher at The Monitor but (inaudible)
I was getting $55 a week, which was nice. [12:00] Then I had a little apartment in New York I
enjoyed working there. If you ever wondered what ever happens to the pie or cake which wins
the Pillsbury Contest each year, they just take it over to the New York Times, it is photographed
and then it is consumed by the staff. (laughs) It was a pecan pie the year I was there. Boy, was
that good. (laughs) Just thought you’d like to know. In case you’ve been lying awake at night
wondering. (laughs) And also they would bring in the fashions from Paris to be photographed.
Plus they were gorgeous things. Everything was hand-stitched and trimmed with ribbon,
you know, it was lovely to see these things. But all the same. And I looked around there and the
women who had been on the Times for a few years, well, you start out by covering the sermons
preached in New York churches on the case, on the possibly that some preacher may say
something significant about world affairs or (inaudible) [13:00] and you sit through all these
sermons, hoping that something -- and then you write it up and turn it in on Sunday afternoon
and you know, once every 50 sermons something will be said.
Q: And this was on the Women’s Page,
AP: No, no, no, no. I was still on the Women’s Page, but women who were, who had been on the
Women’s Page, and then had moved over, that’s how they started and then they crawled along,
you know, covering very unimportant stuff and you know, 10 years later, you know, really
weren’t doing anything, so it looked pretty hopeless to me. And -20

Q: And it wasn’t the same for the men who came on?
AP: Oh no. No, no. They had a little career ladder. They started as copy boys and then cub
reporters and then sub reporters and then onwards and upwards.
Q: And when someone like you would come on, you were immediately put on the Women’s
Page? Or could you be -AP: The women, the women who had bylines in the New York Times were working in the
Women’s News section. That’s the only way I can put it. [14:00] And writing about you know,
the furniture show at Macy’s and you know, appropriate topics like that. And some of them still
are there. I can still open the New York Times and see the bylines of some of the women who
were there when I was there and they’re still writing about furniture. Which is great. I read the
articles. I’m glad somebody writes them. (laughs) But you know, but I didn’t want to write about
furniture or you know -- no-iron sheets or (laughs) something like that. About halfway through
my year at the Times I had a chance, I moved over to become secretary to the art critic on the
New York Times, that was a lot of fun. He went out and covered the art shows and come back and
write (inaudible). That was good. I enjoyed that. But. I began to feel I wasn’t going to get
anywhere on the New York Times. And my brother, who had graduated in 1952 from Union, had
gotten married and had a job and nicely settled and then he got his draft notice and did two years
[15:00] in the Navy. And I thought then and I think today, it isn't fair to expect men to give up
two years of their time to be in the military as draftees and not expect women to do it.
So if the Peace Corps had been invented at that time I probably would have joined the
Peace Corps. I knew I didn’t want to join the Army (laughs) or Navy, but I did want to give two
years of my time to the government in some way. Patriotism. And at that moment I saw a little
thing in the New York Times, saying that a recruitment for the Foreign Service would be in New
York for three days, such and such a time and people could make appointments for interviews.
So I had never heard of the Foreign Service. In spite of my wonderful education. I knew there
were such things as ambassadors, because you would read about those in the papers, but I didn’t

21

know the Foreign Service existed. So I went to this interview and they were recruiting for what’s
called the “Staff Corps”, secretaries [16:00] (inaudible) clerks, that sort of thing.
So I was interviewed and I took a typing test and I passed and I was told that I would hear
in due course and I thought while I was waiting to hear I would write to the State Department
asking what careers they had and that that little brochure about being a Foreign Service officer,
so I took the Foreign Service Officer written exam and passed it and then in June of ’55 got a
phone call saying I’d been offered a job as a secretary in the Foreign Service so I accepted and
went down to Washington and started my training and took the oral exam for Foreign Service
Officer and failed it, which was a shock. It was the first time I’d ever failed anything. (laughs)
And it wasn’t until years and years later that I realized, of course, this was 100%
discrimination. [17:00] And that we had testimony in a legal hearing, which we will get to at
some point, that in those years, in the ’50s, each year the Foreign Service appointed either a
woman or a Negro and I must have been out of sync with this and so I, they just weren’t going to
appoint any women that year.
Q: Was this a written policy?
AP: Oh heavens, no.
Q: A verbal -AP: (laughs) Though it's amazing what they did put in writing in those days. But anyway, the
oral exam was supposed, according to the brochure, is supposed to be a general interview, give
you a chance to express yourself or fluency of -- oral expression. You’ll be point something.
You’re a very broad gauge. So I went in and sat down and three men on the opposite side of the
table and I sat down and they said, [18:00] “What states does this one river flow through?” I’m
waiting for an answer, Carol. (laughter)
Q: I know. (laughs) Mississippi? I don’t have a clue.
AP: Exactly. So I naturally couldn’t answer that and then they said -22

Q: Points under duress.
AP: What was the Treaty of Ghent? That’s a trick question because there are actually three
Treaties of Ghent. It's a city in Belgium, I believe, and various treaties have been signed there
over the centuries and actually the Treaty of Ghent was the one that ended the War of 1812, but
you know, I forget what the other question was, but it was similar, I mean, they were just trying
to blow me out of the water, as we’d say nowadays. So of course, I failed. So I went overseas. I
had signed up to go to London, Paris or Rome on the wish list, the checklist that they give you to
fill out and so [19:00] the personnel office called me in to give my assignment and they said,
“We are sending to [Occa?]” I had no idea where it was but I wasn’t going to let on. I said, “Oh,
oh yes,” of course, I didn’t fool them for a second, they said, “That’s in the Gold Coast,” well,
the only Gold Coast that I knew of is a place in Florida where the rich people live, you know, I
had a feeling that wasn’t the place (laughs) that they were sending me to. And they said, “It's in
West Africa,” ah, so I went home and called my parents and told my mother, I can still
remember, bless her heart, I said, “I’m going to the Gold Coast in West Africa,” and there’s this
long silence and then she said, “Well dear, you did want a change, didn’t you?” (laughs) Trying
to be very positive about this.
Q: And the other one’s going, what can I possibly say? (laughter)
AP: And I went into the public library that same day to get out a book, you know, so I could get
educated about this and they had I think only two [20:00] books about Africa and probably one
was about Stanley, but anyway, the other one, it was about West Africa. I took it home and
opened it up. Chapter one, first sentence, “West Africa, known as the White Man’s Grave,”
(laughs) dotadotadotadota -- (laughs) I was really scared. I really was. I really didn’t think I
would survive, but I went.
Q: So you went there and you were a secretary in --

23

AP: I was in the code clerk type of secretary. I didn’t know shorthand but they were willing to
overlook that. And I was actually very fortunate. At that time the Gold Coast was not
independent, so we had a Consulate General and after it came down and we had an embassy, but
anyway, the Consul General there was a very nice guy and he allowed me to write what we
called “political reports”. So I wrote several while I was there. [21:00] I took the opportunity of
getting out and getting around and I would come home and write up the, come back to the office,
write up these reports and he would send them in. So that was very good.
The working conditions were appalling, as were the living conditions. We had no air
conditioning, either in our homes or in the office. The code room, for security’s sake, we had to
close the windows when I was working with the code books and the windows were whitewashed
so that nobody could see in, because there was a building next door, so you could imagine how
fun that was, working on code books with all the windows closed and no air conditioning. Got
myself into a heck of a lot of trouble there. Coding in those days was done by hand. Really
primitive. You had a little exchange of letters, you know, like A equals B, B equals C, it was a
little more complicated (laughs) than that but not much. And it was very, very tedious and you
converted the text into a handwritten thing and then I would type it up on a [22:00] cable form
and then we had a messenger with a bicycle who would pedal it down to the local cable and
wireless station. Now of course, it's all done electronically. And I found this so tedious and so
boring that I began leaving things out of these cables, (laughs) which is really awful.
So the poor Consul General would, you know, acquire some valuable information and
would write it up in longhand, because he couldn’t type, and hand these things to me and I would
go through and I would leave out whatever I thought (laughs) wasn’t important. Oh, dear. And of
course, for a while he didn’t know this and then he began to get cables from Washington saying,
“Well, what did you mean in Paragraph 2?” or you know, and then he found out what I was
doing and of course, he was appalled and I don’t blame him, the poor man. (laughs) So this was
the end of my first year (inaudible). They transferred me and made me administrative assistant,
which I think was a step up, because I was helping with personnel and administrative work
[23:00] and they got somebody else in to do (laughs) the coding, which was really very nice of
them. They could have fired me, you know, I thought I was going to get fired. (laughs) Anyway.
Q: Is that a normal rise to go from your position to that?
24

AP: No. I had a, I will say, without any modesty at all, I had an absolutely spectacular career in
the Foreign Service, both as the staff and as an officer. I got promoted every year. I went from
code clerk to administrative assistant to I don’t know, personnel officer, which is unusual in staff
corps. Of course, I was still being subjected to discrimination, although I still wasn’t aware of it.
Men who had only high school educations would come into the staff corps and be given jobs
several ranks above the ones that I had. I, of course, had my college degree, had started at the
bottom. And so you know, obviously they had their way of expecting women to be typists and
men to be administrators. [24:00] But I enjoyed being in the administrative section and I
enjoyed, loved Africa. I had a wonderful time there. I was the only American girl in the country.
There were very few people who could make statements like that. (laughs)
Q: How did you know that?
AP: Well, there weren’t that many Americans. There were missionaries. I should have said that I
went out to Africa on a freighter. They don’t let us do that anymore. It took three weeks. They
were 12 people on, passengers onboard, 11 missionaries and myself. (laughs) Which was kind of
fun. But anyway, they were missionaries and of course, there were children of missionaries, but I
was the only unmarried American woman of age 24 or whatever I was, 25, in the country. And
this was really my delayed adolescence. I had a social life which took off like a skyrocket. There
weren’t that many white women around. I dated both Africans and [25:00] whites, but then the
men weren’t that liberal and they were bound and determined that I was going to come out and
go dancing. So they taught me to dance, you know, and I went out dancing every night and
nightclubs and parties and just had an absolutely wonderful, wonderful time. It was great, loved
it.
And we worked from 7:30 in the morning till 2:00 in the afternoon because of the heat
and I’m supposed to go home and take a nap, but we would go to the beach and go surfboard
riding. And then we’d play tennis and then we’d go horseback riding and then after sunset we’d
go out to dinner and then we’d go to the movies and then we’d go to a nightclub and on
weekends the nightclubs closed at different times, so we would go from one to the other. So the
last one closed around 3:00 in the morning, then we’d go to the beach and swim. Which was fun
25

because the water was phosphorescent and it would light up when we swam in it and all that.
And then we’d just go right on into Sunday morning, have breakfast on the beach and go on and
do whatever we were going to do on Sunday. By Sunday night when we got to go to the evening
service at the Anglican Church, [26:00] the minister there said he could sort of tell that we
weren’t at our (laughs) brightest and best. (laughs) A bit of head-nodding in the back pews there.
It was grand, I loved it. Did a lot of horseback riding. Learned to scuba dive there. Did a lot of
traveling around the country and around West Africa.
Q: And did you do that traveling alone again or?
AP: Mostly alone, sometimes with other people.
Q: And in a position like you had, were you given a room like in the consulate?
AP: No, I was given a house and I had four servants when I arrived, which sort of stunned me
because of course, I had worked as a servant. (laughs)
Q: These were African people?
AP: African servants. I had a cook, a houseboy, a gardener and a night watchman. All gradually
whittled it down, whittled it down until there was just me, because you know, I really did not
need a cook or a houseboy. And so I had this house to myself the first year and then the second
year when the woman arrived who was going to replace me [27:00] as code clerk came. She was
assigned to share housing with me. They don’t do this anymore. Women finally got fed up with
it. Single men were never required to share accommodations. Somehow there was this theory
that women could -Q: Could get along.
AP: Yeah, right, you know. So it was really awful because we did not get along. I think for
several months we stopped speaking to one another and this sounds a bit catty but she was not
26

very attractive and she didn’t have very much of a social life and so when my boyfriends would
call up and she was there and I wasn’t, she would not tell me what the messages were and really,
things got very complicated. (laughs) So that wasn’t too successful. But anyway, so I really had a
grand, grand time and wanted to specialize in African things. I took the written exam for the
Foreign Service Officer Corps while I was overseas. Passed it again. Came back. Passed the oral
exam because I think they were just ready to pass me. Although they did manage to ask some
general questions this time. (laughs) [28:00] So I was put on the waiting list, the register of
people who switch off -- back to Ghana.
While I was in Ghana, at that time I was still Christian Scientist and there was a very tiny
group of Christian Scientists there and I taught the Sunday school and that was interesting
because my pupils were mostly African children. One was a little boy, the son of the Supreme
Court Justice of Ghana and spoke beautiful English, many of them educated in England. And
(clears throat) they were well brought up as Christian Scientists, but when I would talk to them in
class, sometimes they would say something that would indicate their African background, such
as they would talk about the God of the River or the God of the Jungle and things like that,
which was, you know, just interesting. There was always a great conflict between the two
cultures. And also while I was there, there was a real shocking thing. A young man [29:00] had
gone to Oxford to get his degree and was I guess about ready to take the final exams, whatever
they’re called there and he was so afraid that he wouldn’t pass that he asked a witch doctor in
Ghana to perform the necessary spells to ensure that he would pass and what the witch doctor did
was to have a human sacrifice and that made quite a (laughs) -- a surprise.
Children were sometimes used as what are called “pawns”. If somebody owed a debt to
somebody else they would, the person, the debtor would loan a child from his own family to the
person who should receive the money and that child would have to work there until the debt was
paid, not working off the debt, but just as a guarantee, the way you pawn a watch in a shop or
something like that. It was really disgusting. Anyway. So some of these children really were
[30:00] lost sight of and you know, bad things happened to them.
But while I liked Africa so much, while I was there I was having a wonderful time. Of
course, people can have wonderful times (laughs) in other places. I found the Ghanaians there
very friendly and open and helpful and they seemed to be having a wonderful time. These
nightclubs we went to are open-air nightclubs, because the climate was warm all year round and
27

you know, they danced to something called the High Life, was their own Africanized version of
western music and you know, I just liked it, I mean the way some people like Paris or Russia or
whatever, (laughs) you know, I just enjoyed it tremendously. And I was there at a very exciting
time because it was the last year before independence and for example, on the queen’s birthday
[31:00], which is officially held on June 6th or something, all around the world in British
colonies, the governor has a Queen’s Birthday Tea Party at the castle. And you know, we went to
that and there was the poor governor strolling around with a gray top hat and an ascot tie and a
cutaway coat (laughs) and striped pants and mopping his brow, you know.
So you had the whole colonial bit going on there and the excitement in the country
getting ready for independence. Cabinet members being chosen. The elections being held. Vice
President Nixon came out as the official representative of the United States. He drove me nuts
because at that time I was still code clerk -- [31:43]
Track 3
Q: [00:00] Tape two, Alison Palmer.
AP: Of course, there was a tremendous amount of preparation. Secret Service arrived and wanted
to check everything out and all that. But Mrs. Nixon had her own schedule and one of the things
she wanted to know is whether there was a European, namely a white hairdresser available who
could do her hair and of course, on the one hand this was a lot of nonsense, as far as I was
concerned and I could sympathize with her. She wanted to look her best and the humidity has a
tendency to cause your hair to disintegrate if your hair is set (laughs) and it was so, but anyway.
It was just a lot of extra work and eventually we got, as a result of the vice president coming, we
got a code machine and got ourselves in a little bit more modern situation.
Q: Now would you meet the Ghanaians? Would it be through diplomatic functions? Or?
AP: Yes. [01:00] Through sport. I was national badminton champion of Ghana. You see, if you
choose your country and your sport carefully you can be (laughter) national champion. There are
only about two teams and I happened to be on the winning team. There was a British Army post
28

there and of course, I had a lot of good times with the British, young British Army officers, they
were very handsome and charming. But there were also Ghanaian Army officers and we
socialized, played tennis together, went swimming together. Went horseback riding together.
I don’t know. I would meet them and they would invite me out and we’d go dancing and
so forth, so -- it was interesting. The British, even after independence and still maintaining
segregated facilities, which is something the British don’t talk about very much, but there was a
club there and after I had gone to -- gone to it frequently, [02:00] before independence, after
independence, the ambassador told us not to go there because it was still segregated and he
didn’t want any Americans going to a club that excluded blacks.
Q: About what year was this?
AP: I got there in March ’56. It became independent in March ’57 and I left in July of ’58.
Q: It's interesting that you are considering that period of time in the South certainly it was still
segregated.
AP: I know. That reminds me of something that happened. The Minister of Finance from Ghana
went to the United States for some kind of tour and was excluded from a Howard Johnson’s
when he was trying to buy a glass of orange juice or something. We sort of suspected he did that
on purpose, because he’s with an American Negro who presumably knew what the rules were,
anyway, of course, it made headlines and a lot of whoop-dee-do in Ghana. But -- [03:00] and our
first American ambassador there didn’t like Africans and never invited them to his residence
until he was ordered to by the State Department, which wasn’t too bright. (laughs)
Q: Interesting. An ambassador to Ghana who doesn’t like Africans? (laughter)
AP: Well, he had been in other, he had never been in Africa before. And I remember -- and he
and his wife just could not adjust. I remember seeing them at the beach one day and she was
wearing a hat and I don’t mean a beach hat, I mean a hat/hat, you know, a sort of garden party
hat. A two-piece suit with a blouse, gloves, nylon stockings and high heels. (laughs) Aside from
29

the impracticality of wearing something like that in the heat, people just didn’t dress like that
anyway. Who dresses like that at the beach? You know. (laughs) So. It was really not good at all.
[04:00] But anyway. I liked Africa and I wanted to spend a lot more time there. And so when I
became an officer I asked to be sent to Africa and I was. So shall we go back to -So I ride back to Washington. Pass the oral exams. Put on a waiting list and in the
meantime while I was still in the staff corps I was assigned as personnel officer with the
responsibility of filling staff corps positions in Africa, which actually made a lot of sense. It was
about the only sensible thing the State Department had done with me in, since I’d been in the
department, to assign me where I could use my skills. So I could talk to the other young women
who were going overseas for the first time. Tell them I’d just come back from Ghana. Loved it.
Wanted to get back there right away and I would give them the sales talk. What I didn’t know
was that my boss in the personnel section had been notified that my name had been reached on
the register, which meant that I could be immediately [05:00] appointed as a Foreign Service
officer and start my training and so forth. And he had told them to take my name off the register,
because he didn’t want to lose me. I was assigned there for two years or until I was appointed as
a Foreign Service officer. And he just did this without telling me.
Q: He could do that? You were never notified?
AP: I was never notified. I had, would go down to the office where the register was kept, about
once every three or four months and asked, you know, how I was getting along. People were
appointed in batches of 30 and put into a training class and he would say, “Well, you’re like
number 42, so you’ll be in the next training class,” or something and so I went back two months
later and said, you know, “How am I getting along?” and he said, “Oh, you were taken off the
list,” and I said, “What do you mean I was taken off the list?” and then he explained that my boss
had told them to do that. So I didn’t say anything to my boss, but I went back to my desk and I
sat down at my typewriter and I typed a red-hot memo saying, “Put me back on the list
immediately. I will be in the next class,” and they did and [06:00] there’s a memo which I’ve got
my hands on, years later, when I was having hearings about discrimination, which went from the
head of the Board of Examiners, which controls this whole thing saying, “They had put Miss
Palmer’s name in the next class X-quota,” in other words, regardless of whether you've got 30 or
30

40 or 50 or 20, she will be in the next class and this was in response to my protest letter. Isn’t
that outrageous? I mean if, I’m sure that if I had been a man working in the personnel office and
they were notified that the time had come for this person to be appointed, there would have been
an office party, congratulations, goodbye, it's been wonderful knowing you, have a great career
as a Foreign Service officer. It would never have occurred to them in a million years to do
anything like that. But as a woman, what difference does it make? You know. She’s probably
going to end up as a personnel officer anyway and she is a personnel officer right now, so I was
occupying the Foreign Service officer slot, even though I was still in the staff corps.
So that [07:00] delayed my entry into the Foreign Service by I don’t know, six months or
so. That’s the sort of thing that was going on. Anyway, I took the training course, applied for
Africa. Was assigned to the Belgian Congo, I’m sure because they thought it was a nice, quiet,
safe place for a woman to be Consul officer and so I took four months of French training at the
Foreign Service Institute and then flew out to Africa and believe it or not, when I traveled on a
propeller plane from New York to Dakar, Senegal, they had sleeping berths on the plans and I
had one. There are very few people who have ever used a sleeping berth -Q: Oh, I have.
AP: Isn't it amazing? Very comfortable. Just like on a train, you know, they had a little berth
with a mattress and pillows and sheets and blankets and little curtains you could pull across. It
was marvelous. [08:00] It was about a 12-hour flight. And you know I tell people this now, they
say, “A sleeping berth on a plane?” I don’t know why they don’t do it now, because so many
people travel -- it would make a lot of difference to people.
Q: To Australia.
AP: Yeah, well exactly. First class people would pay for it. You know, easily. But anyway, that
was fun. So I arrived. Got myself a very lovely apartment in a building overlooking the Congo
River.
Q: Is that something that the, that State would give you? Or you had to find on your own?
31

AP: No, I had a housing allowance and I had to find my own. But I had been assigned to the
house in Ghana because there are practically no suitable houses available and so they had to be
rented by the embassy at a fantastic price. Anyway. I rented this very lovely apartment and I’d
been living in a hotel while I was arranging all this. And so I moved into my apartment, shall we
say on [09:00] a Tuesday afternoon and I hadn’t given the phone number to the embassy because
the phone hadn’t been installed yet or something, so I spent the first night in the apartment,
enjoyed it very much. Get up the next morning. Walked to work, because my car hadn’t been
delivered yet and it was only two blocks from the embassy anyway. And I walked up the side
street to the main street on which the embassy was located. This was just after the country had
become independent. Then I turn onto my street. What is going on? Cars were parked at all
angles in the middle of the street. Belgians, men, women and children were running through the
street to get to the ferry landing, which was just down the street, waiting to go across the Congo
River to the French Congo. Congolese Army guys were wandering all around looking kind of
bewildered but belligerent. (laughs) What is this? You know, what’s happening? [10:00]
I didn’t know what was going on, but I didn’t think it looked very good. And so I was
interested in my own reaction. I immediately decided to take cover. There were hedges next to
the sidewalk and then long and then office building, so I walked behind the hedges, (laughs)
darted from hedge to hedge until I could get close to the embassy and then the embassy was
made of glass, because the Congo was so safe. So it had all glass walls so the people in the
embassy finally spotted me and came out, at least to the front steps and beckoned me in, I got in
there and when it happened, we’d had independence. The Congolese Army had only Belgians as
officers. The Congo, the Belgians had never promoted any Congolese. And the Belgian general
or whatever had the gall to tell the Army after independence that that’s the way it's going to go
on for the [11:00] foreseeable future, there will be no change. (inaudible) still be run by its white
Belgians. So the army mutinied at an army post about 30 miles outside of Leopoldville and it
took a while for the news to reach everything, but began to reach people and people began to flee
and when the news reached the embassy they began to phone all of the American employees and
tell them to get on into the embassy with their families and take shelter. But they couldn’t phone
me. (laughs) Because nobody had my telephone number. So that was all very exciting.

32

Q: That was your first day. My god, what a day.
AP: Well, it was the first, not my first day in the Congo, I’d been there about a month -Q: First day at work.
AP: First day at work, yeah. Amazing. So we had about 300 missionaries and their families take
refuge with us until we could get them out. The Belgian ambassador, the first Belgian
ambassador to the newly independent Congo had [12:00] been attacked in his office and so he
came and took shelter and he stayed in my office and I stayed in my secretary’s office. And that
was dangerous for us to have Belgians there because the Congolese Army kept trying to come
into the embassy and we kept saying, “It's only Americans are here,” so we didn’t want them to
know the Belgians were (inaudible). Ralph Bunche, who at that time was the undersecretary for
the United Nations, had come to the independence celebration and stayed on because he figured
something was going to go wrong. So he used my, after we got the Belgian ambassador out, he
used my office as his headquarters. He had a secretary with him and a portable code machine.
Smart man. And he wanted the United Nations to send in the United Nations troops to
maintain peace and he called Dag Hammarskjold on my telephone, with me standing beside him,
to tell him that and Hammarskjold said that a telegram would have to be sent by Prime Minister
Lumumba requesting it. [13:00] And so I met with, the connection was very bad and I remember
Ralph Bunche shouting in the telephone, “Have you received the telegram?” you know, so
telegram was finally sent. The first troops to come in under the United Nations flag was from
Ghana and some of the British officers with them were people I had known from Ghana, so it
was kind of fun. (laughs) But we stayed in the embassy, except that I had to go out as constable
officer to the airport and to the ferry to get the missionaries out. Some of them didn’t have their
passports and I had a little portable hand seal to make the impression with and a suitcase full of
blank passports and I would meet the missionaries at the airport or the ferry and issue them new
passports, get them out of the country.
Q: Were these Belgian missionaries?

33

AP: No, no, Americans.
Q: Oh, Americans.
AP: We had a Baptist -- mostly we had the American Foreign Baptist Mission Society, we had
some Presbyterians. We had [14:00] Seventh Day Adventists and we had Assemblies of God.
They were all over the place, 3000 of them. It was hard to get them out. The American Air Force
flew in a cargo plane to Brazzaville in the French Congo and in it was a disassembled helicopter.
They put the helicopter together and started going to the mission stations and picking up the
missionaries and the poor pilot just had to use a Mobil Oil road map of the Congo, because we
didn’t have any maps. We weren’t expecting any trouble. (laughs) We didn’t have any maps of
the country. (laughter) It was wild. I found myself out on the tarmac of the airport using a
shortwave radio for the first time in my life, to talk to the American Air Force people who were
over in Brazzaville about refueling and so forth and they’d been fighting out there and it was
really pretty hair-raising. It really was. I can remember one poor missionary woman.
They’d lived in the Congo all their lives, some of them were third generation on the same
mission [15:00] station. And when they were leaving, they could only take what they could carry
and she had to look at her whole house and choose one thing that she had with her, a quilt that
she had crocheted and that’s all she had with her, just this one quilt. That’s what she chose to
carry out. Yeah. Very exciting. Things went downhill after that. The one turning point in my life
came right then. The ambassador ordered all wives and children of embassy employees to leave,
to be evacuated to the United States and also ordered all women employees, including me and I
refused to go. It made no sense to me at all. It was more consulate work than there was any other
kind of work going on because all the normal economic and political reporting had sort of come
to a screeching halt. You know, there was no possibility of doing anything, but consulate section
was busy. And so I just refused to go and he didn’t push it [16:00] and later on he said that he
was very glad that I had stayed and that I had done good work and so forth.
And I think that was one of the times when I established my credentials as a Foreign
Service officer because it just does seem very illogical to me, are we going to have fair weather
counselor officers who will be here when everything’s all right and then leave as soon as things

34

get bad? It just didn’t make sense to me. Scared as I was and believe me, I was very scared and
so was everybody else. (laughs) That’s all right.
Q: Were you the only counselor officer or were there a bunch of you or?
AP: I was the only one.
Q: The only one.
AP: Mm-hmm. And I would get called at all hours of the day and night, when anybody was in
trouble I got, there was a part of the city called the Cité which is where the blacks lived. The
Belgians were just as good at segregation as the South Africans or the British, better than the
British and they had let the blacks live [17:00] in a separate section and so that they couldn’t get
at the whites and we were not allowed to the Cité because it was obviously very dangerous. But I
got called one Sunday afternoon. Some American businessman or whatever had gotten into a
fight with a taxi driver about the fare (laughs) and been arrested and taken to the police station in
the Cité and so I had to go there and I think there was a certain advantage to my being a woman
because I would go in there and in my French say je suis le vice-consul Americaine, you know,
and went on and on about the American Embassy and this person is under the protection of the
American government and we take a very serious view of any harm that should come to him
without due process of law. You made it as long and as complicated as you could because the
Congolese were not used to this kind of stuff (laughs) and they didn’t know what was right and
what was wrong. And I usually managed to get these people released without they’re being
beaten up. Some of them were journalists and some of them I suppose you might say [18:00]
paid their debt later on by writing some very nice stories about me.
That also helped me, I think in my later battle with the State Department, because so
many great stories were written about me in the press that the State Department used those
stories in their recruiting brochures. Aha. And also encouraged me to go out on recruiting tours
and you know how are they going to turn around and say, you know, that I’m not a good Foreign
Service officer when they themselves had been --

35

Q: They cut their own throat.
AP: Yes. (laughs) When I got back from the Congo they, a major story had been written on me
by a friend who was with Associated Press and he tied it to, he printed in the American press the
day that I landed and my father picked me up at the airport and by the time we got home the
phone was ringing. Hollywood called and wanted to make a movie out [19:00] of my life. To
Tell the Truth program, I don’t know if you remember that old (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)
-Q: Will the real so and so please stand up?
AP: Yeah, I was on that. (laughter) And Ralph Edwards wanted me to fly out and do some kind
of thing out in Los Angeles, which I declined. But it was fun. I enjoyed being on the To Tell the
Truth program. That was good.
Q: Did they guess you?
AP: Yes, they did because the two women who were supposed to be my, my imitators or my
carbon copies really (laughs) -- bless their hearts, they couldn’t cope. One of the questioners
asked the name of the Secretary of State and of course, they didn’t know that. (laughs) Well, you
know. But it was just fun being on the program, it really was. And you know, I was interviewed
by press and by radio and by television and this is a good point for me to say that I was very
fortunate to grow up with journalists. [20:00] Because of course, I was completely at home with
the press. I didn’t see the press as the enemy or out to get me. The press was my father, my
father’s friends, people I had worked with on The Monitor and the Times. When I was in the
Congo all of the foreign correspondents were my buddies and would come over to my place on
Sunday evening, brought apple pie and would sing some songs around the piano, you know, so
that I was completely relaxed and this was very useful in later years when I was fighting the
State Department because I could do a very good interview, if I say so myself.
And I saw other women fighting discrimination being interviewed and so forth and they
were nervous or uptight or shy, which I understood but it's kind of too bad because I always
36

thought, this is a wonderful opportunity. This guy’s going to write a story that’s going to be seen
by five million people and I can tell my story in a way I could never hope to do on my own. I
always thought it was a great opportunity. So anyway, that was useful.
Q: When you were in the Congo, was your [21:00] private life soared, had been in Ghana, did
you have as good a time?
AP: Oh yes, absolutely. We had a two-hour lunch hour and I would go to the swimming pool
with some friends and we would play a couple of sets of tennis and then cool off in the pool and
then have lunch and get back to work again. (laughs) And I belonged to the riding club there and
did a lot of riding. Traveled around the country as much as we could, which wasn’t very much.
Because of the security situation. My parents had come out and visited me in Ghana and traveled
around Ghana with me, had a grand time and they came out to the Congo while I was there and
stayed with me for a few days in Leopoldville and then we flew to Kenya and went through the
African game reserves, so that was fun. And had a grand social life. Again, because of so many
European women had left. There were very few white women in the country and I would go out
with, on a date with seven men. (laughs) [22:00] Which is OK by me, you know. They were all
usually foreign correspondents and they all had wonderful stories to tell and then you know, and
then we’d all dance and I loved to dance so it was nice to have seven partners because when one
guy was tired you’d just go onto the next, you know. So I had a grand time. Just marvelous.
Q: So even though you had a lot of work to do as a counselor officer, you still, it wasn’t
consuming your life, in other words.
AP: No, no. It was tiring. Often some emergency would come up and you’d work till 4:00 in the
morning sometimes. Back when I was young and strong and energetic and having a grand time.
The down side of things was that (clears throat) a Foreign Service officer on first tour overseas is
supposed to be rotated through the four functions of the Foreign Service. Counselor,
administrative, political and economic, so that you get your training. There was a young man
who had [23:00] been the counselor officer until I arrived and his two years he was rotated
through all four sections. I spent my entire two years in the counselor section. And which was
37

discrimination. The only time I got out of the counselor section was when the personnel officer,
who was a woman was away for three months’ leave and then I did both jobs. So it was OK to be
a personnel officer.
Q: And who made that decision?
AP: The ambassador.
Q: The ambassador.
AP: Even though the ambassadors, we had two while I was there, respected me for my ability
and courage and you know, felt that I was doing a fine job, they still couldn’t see me as having a
career and in my annual efficiency reports there’s a section about potential for the future
something and they would always throw in some remark like [24:00] “Miss Palmer has a great
career ahead as a Foreign Service officer unless Cupid’s arrow strikes,” (laughs) yes. And again,
you know, I knew that this was wrong. I still hadn’t clicked on what discrimination was or equal
employment or I don’t think that got even mentioned at this time in the early ’60s, but you know
I just knew that something wasn’t adding up. I felt in retrospect, why not just say, “Miss Palmer
has a great career ahead in the Foreign Service” I mean anybody can leave the Foreign Service
for any reason. I mean, men leave the Foreign Service to go into business or something so you
know, if you have a great career, you have a great career as long as you're in the Foreign Service.
So there were all those remarks. Nonetheless, I did get promoted every year that I was
there. And I still -- I enjoyed Africa very much, in spite of the turmoil. I got beaten up by the
Congolese Army at one point, but that didn’t [25:00] sour me on things. I still thought Africa
was a great place to be. And I saved some people’s lives, which was very gratifying to me and in
future years when I was feeling depressed and down I’d say, “Well, at least there’s some people
walking around alive that wouldn’t be if it hadn’t been --”
Q: Well, look at Frank Carlucci now, right?

38

AP: Right. I wrote him a letter when he became Secretary of Defense and got a very nice note
back from him, you know. That was fun. I enjoy seeing him on television now. And the
journalists that I, one of the journalists that I saved from a firing squad wrote three very nice
articles about me in the ’70s when he was stationed in Washington and I was fighting the church
and the State Department and those were very helpful, so you know.
Q: So you made good contacts.
AP: Yes. (laughs) I didn’t do it for those reasons obviously, but anyway. So where are we?
Q: We’re back in Washington. [26:00]
AP: I had asked for -Q: Let’s backtrack for one second. Now when you were in the Congo, this is when you went to
the Episcopal Church for the first time?
AP: Ah, yes. Now we get into religious matters. I want to get a drink of water. [BREAK] I had
been a Christian Scientist since the time that my mother joined the church when I was a child. I
had really ceased to believe in it in 1954 after I left The Monitor, before I went to work on the
New York Times I spent three months looking after my mother’s sister, who was a Christian
Scientist and who was dying of cancer. It was a very, very distressing situation and I felt that
much better to have tried to help with medical care, at least we’d use some sedatives or
something, it was really [27:00] horrible. She had cancer of the stomach. And I looked after her
in her home in Connecticut until she died. So I really ceased to have much faith in Christian
Scientist, Science, although I continued to attend the church and I did teach Sunday school in
Ghana. When I went to the Congo, there was no Science Church there. There was one
interdenominational church which the missionaries took turns preaching at for the European
community -- they had their own separate churches for the Africans and I’ve never heard such
worse bad preaching in my entire life. People used to walk out on the sermons.

39

Missionaries are trained to preach to Africans or whoever, who know nothing about
Christianity, so it's very elementary stuff and they couldn’t seem to convert and preach an
intelligent service to the European community. [28:00] So I was really seeking some kind of
help. I’m scared to death because of what was going on in the Congo. I knew I couldn’t carry on
by myself. It's like what they say about war -- there are no atheists in the foxholes or the
trenches. Then I heard that there was a Canadian military chaplain with the Canadian forces,
which were there under the United Nations flag. He was holding services in an abandoned villa
of which there were thousands (laughs) by this time in Leopoldville. The Belgians had just left
and there were these empty houses. So I started going to his services and he was really
marvelous as a priest of the Anglican Church and so I began to have faith in God and became a
convert to Christianity, again I guess. I had never been baptized as a child. My parents did not
believe in anything like that. So when I got back to [29:00] Washington I attended an Episcopal
church in Washington and was baptized in 1962 and confirmed in 1963. And started attending
church regularly. I guess that brings us up to date on religion. (laughs) OK.
Moving back to my career. I had asked for African University Training. This is a
program that the State Department has to send officers to a university for a year for training in a
specialized field -- Africa, Asia, whatever. And I was turned down. The training officer, who was
a woman Foreign Service officer said that there’s no point in training women officers because
they’re always leaving to get married. And I noticed that the men who were chosen that year,
there were three training slots for African Studies. [30:00] None of them had served in Africa
and two of them had never been overseas, and yet they got these training slots. I already had two
overseas tours in Africa. But there we were. I was assigned as staff assistant to a deputy assistant
secretary, OK, was without doubt the worst time in my Foreign Service career. This was a
woman who lives here on Cape Cod named Katie Louchheim, a political appointee.
Her husband had contributed millions to the Democratic Party in the days when you
could give millions (laughs) to a political party. The good old days, I guess. So as a reward for
this she was appointed as a deputy assistant secretary. Nobody wanted her. First she’d served in
the Bureau of Administration and they didn’t want her. And then she was in the Bureau of
Education and Cultural Affairs and they didn’t want her, so she ended up in the Bureau of Public
Affairs and she had read about me in the newspapers and she said, [31:00] “I want that that
woman as my staff assistant,” well, in the first place, deputy assistant secretaries don’t have staff
40

assistants. Assistant secretaries have staff assistants. But she got what she wanted because of her
political clout. So I was at home waiting for my assignment and I got a call from someone in
personnel and they told me about it, they said, “We fought it tooth and nail. We know this is not
an appropriate assignment for you, but she has insisted and she’s got you and that’s that.”
So I moved down to Washington, got myself an apartment, started my work. Katie had
two secretaries, deputy assistant secretaries. You usually share a secretary, but she had two
secretaries and me. And there was absolutely nothing for any of us to do and -Q: I was going to ask.
AP: (laughs) In the morning I would read, at her instructions -- [31:53]
Track 4
AP: [00:00] -- ideal role model. In the morning I would clip out any reference to her in society
paper and she would read it and then I’d paste it in a scrapbook and the same thing with the
afternoon paper. We officially start work at the State Department at a quarter to nine. Katie
would arrive at about 10:00, after we’d have a chance to clip the paper and sort out her mail. And
she would shuffle through this and you know, maybe dictate an answer or two, make a phone
call or two and then leave to go to Elizabeth Arden’s to have her hair and face and nails done for
her luncheon appointment. And then she’d come back in the afternoon around 3:00 and shuffle
through the mail again and then go to Elizabeth Arden’s again to get set up for the evening.
Q: Why did she want this job?
AP: Prestige. She was a deputy assistant secretary. I mean, wouldn’t you like to be Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State if somebody offered it to you? (laughs)
Q: What was her, I mean what could she really do? I mean, what was she really supposed to do?
As opposed to going to Elizabeth Arden. [01:00]

41

AP: Well, in the Bureau of Public Affairs they were try to get started an interest in women
around the world. And she had me as her staff assistant and she had a woman civil servant, fairly
high-ranking, who was in charge International Women’s Programs, I guess you’d call it and so
women leaders from foreign countries would come and you’d take them around the United States
and so forth. So they were trying to get this started. This was a fairly new idea. This is all fine,
well and good, but it was this woman’s civil servant who was doing all the real work. Katie was
just floating around. And she had a list of people who had given money to her husband to give to
the Democratic Party, a list of very wealthy contributors. And I think she had been a member of
the [02:00] Democratic National Committee. She might even have been chairman at some point.
Anyway, now of course, she was Deputy Assistant Secretary. But from time to time we’d
get calls from people who would say, “Katie, wouldn’t you like us to have that list so that we can
make the contacts, save you all that bother?” she wasn’t going to let that list out of her hands,
because of course, that was her power. She knew where she could raise millions of dollars for the
party. So it was very educational from that point because I had never had any contact with people
in the political side of life. But the only other thing that she did that seemed to have any
relevance at all, whenever an ambassador was going out to his country for the first time he had
all kinds of consultations all over Washington and all through the State department.
And she would have these ambassadors come and meet with her and she would have me
sit in on these things. I would just be dying of embarrassment. And she would tell them, you
know, to be alert to women’s situation -- [BREAK] Anyway, she would have these ambassadors
come in and ask them to be alert to the status of women and the countries that they were going to
and [03:00] and so forth and so on, which was perfectly legitimate. But she wouldn’t know a
thing about the countries. And I remember when we had an ambassador who was going to
Rwanda, which was a former Belgian colony, and she said, “Now this is a former French
colony,” of course, me, as an African specialist, she never asked me to brief her ahead of time or
prepare a little, you know, memo sheet or anything like that, that she just -- and of course, the
ambassador would have such contempt for any person, you know, who didn’t even know
anything about the country that they were talking about, so the whole thing was a disaster.
And she used to take me around with her to various meetings and I would carry her
briefcase and she would always introduce me to someone and she’d say, “This is my staff
assistant,” you know, sort of slave or -- huge, revolting. Well, I got so fed up with this. And I met
42

somebody in a hallway who was in personnel, he said, “Alison, we had just tried to assign you as
[04:00] an officer to Georgetown, British Guyana but Mrs. Louchheim said you weren’t
available and I said, “I’m available,” you know. So then I went back to my office and I wrote a
memo and I described exactly one week’s work. I put down everything that I did. You know,
clipped the papers. You know, sit in on briefings, you know whatever. It added up to about a
total of four hours, you know, for the whole week and I sent this to personnel, which is a very
dangerous thing for me to do, of course. And they read it and they had another meeting and they
assigned me and then they gave me back my memo and said, “You’d better burn this.”
(laughs) You know. Anyway, Katie really didn’t want me to leave but I said it was a
great career opportunity -- I was so desperate to get out of there. So she let me go. Disgusting.
She really -- she just had absolutely no idea -- the only good thing about that assignment was that
the Cuban Missile Crisis happened while I was there. And Katie had to let me go help out
[05:00] in the head office of the Bureau of Public Affairs, which is really fascinating because
you got a chance to see a lot of the stuff that was going on. So that was good. But that was just
happenstance. So that was my nine months with Katie Louchheim. (laughs)
Q: So then you went to British Guyana.
AP: Mm-hmm.
Q: And what was your job when you were there?
AP: Well, I was counselor officer again. Personnel had told me that there wasn’t much work to
be done in the counselor section, I would be able to spend at least half my time doing political
reporting. What I wanted to be was a political reporter in Africa. Turned out not to be true
because the counselor section was very busy, but I did manage to do some reporting on my own.
And it was an interesting country. Very tiny. I think the population was about 600,000, 25 miles
of paved road, which ran from the airport to the town, so by the time you drove in from the
airport you had made the grand tour. (laughs) [06:00] But it was my favorite assignment of all
the places I’ve ever been, in spite of its crazy nature, people were marvelous. It was a very mixed
group of descendants of Africans from Africa who had been brought to work on the plantations.
43

Then after slavery was abolished, the British brought in Indians from India to work on the
plantation and so their descendants were there. They were descendants of Portuguese, they were
British and they were local Indians, Latin American Indians and you know, it was just a grand,
grand place. A lot of terrorism going on while I was there. The consulate was blown up.
Fortunately I’d gone out 10 minutes earlier, otherwise I would have been decapitated.
Blown up by Communist terrorists. We had to check our cars all the time, make sure nobody had
thoughtfully wired a hand grenade to the ignition.
Q: Oh my god.
AP: Yes. (laughs)
Q: So you're living almost in this constant state. [07:00]
AP: Oh yeah. My house was well lit on the outside. Had a wall with barbed wire, broken glass
around the top. I had a night watchman, I had a dog.
Q: All living alone?
AP: Living alone. Take it for granted, (laughs) I’m always living alone. Had all the windows
covered over with grillwork and when I went to bed at night I left on all the lights in the house,
except in the bedroom, so that the night watchman could see if anybody was moving around.
Despite all this one night, I had an extension in my bedroom for the main phone down here in the
living room and one night I heard the sound of breaking glass and listened. I could hear
something moving around in the living room. So I picked up the phone to call the police. I could
hear someone breathing on the phone, I was to (inaudible) (laughs) this gets worse and worse.
And then this person put the phone down on the table, so I couldn’t call out. [08:00] I couldn’t
get out of my bedroom windows because of the grillwork. So I was just there. Of course, the
bedroom door had a lock on it, but even so, so I was just standing there in my jammies and then I
heard footsteps coming up the stairs. And I heard more than one pair. I thought, if it's just one

44

person, but when he breaks in I can throw a sheet over him or trip him up or you know, I’d have
a fighting chance of you know, making a getaway. But several pairs of footsteps.
This is the end, you know. And then I heard the door being tried. (laughs) And then I
heard this wonderful British accent saying, “Miss Palmer, are you all right?” it was a British
policeman, Guyana policeman. My night watchman had been huddled in fear and trembling
outside while this person had broken in. The person next door, who was the British Embassy
Information Officer, [09:00] had heard the break-in and then seen this, so he had called the
police. The police had arrived, come in, captured this guy and then come upstairs to find me.
(laughs)
Q: Oh my god.
AP: I know. Ooh. And apparently he wasn’t, he wasn’t a burglar. He was an Indian, local -Indians were the ones who were hostile to the American government because we wanted their
party not to be in control of Ghana, because they were Communists, we thought. So the theory
was that he had come in and probably was going to phone to a companion, you know, had some
dynamite or something and had that, if you were caught with dynamite you got a long prison
sentence because they were trying to keep the terrorists from moving the stuff around the
country, so that the police had the theory that this guy had broken in to make sure that he could
get in without being caught and then he was going to call his companion to come in and bring the
dynamite and when they found him [10:00] he was in the corner of the living room, just directly
under my bedroom and so, I don’t know what was going on. (laughs) Pretty hair-raising, I must
say. So. Also in British -Well, I should have said in Ghana and in the Congo I had malaria. In British Guyana I
had amoebic dysentery so that was all very exciting. Unpleasant. Not to be repeated if possible.
We had only local doctors who were, you know, of moderate skill. So we mostly went to the
British Army doctor, who was taking private patients. Well, (laughs) I don’t know where he got
his training or how old fashioned it was, but he gave me for amoebic dysentery something called
[Emotine?] Bismuth Iodide which basically has the principle of making you throw up. The idea
is you get rid of whatever --

45

Q: Whatever is ailing you and -AP: So he didn’t explain this too carefully to me. Gave me the bottle of pills and he said, [11:00]
“All right. When you're ready for bed take one of these and take a sleeping pill and have a plastic
bowl beside your bed,” I guess the sleeping pill was so that you wouldn’t suffer too much while
you were being nauseated.
Q: So you can throw up while you're asleep.
AP: There you go. (laughs) Anyway, I was so weak by all of this that I spent an awful lot of time
lying on the bathroom floor, you know. What with you have diarrhea from the dysentery and so
anyway, eventually we consulted with Walter Reed Hospital and they sent down some other
medication which was antibiotics and a little bit more advanced -- (laughs) Occasionally when
I’m reading books about Africa or you know, any period of that time, I run across this treatment
being described and I know exactly what was it, probably stopped using it after Queen Victoria
died, but somehow this was still being used in the British (laughs) Army -Q: They hadn’t updated the textbooks -AP: That’s right. You know, they hadn’t gotten the latest brochure from the [12:00] pharmacy or
something. (laughs)
Q: Oh my god.
AP: Oh, yes. But in spite of everything, I had a wonderful time there, lots of parties. Lots of
horseback riding. Swimming. Going around the country. Went into the interior and stayed on a
ranch for a few days, did a lot of horseback riding there, so just had a grand time. And of course,
took lots of vacations in the Caribbean, Trinidad and Jamaica. Things like that. So that great.
And I had applied for African training again and this time I got it, along with my promotion. So I
was Consul in British Guyana when I left. And so I came back to Washington. Met with my
State Department career counselor who said, “Alison, you've been trying too hard for so many
46

years to show that you can do everything that a man can. Just relax. The fact that you have been
chosen for this advanced training means that the State Department has fully accepted you as a
career officer and just go ahead and be [13:00] (inaudible)” and great.
Q: Do you think part of what he was saying, (inaudible) “The State Department has accepted you
as a career officer,” do you think that in part he was saying, “We don’t think you're going to get
married”?
AP: Well, perhaps.
Q: Were there (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)?
AP: Yeah.
Q: So you were safe to promote at that point.
AP: Yes. Mm. Yeah. I never thought about it that way, but by that time I’d been in the service
from 1955 to, this was 1966 and served only at hardship posts and served well and got promoted,
promoted, promoted so I think what really did it, though, that talk about the old boy network. It
was the only time in my life that it worked for me. When I had been in Ghana, the second year
when we moved up to being an embassy, the administrative officer was a guy, a Foreign Service
officer named Tom Reiner, [14:00] who I got to know, of course, and liked very much and I was
his administrative assistant when I was a personnel officer. So he had seen me serve in Africa.
Then he came back as a Foreign Service inspector when we were in the Congo -- all
embassies are inspected every few years and he was a Foreign Service inspector so we met again
and of course, he gave me a gold star for being in the Congo doing a good job and recommended
me for training. Then by sheer coincidence, he was the inspector in British Guyana, which was
very unlikely to have the same inspector twice. And he really wrote a recommendation for me
which got me my promotion and the training and I think that’s probably what did it. He was an
officer whose word was respected. You're supposed to be very, very good before you get to be an
inspector and so I think that was what swung it. So I came back with [15:00] -- to Washington
47

and then went to Boston University. Before I left Washington I was then told that I would be
assigned as political officer to Dar Es Salaam in Tanzania, which is fine with me because that’s a
very good post. Can we stop for a second?
Q: Sure. [BREAK]
AP: I was very pleased with the assignment to Tanzania because it's a very interesting country,
so I was very happy at Boston University, taking courses. Of course, some of my professors
training me about Africa had never set foot in Africa and that would create a few difficulties.
(laughs)
Q: When you knew more than they did.
AP: Absolutely. Strange feeling. But in general I enjoyed it very much and then through the
grapevine I heard that my assignment to Tanzania had been canceled and I asked the personnel
officer why and he said, “It was because the ambassador doesn’t want a woman, but we’ve got a
good job for you in Uganda,” [16:00] so I accepted that reluctantly and then I heard that that had
been canceled and I asked why and I was given the same explanation. And by this time it was the
beginning of the second term in January of ’66 and I said, “OK, you've had your last chance. If
you don’t get me an assignment that holds up, you’ll never hear the end of it. I’ll take it to the
Supreme Court and I’ll fight it as long as I live,” which actually seems to have turned out to
(laughs) be true. I have been to the Supreme Court (laughs) and I’m still fighting it.
So they got me assigned as Political Officer in Ethiopia, which was OK. And then the
ambassador there objected, so I raised merry hell. And I told them that my father was an editor
on the New York Times and that Senator Margaret Chase Smith was a close friend personal friend
of the family’s because she had worked for my grandfather, before she went to Washington and
then he worked for [17:00] her in Washington, so they got sufficiently scared of the State
Department, to tell me that the ambassador that was objecting was leaving. They would extend
me at the university through the summer so that I would arrive after the ambassador had left and
the new ambassador was very much in favor of my being political officer, so I said, “OK,” I get
out to Ethiopia, the ambassador who objected to me stayed for another year and although on
48

paper I was assigned as political officer, I had been told before I left that I would have to do
whatever the ambassador told me. I did go see the Director General of the Foreign Service before
I left and told him about it and he said, “Alison, there’s absolutely no doubt that you’ll be
discriminated against,” and I said, “What shall I do about it?” and he said, “Show good Foreign
Service discipline by accepting it,” so when I met the ambassador in Ethiopia, he said that he
was not [18:00] prejudiced against women Foreign Service officers, he just knew that there were
some jobs that women officers could not do. Which to me is prejudice.
So he made me nominally his staff assistant, which really meant that I worked for his
wife, preparing invitation cards. I would take her invitation cards down to the printers and then
after they’d been printed out, pick them up and bring them back to her. And I discussed with the
bandleader for the orchestra that was going to play at one of her balls what music should be
played and so forth and so on. Whenever I had a chance I tippy-toed over to the political section
and did political reporting. And eventually the ambassador left. I became fulltime political
officer. Did very well. And I volunteered for Vietnam when my job in Ethiopia was going to be
abolished as superfluous. Which is a kind of a sad commentary.
When I finally, finally got to be political [19:00] officer in Africa, it was in a job that was
the lowest priority for that area and the first one to be cut when there was a budget cut, which
again, says something about careers for women. I volunteered for Vietnam because first of all, I
felt that for my generation, it was a major experience in the same way that World War II had
been a major experience for my parents’ generation. I just wanted to see what it was all about.
And also, because when I had been in the Congo, one of the foreign correspondents there was
David Halberstam. It was his first overseas assignment as a foreign correspondent. Very nice
young man. We used to go around together and all that. And I liked him very much and had a lot
of respect for him. Well, he went to Vietnam and got the Pulitzer Prize for reporting that the
American government, especially the American military, but also the America Embassy was
lying [20:00] about the progress of the war. And I couldn’t make head or tail of this because on
the one hand I respected David very much. We trusted him. On the other hand I couldn’t see that
so many hundreds, if not thousands of American government officials would be lying, the
military, embassy, so forth. So I thought I would go out and see for myself. I asked to be
assigned as political officer at the embassy in Saigon and the personnel office in Washington

49

said there wasn’t a vacancy, although that was the hugest embassy in the hugest political section
we had in the entire world.
Q: Really?
AP: Oh, absolutely. If you look at something called the Foreign Service List, which for every
embassy shows who’s assigned there, usually there are three or four political officers. In a place
like London there might be six or seven. But in Vietnam we had 40 or 50.
Q: Is that because of the war?
AP: Yeah. You know, we were really (laughs) involved and it was a very complicated situation
and people [21:00] were reporting on everything. But they did say that I could be assigned to, I
could be loaned to the Agency for International Development, which in turn would loan me to
the Military Advisory Group and I would be working on the so-called Classification Program. So
I thought well, in a way that’s even closer to the war and therefore better for me to experience
what’s going on. So while I was in Ethiopia I got my orders and it said I was being assigned to
[Nha Trang?], to Vietnam. And I remember wondering if they even had electricity. I mean, it
meant absolutely nothing to me. I had no idea where I was. Fortunately I found somebody at the
embassy who had been in Vietnam, you know, during the French Colonial period or something
and he told me that Nha Trang was the vacation resort for the French Colonialists, very lovely
beach area, a little town on the beach area, so it sounded all right. [22:00]
So I flew directly to Vietnam and arrived in Saigon and was met at the airport by
somebody who I had served with in the Congo, which was nice, a Foreign Service officer. So he
took me directly to, I’m going to have to start using acronyms. The Military Advisory Command
Vietnam, MACV, known as MAC-V, took me to MAC-V headquarters for briefing, which was
very helpful. I stayed in a hotel there. The entrance to the hotel was completely covered in wire,
so that if somebody drove past and threw a hand grenade at you while you were standing at the
entrance it would bounce off the wire. And there were little helpful pamphlets in the hotel rooms.
It was all occupied by American government officials about what to do in case of attack and all
this other stuff.
50

So then I flew to Nha Trang [23:00] and I was chief of the Reports Branch at the
Classification Headquarters for what we called II Corps. I Corps was just south of the
demilitarized zone. We were working our way southward now. II Corps was the mountainous
region which runs right across the middle of Vietnam. III Corps was Saigon, IV Corps was the
Delta. II Corps was where the war was lost. Ultimately. So it was entirely a military operation. I
supervised a major, two captains and a lieutenant and my supervisor was a colonel. And actually,
as far as I know, this was the only time in my entire government employment where I did not
encounter discrimination and I think that’s partly because of military discipline. You know, if
you've got a supervisor, you've got a supervisor.
Q: (inaudible) --handed statement.
AP: Right [24:00] and also because there was a lot of tremendously difficult work that needed to
be done and I was very good at doing it. The reason that the MAC-V had asked the Foreign
Service officers, I was by no means the only one, was first of all, we could write intelligently as
opposed to military reporting, which is (laughs) full of gobbledygook. And secondly they, for
some reason they wanted some honest reporting, which I find really interesting. They suspected,
apparently, at MAC-V headquarters, that the reports being written by their military folks in the
field were not accurate and so they wanted the Foreign Service officers, because we were not
subject to military discipline, and I guess they thought we would be independent enough to tell
the truth, which I thought was, you know, quite an interesting commentary on the situation.
Q: So in other words, it was the people in the field who were putting up smoke screens rather
than the people [25:00] at the headquarters.
AP: Well, ultimately it was at all levels. One of my close friends in Nha Trang was a Foreign
Service officer named Fred [Schelk?]. He was stationed at the embassy in Saigon as political
officer, but he was responsible for reporting on political developments in II Corps, so he had a
second base of operations at the headquarters where I was working. And he told me that he
would write up his reports and take them back to Saigon and turn them into the chief of the
Political Section to be sent on to Washington and he would then go back up to the field and come
51

back, you know, a few weeks later and find that his, the bottom drawer of his safe was filled with
the reports, just as he had left them. They had not been sent in, because he was reporting, you
know, the whole place was falling apart. And his chief of section would not even send them
forward to the ambassador. [26:00] So he was trying to tell the truth, but he wasn’t having any
luck in getting the material transmitted. And I ran into similar situations a little later on.
Anyway, I received reports from the American Advisors at district and province level.
District is like a county, province is like la state. And we had what we called “province chiefs”,
Vietnamese were like the governor of the state and they had an American advisor who was
supposed to help them win the war and win the hearts and minds (laughs) of the people. And at
district level we had district advisors and they would all turn in their reports and they would
come across my desk, being analyzed by some of my assistants and then I would once a month
write the II Corps Overview, which was supposed to be four single-spaced pages that would tell
everything that had happened both militarily and on the civilian side.
Q: On four pages?
AP: On four page-- well, you know, [27:00] lots of paper flowing around. Got to keep it short.
And I had a heck of a time with this because even the reports that I received, even those that
were trying to put a good face on things, showed to me that things were not working. And then
when I began making field trips, it was even more obvious that things were -Q: Now what year is this?
AP: I got there in September of ’68 and left in March of 1970.
Q: OK, so it was after Tet.
AP: After Tet. Just to give you an example, they had, aside from the regular Vietnamese Army,
they had something called Regional Forces, which would be like our National Guard. They were
stationed in the provinces and just worked in those provinces. They didn’t go nationwide. And at
one point there was in instruction sent out from the Vietnamese government to add two
52

companies to each regional force in each province and report back when this had been
accomplished. [28:00] So a couple of months later I get a report from the American advisor to
the Regional Forces saying that this had been accomplished. But I read this report very carefully
and noticed that it didn’t say anything about training or supplies. So I asked him. I said, “Each
company,” I knew from the instruction that each company is supposed to have two trucks. Each
company is supposed to have two shortwave radios. Each company, of course, was supposed to
be armed and have at least some kind of training in the use of these weapons.
And also I knew that there was a very high rate of absenteeism and AWOLism so I said
you know, “What about all this?” and he said, “Well, the companies have been formed and that’s
what we were told to do,” and I said, “Yes, but these companies are not operational. They can’t
go anywhere, they can’t communicate and I strongly suspect that they’ve never fired (laughs)
weapons,” so I argued with him for about three hours before I got him to put into his report,
which then I blended [29:00] into my report these facts. So this is the kind of thing that had to be
told to Saigon, otherwise they would think that these companies are just -Q: Ready to go.
AP: Ready to go, fully operational. So that’s just one example that I remember. We had reports
on the level of classification and Nha Trang was located in Khanh Hoa province and the
American advisor to the province chief was a Foreign Service officer and he told me and he said
in his reports that the province was 100% pacified. And then casually let drop in the conversation
that when he went out to visit districts or hamlets, hamlets being the next lowest level, he always
traveled by chopper because the roads weren’t safe from the Viet Cong. Kermit. His name was
Kermit. “Kermit, how can this place be so pacified if you can’t travel in broad daylight on the
main roads?” so then I started going out on field trips [30:00] scared to death, I must say. Really
scared to death. The first time I made a field trip I traveled by helicopter, also for the first time.
And I was with the colonel who was my supervisor and we were just making a half-day
trip somewhere and I happened to be sitting directly behind the pilot and you know, there are all
these lights and switches and things and after we’d been going about a half an hour, I saw this
yellow light flashing on and off and it had the word “caution” on it and I remember thinking,
gee, I wonder if that does that all the time. You know, is it just a routine thing? And at that point
53

the pilot announced that we were experiencing engine failure and we were going to have to make
an emergency landing. Well, of course, we were over Viet Cong territory (laughs) and I really
didn’t find this too cheery, you know, so we made this landing. Fortunately we had enough
power left to get to an American-held area. And [31:00] then the colonel that was in charge of
this trip insisted on proceeding onwards in another chopper. I would have gone home at that
point, but I suppose you would have had to go home by chopper, so what’s the difference?
You know (laughs) so we went on. And we went to the place that we were aiming for and
got there and walked around a bit and then came home but (laughs) gee, we had to fly at treetop
level and go swooping in and out so that the Viet Cong who were on the ground, they could hear
the chopper, but they’re very thick, heavy tree canopies in the jungle, so they wouldn’t know
where we were until we suddenly swooped around the top of a tree and before, we hoped, before
they could train their M-16s or whatever, (inaudible) we would be off behind another treetop.
But it's not a very safe way of flying because copters have no -- [31:52]
Track 5
AP: [00:00] The chopper pilots were very sensitive about being criticized on the safety of their
craft and they would say that they could always go into autorotation, which meant that if the
engine stopped, the force of the aircraft sinking to the ground would cause the blades to spin
around. Of course, the trouble is for that to happen effectively, you had to be about 5,000 feet -it was no good at all at treetop level. But the other thing that made me very unhappy about flying
in choppers was that I saw amongst many other reports, a report comparing the accident record
of fixed wing aircraft in Vietnam. We had spotter planes with just ordinary fixed wing airplanes
and chopper accidents and the chopper accidents was something like three to one ratio, compared
to the fixed wing aircraft. So nevertheless I continued to travel (laughs) by chopper.
I went up to the border near Cambodia [01:00] once when the base was under fire and
since we got off the chopper we ducked down into the bunkers and spent the whole time that we
were there in the bunkers. Nha Trang itself was often under attack. My first day there, when I
was being shown around the office, I heard a thump-thump-thump and I said, “What’s that?” and
they said, “Oh, that’s OK, we’re just dropping napalm on the V.C. in the mountains outside of
town,” and I looked out the window. There was very lovely green mountains. Great thick clouds
54

of smoke coming up and I guess my face must have shown that I was not thrilled about the idea
of people being burned alive and they said, “Don’t worry about it. The V.C. get way down into
caves and nothing reaches them and then when we leave they come back out again,” it was sort
of a useless gesture that we were doing, which often happened. You know, people would call in
air strikes because there were V.C. in the neighborhood, but the V.C. would you know, take off
and then come back [02:00] after the air strike was over.
Q: So then you were in combat areas.
AP: Yeah. And Nha Trang, as I said, it was itself shelled. We had no telephone in the quarters
where I was living so, and that was true of many Americans scattered around town. So in order
to warn us, a chopper would get up over the town and somebody would use a bullhorn and say,
“Attention, all American personnel, we are now on red alert,” red alert means we are under
enemy attack. Or yellow alert meant attack is expected and white alert meant caution. So you
know, it was kind of an eerie feeling to have that coming at you and you know, then we’d hear
the thump-thump-thump. One time I was up on the roof of the building and we came under
sniper fire and I don’t know how close the bullets were, but I could hear them whine and so
somebody I’m sure can tell me how close that was. Too close for comfort. We came down off
the roof. [03:00] One time a made a field trip by Jeep with Kermit, in his 100% pacified
(inaudible). (laughs) He was really a very nice man. But you know, kind of carried away.
You know, it was a matter of personal pride for all of the advisors to succeed and the
problem with that is that they didn’t have control of the situation. They were not pacifying the
problems, they were advising the province chief, who was pacifying and if the province chief
didn’t feel like doing anything, the advisor got terribly frustrated. Some province chiefs would be
supplied with diesel oil to burn in generators to illuminate compounds at night to prevent V.C.
attack and that instead of using it for that purpose they would sell it and use the proceeds to build
themselves a [billow?]. What are you going to do (laughs) if you're the advisor, you know?
But anyway, I went on a trip to a district with Kermit and we were to drive through a
[04:00] mountain pass where the day before an American Jeep had been ambushed and a couple
of people had been killed and so Kermit arranged for an observation helicopter to fly directly
overhead and if he, this person was to observe us and if we were under attack he would then call
55

in help because by the time the help got there it might be a little too late, but that was the theory.
The only problem was that after we got into the mountain pass, we had a radio in the Jeep and
we heard from the observation pilot that he couldn’t see us because of ground fog. (laughs) So
we were just going along. I’ve never been so scared in my life.
So we got to district and we spent the night there and came back and I think when we
finally came out of the mountain pass onto the flat, open land where we could no longer be
ambushed, I could distinctly hear Kermit give a sigh of relief. (laughs) But that’s an example of
the exaggeration of reporting that was going on. [05:00] I mean, there was another, there was a
Vietnamese police chief who was reporting as being, you know, completely loyal and
hardworking and all that and eventually we found out that he was a Viet Cong and he was a
double agent or whatever you want to call him, so you couldn’t ever tell. Our compound where I
lived was guarded by Vietnamese who was formerly Viet Cong and had defected and of course,
every time we looked at him we wondered, well, how former is he? (laughs) You know, could he
have a relapse because if so, he could attack.
Q: So you couldn’t trust really any of the natives people.
AP: No. There was one very sad situation. In a village, they had a movie, a recreational area for
the local inhabitants, which is just outside in a field with a projector and screen. And one day or
one evening somebody threw a hand grenade into the crowd, killed a lot of people, injured a lot
of people, turned out it had been thrown by a 10-year-old boy [06:00] who was Viet Cong. What
are you going to do with a 10-year-old boy who’s killed 40 people? You just had no idea who to
trust and at one point we heard through intelligence sources that our compound was going to be
attacked by Viet Cong, so we had a meeting and people living in that compound included
American secretaries who were with the Agency for International Development and senior
military officer living there asked if everyone had a weapon and I was kind of intrigued to find
that these nice-looking young women had M-16s that they had to go buy it (laughs) from
somewhere. I was the only one of about 20 people who did not have a weapon and we were
setting up a, sort of a home guard operation to have around-the-clock guards on the roofs, so that
if something started we’d be all set.

56

And so I was asked, I was told that they could get a weapon for me if I wanted one and
that was, you know [07:00] the first time I ever really had to contemplate using a weapon against
a human being and I discovered at that moment that I was a conscientious objector. And so I said
no and I felt very badly about that because that meant that my comrades would have to protect
me and risk their lives for me. Actually the attack never materialized but a lot of Foreign Service
officers, for example, at district level were expected to go out on patrol with the local troops to
see how they were doing. And that meant that they had to carry weapons for their own protection
and I remember when I got back to Washington some of the officers who had, Foreign Service
officers who served in Vietnam met with the Director General to protest a lot of things.
And amongst other things, I said, “Well, what about the fact that some Foreign Service
officers may be conscientious objectors and yet you are assigning them to [08:00] places where
they have to carry weapons,” and the Director General who was a real jerk said, sort of off the
top of his head with a kind of a cynical sneer on his face, “Oh well, we do try to take into
account each officer’s personal whims or idiosyncrasies,” and when he saw my face and he said,
“Or religious beliefs or philosophical conditions,” (laughs) you know, that was amazing.
Personal whims or idiosyncrasies. You don’t like shooting people, (laughs) you know.
Q: So when as a Foreign Service officer you went over there, in other words, you were not given,
even though you were going to a combat area, you're not given combat training.
AP: No, no. There was some kind of an orientation program in Washington, but since I went
directly from Ethiopia to Vietnam, I missed that. But in any case, it had nothing to do with that.
[09:00] Many cases, I think the State Department for a while really had no idea what was going
on. We were on loan to the Agency for International Development, which often happens and we
had AID officers on loan to us. So then we were loaned to MAC-V and this other -- distance,
yeah, we were so far removed. After I’d been there about a year, the State Department did send
out a senior diplomat who interviewed every Foreign Service officer in that situation in the
MAC-V grouping. And asked, you know, what our problems were and what we were doing,
because amongst other things he said that when our efficiency reports went up before the
promotion boards, the promotion boards couldn’t figure out what the heck we were doing.

57

Now that did not raise our morale too much. I mean, you know, we went out there, you
know, struggling and suffering (laughs) and doing our best and being told that back home
nobody had any idea what we were doing.
Q: So really what you were doing was almost like military work. Rather than [10:00] Foreign
Service work and were you in any way prepared for that? I mean, was it just something you were
thrown into and you just did it, you learned on the job?
AP: Learned on the job. I had no idea -- when I left Ethiopia all my order said was that I was on
detail to the Agency for International Development and I would be stationed in Nha Trang. I had
heard, I guess from a letter from somebody in personnel that they wanted somebody who could
write honest reports well, is the basic thrust of it. So I assumed it would be something like
political reporting, which to a certain extent it was. I mean, you're analyzing material. Either
other people’s reports or what you had actually seen. But it was very much in a military
situation. And I found it illuminating in a depressing kind of way. When I started out I had
complete [11:00] freedom to send in not only, well, the overview had to be signed off on by the
commanding general of II Corps, but I also sent in what were called “spot reports” on a daily
basis. If something interesting happened I just did a little report which was sent off by telegram
to Saigon and was signed off on by my immediate superior. So this was all right for a while until
I had a report come in for a Foreign Service officer, an advisor to a province chief that there had
been an atrocity, caused by American military action. And I sent that off as a spot report.
And when the commanding general of II Corps got an inquiry back from Saigon saying,
“What’s going on?” he was furious at me for having sent in the report and he visited the area and
said there had been no atrocity. What had happened was that Viet Cong has infiltrated a village
at night, [12:00] which is their usual pattern and spent the day there indoctrinating people and
intimidating people and you know, just generally doing their thing. And somebody had managed
to get out of the village and go for help and so the province chief had called in Regional Forces
to approach the village and drive out the Viet Cong by a shooting. But they were not doing it
successfully. The Viet Cong were too well entrenched and I guess the Regional Forces were not
too enthusiastic. (laughs) Anyway, they weren’t getting anywhere. So the province chief asked
the nearest American Air Force contingent to call in an air strike.
58

Well, the trouble with air strikes on villages is you get everybody. And after everything
was all over and they went, the Regional Forces went into the village, they found that about 30
villagers had been killed, including women and children and most of them had died in the
bunkers because [13:00] of the air strike. And there’s no doubt about that. There were no bullet
wounds in them. They had died by being crushed, you know, by things falling in on them. And
the Foreign Service officer who had witnessed this from a hillside reported this in writing and
then he came into the office where I was the next day and reported again with tears in his eyes
saying, “Can’t we do something to prevent this ever happening?” so I had, you know, very
strong confirmation of what had happened, and yet the commanding general would have it that
the villagers had been killed, shot by the V.C. so it was just a cover up like the My Lai Massacre.
I couldn’t do any more, I mean it had already reported at Saigon before the commanding general
got me stopped. He never let me do any reporting again. (laughs) So that was that. When I got
back to Washington I reported it to the, I could never get this title straight, the Judge Advocate of
the United States Army.
Q: The Judge Advocate General? [14:00]
AP: Thank you. I knew it was something like that. And I -- what was that? Excuse me. Sorry. I
thought I heard something. (inaudible)
Q: There’s a (inaudible) out there.
AP: Oh, thank you. (laughs) Meanwhile, back at the ranch. I had taken with me copies of the
original report, signed by a Foreign Service officer, so I had that and I sent that all in and asked
for an investigation. But before I could do that I had to get permission -- I’ll start this over again.
I didn’t get any kind of a reply for a long time. So then I thought I would take this to the press.
And before I could do that I had to get permission from the State Department and they kept not
answering my request. So finally I said “Well, if you won’t give me permission [15:00] to
release this document,” a totally unclassified document which by that time was about two years
old, “then do you mind very much if I tell the press that you won’t let me release this?” (laughs)
so they then let me release it and I got press coverage and some interviews on television and so
59

forth. But basically nothing further happened. I felt that the evidence was so clear that there
should have been some kind of effort to reprimand or discipline the Air Force people involved
with, you know, what did they think was going to happen when they dropped those bombs on the
village? But anyway, I did the best I could with that.
But I guess my overall conclusion about the military is that they had such a need to
convince themselves that it was possible to do the impossible, [16:00] you know, go take that hill
or go launch that invasion, even though they know it's almost suicidal, but they have to believe
that they can do the impossible. Well, Vietnam was an impossible situation. We were not in
control of the place. Unlike World War II when, you know, Eisenhower was in control of the
armies. And so they couldn’t cope with the fact that nothing was getting done and we weren’t
accomplishing anything. And so that led to all of this reporting that was so strange. I had one
other major confrontation with authority there which I’m still very proud of.
In order to avoid civilian casualties in areas where the Viet Cong had taken over, we
would try, we, the Saigon government, Vietnamese government were trying to evacuate the
civilians and then after the civilians had been moved to [17:00] refugee camps, then we would
call in an air strike, which is not too successful because the place where we started moving out
the refugees, the Viet Cong would sort of get the idea that (laughs) something was about to
happen, you know. But anyway, that was the only way you could do anything without civilian
casualties. The only problem was that after you’d bombed the village to smithereens, then you
had all these refugees on your hands and this would be going on for quite a while.
So finally an edict came out of MAC-V and I guess signed off on also by the Vietnamese
government that from now on we would not do this -- we would not create any more refugees.
The whole idea was to get refugees back to their villages. So that there could be no more of this
activity of moving people out without first asking Saigon and making a very strong
recommendation. So one day the colonel called me in and asked me to draft a memo to Saigon
recommending very strongly that in a certain area we move the [18:00] people out and then, you
know, call in an air strike and he gave me a folder of data and memos and things. So I took that
back to my office. It wasn’t my responsibility, but he liked my drafting, he liked my writing and
he wanted a nice, clear memo so I read it through. The whole folder, including finding this policy
edict about don’t do this anymore because it just creates refugees. And I thought about it and
thought about what I knew about the whole situation and I felt that this was the wrong thing to
60

do, so I took the folder back to the colonel -- it must have been quite a surprise to him and I said,
“Sir, I am not going to write this memo because I disagree with what you are proposing to do. I
think that is the wrong thing to do. I support the policy that’s been set forth and I don’t think that
anything will be accomplished except to make these people miserable by taking them away from
their village,” and he sort of gulped a little and probably was thinking all kinds of unspeakable
thoughts about (laughs) Foreign Service officers and maybe women in particular, I don’t know.
But anyway, he said, “Well, you can [19:00] write the memo. It doesn’t mean that you
agree with what’s being said,” and I said, “Sir, since I am opposed to this I will not give you one
second of my time to move towards this objective,” that was a fine, ethical decision. And he said
something like, “Oh, all right,” and he took the folder back and that was that. The next day I
happened to meet in the corridor a Foreign Service officer who was an advisor to the refugee
chief of the province and this young man was white in the face and shaking and he said, “How
the hell do you resign from this outfit?” I said, “What’s wrong?” and he said, “I’ve just been
handed this folder and told to write this memo creating, you know, 5000 more refugees and I’m
not going to do, but I don’t know what else to do except resign,” so I said, “Well, that’s very
interesting because (laughs) I had that same project yesterday and I just handed it back and said I
wasn’t going to do it, so my [20:00] advice to you is don’t resign, just turn it back in,” so he did
and that was never heard of again and the people were not moved and the village went on in its
happy existence and I feel very pleased about that. My little contribution to the welfare (laughs)
to the people of Vietnam. Not much, but I did what I could.
Q: So a military officer was giving you this memo to write about a military -AP: Matter.
Q: Matter -- even though you were an FSO.
AP: Right.
Q: So -- but you could get away with saying no, you weren’t going to do this because you were
an FSO?
61

AP: I imagine so because you know, he could have requested that I be transferred and he could
have written a heck of a blast on my efficiency report. Because he was my what you call “rating
officer”. As a matter of fact, he recommended me for the Superior Honor Award, which is
another story. But anyway, [21:00] but it's interesting -- at some point during my tour there, there
was an effort made by MAC-V to have an agreement with the State Department that all Foreign
Service officers would be subject to military discipline, including court martial. (laughs) I
wonder what was bothering them? What could it have been? You know. (laughs)
Q: Well, it seems like such a weird situation to have FSOs under military people and to basically
have FSOs, who are obviously much more likely to be conscientious objectors, let us say, if
nothing else, then military people under them and yet they’re able to say, “No, I’m not going to
do this,” I mean in terms of military hierarchy in a way, you know, you're not supposed to think
in the military, you just do. That must have been difficult.
AP: Yeah. Well, I don’t think they knew what they were getting. I mean, I have no idea, you
know, where the idea came from of borrowing FSOs. I think it's highly complimentary to us
[22:00] that A, they thought we could write clearly and B, they thought we would write honestly,
which was true, generally speaking. But I assume they thought that we would behave ourselves
and you know, salute when spoken to and, and then when they began to run into difficulties, they
came up with this idea of making us subject to court martial, which we all looked at, when we
saw this message come around we all looked at that and said, “Mm,” (laughs) and of course, at
some point the State Department just said, “Don’t be ridiculous,” you know but it was a very
weird situation. (crash) No, that’s all right. Just (inaudible). I have no desire to do any research
on this but it would be fun to know at what point and who did it, who felt that we've got to have
somebody in the chain of command, especially out in the field, reporting to us the truth. You
know, if they suspected that they weren’t getting the truth from their own Army officers, [23:00]
you know, why didn’t they do something about that?

62

Q: Yeah, I mean, why did they just try and avoid the whole issue of the Army officer’s
culpability by bringing in outside people? And you know, anytime you bring in outside people,
you're going to get a different opinion, but you're also going to get trouble.
AP: Yeah, right, I know. It was a very strange experience and another example what was
happening -- Foreign Service officers who were being appointed as junior officers were being
required to accept these assignments in Vietnam if they wanted to join the Foreign Service. I
think that was an outrageous thing as well. But there apparently, of course, not everybody
wanted to go to Vietnam and in some instances I guess, I guess you could be assigned to Saigon
Embassy under the Foreign Service discipline, but I don’t think you could be assigned to MACV without volunteering or at least being willing. In fact, I always thought that was terrible to take
[24:00] to take young officers who had no overseas experience and no experience with the State
Department or anything and throw them into the kind of situation that I was in, for example, or
worse. I mean, I was fairly well off. Nha Trang was relatively safe and I was at a major
headquarters, but some of these young officers were not only at province level but even at
district and hamlet level and I just think that -Q: Was this men and women? Or men only?
AP: Just men, yeah. But we were talking earlier about, you know, combat. All of Vietnam, of
course, was a combat area. There were Viet Cong in the Saigon suburbs where the rocket
launches so that you know, they could launch attacks inside Saigon, on Saigon (laughs) and you
could be under attack anywhere. We always had to check our vehicles and make sure that
nobody had planted a bomb underneath and friends of mine did have that happen. [25:00] And
another case, a package was found on the doorstep of an apartment building like the one that I
lived in, where there were a mixture of American military and civilian and it turned out to be a
bomb. People, the Viet Cong would put powdered glass into Coca-Cola bottles and so forth and
so forth. I saw one very interesting sight. I was flying down to Saigon and happened to fly over
the battleship New Jersey when it was shelling the coast, so I’ve seen a battleship in action and
that was quite a dramatic sight. I had expected dark gray clouds of smoke, but as they fired these

63

guns and the missile that they were firing apparently is about the size of a car, you know, about
2000 pounds. You get great flashes of orange light, it's very, very exciting to see that.
I had some very nice R&Rs. Went to [26:00] Australia for skiing. I had brought my skis
with me, hoping for the best and I had ski boots in a metal press kind of thing that holds them, to
keep them from curling up in their toes and I was getting ready for this trip and padding around
my apartment in Vietnam in my bare feet and I dropped the thing on my bare toe and so I had to
go and see a medic and I told him that I was pretty sure I was the only ski casualty (laughs) he
was going to have. Anyway, I had a nice time in Australia. I went to Hong Kong twice and
Thailand once. So that was all to the good. But basically it was a very frustrating experience, a
very frightening experience. I think I probably did the best work I’ve ever done as a reporting
officer there. And as I say, I was recommended for the Superior Honor Award. [27:00] Which is
the second highest award that you can get in the State Department. After I got back to
Washington I waited awhile to see if this was going to come forward or not and finally I wrote to
Saigon and asked what had happened and they wrote back and said it had been downgraded to
meritorious, which is really not worth very much. Then I asked why and they said, “Well, there’s
a feeling in, at the embassy here that Superior Honor Award should only be given to people who
have risked their lives,” and so I don’t know what they thought we were doing out there (laughs)
in the field but -- I did want to get on record that the only woman Foreign Service officer to have
been killed in the line of duty was a woman who died when the embassy in Saigon was blown
up. And her name is on the memorial plaque at the State Department. [28:00]
When I got back to Washington I found that nobody wanted to hear about Vietnam.
Usually when we come back from an overseas assignment we debrief at the desk of the country
where we have been and then go on to the desk of the country where we’re going to get newly
briefed and when I called the Vietnam desk officer to say that I was back and had some stuff to
tell, he said, “Well you know, we really don’t need to see you,” which I thought was fairly
strange. There weren’t that many Foreign Service officers serving in the field in Vietnam and I
thought maybe something of interest could have been said, but my other colleagues in the State
Department never wanted to hear about it. My family never wanted to hear about it. My friends
never wanted to hear about it. It's been a great silence. I think I’m still emotionally caught up in
[29:00] it. I haven’t been to the Vietnam Memorial in Washington. I didn’t watch the movie on
the making of that memorial, which was on a couple of weeks ago. I haven’t watched Tour of
64

Duty, I haven’t watched (laughs) China Beach. I didn’t go to see Platoon and so generally I’m in
an avoidance syndrome and -Q: When you were over in Vietnam was it, you were talking about when you were in Guyana
and it was very stressful because the terrorists could hit at any time. Now obviously I would
imagine it would be worse in Vietnam because you're actually in combat all the time. How do
you deal with that kind of stress? You know, at the same time that you were talking about you
went to the beach to go swimming, I mean, wasn’t that kind of a weird situation, you were in a
combat zone, yet you're trucking down to the beach every day to go swimming?
AP: Absolutely. Well, what are you going to do? You know, (laughs) we’d be at the beach and
we’d hear thump-thump-thump and we’d look around and see, you know, clouds of smoke rising
from the suburbs [30:00] where the Viet Cong were entrenched. So we went on to hire a little
motorboat and go to an island in the bay. Nha Trang is absolutely lovely. And for skin diving and
picnicking and all that and carry our M-16s and occasionally a shot would be heard and I
remember somebody just firing an M-16 in the air just to let anybody around know that we had
weapons. You just had to live with things. We had no bunkers. The instructions were that if we
were under enemy attack we would get under the bed, which I didn’t think was particularly
useful if a 2000-pound bomb (laughs) was dropping in on you.
Q: You’ll just have a mattress on top of you to -AP: Right. One way of illustrating the situation. I was at that time an Episcopalian. There was no
chaplain stationed in Nha Trang. They didn’t have any regular chaplains in Vietnam [31:00] but
there was an Episcopal chaplain who would fly around the country and whenever he had our
names and telephone numbers and whenever he got to Nha Trang he would call and we would all
gather. It was Thursday morning at 2:00 in the afternoon, well, that was Sunday morning service.
And -Q: How many Episcopalians were you?

65

AP: Oh, I don’t know, 10 maybe. Then -- the Episcopalian Church was considering revising its
prayer book and so there was something around called the Trial Liturgy which was a sort of a
paperback of experimental liturgy and the chaplain got a few of these and suggested that we, you
know, discuss it and so forth so I suggested we meet at my place. So once a week for about three
months all the Episcopalians in town including the chaplain when he was around, would meet at
my place. Well, I was the only civilian and so there would be a knock at the door and there
would be these very [32:00] nice American soldiers, officers and enlisted men, as duty -- [32:06]
Track 6
AP: [00:00] So I would invite them in and they would, you know how ladies, when they come
into a house they go into a bedroom and leave their wraps? Well, they would go in, these
gentlemen would go into my bedroom and take off their helmet, their flak jacket and their M-16s
and leave them on my bed. Come in the living room, we’d sit around, we’d discuss the liturgies
sort of page by page and then at the end of the discussion they would go back to the bedroom,
put on their helmets, (laughs) their flak jackets and their M-16s and leave and I’ve often thought
that that must have been one of the strangest discussion groups for the trial liturgy (laughs) that’s
ever been held but you know, we wanted to do this and it felt good to do it.
And it was also in Vietnam that I received my vocation for the priesthood, which I guess
is a roundabout way of answering your earlier question about what do you do about stress under
combat. It's very hard to describe a spiritual experience. Some people have had visions or dreams
or [01:00] voices or whatever and I just felt, you know, the kind of -- (crash) what is going on
around here? [BREAK] I had been in Vietnam and almost all the time scared of getting killed.
And also struggling a lot with the whole issue of the war. And found myself spending more and
more time reading the bible. For the first time I was reading it with what’s called a
“commentary”, which I find absolutely essential, helping to put the biblical message into some
kind of context. Anyway, I gradually began to feel that there was something God wanted me to
do and it gradually became clearer and clearer that was supposed to do something about
becoming ordained. At that time I knew very little about the Episcopal Church or its history.
I had never heard that this had ever been discussed or suggested, although in fact it had
been on many [02:00] occasions. And I really, you know, just came into this completely cold and
66

there wasn’t anything I could do about it while I was there. I got back to Washington and settled
in there in the summer of 1970. Started going to a local Episcopal church. Finally decided to go
on a religious retreat, which something I had never done before. And in fact, it's interesting, I had
just finished getting my master’s degree at Boston University. I had taken one more course at
American University to complete my credits and I had planned to start working on my Ph.D. in
African Affairs. I knew I’d be in Washington for four years and there are some very good
programs there so I’d gotten the college catalogues and found out when I had to take the
graduate entrance exam, whatever it's called and I had all this information and I’m a highly
organized person [03:00] and I kept not doing anything.
I didn’t apply for the exams. I didn’t go over to a university to talk to any kind of advisor
and instead I kept going on these religious retreats and it was a very strange feeling. My mind
kept telling me, come on now, you're wasting all this time. You should have taken the GRE by
now. The rest of me was saying, come on, that retreat was very good. Why don’t you go (laughs)
on another one? Finally the thought came to me that I should write the bishop of the Episcopal
Diocese of Washington, D.C. and ask for an interview. And it was so hard to write that letter. For
the first time I had not told anyone what was going on inside. And I had to sit down and put
down on a piece of paper, writing to a complete stranger that I am called by God to be a priest
and believe me, that was a very hard thing to say. But I said it and I asked for a meeting and I
met with [04:00] Bishop Creighton and he was very nice. He said that in the past he had rejected
women because he felt that there was no possibility of them being ordained. Now he felt that
there was a possibility and so he would let me go through the whole process of applying.
It starts with a meeting with a committee for a weekend where they ask you all sorts of
impossible questions. Then you have a physical exam where the (laughs) only unusual factors
after they’ve done everything else that they usually do and you're back, dressed, sitting in the
doctor’s office, he takes out a tape measure and puts it around you and measures you and then
says, “All right now, expand your chest,” and he measures you again to see if you can project
your voice and of course, he had never, this was the doctor who examined all the candidates for
the priesthood, but he had never examined a woman candidate and sort of realized that women
shapes may be (laughs) different [05:00] -- this measurement probably didn’t have too much
purpose, you know, comes out differently. But anyway he did it. And I guess I passed.

67

And then I was interviewed for eight hours off and on over several days, by the
psychiatrist, who was hired by the bishop for this purpose. The men who were going through this
process with me had a very pro forma one-hour interview. But the psychiatrist said that I was the
first woman candidate that he had interviewed and he was going to make darn sure, you know,
that everything was all right. And anyway, I had passed all of that. And then had to ask two
people whom I had known for at least 10 years to recommend me. Now that was very difficult
because in the Foreign Service I had served with people for two years at Post X and then never
seen them again. We were all still in the Foreign Service but they were there and I was here.
So I finally, I had one [06:00] friend from childhood whom I’d been in elementary school
with, so she wrote a recommendation. I found one Foreign Service officer who had served with
me in the Congo and then I had met -- (bang) (laughs) We’re being attacked by a pack of wolves,
actually. (laughs) James. So I was accepted as the first woman postulant for Holy Orders in the
Diocese of Washington, D.C. so that led to a certain amount of publicity. We’ll get into my
hearing on equal employment at another time, but it so happened that at the, the day when I got a
letter from the bishop saying that since I had satisfactorily completed physical, psychiatric and
other tests I had been accepted, there was some effort by the State Department [07:00] to imply
that I was a little bit nuts, you know, because I was insisting I was being discriminated against,
so I was delighted to hand this letter to one of the journalists who was covering the story and
said, “Well, it seems that I’m at least the only Foreign Service officer you’re likely to meet who
has a certificate saying that (laughs) she’s qualified for the priesthood, on psychiatric as well as
other grounds. It was a very interesting moment. Anyway.
I was working fulltime in the Foreign Service so I didn’t plan to go to seminary fulltime.
I went to Virginia Theological Seminary night school courses. I had some private tutoring. There
was a special program that the bishop set up for people like me who were working fulltime.
Normally when you take the ordination exams, which are given in the spring each year, you are
finishing three years of fulltime seminary [08:00] including summer school. I took the exams
after two years of part time study and got the highest grading in the Diocese in Washington,
which means if nothing else, I’m a good student. Then I was ordained as a deacon in June of
1974, the first woman deacon in the Diocese. Full television coverage. And then, of course, the
trouble started that the Episcopal Church General Convention, which is the governing body,
meets every three years, had not yet voted in favor of the ordination of women. Bishop
68

Creighton, who was my bishop, said publicly and privately that he knew he had the authority to
ordain women right then without the General Convention. So, and he said that all of the women,
there were other women by this time, [09:00] were very highly qualified and so the Diocese said,
“Well, why don’t you do it?” and he said, well, he thought it would be better to wait.
Q: When you say the “Diocese” -AP: We have Diocese and Convention once a year, which we have lay delegates and clergy
delegates and the parishes have annual meetings and special meetings and this whole women’s
ordination issue was being widely discussed. Washington D.C. Diocese is very liberal,
progressive Diocese and people were petitioning the bishop to go ahead. People were asking him
at public meetings to go ahead. When he visited various parish churches, it always came up
during the coffee hour and so forth and so on. So -- and there are various governing bodies in the
Diocese. There’s the Diocese Council, there’s something called a Standing Committee of
Advisors, so forth and so forth, all of these bodies, [10:00] every one of them had asked the
bishop to proceed. And I went and saw him and asked him to proceed and he said that he was
trying to get the National Canon Law on remarriage of divorced people in the Episcopal Church
made more liberal at the next General Convention and he thought he had a good chance of doing
this, so it would be easier for people to remarry in the church.
And this was very important to him because he was about to retire and he knew that if he
ordained me and my sister defense all held very closely, he didn’t say that of course, (laughs)
and he would be confronted with, he might be charged with disobedience and put on trial by the
House of Bishops and he just felt that his priority was to try and get this particular thing done,
which I understood, but on the other hand, it was somewhat abstract and [11:00] it was a
question of justice delayed and so forth and so on and I didn’t think it looked very good, for him
as a leader to be saying publicly that he knew he could ordain us, he wanted to ordain us. We
were qualified to be ordained. The whole Diocese wanted him to do it and yet he wasn’t going to
do it. It just, you know, looked bad. But he said that he would not proceed. This was in 1975.
In 1974 11 women had been ordained to the priesthood in Philadelphia in a so called
“irregular ordination” and some of them and some of the bishops who had participated were in
touch with us and we were in touch with them and they suggested that, you know, if we wanted
69

to go ahead we should look for a bishop. Now it can be told, I used the State Department watts
lines to phone (laughs) all over the country. (laughs)
Q: I wondered that, [12:00] when you were talking about, “Oh, I’m so terrible, I don’t like to use
the phone,” and you’re talking about sitting there in your office and I though, aha, that’s how she
could afford to make all these calls.
AP: (laughs) Well, worse than that, I don’t expect to get billed at this late date, but -- there were
two other women in Washington, women deacons who were, we were all together on this and
first we called all the other women deacons in the country to see if they would like to join with
us in another irregular ordination.
Q: About how many were there at that time?
AP: Oh, 20, 20 or 30.
Q: Were they scattered?
AP: Oh yes, one was in Alaska. She was hard to get a hold of but she was with us. One was on a
geology mining expedition in, out in the desert of Arizona or something, so she was hard to get a
hold of. But anyway, we called them, you know, we had lists and phone numbers and we, the
three of us on a Saturday afternoon met in my office and you know, [13:00] spread out and used
all the desk extensions (laughs) and we just, we worked our way through the list. Making notes,
which I still have. And it was really interesting, all of them were in favor of it happening, another
irregular ordination. Many of them said that they would join with us except that they were
financially dependent on the church and some of them had elderly mothers in nursing homes and
all that sort of thing and they knew or thought that they would get fired if they went ahead and
you know, they simply didn’t feel that they could do that. One of them said, sort of ironically,
that she was never going to get into the situation again of being trapped, you know, with a salary
coming from the church and she was going to go off and get a job at an oil company or
something, (laughs) which would pay her a wonderful salary. But anyway, they all wanted to do
70

it but couldn’t, except two, one in Chicago and one in Alaska. So then we had to find a bishop.
[14:00] And I was given a list of possibly liberal bishops.
And I called them and I had to call during office hours so I had to sort of close to the door
(laughs) to my office to make these calls. And that was really tough, calling a totally strange
bishop and asking if they would an irregular ordination. They all had wonderful excuses. One
was that he was just about to retire and didn’t want to leave a mess for his successor. The other
one, he’d just been installed and didn’t feel it was right to upset the Diocese, so you know. I
finally found Bishop Barrett on the west coast and he had been bishop in Rochester, New York
and had resigned after he divorced his wife and married the former wife of one of his priests.
Which had created quite an upset. (laughs) [15:00] So I called, and he was working with Planned
Parenthood in California and I dialed his office number and I guess because of the time zones I
got the office before it was open, I got a recorded message which started out, “If you are in
severe pain or experiencing bleeding, go (laughs) immediately to an emergency room,” I thought
well, spiritually I think that describes me, (laughs) but -- anyway I talked to him and he was very
nice. I sent him all kinds of material and he talked to the other women and he finally decided to
do it and I think it was particularly brave of him and his wife, because they knew that this whole
scandal would pop up again in the press and that would expose themselves to criticism.
Anyway, we spent the summer of ’75 organizing this and we had promised ourselves that
we would write, we would inform our bishop before we informed the press, [16:00] but we
didn’t get into just how precise this would be. (laughs) So we wrote a letter to Bishop Creighton
explaining what we were going to do and when and where and how and why and all the rest of it.
And typed it up and we all signed it and put it in an envelope addressed to him and I was happy
to volunteer to take it over to the bishop’s residence, which is on the compound of the
Washington Cathedral. There’s a nice bright red door and so forth and so I felt sort of like Martin
Luther with the 95 Theses or whatever, I just took the envelope, just laid it on the mat. I knew he
was on summer vacation in an island off the coast of Maine, but theoretically we had informed
him. We couldn’t reach him in Maine. We had delivered this to his office. And of course, it hit
the press the next morning and he had to come home from his vacation. It upset him.
All of his clergy advisors had to come back from their vacations. And anyway, he called
us in and [17:00] said that he did not want us to do this and ordered us not to do it, gave us
what’s called a “godly admission” and we had bar-- we three women had met at the Diocese of
71

[Mahbus?] in the ladies’ room, which is always a wonderful place to meet because there would
be no men clergy there, you see, there would be no way (laughs) (inaudible) this was a great
meeting place and we had agreed that when we went into see the bishop we wouldn’t argue, we
wouldn’t explain, wouldn’t ask any questions, we would just sit there and let him say his thing,
then we would leave, so we did that. And he had a full, you know, long table filled with all of his
official advisors and we just sat there. And took the, he had a letter for each one of us, which we
took and we read and we left. And he was so upset by all this that he did something which is very
unprecedented. It's courtesy in the Episcopal Church, the clergy of a Diocese to attend the
ordination of someone to the priesthood. [18:00] Everyone, all clergy are automatically invited.
He ordered all clergy not to attend our ordination and then he issued a pastoral letter to be
read in every parish. It sounds very much like the Catholic Church, doesn’t it? (laughs) I don’t
think it had ever been done before in this Diocese. We were going to get ordained, I don’t know,
at 4:00 on a Sunday afternoon and this pastoral letter was read at the church services in every
parish that Sunday morning, saying A, he ordered the clergy not to go and he strongly
admonished the laity not to go, well I mean, that is absolutely unheard of. Bishops don’t order
lay people in the Episcopal Church.
Q: Not in the Episcopal Church.
AP: No. I don’t know how it goes in the Catholic Church but -Q: They’ll do that, I mean if they could order people’s sex lives, why not?
AP: (laughs) Yeah, so they order you not to go to a church service. Well, it was very interesting.
The church that we were ordained in was just an ordinary parish church would seat maybe 200
people. Best estimate, it was over 2000 people there, including, [19:00] as I heard later from
some friends, they said they hadn’t particularly planned to go because it was hot or they thought
it would be crowded or they knew of plenty of other people going, but when they got that
message from the bishop (laughs) they went, you know.
Q: That would be my reaction.
72

AP: And the -- and of course, tremendous press coverage and television and everything. And the
front page of the Washington Post on Monday morning, big picture of the women kneeling,
being ordained and face-- with our backs to the camera, and facing the camera were the clergy
and the, putting, they laid their hands on the heads of the ordainants -- all of these clergy very
clearly identifiable by their faces, of course, and you know, as well as the names and titles,
including, you know, the bishop’s advisor on this and the, you know, the head of the Clergy
Education Program that we had been through was especially appointed by the bishop. You know,
it was out and out defiance, (laughs) you know.
Q: Right. Very public defiance. [20:00]
AP: I would say. It was a wonderful day, I would add, wonderful experience. But the sad thing
was, I would love to have had my mother come to that. But I didn’t invite her because I thought
it wasn’t safe. At the Philadelphia ordinations, in 1974 -- those are toads that are croaking out
there.
Q: (inaudible)
AP: Didn’t tell you before you came. I thought (laughs) you might get discouraged. That’s all
right. They switch off around 11:00. At the Philadelphia ordinations in 1974 a smoke bomb had
been found under one of the pews and the opponents to the ordination had planned to rush down
the aisle at the moment of laying on of hands and disrupt the whole thing. Well fortunately
supporters of the organization found out about it and they had linked arms in a double row
around the ordinance, but even so, it was a pretty scary [21:00] situation. At our ordination we
had police from the district. We had private security that we had hired. We had lay people who
were especially deputized to watch out for things and believe it or not, each of us were wearing
what’s called a “clergy shirt”, the black clergy shirt with a pocket. We all had our car keys in our
pockets and our cars parked where we knew we could get out, we weren’t blocked by other cars.
And we had a secret rendezvous point that if it had been disrupted, we were all just going
to vanish out the back door of the church and jump into our cars and the bishop would be coming
73

with us and we would go to the secret rendezvous and finish it there. But I mean, that’s how bad
things were. And I didn’t feel that I could take the chance of my mother being there and you
know, getting knocked off her feet or something like that. So that’s one of the prices we pay.
My brother was there. He’s a Catholic. And -- [22:00] it was a great service. And then the
next day we were all, the bishop’s secretary called each of us at our various places of
employment, said he wanted us to come over to his office to pick up a letter and we were very
happy to say, “Well you know, but sir, we’re working, (laughs) we can’t just run over there,” so
then he had it delivered to us. It was another (inaudible) admonition telling us not to function as
a priest, not to perform Holy Communion or give absolution and -Q: Was that just in the Diocese? Was that where he had -AP: That’s where he had jurisdiction. I don’t remember, I think it was just don’t do it. Interesting
enough, this is the only piece of paper I’ve lost. I wonder what a psychiatrist would make of that.
(laughs) I have no idea. But I think eventually I’m going to have to write church [23:00]
(inaudible) and say, “Would you mind sending me a copy?” I’m writing my memoirs and I can’t
seem to locate, (laughs) but that’s strange. I think what happened was -- the two women who
were ordained with me from Washington came over to my office a lunchtime. We’d all agreed to
have an opening ceremony where we can all open the letter from the bishop at the same moment,
because we thought it would be kind of fun. So we did. And they were all identical letters. And
then I think one of the women wanted to Xerox them for some purpose and I think I gave mine to
her to make copies for me or something and then I never got it back. (laughs) But I still think it's
kind of interesting. I have letters that I wrote when I was six years old, (laughs) you know, but I
don’t have my godly admonition. (laughs) Anyway.
The following Sunday evening I celebrated communion at the home of a parishioner and
it was particularly moving to me [24:00] because he had married a woman who was Catholic and
who had divorced her first husband and had been excommunicated, of course, when she
remarried and also her family had more or less thrown her out and this had all been very painful
for her. And after we had the communion service she said that my having defied the Episcopal
Church and becoming a priest had validated for her, her defiance of the Catholic Church. That

74

somehow it made it seem possible that women could be right and the church could be wrong, so
to speak. So that was great. So we had a church in exile, we celebrated in people’s homes.
We eventually rented out the Methodist Church and used it in the evening. We received
invitations from here and there. I went up to Rochester, New York to do a celebration, a Holy
Communion once, [25:00] and I wanted to mention again, the kind of ministry that we had,
especially to women. I met a woman there who was a professor at a university and she had filed
a sex discrimination complaint. Her husband was also a professor at the university. He was fired
because she had filed a complaint and he committed suicide.
Q: Oh my god. What guilt to live with.
AP: I know. Can you just try to focus on that for a minute.
Q: Oh my god.
AP: And that’s the kind of ministry, you know, I would love to have said this to the bishop, but I
never really had a chance. I said, you know, people may have thought that we were getting
ordained out of pride or vanity or ego trip, and this has all been said to us as different times, but
we knew that there was a need for a [26:00] ministry to women, by women -- not that we don’t
also minister to men and we are ministered to by men, but that kind of thing could not, I believe,
fully be understood between women. And you know, that kept happening again and again.
People would come up with their stories and say how much it meant to them to receive
communion from a woman and that’s what it's all about. Completing the priesthood, really. But
I’ve never forgotten that. That was so rewarding.
Q: My god, can you imagine. One wonders how the person who fired him felt. I mean, you're
obviously doing this very vindictive act to begin with.
AP: And they probably don’t even see it that way. I mean, I try and, you know, think like a
person like that and they may [27:00] at first like presumably don’t believe there was any sex
discrimination. Therefore the “wife”, is misbehaving or is hysterical or you know, the one who’s,
75

in fact the woman professor who’s filed the suit is just, you know, off base. The husband should
talk to her and get her settled down and make her see things the right way. And she told me that
her husband had been fully supportive of her and you know, knowing that it would come back on
him in some way, but not expecting that. And so I suppose the university, whatever, the head of
the university, whoever did the firing probably thought that well, if this husband isn’t going to
cooperate, he doesn’t have the best interest of the university at heart. I’m just trying to develop a
pattern of reasoning, if you can call it that, that would get someone to do something like that.
Q: I think unfortunately that there are some people who -- [28:00] I don’t know if evil is too
strong of a word, but where I went to school, for example, while I was there we were in Ms.
Magazine, the whole thing, for the sex discrimination case that happened. The head of the
department sexually harassed two professors, you know, professors in the department, a registrar
and on and on it went. And she, and it was quite illuminating in terms of the sexual harassment
case because two of the three women he harassed were very unattractive. So it proved a point
that it's not a sexual thing. It's a power thing and one of them was from Chile I believe and she
had left Chile for political reasons and immigrated to the US and her name was on one of those
lists and if she were to come back she would be killed. And when she filed the sex discrimination
suit, the college chose to have its lawyers represent [29:00] the man. And they did all sorts of
nasty things like when they sued, it became a class action suit, as it always does.
AP: Yes, (laughs) thank goodness, yes.
Q: When the women went to deliver the subpoena to the university it said “Clark University”, so
and so etc. al versus Clark University. And the lawyer thought he was being very slick by saying,
“Well, we shouldn’t accept this because the actual legal definition should be the trustees of Clark
University,” and the judge looked at the lawyer and said, “Do you accept checks for into Clark
University?”
AP: (laughs) Very nice. (laughs)

76

Q: But meanwhile Clark reported to INS that this professor was no longer working, because of
course, she was fired, although the registrar and the others were not. This one was the vulnerable
one and she was fired. And INS not knowing what’s going on and requested her green card
[30:00] isn't validated yet, she’s going to be deported back to Chile.
AP: Tortured and killed.
Q: And the person who did this knew what they were going to do to her. And luckily this hit the
press and she was rehired. But one wonders about the person who carried out that order. I mean,
you're sending a person to certain death. You know, and even if you say, “Oh well, it won’t
happen, it won’t get to that point,” there’s nothing certain in life.
AP: You're gambling, you're gambling with someone else’s life.
Q: You're gambling with someone’s life and how can you do that? How can you really and truly
do that? And of course, what eventually happened was those things are always very messy. And
John, he finally admitted his guilt and he was not fired. Or anything else. And the women, as I
recall, won quite a bit of money but who wants to go back and work under situations like that?
And that department was decimated. And that was, it was sociology and that was one of the
Women’s Studies Department. [31:00] Yeah.
AP: Very charming.
Q: So one wonders about people like this. They just don’t have any moral sense of -- there’s no
moral center.
AP: Yeah. This is about carrying out orders. I mean somebody, you know, up there may give an
order to somebody down here, to somebody down here, to somebody down here to do it. But as
happened with that refugee thing Vietnam, I mean, at some point somebody has to say, “I am not
going to give you one second of my time on this because I am against it,” and then see what

77

happens. And you know, you may get fired. But then you have something else to fight about. I
don’t know. So many times I’ve asked people for help to testify -- [31:48]
Track 7
AP: [00:00] In the meantime I’d been assigned by the State Department to a job which took me
to Geneva three times a year to conferences, which we’ll get back to at some other time. And
since England has always been my favorite country and London is my favorite city, I knew that I
was going to always stop off in London. And I decided, after some wrestling with my
conscience, that I should get in touch with women in England. I really didn’t want to, because
that would mean giving up my vacations to meet with them and so forth, but I felt that I should,
knowing how much the ministry of women meant to me, I felt that I should make myself useful
when I was over there. The leader of the effort to ordain women in England was a woman named
Una Kroll, a medical doctor. She had been a doctor and a [01:00] sister, I guess, in a celibate
religious order.
Q: Episcopal?
AP: Anglican.
Q: Anglican.
AP: Working in South Africa. And had met Dr. Kroll, Leo Kroll, who became her husband, he
was a medical doctor, the head of a celibate order, also working as missionaries, medical mis- -Q: And he was an Anglican also.
AP: Right. And so they met in the course of their work as two doctors in South Africa and one
thing led to another and (laughs) I’m not sure of the details, but anyway, they eventually left
South Africa and resigned or were dismissed from their orders and married and had four
children. Anyway. Una was very active and had formed a group who worked on all, getting the
78

Church of England to change its position. And I met her for the first [02:00] time in March of ’76
and celebrated communion at the home of a parishioner from her parish. And I have the tape of
that and perhaps I should explain that the content of the tape a little bit. It's a long tape. The first
part of it is discussing whether or not we should allow a newspaper reporter who was present to
stay. Una had put a notice of this service that was to be held in the Church Times, which is the
newspaper of the Church of England. She had sent it to the paper to be printed. And then found
that the, let’s see, the wife of the Methodist minister of that town had left her husband to be with
the Anglican priest of the parish, who was also married. [03:00] And Una felt that if this report,
if we had a publicly announced meeting with the press at the service of Holy Communion, the
whole parish would come under scrutiny and this other situation would inevitably be uncovered
and everything terribly messy. So she called the Church Times to withdraw the announcement,
which she did, but in the meantime a reporter on the Church Times had been notified because
(inaudible) had said, “An American woman priest is going to do a communion.”
So this reporter named Susan Underwood came to the meeting. And so for the first half
hour or so there was this very delicate, tippy-toeing around the whole issue of is there going to
be a Eucharist and if so, would we care to have Miss Underwood stay to cover it? And she
didn’t, Susan had no idea what was going on. She knew Una very well. [04:00] Una wasn’t about
to say, “We don’t want you to cover the Eucharist because you might find out about this other
scandal,” I was completely baffled because I had just arrived, you know, I didn’t know any of
these people. Una had briefly explained this to me a few hours ahead of time. And so I had to be
more or less guided by Una and finally there was a decision made that we did not want publicity
at this time and we would prefer that Miss Underwood leave, so she leaves.
Then we get into a discussion, more or less, what is the situation in the United States? I
give a fairly lengthy explanation of my relationship with my bishop and the other women priests
and so forth, which I think is useful and valuable. Unfortunately it's a lot of background noise but
I’m hoping that you were able to overcome some of this. And then finally there’s the Eucharist
itself. So. And that, as far as I know, is the first time [05:00] a woman priest ever did a Eucharist
in England. There is one other, there was one other woman priest. Her name is Joyce Bennett.
She had been ordained in Hong Kong and then retired to go live in the UK and we never were
able to find out whether she had done any Eucharist and we sort of suspect she may have done,
but done them very quietly, as no one has talked about them, because it was very controversial.
79

But anyway, it was, I’m the first or one of the earliest Eucharist, when I did it. And very
powerful experience of -- some of the people had tears in their eyes when they were receiving
the bread and the wine. And I was invited back by Una to do a public service in November,
which is the next time I’d be back, on my way back from Geneva. [06:00] So I did that service.
And I just happen to have here, (laughs) this is the announcement and that’s the press coverage.
One tiny bit of the press coverage.
Q: It must have been so exciting to be there, because this is history being made, you know, I
mean and church history, you know, I had a, my archives teacher in graduate school used to be a
nun. Many archivists were nuns and priests because of course, the Catholic Church is so hyper
about records. And she always used to say, “Well, with Pope Paul,” who came in the ’60s, she
said, “With Pope Paul we entered the 19th century,” (laughter) she says, “God may move slowly
but the Catholic Church moves even more slowly.” (laughter) [07:00]
AP: But it was very exciting. I did a tremendous number of interviews and I have tapes of those
as well. And these are historic tapes. There’s the tape of the service itself. There are tapes of
interviews I did with the BBC radio and other things of that nature. And the church was
absolutely packed and as usual, the television cameras were there. We were about halfway
through the service when all our lights went out. They overloaded the circuits. (laughs) I was
going to come out with that old joke -- where was Moses when the lights went out? In the dark,
you know. But I thought, no (inaudible). (laughter) No, they won’t understand. So I said, in a
very calm voice, “Let’s just carry on,” (laughs) I thought that was more appropriate. (laughs)
But it was a very powerful experience. [08:00] I preached the sermon and did the service
and -- it was all so rushed at the end. One woman who came up after the service to thank me I
was told later had been a leading suffragette, you know, very elderly woman, but a leading
suffragette during the time in England, I guess was it just before World War I.
Q: Yeah, they had a terrible time.
AP: Yeah, with people being force fed, it was horrible.

80

Q: Worse that it was violent.
AP: Oh ghastly, yeah. And you know, I would love to have had time to talk to her, anything, but
you know, everyone was, people had come from all over the UK, I mean, they had come from
Scotland and just all over the place and there were nuns, Catholic nuns and Anglican priests and
it was just really powerful. Well, as you can see from the picture, that really was an amazing
experience. And in a way, I was beginning to feel, [09:00] I don’t think this is blasphemous. A
little bit like Paul and some of the other apostles in the early days of the church, when they were
traveling all over the Mediterranean, you know, to Antioch and Colossus and [Collins?] you
know, to set up the church and to do services and so forth, it was that kind of feeling. People
desperately wanted this and I was the only one doing it.
Q: Well, it's a healing kind of function. And I kind of feel that in the Catholic Church, certainly
that’s one of the reasons I don’t attend is because of their treatment of women and I've spoken
with a lot of other people and they just feel alienated and cut off from something. I don’t know if
you've ever heard of the woman, Mary Ann Sorrentino, who was head of Planned Parenthood in
Rhode Island and she was excommunicated for being head of Planned Parenthood. And terrible,
terrible, it was awful what they did to her. And she then went and tried to take communion and
they refused to give her communion. And that was more upsetting to her [10:00] than the
excommunication, that someone could refuse her communion. And it was in what was
considered itself an avant-garde parish with homosexuals and so on and so forth and yet they
refused her communion and she has felt actual pain, you know, physical, you know, a separation
and she was talking about the need to cleave and re-heal, so I think that’s part of it is feeling
alienated and then with a woman ministry you are healed. It's like a wound that’s bound up
against.
AP: Well, one of the services that I did in Washington -- was a group of Catholic nuns and
priests who were married and that many of them had been missionaries in Brazil and so forth and
they were very appreciative [11:00] of the service and they also said something which I find
fascinating. I’m just waiting to see if it happens. They said that when the Catholic Church
ordains women, it will happen in a place like Brazil, where you know, there’s one priest for, you
81

know, a million people or something and even now women, nuns and so forth, are doing
everything but consecrate the elements. You know, they’re conducting services and so forth.
And these people said that sooner or later some bishop, overseas bishop will be so desperate and
just say, “I have got to get these people ministered to,” and there are these sisters who are superb
and they’ve been doing it for years, except saying the magic words and I’m just going to lay
hands on them, make them priests and then I’ll disconnect my telephone, (laughs) you know, or
something -- but I mean, that’s the idea. That’s how it's going to come about.
Q: When I was reading your autobiography I was struck by the recurring theme, which is wait,
wait, wait. Which happened just inside at Brown, [12:00] they want to get women on the
corporation and the alumni did all this stuff and they got back this classic letter, which said, “the
time is not yet ripe.”
AP: Absolutely. It never is. (laughs)
Q: It never is. That’s the whole point. And I had to laugh. A few months ago the Catholic
bishops came out, the renounced the sin of sexism.
AP: Ah, that’s nice.
Q: That’s real nice, guys.
AP: On a Tuesday morning they just renounced it. That takes care of that.
Q: Of course, it was the American bishops and they said, “We have to examine our lives and our
church’s teachings and how we are being sexist,” and they said, “We have to examine these. We
do not ordain women,” but I read a few years ago, in the New York Times they did a very
interesting study on the problem with the priesthood and the Catholic Church and they said, “The
overriding reason, the overriding element that leads young men to go to into the priesthood is
mother’s insults,” and what’s going on [13:00] in America is that women are not influencing
their sons to go into the priesthood because their daughters cannot do the same. And we always
82

think of Catholics as the most conservatives. But you know, for any variety of reasons, these
women are not encouraging their sons. It's an inhibiting factor that not necessarily they’re
subconsciously aware of, but they feel that it is, they are, in other words they’re feeling sexism
on some level.
AP: I was going to say, it may not be so much that their daughters cannot become priests, but
certainly that they are aware that sexism in the church -Q: And misogyny. And they do not want their sons -AP: Divorce and birth control and everything else, yes.
Q: And I think it said that it was especially strong among Irish Catholics, which I found very
interesting. And they said the church is just going to one of these days, whether it's in our
lifetime or not, is going to have to wake up to the fact that there are no more priests around. And
the reason is, and the result is, is that one, they’re going to have to [14:00] let women in to fill
the gap but two, when they do that, they will have to address the whole issue of sexism in the
church.
AP: And celibacy, of course. That’s the other thing because how many men would be priests if
they could marry. You know, there’s -Q: Well, the thing that I find just the ultimate in stupidity in the church is that Episcopal priests
who are married and have children can now become high priests.
AP: I agree with you a thousand percent. When I first saw that -Q: Is that hypocritical or -AP: The arguments in the Catholic Church, as far as I’m aware of, for celibacy are A, it's
traditional. Of course, there was a time when it wasn’t, in the first three centuries. But be that as
83

it may -- and the other thing is that that enables a man to give his full dedication to the needs of
the church. Which I think is rather insulting to all other ministers because you know, what are
they doing? Goofing off? You know -Q: It means you're too busy thinking about sex, you can’t possibly think about God.
AP: But anyway, when I saw this happening, A, of course, I was insulted [15:00] because of
course, many of these Episcopal priests left because women were priests and I didn’t think it was
very nice (laughs) of the Catholic Church to encourage them, but anyway -- but as soon as I saw,
you know, there were the ordinations on television and the wife is in the front pew and I said,
“What on earth does that say to all the poor Catholic priests who have been struggling with
celibacy their entire lives and now it's just been wiped out.” (laughs)
Q: Well, that’s the one issue my father-in-law that I was telling you about, that left the
priesthood because he couldn’t be celibate, has never been able to deal with, he will just not talk
about it. And you’d think he would have been a happier person or whatever it was, but certainly
he wouldn’t then have been able to blame his wife for tempting him. (laughter) You know, for
Jan’s sake, certainly, but you know, you must wonder how do you feel, you’ve been a Catholic
priest and you know, you've bitten the bullet and as they say and you know, here’s John Smith
and his lovely wife Mary and his four daughters. (laughs) [16:00]
AP: Well of course, I suppose the only, or the main reason why the Catholic Church has done it,
because they’re so desperate to get priests. They’re so desperate they’ll take anybody.
Q: At this point it's if you're that desperate, why don’t you get the women? I mean, let’s be
serious about it and I had to laugh, my teacher, my professor who was a nun, she was very, very
funny and she was very religious and she was very respectful, but she wasn’t stupid, you know.
And she would go on at great length about this is a private conversation about the church’s
views, which I’m sure came out in the Episcopal Church, well, Jesus was a man. So therefore,
you know, you have to be similar to Jesus and Lillian always said, “Well, I guess that means you
have to be a 30-year Jewish man.”
84

AP: And be crucified. At the end of your three years of ministries, the way I always put it is that
you come to a sharp and painful and sudden death. (laughs)
Q: Let’s do human sacrifice.
AP: Yeah, every three years we knock off the priest. (laughs)
Q: And she always said, “Well, you know, how many Jewish Catholic priests do you know?” I
mean, that kind of aggregates that [17:00] argument and -AP: Oh, I love that whole approach to say, OK, no salary, no house, no fixed place of
employment, no respect, really, no title. What else would we say? Well, you have to beg for a
living. And as I said, the total length of the time in the priesthood is three years, at which point
you get crucified. If you want to copy the whole thing, why just focus on the genitals, is what we
usually come down to. (laughs)
Q: Yes, exactly. And I, it wasn’t Lucille, but she -- someone else I know said, “Well, to be very
crude,” and it's interesting, this whole topic brings people to their very basic feelings. She said,
“Well, if you piss in a can you can be a priest.” (laughter) And I thought that was one of the
funniest ones I’d ever heard. But it gets right down to that level, that’s what they’re talking
about. [18:00] If you have a certain kind of genitals that means you are more qualified than
someone else to do this.
AP: Absolutely. Or you are qualified, you know, as opposed to -- your lower regions. (laughs)
Q: So I don’t know what the Catholic Church is going to do. They’re going to have to wake up
and smell the coffee one of these days.
AP: Yeah. Well, it will just have to get to utter desperation.

85

Q: And I know my husband, who still goes to church every week, when the Pope came last year
and lambasted Americans for being smorgasbord Americans, smorgasbord Catholics, oh, my
husband was absolutely livid and he said, because of course, money is power, “Where does the
Catholic Church get its money? It gets it from America and they’d better start listening to
Americans,” and certainly it's not only in America that people are smorgasbord Catholics. It's
just that you can get them all suppressed by saying that Americans are smorgasbord, as opposed
to Brazilians.
AP: Well, and the other side of that is that [19:00] these same priests and nuns whom I had done
a service for in Washington said that it's absolutely common that the many of the local priests
had their mistresses and their children living with them. The bishop would meet with them. I
mean, there was no hiding in the corner kind of thing at all.
Q: No. In my husband’s families, not their parish but the next one over, the priest has a girlfriend
and everyone in the parish knows that if you want to get a hold of the priest in the evenings you
call his girlfriend’s house. Isn't that charming?
AP: All that’s encouraging is, what do they call it? Fornication outside of marriage or something,
I mean -Q: The greatest story was this man and woman, a priest and woman who had an affair and she
got pregnant and then they said to them, “Why didn’t you use birth control? I mean obviously
you must [20:00] know that you were going to get caught,” and they said, “Well, we’re
Catholic.”
AP: We can’t use birth control, it's a sin. (laughs) Yeah.
Q: You know, that was just a good one. And the reporter at that point said, “But isn’t it a sin for
a priest to engage in this kind of activity?” and the reporter at this point said, “What is the greater
sin?” You know, if you're getting into degrees of sin here, if you've already, you know, drawn

86

the traces, you know, obviously the greater sin would be to break your vow, I would imagine,
people and law. But, so that was very funny. So we’ll see what happens with the Catholic
Church, even in our lifetime.
AP: It's going to shit.
Q: They’re going to run out sooner or later.
AP: Yeah. One of the statistics said that half of the priests in the United States are over 50 or
something like that, whatever it is, you know.
Q: And I know, [21:00] I’ve heard a lot about they’re bringing priests out of retirement now.
AP: And you can’t keep on doing that forever. Aside from whether it's effective as ministry or
not.
Q: And I know in my husband’s family’s parish they have the one priest and my husband said
when he was growing up they had three. And now it's this one priest who is really kind of a
bookkeeping priest, but because of the shortage he’s been pressed into doing actual people
ministry and he does not like to do it. He’s a numbers and no one can figure out why he’s still a
priest and not an accountant. And he’s just terrible with people. In fact, one of the very good
reasons why I stopped going was after one of his sermons, when he got up and basically said
that, “If I had my way I’d get your income tax forms and find out how much you make a year
and I’ll come to your house and demand 10% of it,” you know, the duty to the church and this
was an Easter service.
AP: That would make you really rejoice at the resurrection. (laughs)
Q: And this, the same church [22:00] they were collecting for Catholic charities, this is a couple
of years ago, the Ethiopian Famine, he was out of type and the church, this is a very wealthy
parish and they have a huge goal, let’s say half a million dollars and the priest kept exhorting
87

them to give over the goal, that this would be a good thing to do and they raised $600,000, let us
say. In any case, it was $100,000 over the goal and the priest took that $100,000 and put an
organ in the church.
AP: Oh, no.
Q: Talk about self-aggrandizement.
AP: Well, none of that, disrespect for the people, you know, because it had been raised for
famine. And he just felt free to do whatever he wanted to do with it.
Q: Right. So that’s not a very charming parish, in other words.
AP: Well, my horror story of all horror stories about, well, the Catholic Church, I was in British
Guyana when President Kennedy was assassinated and the following Sunday the Catholic
Church there, [23:00] there’s a lot of Catholic population -- was going to hold a kind of a
memorial service. And so we went as representatives of the American government and the
Catholic priest, apparently it was on the church calendar, it was the day of Our Lady of Fatima,
is that how you pronounce it? With the Miracle of Paris and all that. So he preached his standard
service, sermon on Our Lady of Fatima, who apparently appeared with orange and purple lights
or something. I remember the color scheme that he described. (laughs) And he went on and on
about this and the shrine and the people who come there and we were all sitting there with our
black armbands and the flat at half-mast across the street at the consulate and wondering when he
was ever going to mention Kennedy, you know, and he got all through his sermon without
mentioning it and then he did manage to sneak the name into the intersections, you know, but,
you know apparently he just could not break loose from the [24:00] calendar and -Q: The calendar that says, “On this day you will do the Lady of Fatima speech and that’s the end
of that.”

88

AP: It was weird. The cathedral was filled, all the diplomats were there and all, the governor was
there.
Q: And not fulfilling the ministry.
AP: (laughs) Oh dear, pathetic. Well, my next horror story, since we’re downplaying the
Catholic Church, (laughs) they have a Good Friday, Ecumenical Good Friday service here in
Wellfleet and it's held at different churches, but all of the ministers and priests take turns during
the three-hour service and the most recent time that I went it was being held at the Catholic
Church and so the Catholic priest there had the opening business and closing business. Well, it’s
supposed to be a three-hour service and somehow when he finished his closing meditation, we
still had 15 minutes left and [25:00] I would have just dismissed the crowd or say, “If you want
to stay in silent meditation, well, we have that --” you know, he apparently felt he had to go on
talking. So he pushed his automatic pilot button and got onto homosexuality, abortion and
divorce, I think. You know, and then he still had five minutes left.
Q: He did all that in 10 minutes.
AP: Yeah. He covered the waterfront in 10 minutes. So he said, all during the service we had not
been kneeling, because you know, we had Methodists and Congregations, Presbyterians,
Baptists, you know, so we just were bowing our heads -Q: You did what you did, right.
AP: So he said, “We will now all kneel and pray to the Virgin Mary,” and so we all knelt. I don’t
think we prayed to the Virgin Mary, but you know, he just got, he couldn’t deal with this
ecumenical thing about don’t say anything, you know, that is kind of offensive to a mixed group,
you know. All the other clergy had done beautifully. They’d talked about the last words on the
cross or what the apostles [26:00] did. You know, the usual (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) -Q: Oh god, going through that whole -89

AP: Oh, but when he got onto abortion, divorce, homosexuality, “We will now kneel and pray to
the Virgin Mary,” and apparently the training is so rigid, which I think is a sign of fear by the
authority.
Q: It's a sign of insecurity.
AP: Yeah, if they once let these people start thinking and acting for themselves, all hell was
going to break loose.
Q: Well, in this same parish, as was this story about the organ, as my sister-in-law said, “Karen,
it was very lucky you weren’t there,” because she knows one of the things I dislike about the
Catholic Church is you're not supposed to respond. You know, you're just supposed to be talked
to. And I do not like that at all. And they handed out cards to send to the congressmen that you
were against abortion in the church. And I thought that was, they should right there lose their
tax-exempt status right there.
AP: Absolutely.
Q: Right there. And then my husband was at a [27:00] church in Delaware, this was when he was
a graduate student and he said to me, “I was so glad you weren’t there because you would have
just done something,” (laughter) and he said he was hard-pressed, he left, he walked out. They
enter and it was sometime in the spring and the (inaudible) was a “Right to Life”, this was Right
to Life Sunday. And before, and he delivers this sermon and my husband just is feeling that this
is not appropriate. And before my husband can decide what to do, a screen is set up and they
show that god awful Silent Scream (inaudible) to children. To the congregation. And then he
walked out. And a deacon at the door, apparently they were expecting people to (inaudible)
“What are you doing?” and my husband said, “I am just so repulsed. There are children in the
audience and this is a piece of crap,” on film, you know. My husband doesn’t believe in abortion
but he doesn’t believe that the church should meddle. [28:00] It's a person’s own thing. And he
was just so absolutely livid.
90

AP: I can’t believe that happened.
Q: Showing that to children. To show it under -- regardless, any -- but to set up a 20 foot screen
in your church. Is this the point of a church? I ask you. And you know, I just, at that point, I
think in fact that, when Paul told me that story, I think that was the last time I had gone into a
church. And he, and Paul was not contributing any money. And more because he knows I would
just kill him. (laughter) This is what we’re spending money on, you know.
AP: Isn't that odd. Oh.
Q: But this bit about handing out cards to send to your congressmen -- you know, now they are
suing (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) the Catholic Church is getting rid of (overlapping
dialogue; inaudible) -AP: It's political, yeah.
Q: And I hope they win because, you know, you can’t have your cake and eat it, too. You can’t
be part of the American political process and then say that you [29:00] are talking from a play on
moral superiority; you cannot do both. And I think they’re going to be in trouble in America that
way, too. Because there’s some kind of very basic schism between American values and Roman
Catholic values. The American values of individuality and freedom of expression versus the
Roman Catholic values of do what your priest says and don’t think about it. And there is that
schism. And the abortion issue is just, you know, I mean it was like, and birth control and when
did the film, in fact, not [Pincus?] but the other guy, I know this because they developed
(inaudible) at Clark, where I went to undergraduate school and this was a fable, old story.
Not because, but the other guy was a Roman Catholic and he was very hopeful for this
pill because it was made from female hormones and but this is natural. It's completely natural. It
is working with the body’s [30:00] own natural chemistry and he was an OBGYN then and he
was seeing all these Catholic women dying. And of course, when the pill came out the Catholic

91

Church went absolutely crazy with that and he was very disappointed because he had viewed this
as the way for the church to get out of the whole issue.
AP: Yes. With grace and dignity. Yes. (laughs)
Q: And of course, people left in droves, who have never come back.
AP: My father being one of them.
Q: And they were just, you know, not catching up with them both. But you know, the difficulty
is, is that each priest is different and if you go to one priest you get one story, you go to another
priest you get another. A friend of mine at work, her cousin just died at the age of 19. She got
married at 17, had a kid nine months later. And the doctor told her, “Do not have any more
children,” she had some kind of blood clotting thing where [31:00] if she were in a situation
where you were losing that much blood, she would have a stroke and then undoubtedly die and
she goes, “But I’m Catholic,” doctor goes, “But you’ll be dead.”
AP: (laughs) How many dead Catholics does the church want?
Q: And she went to her priest and he said, “No, it is your duty to reproduce,” you know, he
wouldn’t even let her be abstinent. He said, “It is your duty to reproduce and create Catholics,”
and she got pregnant and she died. At the age of 19. Well, the baby lived and so now there are
two children under the age of two without a mother and at the age of 19 she’s dead.
AP: How could people be so terrorized or confused or -Q: That priest has blood on his hands. You know, and I said to Beth, my friend, I said, “What the
tragedy is, is first of all that someone couldn’t think on their own and second of all, the tragedy is
that if she’d been in a different parish she would have had a different priest, he would have told
her to get her tubes tied. [31:56]

92

Track 8
Q: [00:00] -- was happening. The priest was there and they were decided to cut off her life
support or not. You know, how can you live with yourself? You know, you sentenced this person
to death.
AP: Well, except that what about her?
Q: What about her. But -- the Catholic Church would say that she acted correctly. You know, the
issue of free will -AP: Yeah. Except that at the age of 19 or 21 or whatever, she has grown up knowing about all
the controversy in the church.
Q: I mean, we see that.
AP: Well, she must have at least heard about it. I mean you know, (inaudible) that people are,
that Catholics are using birth control and still going to church for that matter and then there are
priests and bishops -Q: If they excommunicated all the Catholics who were using birth control there would be no one
left in church.
AP: Well, yeah. So it is a terrible thing and it's [01:00] especially a very young person who is so
unapt to stand on her own two feet or think things through or -Q: The ultimate responsibility is hers, of course. It's just that, you know, as a priest he should, as
a minis-- as part of his ministry he should have been able to see this.

93

AP: Yes, I mean, I agree with you. If she says to him, “If I have a child I will die,” he has the
responsibility to do something about that, other than say, “Die,” which is what he said, (laughs)
you know, yes.
Q: So I mean -- I always laugh when people say, “Well, there’s no difference between the
Episcopal Church (laughs) and a Catholic Church.
AP: (laughter) Oh, I could tell you stories. This does not go on in the Episcopal Church. A lot of
other things, yeah. We still are fairly uptight about divorce. Well, divorced clergy apparently still
bothers people. I don’t quite see what difference it makes whether it's clergy or laity. I think it's a
false double standard [02:00] to say it’s all right for, you know, dozens of people in the
congregation to have divorced and remarried in the church but it's not all right for the Episcopal
priest to have divorced and remarried. I don’t see that. But in many Dioceses nowadays, if a
married priest tells his bishop that he’s going to get a divorce, he will be either unfrocked or
suspended until he’s gotten a divorce and a certain length of time has passed and then he’ll be
reinstated, which again I think is kind of silly. You know, you get these little announcements
from the Diocese and registrar saying, “Father So and So has been suspended from his duties for
a year,” and you just sort of assume, OK, he’s getting a divorce. Well, why, why bother? I think
it's a façade that the bishops are trying to put up to show that they take this very seriously and the
clergy had done something wrong or something, it just seemed kind of silly. Useless exercise.
Because then the people are reinstated. So why bother? (laughs) [03:00]
Q: As if they’re unclean for that year. That’s interesting.
AP: Yeah, weird. But I know so little about the Episcopal Church. You know, I joined in 1963
when I was in Washington and then more or less overseas or moving around all the time, so you
know, I didn’t know for a long time we had something called a “presiding bishop” which is like
the Archbishop of Canterbury, except we call him the presiding bishop. Or that we had a church
headquarters. Or that we had a General Convention. I mean, I’m really very ignorant about the
whole thing, which is probably just as well. (laughs) I don’t have very much respect. I’m sure if

94

I’d been properly brought up in the church I would have struggled with my disobedience or
something. (laughs) Not too long (inaudible) (laughs).
Q: Do you think there was any difference between women being ordained who are single, as
opposed to women being ordained who were married with children? Was one more acceptable
than the other? Or? [04:00]
AP: I don’t think it has made any difference. The group in Philadelphia, more than half of them
were married with children. In my group, one was married and I guess the rest of us were single
but I don’t think (inaudible) (laughs) one of the women who was ordained in Philadelphia was
pregnant at the time and we were all in our little sisterly way saying, “Well, I wonder what that
makes the baby,” (laughs) interesting theological question.
Q: That’s true. And the first time it's ever come up. (laughs)
AP: Well, furthermore, I technically might be considered a Catholic priest. [05:00] Bishop
Barrett, when he was consecrated bishop, had not only bishops of the Episcopal Church lay
hands on him, but he had a very good friend who was a Roman Catholic bishop laying hands on
him and Barrett, George Barrett used to tease this bishop later on saying, “Well, under the
Catholic Church tradition, doesn’t that mean that I have been made a bishop of the Catholic
Church? And if so, and then if I ordain somebody, (laughs) doesn’t that make them Catholic
priests?” so you could have a lot of fun speculating (laughs) about this.
Q: You can -- apoplectic fit, my god.
AP: (laughs) Well, I don’t know. I don’t know enough about Catholic teachings to know -Q: I don’t know enough about the law.
AP: Yeah, how that would close down to magic fingers or anything like that. (laughs)

95

Q: It's beyond most people, I think. I mean, Catholic priests, they have, you know, a very
different [06:00] ordination with you know, the prostration and (inaudible) very queer thing that
they do. It's admirable, but anyway.
AP: Well, coming back to this birth control thing for a minute. One of the retreats that I went on
before I started the process was led by a man whom I had never heard of at the time, it turned out
to be a very well-known Catholic theologian, a German named Bernard Haring, H-A-R-I-N-G.
And after the retreat was over and when we just started chatting before we all left, he said that he
had served on a commission for the Vatican at some point that was studying the whole thing
about birth control and that commission had come out with a recommendation which was
extremely liberal, which you know, in essence would have solved the whole problem and that
Haring knew that when that commission turned in [07:00] its report to the Vatican, that some of
the old line hardliners, staff of the Pope, stopped the report from reaching the Pope. And when
Haring heard about this, he apparently had known the Pope before the Pope was consecrated, and
when the Pope had been consecrated he had told Haring that he could call him at any time and he
would always be available. So Haring tried to reach him on the phone to tell him about this and
couldn’t get through. I thought that was rather interesting. (laughs) Talk about intrigue in high
places.
Q: You wonder how much progress is stopped at lower levels. By people who want to maintain
the status quo. These are all personal.
AP: Apparently the thinking of these people who stopped the report was that it would be so
embarrassing for the Catholic Church to more or less [08:00] reverse itself or -Q: Admit a mistake, heaven forbid. We’re supposed to be infallible.
AP: I have a Catholic friend who has seven children who says if birth control is ever approved
he’s going to send the last five to the Pope. (laughs) I don’t think you've heard that one before.
(laughs) I think it's kind of cute. (laughs)

96

Q: Well, my favorite story about that was in my hometown there was a family who had 11
children. And the woman was, the mother was my mother’s age and she looked older than my
grandmother.
AP: (inaudible) your body.
Q: Yes. And I, we always wondered how the Bells could afford the way they were dressed. You
know, the mother, of course, couldn’t work. She was always pregnant. And if she wasn’t
pregnant she had just miscarried and it was terrible. But they were always dressed really well.
And all the kids had cars. I always wondered, you know, what’s going on? Well, one day I
happened to be in the one and only bank in our town and I was waiting my turn [09:00] and I
noticed the parish priest was sitting with Mrs. Bell and the little Bell. I knew one of the girls in
the family so I knew all the kids. So I’d just turned 10. And I very obnoxiously eavesdropped on
the conversation and learned that apparently the church settled a certain amount of money on
each child when they reach a certain age.
AP: Right, showing such a wonderful example to all the other members of the parish, this
wonderful, happy, Catholic family that was getting along just fine, thank you very much. Well of
course, if that had started a trend it would have bankrupted the church, because everybody would
be saying, well, I’ve got 10 children, don’t I get my cut? (laughs)
Q: And that’s how they could afford it. And so the church would pay for their college education.
And they would give them jobs every summer and the whole nine yards.
AP: Oh gosh, that’s astounding. I wonder how that was accounted for financially out of the
parish or Diocese’s funds. I mean, [10:00] again, this is lack of accountability. There was a
parish in Virginia, just outside of Washington, D.C., which apparently had one of the most
progressive of Catholic parish, had one of the most progressive parish councils or whatever it's
called, under a progressive priest and then that priest left and the bishop sent in a good old
fashioned reactionary priest who promptly disbanded the parish council, which more or less
refused to be disbanded and it got into all the newspapers. It was fascinating to watch this
97

struggle for shift of power to the laity and I don’t know how it came out, I’ve lost touch with it,
but you know, that must be happening in many places, such a struggle.
Q: Oh, I’m sure it is, I’m sure it is. It's very interesting to see it, see it going on. I was reading the
history of this 19th century Episcopal Church and they were talking about, they were having
trouble raising money and they said, “We must figure out a way to do as our Catholic brethren
do and get money [11:00] out of the people who can least afford to do it,” and I thought -AP: Ooh, thanks a bunch. (laughter) So they noticed, did they? Isn’t that awful?
Q: That’s good, that’s good.
AP: (laughs) It's terrible.
Q: But that was the greatest comment, you know. Because they weren’t knocking them.
AP: No, they were just copying them, saying, “We’d better find out how they do it.”
Q: They were a poor parish and they didn’t know how to get the money. Because you know, I
think this cool church was accustomed to relying on wealthy people and this was a poor parish,
for whatever reason and how can they raise money and they were saying, “Well, we’re going to
do a study and watch the Catholic Church for the next six months and see how they do it.”
AP: Well, speaking of money, one thing that came up in the Diocese in Washington, when we
women got so independent and uppity -- I was aware of the fact that my salary [12:00] at the
State Department was higher than the bishop’s salary. Because clergy traditionally don’t get paid
very well, even though Washington sees a fairly wealthy Diocese but after our group had, in this
special clergy education program had gone through the process and been ordained, both the men
and the women, the bishop stopped the program, he didn’t keep it going and he announced that
from then on the only people who he would accept for ordination were those who went into, first
of all, three years of fulltime seminary and then were prepared to go into the fulltime ministry,
98

because all of us were part time, what they called [nonsupendiary?] ministry. And we figured
that he didn’t like the fact that he had so little control of us. He couldn’t fire us because we
weren’t working for him. We weren’t earning any money anyway from the church. And then we
figured he didn’t like that feeling at all. Which I don’t particularly blame him for (laughs) but it
was an interesting development. Again, this question of money and power [13:00] and control.
Q: So when you went to England the second time and you got even more publicity -- when you
came back, what happened within the Diocese? Did people say things to you or?
AP: (laughs) Let’s see. I did the service in March ’76 at the Unitarian Church. Then -- it was, I’m
sorry, that was November of ’76. I went back to England on my way from Geneva in March of
’77 and did a house (inaudible) Eucharist, without any publicity. But started planning to do a
service in an Anglican church. I had decided that I didn’t want to continue working with Una
Kroll, for various reasons. There was another [14:00] Anglican priest named Alfred [Willets?]
and his wife Phoebe, who was a deaconess. And they had been coming to these services, they
were living in Manchester and they had a parish there. And they invited me to do a service in
their church. So we began planning that. And we worked on it for several months and then
agreed that I would come back in October of ’77 to do the service. And I did that at their church
and then went to Newcastle on Tyne to do another public Eucharist in a church there, thus
knocking off two archbishops at once. Newcastle on Tyne is under the Archbishop of Newark,
whereas the Willets were under the Archbishop of Canterbury. I just thought I’d throw that in
(laughs) for what it's worth. [15:00]
Q: They had banned priests from the irregularly ordained people from doing the Eucharist in
England at this point?
AP: No, all women priests were banned which by this time some women in Canada had been
ordained to the priesthood and all -Q: Legally?

99

AP: Legally. And also starting January 1st, 1977, women had been regularly ordained in the
United States and there were these four women who had been ordained in Hong Kong in 1973,
Chinese and Joyce Bennett, who was an Englishwoman living in Hong Kong and who had
retired to England, so there was a possibility of a number of women from a number of places
doing celebration in England and the Archbishop of Canterbury that had issued a statement along
the lines that the canon law of the Church of England, [16:00] which dealt with priests from
outside England doing services there, had traditionally been interpreted to mean male priests and
therefore female priests could not officiate. Of course, my answer to that was, well of course, it's
been traditionally interpreted to mean male priests, because that’s all you had. (laughs) When
would you start changing the interpretation? When you have female priests, you know, but
anyway. (laughs) So much for canon law. So we were all banned, whether regularly ordained or
not. The women who had been ordained in Philadelphia and with me in Washington, had been
offered what was called “regularization” by their various bishops after September 1976 when the
General Convention met and finally voted that women could be ordained. [17:00]
However, one woman who had been ordained in Philadelphia, Katrina Swanson was in a
Diocese where her bishop said that he would not accept her as priest. She would have to start at
the very beginning, apply to be a postulant and then be a candidate and then be a deacon and all
the rest of it. And so I agreed to hold off on being accepted for regularization until Katrina could
be rescued. So this is the newspaper story on that.
Q: But he was the only one?
AP: Right. Katrina was the only one who was in trouble. We were afraid that if we went ahead
with our ordinations around the country, in Washington, then she would just be permanently left
behind. The only way we could put pressure on her bishop was through our bishops. Our bishops
were desperately eager to regularize us so we would stop doing [18:00] all these crazy things,
from their point of view, you know, as, you know, doing how strict Eucharists and so forth. They
wanted to finish it off and get it settled. So I met with Bishop Creighton, in fact, I took him to
lunch, I thought that was kind of fun. I invited him to have lunch with me. Because we’d only
met formally before and always under confrontation. So I took him to lunch at a very fancy
Washington restaurant. I picked him up in a taxi. (laughs) And he was sort of confused because
100

this is almost a courtship, you know -- it was a complete role reversal. Not only male/female, but
priest/bishop, you know but anyway -- I took him out to lunch, bought him a very nice lunch,
including cocktails and everything. And told him about the situation and said that, you know, I
was holding back until Katrina could be rescued. And he said he understood that. So time passed
and Katrina and her husband, who was also a priest, were applying for jobs all over the country
and not getting anywhere. [19:00]
And I came up with what I still consider a rather brilliant idea. There are always plenty of
jobs, there’s just no salaries to go with them. You know, like Catholic Church, there’s always
plenty of work to be done, there just wasn’t any money. So I said, “OK, why don’t we set up a
kind of a trust fund for the Swansons and then find a Diocese with a friendly bishop who has a
parish which needs a priest and they’ll hire the Swansons as a team and he’ll pay the normal,
Diocese or the parish will pay the normal salary for one of the Swansons, we don’t care which is
which, and the trust fund will pay the salary of the other Swanson,” and so this was accepted and
we began the fundraising campaign and badgered the bishops, which we were then quite good at,
(laughs) if I do say so myself. [20:00] Bishop Paul Moore at the Cathedral of St. John the Devine
in Washington said he would spearhead this amongst the bishops to raise, get, all bishops have
discretionary funds and we figured we really didn’t need an awful lot of money, $5000 would do
it, you know, just in the first year. And so he said he would spearhead this movement.
So we waited and of course, nothing happened and so then I called and said, “Well,
would you mind very much if we convened a meeting in your office. You don’t even have to
come (laughs) if you don’t want to,” so he came and we met in his office and got things moving.
So eventually the bishop of the Diocese of New Jersey came up with an inner-city parish, which
is the kind of thing the Swansons wanted anyway. And George Swanson became the rector and
the Katrina was his assistant and we had enough money for the first year and so in July we had a
ceremony at that church in New Jersey, [21:00] which I attended and I have a tape of that. And
the first part of the ceremony, Katrina is recognized as the priest by the Diocese of New Jersey
and then a message from my bishop is read by the bishop of New Jersey saying that I am
accepted as, recognized as the priest of the Diocese of Washington, so that was that.
But that was a hard time for me. I had a feeling that if I delayed too long, Bishop
Creighton was retiring and in fact he did retire -- Bishop Walker, who was to succeed him, who
was black and had always been quite hostile -101

Q: Well, Dick, is he the -- I think there was a Dick was difficult in your autobiography, I’m
talking about “Dick did this”?
AP: No, it's somebody else.
Q: Oh, it's somebody else?
AP: This was Bishop John Walker. So I was taking a real chance that, you know, Creighton
would leave before I got regularized, Walker might not regularize me or he would impose some
impossible conditions. [22:00] But anyhow, I felt I had to do something to help Katrina. So it all
worked out, which is just as well, because coming back to the Willetts -- the Willets wanted me
to do a service in their parish, but they wanted me to be regularized first and I sort of understood
that, you know, they didn’t want any, there was going to be enough controversy without getting
questioned, is Alison really a priest or not, so anyway, we got that straightened out. And so I did
the service at their place. We had press coverage. The Manchester Guardian had a religious
news correspondent guy named Hickman, Barry Hickman. Maybe? Anyway. And we invited
him to come to the service at the Willett’s parish and then said, you know, “And then you can
come along to Newcastle on Tyne and then write the whole, and then release the whole story, but
we don’t want the story released until I’ve done the second service and he said that was
absolutely fine with him, but he didn’t think that the service could be kept secret that long, but
you know, there would be too many people who knew about it and we said, [23:00] “Don’t
worry about it, we know what we’re doing,” and we did it and he was very impressed. (laughs)
But you know, there was no week, I did this, the Willetts had a Tuesday evening service
as well as their regular Sunday service and I did the Eucharist at their Tuesday evening service
and then went to Newcastle and did the Sunday morning service and preached at the Sunday
evening service and I have tapes of all of this, which I really would love to have you copy or
keep or something because these are really historic. I mean, the thing at the Unitarian Church
was historic but it wasn’t in a Church of England parish and to do it in the Anglican parish was
really significant. I suppose roughly equivalent to a woman Catholic priest doing a service in
Rome against the wishes of the Pope, (laughs) so to speak, you know, it has reverberations.
102

So I have clippings by the ton. Oh, we’ll have to go back [24:00] -- this is the name of the
woman in Rochester whose husband committed suicide and that’s the card she gave me at the
service. Old restaurant bill I think is here. OK. We have (inaudible) -- this is all (inaudible) up.
That’s me at my ordination in Washington, that’s Bishop Barrett and my sister priest. These are
the, this is the letter from the parish in Newcastle on Tyne to Archbishop Corrigan of
Canterbury. [25:00] Archbishop Blanch from York and Bishop (inaudible) the Diocese
(inaudible) saying, “We’re writing to let you know that Reverend Alison Palmer will, oh, did
celebrate the Eucharist,” and they had discussed this with them ahead of time and so they knew
about it. This is the service at the Willetts’ church in Manchester. Alf, myself and Phoebe. And
this is the service itself. Alf had served as my deacon and that’s (inaudible). (inaudible) then.
This is all press coverage. Palmer Defies Church -- (laughs) all kind of silly, really.
Q: By this time everyone knows your name.
AP: Absolutely. And this is just some of the coverage.
Q: Rebel Priest.
AP: And it just goes on and on. Woman Needs Anglican Right. Church Fury Over a Woman in
the Pulpit. [26:00] This was [E.M. Proper?] who was the rector of the Church of Newcastle. And
what was especially fun for me, I did the service, the coverage began the Monday morning
following the Sunday that I was at Newcastle. I had taken the train down from Newcastle to
London Sunday night and went straight to the airport and got on the plane, but I stopped in the
airport lounge and bought the newspapers (laughs) and then on the plane the stewardesses were
handing out newspapers and every paper had my picture (laughs) on the front page. It was lots of
fun. Bishop Calls for an Explanation Over Woman Priest, and so forth and so forth.
Q: Wow, all this coverage, just amazing. Now people, you know, nowadays you just take it so
for granted, women are Episcopal priests, you know, and [27:00] just in 10 short years, really.

103

AP: Well, it's still very, very controversial. I am not accepted here on Cape Code by any of the
churches, but we’ll get to that in time. (inaudible) I may have to (inaudible) it again.
Q: I think though in terms of the public’s view of it.
AP: Yes, yes. Well, it's there, you know, it's happened, it is a fact. But that’s different from
accepting it where you are, at an Episcopalian and whether or not you want to receive the
Eucharist by a woman. They didn’t pick on that stitch -- before, anyway it went on and on.
“Sexual apartheid” says Alf Willetts. Degrees of Disobedience. This was a letter from a Foreign
Service officer, sent me a news clipping. Anyway, as you can see, I have tons and tons of
material that you can all get at some point or another. [28:00] One of the sad things about all this
was that when I met the Willetts in London in June when we were planning the service, they had
come down from Manchester to spend a couple of days with me, we did all of the planning and
talking and all that and then very casually and quietly Phoebe said that she had breast cancer and
she said she was being treated for it and I was not to be concerned about it and I followed her
lead. I did not, you know, get all upset because obviously she didn’t want me to.
And they kept me informed about it and when I went back in October of ’77 to do the
service at their church, she had been receiving, she didn’t have a mastectomy but she had
radiation treatment and the skin had come off her breast and she was very uncomfortable. But we
did the service [29:00] and then she went with Alf and me to Newcastle and they were in the
congregation when I did the service there. And she died in January the following year. Alf called
to tell me about it and when he wrote his memoir of Phoebe, when he dealt with their
relationship with me and what I had done, he said that from the time that Phoebe was discovered
to have cancer to the time of her death, the only time when she was fully strong and energized
and normal and able to do everything was the week that I was there with them doing the services,
which I thought was very interesting. Alf’s letter to me, which I got yesterday, was telling me
that he, he’s written a book [30:00] called Bereavement and Beyond, about Phoebe and it's just
been accepted for publication. But she, of course, wanted to be ordained a priest and about three
days before she went into the hospital and died, she and Alf concelebrated in their parish church.
She was in a wheelchair but she wanted to do this, so.

104

I know an awful lot of women who have wanted to be priests and they have not been able
to because of the opposition of the church or their families or whatever. Jeannette Piccard, who
was ordained with the Philadelphia group was 70 years old. She is, the name Piccard, her
husband, Jacques Piccard was a French balloonist who went into the stratosphere using the hot
air balloon and she went with him and she was the first woman [31:00] to try to reach the
stratosphere, which I think is an absolutely fascinating career. And she was a professor and all
this kind of thing and she said she’d had a vocation to the priesthood since she was 11 years old,
that she was -Q: That long, my god.
AP: And she was, she was ordained and then went to seminary for three years and she eventually
died of cancer when, I guess when she was about 76, but that’s just an example of all the
vocations that have not been responded to, you know, except after great difficulty.
Q: Fifty-nine years, I mean -AP: (laughs) Wow.
Q: Yes. So -- when you, you don’t want to be a parish priest.
AP: Right. I had never wanted to be a parish priest. I had expected -- [31:55]
Track 9
AP: [00:00] My thought, and I said this in my original application to the bishop, was that I could
minister to the Foreign Service, as what’s called a “worker priest” which was something the
Catholic Church developed during the Industrial Revolution, they would have priests working in
factories who understood the working conditions and could establish rapport with the other
workers. Foreign Service is a very stressful career and it has the additional burden of not
expected to show any weakness. People are very hesitant to discuss problems like marriage
105

problems or drug problems or alcoholism or anything else, you're under scrutiny all the time,
you're supposed to represent your country, you're supposed to be perfect. Then it gets even more
complicated when you're overseas because for security reasons you're not supposed to go to a
foreign psychiatrist and [01:00] you know, it just gets messier and messier and I had seen a lot of
this. And even in Washington, where there are plenty of facilities for help, people are hesitant to
go or they feel that if they go to a therapist or something, that person will not understand the
Foreign Service. Well, I understand the Foreign Service because I was in the Foreign Service.
And as a priest, I could provide total confidentiality under the seal of the confessional.
And this started to happen long before I was ordained, as soon as it was announced, you know,
that people knew that I was a candidate for the ministry, they began talking to me and they
would talk to me in the corridors and the elevators, at their lunch or in their offices or whatever,
about their problems or maybe they had children who had gotten into drugs while they were
overseas and the kids were now in a mental institution and all of their guilt and embarrassment
about that -- [02:00] I was already representing people in grievance cases and people already
knew about my battle with the State Department about sex discrimination, so they had some kind
of feeling about my strength and so on. And people would, I had one Foreign Service officer
who had been sent back to the United States from his post in South Africa by the ambassador
who was dissatisfied with him and he’d just been put on a plane without being able to see his
family or anything. And he arrived in Washington after these long flights from South Africa and
he came straight to my office, he was all disheveled and unshaven and tired and he came into my
office and closed the door and burst into tears and you know, because he was so upset by
everything that had happened to him and you know, I helped him as well as I could.
So this was an ongoing ministry and I expected that I would do this overseas as well as in
the United States [03:00] and I would not want to be a parish priest for all kinds of reasons. I’m
not interested parish administration. I don’t spend a lot of time balancing the books, so dealing
with women’s (laughs) (inaudible) all of the church politics, which go on constantly. If
somebody wants a new organ and somebody thinks, no, we should spend the money to fix the
leaky roof, every church I’ve ever been associated with had a leaky roof and a new organ was
needed. I mean, the two things just simply go together with Christianity, as far as I know.
(laughs) So the latest brochure I got from the Episcopal Chapel in Wellfleet, which is
only open in the summertime, had a reference about the funds for the new organ, (laughs) it just
106

seems to go on and on. Anyway, I’m interested in ministry, I’m not interested in the work that
has to go on to keep the ministry going and there’s a lot of advantages to not having a church to
worry about. [04:00] So that was my approach to being a priest. And it has worked out exactly
like that. I still get calls from women, either those who are anxious to be come priests or women
in secular employment who need help. So that still goes on. You had asked me sometime back,
what was the reaction in the United States to my doing the services in England. Generally
favorable, people were interested and intrigued and surprised.
Before I had left the United States to do the services in Manchester and Newcastle, I had
gotten in touch with a woman journalist named Marjorie [Heier?] who was the religious news
correspondent for the Washington Post and whom I had known for years, because she had
covered all the other things about women priests. And I said, “Marjorie, I’m going to do
something very controversial and historical and I would like to brief you fully and give you eve,”
so I gave her all the copies [05:00] of the letters and a picture of myself and all the names and
addresses and telephone numbers of everybody concerned in England and I trusted her totally, as
far as discretion is concerned, I said, “Sooner or later the ticker in your office will start
producing this over the normal Associate Press reports and then you can go to town, you’ll be all
set and you’ll have an exclusive in the United States,” and I gave this to her a good month before
I left and never had the slightest doubt of her discretion.
On the other hand, I thought about telling Bishop Walker ahead of time and I could have
told him under the seal of the confessional, which theoretically would mean that he couldn’t do a
thing about it -- I didn’t have enough trust in my bishop, even under the seal of the confessional
to tell him, (laughs) so I didn’t tell him. So he learned about it the hard way when the phone
started ringing. And I didn’t hear from him about it at all. Sort of surprised me. But I was glad.
[06:00] Thought well, fine. You know, he’s accepted it and there we all are. Then I was invited
to do a service at the cathedral. There was a group which met Saturday afternoons, they were sort
of into deep spirituality, (laughs) is the only way I can describe it, it's a very special group.
And the regular priest was going to be away and he called up and asked if I would take
the service. I was delighted because I had never celebrated communion in parish church in my
Diocese and I still haven’t. And I’m sure that’s a historical first because normally you celebrate
in your own parish church the Sunday after you're ordained, you know. And of course, I couldn’t
do that because we were under a godly admonition and after I got regularized, nobody ever
107

invited me, so I had never celebrated in Washington in a parish church. So I got this invitation to
celebration (inaudible) well I thought, well, isn’t this wonderful? All of the trouble has dissolved
and faded away. We’re all back to being nice people together [07:00] and so I could get just a
normal routine of, could you fill in for me because I have to be away and said “Certainly, I’d be
delighted,” and so I was just planning to go up there and do a normal communion, in fact, it
happened to be at the beginning of Lent, so I think I was going to do one of these absolutely dull
sermons about the importance of fasting in Lent or something, you know, just couldn’t be more
Anglo-Catholic, which I happen to be, in spite of everything.
And so the Friday before the Saturday that I was to do this service, I get a call from the
priest who had asked me to do it and he said, “Did you know that you are banned from preaching
or celebrating at the cathedral?” I said, “No, I didn’t know that. (laughs) If I’d known that I
would have told you when you invited me,” he said, “Well, Bishop Walker saw your name on
the list of people who are doing services at the cathedral and he said that he will not allow you to
do this,” and I said, “That’s very interesting, he’s never told me anything about this,” [08:00] and
the priest was very apologetic and said, “Well, you know, there’s nothing I can do about it. I’m
leaving immediately and so the bishop is going to provide another priest, but why don’t you
come to the service and see what’s going on?” so I said, “Right,” (laughs) so I went to the
service and the service was taken by, I don’t know, one of the senior priests at the cathedral and
when I walked in before the service started, came over to me he said, “Alison, do you have a TV
camera crew with you?” (laughs) poor man. I said, “Sure, they’re right outside.” “No,” I said,
“Of course not,” but it shows what their image was of me. (laughs)
And so the priest who had asked me to serve had left a written statement for his
congregation, which just sort of narrated the whole thing and said that he was extremely sorry
that this had happened, that he was very eager [09:00] to have me celebrate and preach and he
regretted very much that I was not able to. And the congregation, then the priest who was there
invited the congregation to discuss this, which was a smart thing. And so they all more or less
said that they were, you know, unhappy about this and several of them abstained from taking
communion. And so then the bishop asked me to meet with him, so I did. And he said, by this
time it was February of ’78 and I had done my services in England in the fall of ’77 and he said
the reason he had banned me from the cathedral was that the Archbishop of Canterbury was
going to come in the fall, in July to attend a conference and it would be insulting to the
108

archbishop if the archbishop knew that Bishop Walker had allowed me, who had done these
things in [10:00] England, to celebrate at the cathedral. And I said, “First of all,” I said, “It seems
so unlikely that the archbishop would know about it and in the second place, this is not episode
celebrating the cathedral,” this little tiny group met, didn’t even meet in a chapel, it met in the
crypt. I mean, it was just about the most Saturday afternoon in the crypt with about 10 people is
not exactly an earthshaking event.
And I said, “But in any case, I had never been informed by you about your anxiety or
displeasure or anything about what I've don’t in England and I, you have never asked me to
discuss it with you or even allowed me to tell you that both archbishops had been informed in
advance that we were going to do this and did not prohibit it,” and you know, there are a lot of
things I could tell about how this whole process went on for two years as we worked up to it and
you know, and he said, well, as soon as he had learned about the service in England he had
intended to call me in immediately. [11:00] Like the first week in November or something, but
his calendar was so busy that he decided he wouldn’t be able to see me until after Christmas and
then he just forget. And I felt that he was sort of making this whole thing up. You know, it all
sounded so weird. I mean, he could always find time in an emergency and there had been
emergencies such as when a woman priest at the Diocese announced that she was gay and he
found time to see her within about 15 minutes (laughs) after the announcement, so you know, it
is possible to arrange your schedule.
I think what had really bothered him was that I had established a ministry to the gay
community and had been preaching at the Episcopal gay church services and that pressed him on
his stance on ordaining gay people, because he had signed a statement [12:00] at General
Convention saying that homosexuality is no barrier to ordination, which made him sound real
nice and real liberal and then come back to his Diocese and said, “Under no circumstances would
he ordain a homosexual,” talk about talking out of both sides of your mouth. And so I had
written him a letter asking him about this and not too politely and -- I had learned from a friend
at the bishop’s office that he had thought that when I was invited to preach and celebrate at this
cathedral service, that I would preach on ordination of homosexuals. Gee, you know. (laughs)
Q: What a roundabout way --

109

AP: Round and round we go, you know. And so anyway, I left his office and when I got back
home, Alf Willetts called to tell me that Phoebe had died, so I had told Bishop Walker that I
would get back to him after I had thought about all this [13:00] and so I just dashed off a quick
note saying that I was so concerned about the death of my friend in England and I didn’t feel that
I could deal with anything else for a while and I got back a very nice note from him saying he
understood. And then at some subsequent time I wrote him a letter and told him that I had heard
that he thought that I was going to preach on homosexuality whether or not I was going to, we do
have freedom of the pulpit. You know, you can be jumped on afterwards, but I’d never heard of
anybody being jumped on before they said anything.
Q: Especially when you had intimated that you were going to do it anyway.
AP: I was going to preach on fasting and Lent. (laughs) And so I really felt, and then it went to
the whole question of due process of which there is none in the church hierarchy, any more than
there is in the Catholic Church, I mean a bishop or a rector of a church can do anything to the
assisting clergy and there’s really no redress. You, you as the lower animal could be put on trial,
but there’s no way to get at a higher authority [14:00] if they treated you unjustly so I wrote him
a letter in which I said, “Simple due process would suggest that if you were concerned about
what I’d done in England you’d tell me that you were concerned. Let me present all of the
correspondence and so forth, so you can see that this was not done in some off-hand way, but
had been thoughtfully considered and prepared for at the invitation of other people, not my own
initiative,” dadadadada -- “and I would like you to have read the correspondence between the
bishop and the rector and the archbishop and so forth,” and he wrote back and said, “Alison, you
real seem to be very full of hatred towards bishops,” and that was very perceptive of him
(laughs) actually. And he said he would pray for me, which is the standard brush-off, you know.
(laughs) When in doubt, say that you’ll pray for somebody. So as far as I know I’m still
under ban, I’m still canonically resident of the Diocese in Washington, didn’t transfer when I
came up here. [15:00] And I have never celebrated in the Diocese in Washington in parish
church, so here we all are. Strange career, I must say, as far as the church is concerned. But I
have never regretted going to England. It's a very moving and powerful experience to do that and
valuable to me and to the people I had in my congregations.
110

Q: You said earlier that you're still not accepted here on the Cape.
AP: Oh my. I got up here in January of ’81 and lived in an apartment in Wellfleet while this
house was being built. And as soon as I got settled there, I started going to the church in Orleans,
which is the nearest Episcopal Church that’s open year-round. And I didn’t wear my clergy
collar. I didn’t introduce myself to anyone, I didn’t want anybody to know I was there. [16:00] I
was just going to communion. I went to the early service and I just went in and received
communion and left. I was about as low key as I could be without not going there at all, you
know. And so this was fine and it went on. And then at one of the services we exchanged peace
in the middle of the service and a woman who was next to me shook hands and said, “Peace be
with you,” and then told me her name. Well, when somebody tells you their name you almost
inevitably have to tell them your name, if you don’t want to look peculiar.
But I thought, what the heck, it won’t mean a thing to her. So I said, “My name is Alison
Palmer,” and her whole face lit up. She said, “I was at your ordination and watched you --” oh,
lord. (laughs) And to make things more complicated, the Cape is full of retired bishops and one
of the bishops is a guy named Bishop Rath, who was the bishop of New Jersey who had had a
women from his Diocese [17:00] be ordained in Philadelphia and he also knew the whole thing
about the Katrina Swanson, so he really knew a lot about me from various sources. And he was
there in the congregation and so as we left, she sort of padded by the elbow and she said, “Oh, I
want you to meet Bishop Rath,” I said, “Ooh,” and so she introduced me and he knew my name,
but we just smiled at one another, you know, and I left. But of course, he went and told the rector
immediately and (laughs) (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) -- you know, I ought to take out an
alias or something. Wear a veil. Anyway -- (laughs) so the next thing that I know I get a call
from the rector, David something or another at the church in Orleans and he said when he found
out that there was woman priest in the [neighborhood?] he felt like he’d been kicked in the pants.
Which made it quite clear to me how he felt about the ordination of women. And anyway,
he said would like to come and call on me, (inaudible) [18:00] he came and called on me and we
fenced around in a delicate Anglican fashion for quite a while and then he finally said, well, what
were my plans as far as being a priest up here and I said, “None whatsoever. You know, I’m
busy building my house and I’m looking forward to my retirement and I know, I’m not asking to
111

be included in anything. If I could ever be of any help, if you need extra people, please let me
know, but other than that, fine,” and he said, “Fine,” and he was frank about not being able to
really accept women priests but he said that his wife did and that he knew women priests who’d
been ordained at Philadelphia and he had a lot of respect for her and so forth and so on so he
said, you know, he was working on it. Fine, (inaudible). And so that was that.
I continued to attend services very quietly. I went out the side door so I didn’t have to
meet him, you know. So the Sunday before Easter he met me at the side door and [19:00] said,
“Alison, I know we agreed that, you know, that you wouldn’t, you know, be participating unless
I needed help. Well, I need someone to help at the early Easter service to serve as a deacon and
to help with distribution and would you be willing to do that?” and I said, “Of course, I’d be very
glad to be of any help that I can,” so that was fine and Saturday before Easter Sunday, Saturday
afternoon he called me and he said, “Alison, I really don’t think that the early morning
congregation is as ready to deal with a woman deacon. You know, people who go to the early
service tend to be the more conservative group, which is why I went, because I like that early
Anglo-Catholic service. And in fact that thought had crossed my mind after I’d accepted the
invitation, does this guy really know what he’s doing? But anyway, he said, so why don’t we,
[20:00] I’ll get somebody else to help at the early service and why don’t you help at the main
service?” and I, I had been through this too many times and I said, “Either I am a priest or I’m
not a priest, I’m not going to be at one service but not another service,” because I had been all
through this after my ordination with the director of the church in Washington where I worked
and he wanted me to come to the service where the people were liberal and not appear as a priest
at the sew where there were conservatives. I wanted no part of that.
So I said, “Either you accept me fully or not,” and he said, “Oh no, don’t be like that,”
and said, “That’s the way it is,” and he paused for a minute. I suspect that what had happened
was that the, he was not, David was not going to be at the early service, another priest was going
to take the early service. And I suspect that that priest, when told that he was going to have
woman deacon had objected. And David collapsed under that and called me to try to get me to
change so I said, you know, “Either you accept me as a priest or you don’t accept me -- you can’t
have me [21:00] one service and not the other,” and he said, “Oh, well all right. I’ll take the early
service and I will be glad to have you serve as deacon,” and so I did serve as deacon with him.

112

I told my mother about this and she immediately said that she would come to the service
to support me. She’s Christian Scientist but she came. So that was nice. But the next thing that
happened, there are several different gospel lessons for Easter service because there are lots of
Easter services and they have to sort of spread them out. So you have a different gospel. And the
gospel assigned in the Episcopal Church for the first service of Easter Sunday is the one where
the women went to the tomb and meet the risen Christ and go back and tell the apostles about it,
the apostles are scared and they don’t believe him, [believing?] the women as the good people,
you know. And the next gospel which is to be read at the main service is the one where the
women were at the tomb [22:00] to see the risen Christ and they are afraid and don’t tell
anybody, which the women are the bad people, you know. And David, as a deacon I would be
reading the gospel, that’s how it was handled. And so David said, “Well, I really think that it
probably would be best if you read the gospels for the main service,” and so I did, but I didn’t
think it was a very nice thing for him to do because you know, the other gospel, the first gospel
has the women in the leadership role.
But after that I finished the service and I sort of shook the dust of the church off my feet
and never went back because I have, know that kind of situation. He has never had a woman
priest celebrate there. Now there are lots of women priests in Boston now and he’s even had a
woman priest come to his parish to teach a weekend course in something or other, it would be
ideal to have her -- [23:00]
Q: And he didn’t have her do anything.
AP: No, he had her preach and I asked him about this. He said he always wants visiting clergy to
have the opportunity to preach, because he thinks that nice for them to have that opportunity and
the implication was that you couldn’t possibly expect a woman priest to both preach and
celebrate. Of course, men do this all the time and women do this all the time, but that’s his way
out of that. He has never had a woman at the altar and that’s of course, the crunch issue.
Preaching, as important as it is, can be done by lay people, (inaudible) it has no particular
sacramental significance. And so to this day he has never had a woman priest and to this day I
have never been back. And whenever I am asked, you know, people occasionally ask me, you
know, do I have a church of my own or do I participate in another church and I say, “Well, I used
113

to go to the Church of Orleans but they don’t accept women priests,” they said, “The rector
does,” and you know, I keep dropping this bomb [24:00] (laughs) and they look at me in surprise
and finally say, “Oh really?” and I say, “Well, have you ever seen a woman priest at the alter?”
and they say, “Well, you're right,” (laughs) so -There is a chapel here in Wellfleet, which is open in the summertime. It was established
by Bishop Pike, who was the first bishop to ordain a woman to the deaconate which is kind of
nice. He ordained her and the regular ceremony and then the following year General Convention
decided that we could have women deacons, there’s a sort of a pattern building here, you know.
Anyway, and so I attended, during my first summer here, (clears throat) then the second summer
I was invited to do the early service, which is at 7:30, which is fine with me, because there’s no
other clergy (laughs) around. And so I enjoyed that and I was invited to do it again the second
summer and I did it. [25:00] But I was beginning to get the feel of a lot of sexism in the
hierarchy there and also I did not like the way the church was organized.
You had mentioned earlier how strange it was to be counseled for marriage by one priest
and then have another priest to do the service. I feel that theologically you cannot separate
pastoral care, which is what counseling is, and the sacraments. This church, St. James, in its
brochure says at the bottom, “Persons needing pastoral care should call Father Whosit at the
Anglican Church in St. Mary’s in Provincetown,” I mean, they’re completely open about it. I
asked one of the parishioners about this and she said, “Well, the priests in charge,” they had two
priests in charge, “are here for their summer vacations and they enjoyed you in the Sunday main
service, but they don’t want to be bothered with anything else.” [26:00]
Q: How can you turn that off?
AP: Exactly. I mean, when my mother died, I would like to have been able to talk to some clergy
whom I knew. I was certainly not going to go driving all the way up to Provincetown to meet
with a totally strange priest.
Q: Somebody you know.

114

AP: But it's actually, I’ve never seen this done before. And that two priests in charge, which I
think is some sign of an ego trip, both, one is a retired bishop, the other is a retired dean of Union
Theological Seminary, they both -Q: That would be like a doctor saying, “Oh, I can’t, you know, it's an emergency but I can’t treat
you, I’m on vacation.”
AP: I mean either you're the priest in charge of a parish or you're not. If you are, I’m not
suggesting they be on duty 24 hours a day. They now have three priests in charge, they’ve added
a third, all men of course, and you’d think they could work out some kind of a duty roster, you
know. I’ll take it Monday and Tuesday, you get it Wednesday and Thursday -Q: I mean, it's not an overload of people. [27:00]
AP: Yeah, only we have, it's a fairly well attended parish. You know, from tourists and fine, but
you know, how likely it is that a tourist is going to have a problem. And there are also, of course,
the summer people who’ve lived here for years and they go and that’s wonderful. But it just sets
my teeth on edge. Plus any number of little tiny sexist things. They never invited me to celebrate
at the main service. Although they rotated amongst themselves and they rotated amongst visiting
clergy. Well, as a matter of professional courtesy, it's often in a parish, one priest will always be
the one who does the early service and one does the main service and one does the late service or
whatever, but usually, at least once a year, all priests are invited to take their turn at celebrating
at the main service, just as a professional courtesy. I was never invited.
It finally happened that one of the women ordained with me in Washington named Lee
McGee, was coming up here for the summer [28:00] and she was invited to preach at St. James
and she said it would be wonderful if I could be the celebrant because of all we’d been through
together. And I said, “It's fine with me,” but she really had to put pressure on the clergy to let
that happen and it was a wonderful service. And that was the first time that I had celebrated in an
Episcopal church in the United States.
Q: Oh my god.
115

AP: I know, (laughs) it's really a very strange history. And it's the only time. After the -- well, I
had intended to try and change things the third summer that I was there, but my mother died in
June and I told them I wasn’t available at all for that summer. And then I just decided I really
didn’t want to be bothered fighting it and you do get tired after a while. The Congregational
Church here has a very large contingent of Episcopalians who attend all year round and I attend
the Congregational Church all year round at the early service which is a community service,
[29:00] which the last time I counted we had 20 Episcopalian and one Congregational (inaudible)
(laughs) you know, and they have invited me several times to fill in when the pastor is away and
I do both services. And I’ve been totally welcomed. I feel totally at home and so that’s just fine
with me. You know. I am not longer interested in changing parish’s viewpoints or rector’s
viewpoints, (laughs) I’ve done my, my little bit, you know.
But you know, you were saying earlier about when a priest being accepted -- I would
love to have somebody do a survey of how many Episcopalians have actually received
communion from a woman priest. Even now we only have maybe 200 or 300. And a lot of them
are not on parish situations, they are hospital chaplains. They are teaching or they are at Anglican
schools, you know, as chaplains there. So the number of parish priests is small. [30:00] We have
approximately 14,000 male clergy. So even now it's more than 10 years after we started
ordaining women. It's dropped off to a trickle. We had a good surge, you know with a backlog,
for anyone prepared for any and so forth. Now it's down to quite a small amount. And yeah, I’m
sure that the majority, I would just make a bold statement. The majority of Episcopalians have
not received communion from a woman priest. I don’t know that they would refuse it or be upset
by it, but I think it just hasn’t happened for them. Which is why, one of the reasons I got kind of
annoyed at the St. James here. People come from all over the United States to Cape Code and
they come from as far away as Texas.
If they would allow me to be the celebrant even once a month, we would be reaching
people, you know, as a kind of a missionary endeavor. And it's a unique opportunity. But they
don’t see it that way and I guess the punchline for me [31:00] -- we had Bishop Porteus, who was
one of the priests in charge -- he’s a retired bishop from Connecticut. Bishop [Coburn?] is the
retired bishop of Massachusetts and he has a summer home here so he is officiating at St. James - [31:21]
116

Track 10
AP: [00:00] So we had three bishops. And we were, I was helping out as the deacon at the main
service and so we were all vesting in the sophistry and then we came in and started the service
and the visiting bishop was preaching and often clergy feel they have to start out with something,
a joke or something. And so he said, “Well, we were all in the sophistry resting and it occurred to
me that in the Episcopal Church you have to have three bishops present in order to consecrate a
bishop. And I thought, well, we have the three bishops here and if we had a priest, you know, we
could consecrate a bishop, but unfortunately the only priest present is a woman, so of course, we
can’t,” oh god, I’m sitting there, you know -Q: I don’t believe that.
AP: Oh -- (exasperations) Ho-ho-ho. (laughter) [01:00] You just never know from minute to
minute, you know, (laughs) (inaudible) something up.
Q: Open mouth, insert food, right? (laughter)
AP: Oh, really. Anyway. So I guess to bring everything up to date as far as the ministry is
concerned, I was glad that I was able to help Katrina Swanson. I was glad that I was able to help
England and I have helped two women from England who are interested in coming to the United
States to be priests and one of them made it. [Elizabeth Kent?] wrote to me from England. We
had a mutual friend. I invited her over. This is while I was still living in Washington. And she
came over and she was a deacon in England and transferred to the United States and was
ordained in the Diocese of New Jersey, which had a very [02:00] forward-looking bishop. And
she had a very nice quote from a letter which I had sent her. It's down at the bottom of the page
there. She’d asked about coming here and I wrote to her. Anyway, you can look at that later.
But I was very glad to be able to help her come over and as a matter of fact, she’ll be up here
visiting me in July. She now, believe it or not, lives at a monastery in South Carolina and that
really created a stir when she went to live there. (laughs)
117

Q: No kidding.
AP: But they’ve loosened up a good deal. She is a spiritual director and leads the retreats and so
forth. And she’s written another book about [03:00] prayer and she’s just about to come out with
her third book. And she travels around the country and gives presentations and so forth. And so I
was just very thankful to be able to help her. And then a friend of hers named Ursula [Shum?]
from Scotland, the trip to England in Scotland, came over and was thinking about doing the same
thing but ran into some obstacles, but she has now got her own, she’s still a deacon, but she is
working at Coventry Cathedral in England and she has a degree in chemistry and there’s a big
industrial complex around Coventry and so she has kind of a joint ministry to the industry there.
Which is quite novel. So you know, I get satisfaction out of being able to help other women. I
was helped a great deal by [04:00] the women who were ordained in Philadelphia, for example
and I just try to keep things moving along.
Q: I just have one last question about the church, which was why you picked the Episcopal
Church.
AP: Probably because of that Canadian Anglican priest who converted me to Christianity in the
Congo. I had been to Anglican services in Ghana, just because everybody I knew was an
Anglican and we all went to Sunday evening service to sleep in the back pews, (laughs) as I said.
But you know, it's a very beautiful liturgy. But I had no particular feeling of faith or conviction
at that time. But I guess simply because we, the priest who [05:00] brought me to Christ was an
Anglican and so I started attending the Anglican, the Episcopal Church when I got back to
Washington. And I had met women in the Methodist Church and Presbyterian Churches who
said that they were, had been Episcopalians and they had a call to ministry to the priesthood and
just, you know, got so discouraged that they left and joined another denomination and were
ordained there. The Methodists, God bless them, had been ordaining women for a long time. I
attended a ceremony in Washington once to celebrate the 50th year in the ministry of a
Methodist woman.

118

Q: Oh my gosh.
AP: But the last time I look at their statistics, they had only five percent women, which was kind
of interesting. They had done it and this often happens, people, you know, a barrier is broken and
it starts to happen and then [06:00] it just sort of fades away. And she had been given only the
most minor kind of parishes. She worked in Vermont or someplace. She had four churches that
she had to, you know -Q: Rotate.
AP: Rotate around, trying to cover and of course, miserable salary. So you know, sometimes we
all thought, wouldn’t it be a lot easier to join a denomination that ordains women, but you look
around, I mean you really look around, which denomination would it be that, where you feel you
had even a remote chance of being treated as an equal? I’ve counseled with women in Seventh
Day Adventist churches who are ministers and they discriminated against and who had filed
lawsuits and Assemblies of God had women ministers and not very many. I mean, I can’t
offhand think of any denomination, can you? Where women are even [07:00] 20% or 10%.
Q: I’ve only been to and really I don’t church shop every weekend, (laughter) but I’ve only been
to one service where there’s a woman minister. It was a wedding and she was marrying her
sister. And I remember not liking it because she wore a major (inaudible) dress and not a clerical
garb.
AP: How weird.
Q: And for the service she put the -AP: (inaudible)
Q: And it looked too weird. She had on this beautiful purple lace dress with, you know, a purple
flower in her hair and then she put the thing over her neck and I thought, “I don’t like that,” if it
119

were a male minister he wouldn’t be wearing a tuxedo and then just throw this over his head.
And I didn’t like that.
AP: That’s awful. I mean she sounds like as if she couldn’t make up her mind whether she was
there as a member of the family or there as a clergy.
Q: It was awful. I don’t like that. It was exciting, though, [08:00] to see a woman in that role. It
was, you know, I remember eyeing my husband and our other friends who are all Catholics, you
know, thinking my god, you know, we’re seeing a woman in a role like this, this is exciting, but
we were all -- why does she have, you know, and a collar. You know, it would have made us feel
better. There is something to the garb.
AP: Absolutely. That reminds me of any number of times, both men and women have said nicely
or otherwise, “Why are women priests wearing a clerical collar?” you know, they think it's
inappropriate. This was especially said in England. And my answer always is, “Well, it is a
symbol of priesthood, which is universally understood and that’s why we’re wearing it. You see
it as a symbol of male priesthood, like a man wearing a necktie and a business suit. But we don’t
see it as a symbol of male priesthood, we just see it as [09:00] a symbol of priesthood and it
would be unreasonable and impractical for us to try and invent totally new garb and then spend
100 years getting people to recognize it for what it is. So there we are.
When I first was ordained and was ordering clergy shirts, the clergy supply places had
not adjusted to the thought of women’s figures, so boy, did we spend time altering and putting in
darts and tucks and taking them in here, letting them out there. Now they do have female shirts,
(laughs) which is nice. And women have experimented with different things, too. One woman’s
come up with what she calls “a short scapular”, a scapular, you know what a scapular, OK. Well,
it's just, it's black and has a clergy collar. And she says you can just, just put it over whatever else
you’re wearing. See, the problem is that if you're going to wear a clergy shirt, you almost have to
wear, you know, either a pants suit or a skirt, you know, [10:00] because it doesn’t go with
anything else. This is something you can just sort of put on over whatever else you're wearing.
So some women have come up with some really lovely vestments. Which I think is
terrific. I ordered my chasuble and so forth from a clergy supply house and made my own stoles,
120

which (inaudible) -- haven’t worn them very much. (laughs) I have hanging in the closet here the
chasuble that I wore in England, so I guess makes than a historic (overlapping dialogue;
inaudible) of some sort. I don’t know where on earth I’m going to send it, because I’m darn sure
the Episcopal Church isn't going to want to hang it up in any kind of museum (laughs) or
anything.
Q: True. Well, not now. Maybe in 100 years they’ll wish they had.
AP: Yeah, it's interesting. They are starting to collect material about the ordination of women
and they’ve asked some women if they were willing to supply it and we had a little huddle and
decided [11:00] we wouldn’t trust them an inch with our stuff. You know, I don’t think they
would set it on fire deliberately, but we have a feeling that in a few years -Q: You’d be amazed at how much is lost.
AP: Yeah, or they don’t have space for it anymore or something and we just thought we -Q: Well, even in the book I gave you about Rhode Island, there’s a list in Susan Lee’s essay
where she talks about the whole thing, the General Convention one, in the Pledge of Collegiality,
all this other stuff, which was quite fun to read and she has a list of all the women in Rhode
Island. But in the back of that book there are interviews with two or three women in Rhode
Island, none of whom are Rhode Island women priests. And I thought that was just terrible. And
when I first got it I thought, oh good, I can read this before I visit Alison, maybe I’ll get some
insight, you know. And I opened it up and I said, “Oh, I am so disappointed,” and in fact one of
them, [Flora Tashigian?] -AP: I know Flora.
Q: Who is black. Is the chaplain of Brown [12:00]
AP: Black?
121

Q: She’s black.
AP: Flora?
Q: Yeah. Either that or every picture I’ve seen has been muddy, because she always looks black
in these pictures.
AP: Dark-skinned, not black.
Q: Well, maybe it was a Brown student newspaper, so it was probably a terrible photograph. And
I thought -- well anyway, this is an interesting person because she’s ministering to a very diverse
group of people and there’s just a whole bunch of them who are still around, even in Rhode
Island and I can’t believe that none of them would consent to do an interview. I just, I said to
myself, I wonder, why is it to? I have to say, I don’t think I would trust, in your case, the
Episcopal Church to hang onto those things.
AP: No, no. That’s why I’m going to trust you. (laughs) I have more faith.
Q: Well, we’re impartial, you know.
AP: Yeah. You're not going to get all upset about -Q: I don’t have axes grind.
AP: Yes. Disobedience to the clergy or whatever, you know. [13:00]
Q: If we were worried about disobedience then we wouldn’t collect women.
AP: (laughs) True, because there’s an awful lot of it going around, yeah. (laughs)

122

Q: Brown is a hotbed for disobedience, so -AP: It's interesting you mention Flora. She wrote to me and invited me to come and do service at
Brown and to give a talk and I said I really have retired from that. I still, you know, I do get
invitations and I just feel I’ve had all the gallivanting around that I want. This is a, change of
subject, this is a New York Times story, just after I got back from England. Trying to see if I have
anything more to do with the church that we need to cover. [14:00] [BREAK]
Q: OK, now we’re going to digress and go back to the EEO grievance.
AP: OK. I had planned to file the grievance in Ethiopia, but my transfer to Vietnam came
through rather suddenly, so I got to Vietnam in September 1968 and filed my EEO complaint in
October and I still have the original yellow pad where I drafter this complaint. I never throw
anything away, a habit. And I sent it off. I was very fortunate that the personnel officer in
Washington who had handled all of my assignments and their cancellations had been an officer
who had served in Congo Brazzaville while I was in Congo Leopoldville during the mutiny
[15:00] and the evacuation so we had worked very closely together and he had a lot of respect for
me. And so forth. And so he had given me copies of these letters back and forth between the
State Department and the various ambassadors, all of which were very useful, because they
contained all this stuff about Miss Palmer being a woman and this and that, so I was well
prepared. I sent this letter off to the EEO office at the State Department. Requested an
investigation and that a finding of discrimination be made -- that this also state that this
discrimination had adversely affected -- (laughs) affected my career.
The cats are fighting on the -- Anna. Come on, sweetheart. Come on down. Settle down
somewhere. (laughs) You see what my life is like. [16:00] Never a dull moment.
That there be a finding that my career had be adversely affected by discrimination and
that this finding be placed in my personnel file -- also that there be a reprimand against the
persons involved and did specify and that steps be taken that this not happen again. A pretty
good wish list. I got back a letter saying that they had appointed a woman named Gladys
[Rogers?] to investigate the complaint. She was a Foreign Service officer, a career officer and an
inspector, so she had good credentials. So I got that reply in say November. And then a long,
123

long, long, long silence. I found out much later that Gladys had done the investigation and
finished it and turned her report in January and she had made a finding [17:00] of discrimination
and that I had be adversely affected and she said the investigation had not gone far enough to
identify the persons concerned and she was sorry she couldn’t complete it, but she had to go
overseas on an inspection tour. Then she was no dummy, she wasn’t going to finger these
ambassadors -- (laughs) But I knew nothing about this. Time passed.
Finally I wrote to them and said that if I didn’t hear from them within 30 days or
something, I would write to Senator Margaret Chase Smith who was an old friend of the family
and so forth and so on. I didn’t hear from them so I did write to Margaret. She wrote to the State
Department and then they wrote back what I always called “the threat letter”. Bless their hearts,
they are so stupid. This is how all good cases are won, by the stupidity of the oppositions.
[18:00] They explained that the investigation was not yet complete. This was a year later. And
according to EEO regulations of the time, it had to be completely within 60 days of the filing of
the complaint. (clears throat) And they felt it would be best to wait until I returned to
Washington in March of the following year so I could discuss this face-to-face and that with
regard to my request that I have a finding of discrimination put in my file, people, quote, “People
knowledgeable about how the Foreign Service promotion system works, including the director
general of the Foreign Service, feel that this would adversely affect your career,” interesting
ideas. So there was nothing more I could do, because they weren’t going to do anything.
So I get back to Washington. Went to see the EEO counselor. He said that the entire file
[19:00] was with the director of personnel and had been for months. So I went to see the director
of personnel. Idiot named Howard [Mace?] and I walked in and he smiled at me and he said why
am I here (inaudible) said, “You're almost as tall as the investigative file.” (laughs) Yes. Talk
about irrelevancy, you know, anyway. He had a file stacked up on a coffee table in his office. So
we sat down and he said that I had not been discriminated against because I’d been promoted and
my heart sank, because I thought he was giving me the official version of the official result,
which I still knew nothing about. Then he said that I could read the file and of course, each big
file and the director general, the director of personnel sitting there, I didn’t have much of an
[20:00] opportunity, but I did note that there was a memo there, which described the happenings
and on the last page included a finding of discrimination, that my career had been adversely
affected. And he said, and there was a place for him to sign off on this -- it had been signed off
124

on by the EEO counselor and by the legal department of the State Department. But he said he
had not signed off on it because he didn’t agree with the finding.
I’m not sure that there was any legal way he could even be involved in it. I think it was
just had to be by the EEO Council, but anyway. I said, “Could I have a copy of the memo?” he
said, “Of course,” and I said, “Well, I was needing to go on home leave,” would he mail it to my
home leave address?” he said, “Certainly,” and I thought that memo was dynamite and I thought
I really had something there. So I got home. It was a four-page memo and all of the interesting
stuff was the fourth page. So I got a letter from the Howard Mace a couple of days later saying,
“Dear Miss Palmer, it was so nice to have met you and I enjoyed our talk very much,” [21:00]
dadadadadadada, “and as you requested, I am enclosing the memo from your EEO complaint
file,” and only the first three pages were there. So that -- and I’d also asked him to put that fourpage memo in my personnel file, even though he had not signed off on it and he said,
“Certainly,” I got back to Washington after home leave. Look into my personnel file and only the
first three pages. Then I called his office and spoke to his secretary and said, “You know, there is
this memo and we had this correspondence and Mr. Mace said that I could have a copy of it,
would you send me the copy,” and she sent me the copy at home with the first three pages, I was
beginning to establish a pattern, if you might say.
So I knew I had to go onto the next step. I couldn’t have a hearing until the EEO office
wrote and told me that they had done everything that they were going to do and that was it and if
I wanted to [22:00] proceed to a hearing I could. (inaudible) have a letter from them saying that
they were finished. So I kept the EEO Council for this and he kept saying, well, he wanted to
think about it. And I was really blocked because legally I could not proceed. So finally I called
him and I said, “I am going to call a press conference if I don’t have that letter from you by
closing time today,” and closing time was whatever it was, 5:30 and so at 5:29 1/2 his secretary
(laughs) came running down the corridor to my office with an envelope which had just recently
been licked (laughs) because it was still damp on the outside and in there was the memo, or the
letter. I, to digress for a minute, had joined the American Federation of Government Employees
long, long ago, because I’m a great believer in unions. And when I was in Ethiopia [23:00]
getting ready to file my complaint, I had written to AFGE at the State Department, they had a
local chapter, asked if they would help me and they wrote back and said that, “We really don’t
think this is a good idea. We think you’ll ruin your career if you proceed,” which is what
125

everybody had been saying to me. Not very helpful. So I had dropped them. Although I’m still a
member.
In order to get my master’s degree at Boston University, I had to take one more course to
get three more credits. I took the course at American University the summer of 1970 in
American Government and I had to write a term paper and I chose to write about the efforts by
AFGE to unionize the Foreign Service and I have that paper available if you want it. And in
doing the research I talked to a lot of AFGE people and one of them had heard about my case
and said they would be very glad to represent me, so they had progressed in the ensuing years.
So they did represent me. [24:00] And we had the hearing in the summer of 1971, the first ever
EEO hearing in the State Department. Now each government department was supposed to have
its own trained hearing examiners to do these things. The State Department, of course, didn’t
have any because I guess they never thought it would ever happen, or something.
So fortunately for me, the Department of Labor provided a hearing examiner, which was
nice, because he was completely outside and not on the (inaudible) to any ambassador or
anything like that. So he conducted the hearing. It lasted for three weeks. In the preparation for
that I’d been hearing from women officers all over the world, telling me their sad stories and I
had some of them as witnesses, and of course, I told my own story, starting from square one with
the oral exam, (laughs) the first one I ever took. The transcript is in five bound volumes. [25:00]
And it went quite well. The State Department was kind of stuck because A, I had all this
correspondence about the ambassadors and B, my career in the Foreign Service had been so fast
that I fit into the category of what they call “water walkers”. They had done a little statistical
survey of typical Foreign Service careers, how fast you got promoted and they had below
average, average, above average, much above average and water walker and mine promotion rate
put me in water walker, so they were kind of stuck as far as my capabilities were concerned, plus
all of my OE, my efficiency reports kept saying, you know, what a great job I had done and so
forth and so on. And I had all this evidence. So the hearing examiner found in our favor and
recommended that I be given an immediate promotion.
Unfortunately [26:00] he got all mixed up about the Foreign Service promotion system
and I don’t blame him a bit. We had promotion boards which meet in the fall and the promotion
list comes out in the spring. And so he was trying to say something about I should be promoted
the next promotion list comes out -- there’s a spider running down your, or something. He’s a
126

close. (laughs) It was a bug of some kind. Anyway. He got all mixed up and said I should be
promoted before the next promotion list came out, meaning a special immediate promotion, but
unfortunately the next promotion list was coming out in 1971 or 1972 and I should have been
promoted in ’71 anyway, as soon as he turned in his recommendation to the State Department,
they realized that he was confused. He’d turned it in and gone off on vacation in Puerto Rico
because he was so tired from all this. [27:00] They called him long distance in Puerto Rico from
the Legal Department, State Department, said, “Didn’t you mean she should be promoted in
1971?” and he said, “No, I wanted to promote her before the next promotion list comes out,” and
you know, they couldn’t get him straightened out on this.
As soon as we saw, it was absolutely clear that he was just confused about the system.
And so we had a meeting with him, trying to get him, all he had to do was issue a correction and
I guess by that time his back was up or something and he finally issued a memorandum saying
that what he meant was that I should be promoted as soon as possible and outside the normal
thing, but that didn’t help. So the State Department sent, all this got terrific publicity, we had
timed the public coverage of this to wait until the last day of the hearing. We didn’t want anyone
to feel that we were trying to influence what was said at the hearing. So we had the press
(laughs) all lined up and as soon as [28:00] the hearing ended we went out with all this, including
the correspondence from the ambassadors and everything, which drove them crazy.
And by this time the ambassador in Tanzania, who was the first one to reject me, had
become Director General of the Foreign Service, so (laughs) he was also responsible for the
administrative, the administration over the EEO here, it was a real conflict of interest. Anyway,
so we got a lot of publicity during this six or so weeks of the summer while we were waiting for
the hearing examiner to issue his recommendation. He came out with the recommendation,
strong finding of discrimination and a recommendation that the State Department have a policy
publicly announced that women could be assigned anywhere regardless of multicultural
conditions, Muslim, (inaudible) leaks or whatever, you know, that this should be the way it is
and the State Department accepted that. So of course, that really got a lot of publicity and I was
in Time Magazine [29:00] and on television. I was on The Today Show and The Morning Show
and whatever. But they wouldn’t make the promotion retroactive. So I went to court in 1973, or
-2, or -2. I was promoted in May 1972. My name was simply added to that list as a special
promotion, which was the first time they’d ever done that. They’ve done it several times since, as
127

a result of the EEO hearings. But it should have been May ’71, so I went to court to get that,
make that retroactive. Lost in the District Court, won in the Court of Appeals, which found that
“I’d been subjected to severe discrimination and lost at least one promotion,” so they ordered it
be made retroactive with back pay and legal fees under Title 7, thank god, [30:00] we get to
refund the legal fees if you win. So I got a check for $25,000 for the legal fees plus my back pay.
Took another two years to get the State Department to straighten out all its records about
the promotion date, but they finally did. But in the course of all this, of course, I’ve learned so
much about what was happening generally in the Foreign Service to women that I felt a class
action was justified, so I got the check for the $25,000 in February of ’76 and started the class
action in February of ’76. Don’t you think we should stop tonight? (laughs)
Q: Sure. [BREAK] Go head.
AP: I’m going to be turning over to Karen two cardboard boxes of [31:00] legal documents
pertaining to both of my lawsuits against the State Department. And with that I’m giving a onepage kind of a description of what the documents are. It's a short history of the lawsuits and I’ll
read it into the recording now. Lawsuit No. 1 was an EEO complaint filed in 1968, the first sex
discrimination complaint ever filed in the Foreign Service. The hearing was in the summer of
’71. Decision was in December ’71, which was a finding of discrimination and a lost promotion.
I received a special promotion, the first ever as a result of an EEO hearing. In May of 1972 -[31:46]
Track 11
AP: [00:00] Before I could get to the Civil Service Commission I had to have a letter from the
Secretary of State saying that the State Department was not going to do anything further. This
was Kissinger at the time and I waited and waited, didn’t get anywhere, so I sent a telegram to
Kissinger’s residence in, I don’t know, Bethesda or someplace and it arrived in the evening while
Kissinger was still at the State Department, so Mrs. Kissinger called him, because she didn’t
know what it was (laughs) all about. And I got a phone call from Kissinger’s staff assistant that
next morning saying, “Don’t you ever do that again,” (laughs) I still didn’t get a response. So I
128

found out from my friends with AFGE that any person can file a lawsuit. I mean, you just have
to type it up on the proper size paper and take it down to the court and pay, I don’t know, the
five-dollar registration fee. So I got a sample and sort of followed it and basically I said I wanted
the defendant Kissinger [01:00] to respond to my EEO complaint. So I filed it and of course, it
was delivered, a copy was delivered to the State Department, still nothing.
Then I found out that for $25 you could have a federal marshal deliver one of these
lawsuits directly to the person named. So I thought, this is the cheapest form of entertainment
(laughs) I’ve ever discovered, so you guess what happened next. I had a federal marshal come to
the State Department. He didn’t get to Kissinger, obviously because of security and everything,
but he did deliver it and that certainly broke the ice and I then did get a letter from Kissinger
saying the State Department was not going to do anything further and I went onto the
commission, but you know, a lot of what I was going through was very stressful and hard and
painful and frightening and whenever I could find a way to lighten up my own feelings, (laughs)
I took the opportunity. So anyway, back to the documents. Lost at the [02:00] Civil Service
Commission, filed in 1972 under the Title 7 Amendment, which included sex discrimination.
I was represented by AFGE. They had lawyers on their staff who handle important cases,
but I found him very unsatisfactory, lethargic and generally incompetent. So I then, through
friends, found a lawyer named Bruce [Terris?] who does what’s called “public interest lawsuit”,
charges very low fees and then hopes to get reimbursed after we win. So I used him. We went to
the District Court and lost. We were seeking a retroactive promotion with back pay and of
course, legal fees. Went to the Appeals Court and won and Judge Flannery said that I had lost at
least one promotion through discrimination and so I got that all taken care of in 1975, except
[03:00] that it took another three or four months to get them to actually issue the check for
$25,000 and as soon as I had that in my hand, I’d already discussed with Bruce about doing a
class action and in fact, we had tried to make the first lawsuit a class action and in it you will find
a lot of very valuable statistics about women in the Foreign Service in general, as well as my
own personal story. In any case, we filed as a class action. Normally that’s just a routine matter,
but it took us three years to get certified as a class action, which was a horrendous expense and
very time consuming. And then we went into what we call “waves of discovery”, because we
were asking for everything under the sun.

129

The State Department’s personnel system is a shambles. Only partly computerized and
computerized wrong in many cases and they would take months to deliver some computer tapes
and we would run them through our statistician and find out that that it didn’t make any sense
and we’d take them back to the State Department [04:00] and say, “Oh, gee, we must have
dropped out a couple of classes, you know, lost a couple of years or something,” and so this went
on and on and on and on. Finally we came to trial in the spring of ’85. Lost under Judge Smith in
District Court and went to the Appeals Court where we won.
Judge Bork was a member of our appeals panel and he gave us a lot of difficulty and it
was rather annoying to me. Of course, my lawyers would never say anything like this, but it was
annoying to me that when he was having his hearings to get onto the Supreme Court, he cited my
case as an instance of his liberal attitude towards women.
Q: Oh, really.
AP: Yeah, (laughs) really. (laughs) But anyway. And talking of a small world, the senior judge
on this three-person panel, it was a woman named Wald, [05:00] who I found out after the event
is related somewhat distantly to my neighbors around the corner on Lookout Road and I thought
well, considering the size of South Wellfleet, which has a population of 200 or something,
(laughs) amazing. So anyway, I asked my neighbors, “The next time you see your relative, tell
her thanks a lot,” because we did get a very nice ruling. We got that ruling in 1987. The State
Department, having been found guilty, and incidentally, the State Department has never
informed State Department employees about any of this, which I think is extremely interesting -the guilty party is then supposed to propose remedies, make the persons who have been injured
whole and also change what’s ever wrong in the system to prevent future discrimination.
Well, we sort of waited and waited and waited. Finally we proposed the remedies and
they talked and thought [06:00] well, this might be all right, then they didn’t do anything. So in
May or even June of this year, we filed our own remedies in court and asked the court to order
them, so that’s where that stands. Meanwhile, in 1983 we had such a good, strong case on
discrimination in recruitment that the State Department came to us and proposed remedies. They
would send out letters to something like 20,000 women who had taken the exam over a certain
period of years and not passed and invite them -- we found discrimination primarily in the
130

written exam, and invite them to come back and take the oral exam without having to take the
written exam and the agreement was that -- we had figured that approximately 75 women had not
been appointed who should have been appointed. So they went through that process and all 75
women are now onboard [07:00] and I’ve had, not had, I have had -- one letter of thanks from
one of the women who was appointed, as a result of this.
The out of court settlement on recruitment not only included this business about
appointing 75 women -- also because the State Department never admitted to discrimination,
that’s one of the things I don’t like about out of court settlements. I would like them to say that
they did something wrong, but anyway, the main thing is to get the settlement. And also, we
wrote into the agreement that they would not discriminate in the future -- whether or not they
ever had in the past, they wouldn’t in the future and of course, they were willing to sign that
because of course, they never had and never would. And we had a monitoring agreement to
check on how women were appointed after 1983 when we reached the agreement and we soon
found that there was discrimination occurring. So we first wrote to the State Department about
this and they came back and said our statistics were all wrong and [08:00] then when we got
them straightened out on that point, they then said that we had no legal standing because none of
the women who had taken the exam say in ’85, ’86, ’87, we members of the class action, because
the class action had a definite cutoff date for people who were included.
And we said, “Yes, but we had this document where you said that you would not
discriminate in the future,” and they still refused to go along with that, so we went to Judge
Smith, he ruled that we did have legal standing. The State Department still wouldn’t cooperate,
so about six weeks ago my dear lawyers -- Bruce is the head of the firm and all the other lawyers
are women, which I find very (inaudible) (laughs) -- and they get a lot of fun out of this, I’m
happy to say -- got a temporary injunction against the State Department stopping all recruiting
and hiring -- male, female, no matter what stage -- if the person had been sent an offer of
appointment and hadn’t yet signed his [09:00] entry form, stop it, the whole thing and scared
them to death. And they (panic breaths) were panting and huffing and puffing and said, “Oh, oh,
oh, well, why don’t we come up with another out of court settlement about what we will do
about these women that you think should have been hired in the last three years,” and so that has
all straightened itself out very nicely. So it's never a dull moment.

131

This stuff goes on and on and on and on. Anyway, coming back to these boxes of
documents, you will find pages and pages of statistics of discrimination in all aspects of
employment of women officers. You will find individual affidavits and stories which I find
fascinating because mine is in there, but many other women are in there as well. When we had
the trial, women who we had located who had especially horrendous stories to tell, some of them
were in Washington and it was courageous of them to testify, because of the possible
recrimination and [10:00] harassment afterwards. Some of the women were overseas.
One of them was in Korea and she paid her own way back and took leave in order to do
that, to testify and I was just so touched and moved and in many instances I had never met these
women before. I of course, was sitting at the trial and you know, they would come in and go up
in the witness stand and testify and leave and I just tried to be sure I was in the back of the hall,
at least to grab them (laughs) and say thank you, you know, and never saw them again. But I
thought that was just great. Anyway, I think this will be interesting reading. There’s a lot of
fascinating legal maneuvering on both sides, which is more interesting to lawyers. And the two
cartons that I’m giving you are just the tip of the iceberg. My lawyers generally do not send me
what the opposition files, they just send me what we file, so there’s all that missing.
Plus the stacks and stacks and stacks and stacks of documents we used during the trial, so
at some point all of this will reach you and my lawyers are, [11:00] in their spare moments,
beginning to sort through, I think they must have a whole basement filled with documents
pertaining to my lawsuits and they’re beginning to sort some of this out for the -- another entirely
separate set of documents that I’m giving you pertains to our efforts to get legal fees. We still
haven’t gotten all of our legal fees that we were due for the out of court settlement in 1983. We
got some, but not all. And we should have gotten legal fees after we won the rest of the lawsuit
in ’87 and we still haven’t gotten anything on that. The State Department and the Justice
Department maintain that my lawyers’ fees are too high and so we had to go around, interview
lawyers all over Washington who happen to be at the same size firm doing the same size work
with the same legal qualifications and experience handling cases of similar complexity, you
know, so you can compare, compare, compare, compare and then turn your reams and reams of
those statistics about how much they charge per hour and so forth and so on. [12:00]
There is one document that I just got recently, which will help anyone to understand the
whole chronology of the case because it's requesting fees and it lists each phase of the lawsuit
132

and the discovery, various appeals and how much time it took and so forth, so that would help
understand the different things that happened in the suit. So anyway, that’s that. I have news
clippings here about when we won the class action. This was from the International Herald
Tribune, which somebody sent from overseas. This was from Caracas. This I have to say is the
London Economist and I think you have, I sent to the Alumni Magazine some news clips. Did
you get those at all?
Q: I can get them.
AP: OK, well anyway -- [13:00] This was the Cape Cod paper coverage. This is the Washington
Post. This is the local coverage on when we won the out of court settlement, which says that they
sent out 25,000 letters, which I think (laughs) must have been a lot of fun for some poor soul
who had to do it.
Q: Bulk mailing.
AP: Yeah. This is my favorite cartoon. It shows a rather bedraggled woman standing in front of a
judge who’s seated high on his podium and he is saying to her, “So you're the little lady who
filed this big complicated sex discrimination suit,” (laughs) (inaudible)
Q: Kind of like what Lincoln said to Harriet [14:00] Beecher Stowe, “You're the little lady who
started the Civil War.”
AP: Started the Civil War, yeah, right. (laughs) Anyway. I mentioned that after we won in ’87,
the State Department still had not said word one about this and I got kind of fed up. So I got my
lawyers to agree that I could write a letter to the State Department employee monthly magazine
about this and I did and I described the whole sequence of events and said, the last sentence is,
“State Department should publicly acknowledge the presence of these problems in the past and
take immediate action to ensure that the past damage is remedied and that sex discrimination will
not continue infect the department’s future, sincerely, Alison Palmer, FSO Retired,” little tiny,
this was on page, I don’t know, 83 of the magazine. The Bureau of Personnel replies, “Later this
133

year, the court will specify remedies for the discrimination that has occurred [15:00] when the
remedies have been determined an article concerning them will be submitted to the State
Department newsletter,” not printed necessarily, but submitted. What I thought was wonderful is
that the little phrase “The court will specify remedies for the discrimination that has occurred,”
that is the first mention ever by the State Department that discrimination has occurred and it's in
this fine print at the bottom on page 83 of the newsletter, so anyway.
Just for your own information, this is my, one of my more recent bills from my lawyers
and it shows that I owe them about $50,000 and I have paid them $275,842.49 or something.
And I do want to say for the record, I have no miraculous source of income. I had my salary
when I was working and half my paycheck went to my lawyers and I have [16:00] my pension
and half my pension check goes to my lawyers. So at some point I look forward to getting
(laughs) a nice large check but -Q: You can take a trip around the world (overlapping dialogue; inaudible) -AP: Well, I’ve done all that. (laughs) Plant another couple of geraniums or something but there’s
no compensation for inflation and there’s no interest paid because the government doesn’t pay
interest on its debts. So you know, as the years roll by it gets to be less and less. But you know,
nonetheless, it’ll be nice -Q: You’ll take it.
AP: I’ll take it. This was a -- article in the Boston Globe written during the trial while I was in
Washington, but I had given an interview to the woman reporter before I went down there. Still
on subject of documents, I have here a folder of documents pertaining to both the first [17:00]
and the second lawsuit. These I need for my writing my autobiography. If you want to take them
with you, Xerox and return them that would be fine. I think they’re particularly valuable. There’s
my affidavit for the first lawsuit, describing my career and the discrimination. There’s the
Appeals Court decision. There’s the affidavit for the second lawsuit, the class action.

134

Q: So what I saw there, it said Alison Palmer versus Cyrus Vance, you sued the State
Department Secretary.
AP: Yeah, each one. It started with whoever, Kissinger, I guess. And I worked my way through
Vance and Muskie and Haig and (laughs) Schultz and I’m sure we will be still, at the present rate
of progress, still be on the next Secretary of State, it just keeps, it’s Palmer versus whoever is the
Secretary of State -Q: Oh, I see. That’s just the way the legal thing is done, is to a person rather than a department.
AP: Right. So whenever we have a new Secretary of State, [18:00] the lawyers file a little onepage thing saying, “Please change this to whatever.” (laughs)
Q: I wonder what their, the secretary’s files look like. I wonder, you know, you wonder if anyone
ever said, you know, you come into it as a new position and you get this coming across your
desk, you must wonder what they think.
AP: They probably don’t know a thing about it. It’s handled in the legal department, State
Department, but not even there very much. Basically all government agencies are represented,
are defended by the Department of Justice, which is particularly amusing because of the civil
rights or civil justice section of the Department of Justice which files lawsuits on behalf of poor,
oppressed people you know, around the country on sex and race and whatever discrimination is
also defending -Q: Not a little conflict of interest there.
AP: (laughs) But anyway, I would like all of this back. This is the, my favorite piece of all.
[19:00] This is the Appeals Court decision on the class action and it makes fascinating reading.
The first part is fairly technical with statistics. The second part gets more into the substance of
the matter. And they just absolutely devastate Judge Smith of District Court for all of his rulings.
And we, after you win in Appeals Court, it's sent back to the District Court and the judge is
135

supposed to, you know, understand things better and do it, come up with a different decision,
which he did. But we heard in the Appeals Court, there are various places which are just
marvelous from my point of view. At one point they say, “On this issue Judge Smith is totally
correct and totally irrelevant.” (laughs) Oh boy. And we heard through the grapevine, you know,
lawyers are always talking to other lawyers at cocktail parties. I think we heard through the
grapevine that Smith’s reaction to all of this [20:00] stuff was to the effect that he didn’t mind
being found wrong, but he did mind being called “stupid.” (laughs) Which I sympathize.
James, no. James. That’s a good boy. Come on, all right. Anyway. And at the very last
year is the Remedial Order, which we, for the remedies. I’ll put a note on this. I’m in no hurry to
get these back. This I would like back as soon as you can because my lawyers and I are
discussing it and I’ll never know when they’re likely to call. So if you could get back to me, you
know -Q: Well, my assistant will probably do the Xeroxing tomorrow and Friday, so -AP: Fine. Swell. Everything else -Q: You're determined to step on everything. You're just a (inaudible) dog.
AP: The other documents in here -- [21:00] This was a hearing in Congress in 1988 on women in
Foreign Policy and various people, women gave presentations. A woman named [Vivian Derek?]
gave a presentation. She had been the head of EEO in the State Department for the past couple of
years and of course, in that position could not say very much about things she didn’t like in the
State Department, but now that she’s back in private, or what we used to call “the real world”
(laughs) she makes a lot of statements about the dissatisfaction she felt with the number of
women being appointment and how high they were rising in rank and so forth. So this also I’m
giving you, if you would just Xerox these pages because I want to -- I feel, of course, that she’s
responding to my lawsuit. These are pages from the State Department employee newsletter of a
hearing [22:00] in Congress, generally about the Foreign Service personnel system and they say
that there must be a special investigation of discriminatory practice including sex discrimination
and Senator Helms, of all people says, “I have long been concerned that the apparent favoritism
136

in the Foreign Service is towards Ivy League graduates and they’re all white males,” and so forth
so -Q: Helms said that? He must have been on drugs that day. (laughs)
AP: Now, now, now, now. But -- I feel again, that this is a direct response to my lawsuit. And so
those also. OK. Now we can go back to talking about the lawsuit in more personal terms. I filed
the class action alone, which you can do, as long as you have [23:00] statistics to show that many
people are affected. I didn’t even ask other women to join with me because I expected them to
say no. Rather to my surprise, the woman Foreign Service officer named Marguerite Cooper,
who was president of the Women’s Action Organization, which she and I had helped to found
back in the early ’70s, heard about the lawsuit a few months after it had been started and came to
me and said, “What is this all about?” I was so sure that she wouldn’t be active, partly because in
WAO’s founding policy document they say that, “It is our policy not to be confrontational, but to
work within the system,” which is why I left WAO, (laughs) because I didn’t feel that you would
get anywhere working within the system. I knew, I’d tried.
So I was sure that Marguerite, as president of WAO and also because she had a different
way of approaching things, [24:00] wouldn’t be interested. So anyway, she asked me to tell her
what it was all about and I said, “Really, Marguerite, I’m really too busy,” very rude of me, but I
said, “I’m too busy to go through all of the pros and cons and all of the data and everything. If
you want to, you can call my lawyers and get briefed by them and I’ll call them and say that it's
all right for you to be briefed, but it will probably take an hour or two and would you mind
paying for their time?” and I was really, I didn’t feel she was going to do anything and I didn’t
want to be bothered. So she got briefed and then she came back and said that WAO would file an
amicus brief and that she would like to be a named plaintiff, which I found rather gratifying
because we had parted company in a friendly kind of way in the early or mid ’70s because, you
know, she felt I was being too radical and apparently she had learned the hard way, through a
bitter experience or whatever, [25:00] or just from hearing other women’s stories that the way I
was approaching things was the only way that anything was going to happen.
So on many of the legal documents you’ll see Palmer versus Kissinger and Cooper versus
Kissinger at, when we were trying to get class certification the, Judge Smith ruled at one point
137

that we had to -- each woman who had grievances, they weren’t exactly identical, of course, and
he said, “You're going to have to split this up into two lawsuits and lump together all grievances
like promotions and assignments with one person who has the evidence on that and put things
about recruitment and training with another griever, which was a darn nuisance, but we did it and
then later on he said we could bring them all back together again. (laughs) Anyway. So that
explains why you keep seeing Palmer versus somebody and Cooper versus something. Also
Marguerite was married at one point, [26:00] so it becomes Marguerite Cooper King and then
she got divorced so she goes back to Marguerite Cooper again.
Other women were willing to be named plaintiffs, which is a pretty tough thing to do and
so eventually we had I think nine named plaintiffs. WAO put out a mailing to all women officers
explaining what was going on and asking for financial contributions. Basically Marguerite and I
did the Xeroxing, folding, stuffing of envelopes and mailing because there was no one else
willing to do it. And I think we got back something like three or $400. Salaries, well, my salary
when I left the Foreign Service was $50,000 and it should have been around $60,000, except that
I was in the Senior Executive Service [27:00] and there was a freeze on salaries and so I wasn’t
getting that. But my point is that if you've been in the Foreign Service even a few years, you're
earning around $30,000 plus a housing allowance plus other allowances. And I would have
thought that almost any woman officer could have afforded say $10 a week, which would have
been about $500 a year, which if it had come in from even 20 women officers, would have been
a nice little chunk of money. But (clears throat) we didn’t get that and I found that disheartening.
And that’s more or less how it went along. I did all of the work with the lawyers about
getting statistics and you know, the nitty gritty that I’d spend my, I’d take a day off from work
and go down to the lawyer’s office and read through documents that they were going to present
to make sure that they were correct. [28:00] And it was just tiring but obviously I felt that it had
to be done. If I didn’t do it, clearly no one was going to do it. And in a way I sort of understood
that. I had already become persona non grata by my first effort and so I had nothing to lose. I
knew from, and I had said this publicly, that my career in the service was basically over, you
know, as far as any real important assignments or any future promotions. So I might as well take
advantage of that situation and certainly I was financially able to do it. (laughs) Although I could
think of lots of other things I could have done with all that money. But so we struggled along.

138

And it was gratifying. When we made progress. Before the trial we hired a man who
[29:00] makes his living out of testifying at EEO hearings. Apparently this has become a growth
industry. He is a statistician. He has a little tiny consulting firm in Philadelphia or something and
he, he -- there was a suit against Sears Roebuck by women employees -- he did all of the
statistics for that. He gets the data from the plaintiffs and analyzes it a thousand different ways
and prepares graphs and all the rest of it and then he is called as their expert witness, because the
other side has another expert witness who tries to tear all of this apart.
So my lawyers had found this man and he agreed to come in on kind of a contingency
basis, because we couldn’t possibly have afforded to pay him the full amount. And I had never
met him until the time that he appeared on the witness stand the first day of the trial. And
apparently he just went blank and we found, he said later it only happened to him once, in one
other case. You know, [30:00] you've probably had this feeling of just absolutely freezing up.
You know that you know what you're supposed to say, but you can’t say it, you know. And so he
wasn’t too bad, he started out by being questioned by our lawyers and then the opposition took
over and he just got more and more confused. It's a very confusing situation. For one thing, the
State Department has entirely renumbered their personnel system. We had FSO grade 8, 7, 6 and
so forth, up to 1 through most of the lawsuit, but about four years ago they renumbered
everything and so we now have FSO 3, twos and ones and we decided early in the trial that we
would use the old system consistently throughout, but even so, the statistics that we were getting
were sometimes labeled the old way and sometimes labeled the new way.
Anyway, this poor guy just completely blew up and I was sitting there, said “Oh, god,”
(laughs) I left, I’d been down there for three [31:00] weeks and I finally left because it was clear
it was going to go on forever. So I didn’t hear him on the second day, but my lawyers called me
and said he was absolutely brilliant the second day. He got everything into the record that we
needed for the appeal. So it was that sort of thing that just -- (laughs) it's very disheartening. And
discouraging. One of my lawyers, named Karen, (laughs) was pregnant, very pregnant and about
halfway through the trial and she was, you know, they split up the cross examination and so
forth, so the various lawyers were doing things, but anyway, Karen was there I would say on a
Thursday afternoon doing the cross examination and she had her baby the next day.
In one of the bills, one of the documents with billing for expenses, they bill for each
lawyer separately and there was a little footnote at the -- [31:58]
139

Track 12
AP: [00:00] There’s a little footnote at the bottom of this lengthy document somewhere saying,
“Miss Karen [Edgecombe?] gave birth during the trial and this is the reason why she’s not billed
for any further (laughs) expenses (inaudible) thought was kind of cute. I joke with my lawyers
that I’ll be attending the children’s graduation from Harvard Medical School and this lawsuit will
still be going on. We’re just about halfway through out 13th year on the class action. So then
we’ve got a heck of a long way to go because when we get the remedies, assuming the judge
orders the remedies, State will probably appeal some of them, so we’ll have to go to the Appeals
Court and we assume that we’ll win there and then go back to Judge Smith and then he will rule
and then they’ll probably try and appeal again and you know, I sit here and smile about this, but
in all seriousness, we’re talking about real live breathing human beings in the Foreign Service,
[01:00] women who should be at a higher rank or be in a different field of work.
Most women are pushed into the counselor field because somehow this is considered
women’s work. And you know, their lives are going by and it's been pointed out to me that even
if we get remedies which say, for example, that women must be given retroactive promotions
and made political officers instead of counselor officers, some of them may be afraid to accept
this because then they’ll start competing with men who have been in rank already for several
years and have, you know, 10 more years of experience in that field, so that’s the sad part of all
this delay. But got to do it somehow or other. And we keep saying to ourselves in the law firm,
“The longer the delay, the bigger the remedies are going to have to be,” and we may end up just
asking for monetary compensation and they’ll figure that it's better that they each get a check for
$30,000 or something than nothing at all, which they can invest it [02:00] or whatever.
But it is sad. It's sad on behalf of the women. It makes me feel sad on behalf of the State
Department and the Justice Department and the federal government in general that they have
fought this so bitterly. You know, where is their sense of justice? Some people in the Justice
Department and State must surely know we are right and if they didn’t know it before, they knew
it when we got the decision. And they’ve accepted the decision. They haven’t appealed the final
ruling. So you know, why don’t they just get on with it? I think, to a certain extent, there may be
a personal feeling against me, which I sort of understand. The day that the class action was filed
140

in court, this is one of my favorite stories -- there was a woman Foreign Service officer working
in the EEO office, she wasn’t the head of it, but she was an assistant named [Georgiana Prince?],
whom I knew. [03:00] And I had been in touch with her -She was in an awkward position because she was in the EEO office, so she was kind of
the opposition to me. But I would go to her as anyone can go to anybody and ask for some
statistical charts, which she would hand out. And so I had told her, as I would tell anybody, that I
was getting ready to file a class action and so the day came when we filed it and there’s a whole
set of reporters who always are hanging around the District Court reading each lawsuit by
anybody that’s filed to see if it's a newsworthy story. Well, this obviously was a newsworthy
story, so somebody noticed that there was a sex discrimination suit against the State Department
and ran back to the noontime State Department press briefing. Well, press briefings are always
very carefully prepared. Any person in the State Department who thinks that a question is likely
to come up on anything, Afghanistan or whatever, is supposed to write up the hypothetical
question and the best possible [04:00] response, get it cleared by a thousand people, get it to the
press office by 10:00 in the morning, so he can reveal it, so he’s all ready. So these so called
spontaneous answers are nothing of the kind. You know, this is a perfectly sound practice.
Why not? Can’t expect the press officer to know everything about everything. But
obviously, you know, he wasn’t ready for this one. And so somebody stood up and said, “Would
you care to say anything about the class action lawsuit charging sex discrimination against
women officers in all aspects of personnel practices?” and (laughs) “I’ll have to get back to you
on that one,” and then as soon as the press briefing was over, the press officer went to the
undersecretary for Management, which handles the personnel side of things, a guy named
Lawrence Eagleburger, who was a protégé of Kissinger. And of course, he didn’t know what it
was all about, so he called the EEO office and [05:00] Georgiana Prince went up to the seventh
floor to explain all this and so Georgiana was asked if she knew anything about it and she very
properly replied that I had told her that I was planning to do this but she had no idea when I
would do it or, you know, whether I actually would do it. So she hadn’t, you know, reported it
officially. It was fine because this had been going on for months.
And Georgiana, god bless her, testified about this meeting with Eagleburger at the trial
and she said that Eagleburger was enraged and said, “I don’t care what it takes. We’re going to
get her. We’re going to get Alison, I don’t care what it takes, (laughs) we’re going to get her,”
141

and I’ve attempted, after we won the lawsuit, to write a note to Eagleburger, who’s now working
for Kissinger at Kissinger Consulting Firm in New York, just a little note saying, “Dear Larry,
(laughs) I understand you said you were going to get me. How are you making out?” [06:00] or
something. I haven’t, you know. (laughs) It made a certain amount of impact at the trial because
it was such a -- an inappropriate response. I mean, you know, if somebody files a lawsuit against
you, you can say, well, you know, “How do you think we’ll be able to defend ourselves?” We
can discuss it on a substantive standpoint, but with such a personal reaction, and I found that
fascinating.
All during the ’70s, once my EEO complaint had been publicized in the summer of ’71, I
began having women at the State Department come to me and tell me their stories, which was
very useful for future reference, and also asked my help. I also had women from other
government agencies, there was a woman working the [07:00] Civil Rights section of the
Department of Justice who had decided to file a personal sex discrimination lawsuit against the
Justice Department and she did and she won. Women came to me from the CIA. Women came to
me from the National Security Agency. My lawyers represented women at the National Security
Agency that won there, because the whole problem there was getting data. The agency’s initial
response was, “We can’t answer any questions about anything because of the very sensitive
nature,” and my lawyers were able to get that overruled saying, “We’re asking about salaries and
numbers of employees in different ranks, basically. They don’t have to say what they’re doing or
anything, but just get the pattern established,” so they proceeded and did that.
One of the women officers whom I represented, [08:00] a woman named [Lee Morris?],
she had joined the Foreign Service and after she joined she married a man who was kind of an
artist and she basically was supporting him. And she was sent to Mexico City. She was in a
political officer function but she was made a file clerk. She filed newspaper clippings and so
forth and so on. Obvious discrimination. Her husband was with her and eventually she got an
efficiency report which her supervisor told her ahead of time that he was writing it so that she
would be selected out. “Selected out” is a euphemism in the Foreign Service for getting the axe,
very diplomatic, (inaudible) you are selected in and then you are selected out. Why they don’t
called it “invited in” and “invited out”, it's the same kind of nonsense (laughs) language.
But anyway, he was [09:00] deliberately writing her efficiency report so that she would
be selected out so that she could go home and lead a normal life, namely that her husband would
142

support her and she would stay home and have children. And this is exactly what happened. She,
when she tried to, you know, get this changed, couldn’t, asked to be transferred, was transferred
back to Washington, went out to her home in Minnesota on a little bit of vacation, which she
certainly needed, and got a phone call telling her that she had been selected out and she said,
well, isn't there some way that she could fight this -- isn't there some procedure? And her
personnel office said, “No,” well of course, he was totally wrong. There’s not only the EEO
procedure, but there’s a regular grievance procedure for anybody who feels that the regulations
haven’t been followed. Well, bless her heart.
She came back to Washington and came to see me at my office, just walked in and told
me the whole story and from what she said I felt that we had a good case so I represented her
[10:00] and I am happy to say, well first of all we got her back on the payroll and assigned to
Washington, because she couldn’t fight the case in Minnesota, it was just too far away. And she
didn’t, if she didn’t get back on the payroll, what kind of a job was she going to get in
Washington? So we got her back on the payroll. And ultimately the decision to selection out was
canceled. She was given a retroactive promotion with back pay. All of the derogatory material
was removed from her efficiency reports. She was given language training. You had to pass
language at a certain level in order to qualify for your second promotion in the Foreign Service
so she was given language training to meet that requirement and then a guaranteed overseas
assignment as political officer. So I felt very good about that.
Somewhere along the line she divorced her husband for other reasons. [11:00] Went out
to an overseas post as political officer. Found that her desk was in a hallway and she was
expected at the entrance to the secure area where people had their safes and she was responsible
for sort of guarding the secure area and you know, she had no privacy or anything like that. And
she was also subjected to sexual harassment by the ambassador, as were all the other women
officers and wives at post. He would snap their bras. Or say, “Hm, are you wearing a bra?” At
diplomatic receptions when you say goodbye to the American ambassador as you're leaving, you
shake hands or not even that and you say, “Goodbye,” you know, he would kiss them. It really
got so bad that when the Foreign Service inspectors came through, all the women got together,
which again, took a certain amount of guts and complained and the inspectors [12:00] apparently
said something to the ambassador about this and they also reported it when they got back. But
there was no official action taken against him. Anyway, Lee had a very successful career in the
143

Foreign Service. Remarried and eventually resigned but you know, I felt good that she had
gotten that much out of her career.
Represented a male Foreign Service officer who was being selected out. He had joined, to
go back a little bit, I had become active in AFGE. I had taken a union shop steward training
course that was given at the American Labor Studies Center, which is sponsored by the AFLCIO
and downstairs in my family room you’ll find hanging on the wall my certificate as a graduate of
this course. [13:00] Everyone in the course were bus drivers, member of the Retail Clerks Union
and so forth and we had a grand time. We all had the same wonderful stories to tell about the
stupidity of management. It doesn’t matter whether they’re running a bus service in Washington,
D.C. or the Safeway, you know, they’re all so stupid, you know. So I got a lot out of that.
And then I began representing people officially in grievance cases. At this time there was
only one that was a grievance system, which nobody ever heard of. It was buried in the Foreign
Service Manual, which is about a 10-foot shelf of regulations about everything under the sun,
travel allowances and one thing or another. And usually when people got into difficulty they
would just try, with the efficiency report or whatever, they would just go to someone they knew,
the old boy network, and try to get it straightened out. And sometimes the State Department
would convene and an ad hoc panel which they chose [14:00] -- there were no rules and
regulations about due process. You didn’t necessarily have access to any files. You didn’t have
the right to have anybody with you or a lawyer or anything. It was really primitive. Pre Magna
Carta. Then one Foreign Service officer sort of discovered these grievance regulations.
He was about to be selected out and so he filed a grievance and the State Department
said, “Well, we will not accept this under the grievance regulations, unless you show us your
evidence to show that you have a legitimate grievance,” which would have meant that he would
have to present to the people who were trying to do him in every bit of testimony that he planned
to present in the hearing, which you know, is completely unheard of. (laughter) “You can’t have
a grievance hearing until you show that you have a grievance and to do that you have to give us
all the evidence ahead of time.” So it took a long time for him to get them squared away on that.
I filed the second grievance ever [15:00] used under this system. Then the State
Department issued new grievance regulations. Apparently they had begun to realize, somewhat
very slowly, that they needed to have something that at least faintly resembled, this was Foreign
Service -- the Civil Service had its own grievance regulations, they’d had them for decades, you
144

know, but the Foreign Service is a peculiar, very peculiar institution. Anyway, they realized they
had to do something. So they came out with new grievance regulations which had a Foreign
Service Grievance Board of people from outside the Foreign Service and you had the right to
have a lawyer and this sort of thing, but I represented a man named [Philip Lindsay?] who was
being selected out in hearings and first of all we had to fight for the right to see his files.
We had to fight for the right to be told why he was being selected out. All you did was
get a letter just saying, “Dear So and So, your performance has been found unsatisfactory [16:00]
and you know, you’ll be terminated in 60 days,” or something, no explanation. We had to fight
for the right to represent him. I was successful. The selection out was canceled. And then he
spearheaded a class action lawsuit against the whole selection out system and won. Which really
was a great victory. Somewhere along the line another Foreign Service officer named Charles
Thomas had been selected out. Tried desperately to get reinstated, to have a hearing, tried
desperately to get another job, but he’d been fired by the State Department -- that is hopeless.
And he had a wife and a couple of children and finally he shot himself, so that his wife would get
a pension. So we formed, several Foreign Service officers came to my apartment and we formed
the Charles Thomas [17:00] Memorial Legal Defense Fund, which is still in existence and began,
we got tax exempt status, we got a lot of prominent people to be on the list of sponsors and we
began representing people in grievance cases and so on and in lawsuits.
So there was a tremendous amount of stuff going on. And I was either in my own
hearings or representing people in their hearings, sort of nonstop and I used to say, somewhat
jokingly, “I give myself one night off a year,” which is more or less true. Because remember, all
this time I was also in the whole church thing -- I was also working as a Foreign Service officer,
which we must get back to at some point. (laughs) Which is a very demanding, highly
professional work and anyway -- I represented a woman who had been my secretary in British
Guyana named Regina [18:00] Maloney and after she was transferred from British Guyana she
went to Mozambique, Portuguese colony in Africa and married a Portuguese lawyer there.
Well, there were at that time an absolutely horrendous regulation said that any person in
the Foreign Service who marries a foreigner must submit his or her resignation and then go on
leave without pay. The perspective spouse will be given a security clearance, an investigation
and all investigations and if passing all this, must promise to become an American citizen and
the family, the couple will be transferred back to the United States until this person does become
145

an American citizen, which usually takes a minimum -- it was paranoia of the most impossible
kind of -- the implication was that any foreigner is a spy and that’s [19:00] the implication
number one. Implication number two, he or she will seduce the American employee into
becoming a spy also and would immediately there would be this terrific flow of classified
information to whatever country the foreign spouse is from. It was absolutely ridiculous.
It caused so much hardship to so many hundreds of people. Over the years I have talked
to many Foreign Service officers and staff who have married foreigners. One friend of mine, a
young man had married a British citizen and had gone through this whole embarrassing,
humiliating procedure and she had become an American citizen and she told me she didn’t want
to, you know, why should she? You know. No particular reason to do it, but she was forced -What is the value of forcing someone to become an American citizen? I think if anything, that
would be more likely to turn them into a hostile person, if they weren’t already. So many people
just resigned because they couldn’t stand it or couldn’t put up with it and didn’t want to put up
with it. Regina had been working as a secretary [20:00] at the American Consulate General in
Mozambique. Was forced to resign when she married Jose. Wrote to me for help.
Seemed to me that this was a good case of discrimination on the basis of marital status.
So I represented her first in the EEO complaint and lost, then in a grievance complaint and lost.
Then got Bruce Terris to take her on, on a contingency basis and I spent I don’t know how many
hours in the State Department library trying to find all the cases I could of people who had
married foreigners and who hadn’t been forced to resign. I had heard this through the grapevine
that everybody knows everything (inaudible) about the Foreign Service, very small group, but I
had to go through what’s called the “Foreign Service List”, which is published every quarter and
lists where everyone is overseas and I just went back and back and back every lunch hour
through these lists and found more and more names, gave them to the lawyers who then
requested information. [21:00] And the ultimate result was that, this started in about 1971, 1981,
letter from Bruce Terris to Regina, who by that time she and her husband had left Mozambique
when the country became independent because things got too bad, so she was now back in
Lisbon working as a very underpaid clerk at an American business firm and was able to finally
get a law practice established. Anyway, “The judge has found that you were illegally discharged
from the Foreign Service and were illegally denied re-employment on the basis of the Alien
Spouse Regulations. You’ll be entitled to back pay from 1971 until the date the State Department
146

reinstates you and back pay as a Foreign Service employee,” and then there’s a letter from the
personnel office to Regina saying that, “I’m pleased to offer you, Dear Ms. Nunez [22:00]
[Correia?], I am pleased to offer you employment as a resident staff secretary in Embassy Lisbon
salary at $20,986,” so forth, so in regard to back pay, so forth and so forth and so on and then a
nice letter of thanks from Regina. And the regulations were abolished.
Now the fascinating thing was that about the second year into this case, a source who
remain nameless sent me a memo that the legal department had written about this saying to the
Secretary of State, “It is unconstitutional for us to require that people resign,” so that their
resignation when they become engaged to a foreigner, “it is unconstitutional to require that the
foreign spouse become an American citizen and it is probably discriminatory to require that the
couple be transferred back to Washington,” well this was dated, I don’t know, 1973 or something
and the State Department continued to fight the case. You really -Q: Why did they do that? [23:00] Arrogance? (overlapping dialogue; inaudible)
AP: It doesn’t cost them any money because the Justice Department is doing it. Obviously they
preferred the regulations the way they were, because they were paranoid about security. And
they would just let this roll along and roll along and roll along until they finally lose and then of
course, they had to change the regulations and now I believe through the grapevine that although
those regulations no longer exist, still when somebody comes into the embassy and says, “I’m
planning to marry so and so,” who’s a foreigner, the conversation flows along those lines. They
sort of try and pressure the person into thinking, well, you know, this could adversely affect your
career and you know, the department worries about this and don’t you think it would be better if
your spouse became an American citizen? But they can’t require it anymore, which is a great
step forward. I mean really. (inaudible) [24:00] Absolutely amazing.
Q: What if you were, if you weren’t married, what if you were just seeing someone or living with
them, rather than being married?
AP: Well, I don’t have an awful lot of information about that, except one really sad, sad case and
this woman also came to me for help. Well, I’ll have to backtrack a little bit. The only case that
147

has ever been publicly announced about treason involved a male married Foreign Service officer
in Warsaw who began having a love affair with a Polish woman who turned out to be, you know,
the usual plant from the Polish government and after the affair had gone on for a while, he
started to be blackmailed and so he started to hand out classified documents. And this was all
ultimately discovered and he was sent to federal prison. The irony of all that [25:00] is that for
years and years and years and years and years single woman officers would not be assigned
behind the Iron Curtain because they were likely to be seduced into treason. Now this was, and
so only married couples would be sent. Hahahaha. Right.
Anyway, so after that happened, the State Department sent out a kind of an
announcement and it said, “If anyone is ever being blackmailed along these lines, please just
come to us and tell us your sad story and we will help you in any way we can and there will be
no recriminations,” and you know, “Please, you know, don’t be blackmailed, come and get
help,” well, this woman whose name I really can’t remember, let’s call her Jane, was a Foreign
Service officer stationed in Cairo, a single woman. She got to know an Egyptian man. And
[26:00] had an affair with him and then decided that she wanted to break it off, for whatever
reason and so she told him. And he was very upset and he said that if she stopped seeing him he
would go to the embassy and tell them that she’d been having an affair. Not so much he’d
wanted classified information or anything like that, he was just trying to put pressure on her to go
on seeing him. Nonetheless, it was a kind of blackmail. So Jane, following these instructions and
so forth, went to the ambassador immediately and told her story.
She was taken from the embassy to the airport. Didn’t even get back home to pick up her
toothbrush. Sent back to Washington. And told that if she didn’t submit her resignation she
would be fired and fired with prejudice. Whereas, if she submitted [27:00] her resignation, then
she could, you know, apply for jobs in the real world without the State Department having
anything on her record to show that there had been any kind of a problem. Well, she felt that she
shouldn’t have to do either one, that you know, she should be allowed to stay because she really
hadn’t, she hadn’t jeopardized anybody or done anything that -Q: She just had an affair.

148

AP: Yeah, right, you know. (laughs) But anyway, they continued to bully and harass her and so
finally she submitted her resignation. She had a degree in economics or something and so she
tried to get various jobs, both with the government and with private companies and kept getting
to a certain point in the application process and then getting turned down and she finally found
out, as you might expect, the employers were, the perspective employers would write the State
Department and get back a little blurb saying Miss Whatshername worked as an officer from
such and such to such and such and her field of endeavor was economics and end of discussion
and [28:00] and so then the employer would call the State Department and over the phone the
State Department would not give all the details, but just say, “Well, you know, she had to resign
because otherwise we were going to fire her because there was something really awful going
on,” so she was getting the same treatment as if she had toughed it out and let them fire her and
she ended up, I don’t know, working as a clerk at Woodward & Lothrop’s department store or
something, it was really horrendous.
And so I sent her to Bruce Terris. I used to send him (laughs) a lot of people and he
looked into it and I think he, his problem was so many years had gone by, there’s a kind of a
statute of limitations and they really, I don’t think there was anything he felt he could do about it,
but that’s just one of the many sad stories that I heard about and there were many, many others. I
wish now that I’d kept more notes of things. I have notes of the cases that I [29:00] handled and
of course, Bruce would have notes of cases but it was just appalling. Just aside from anything to
do with legal due process, just sort of lack of humanity. The State Department’s attitude, or I
should say the Foreign Service, part of the State, but the attitude is simply is that you should be
so grateful that you ever were appointed as a Foreign Service officer that anything should be
acceptable to you. It's a perfect case of what I call “monopoly employment”.
Now if you're a doctor or a lawyer or whatever, there are a zillion places you can work.
You can set up your own practice, you can go to a group practice, you can work at an institution,
you can work for the government, dadadadadadada -- and if you don’t like what’s happening in
one place, you know, you can try and change it or you can shake the dust off your feet and go
someplace else. If you want to be Foreign Service officer, I sometimes thought I would like to
set up a storefront with the State Department across the street [30:00] (laughs) from the State
Department and say, “Come on in, everybody’s welcome,” you know, “Visas issued while you
wait, policy made within half an hour,” you know, like these instant printing -- so you have to
149

have some of these (inaudible) but you know, there is only that one place to work and I have had
people say to me and also to male Foreign Service officers complaining about something else, if
you don’t like it, why don’t you resign? You know, that’s because we get 20,000 applicants
every year for maybe 100 jobs, so that seems to, they don’t seem to have any sense that they’re
not making the best use of their people and they’re certainly not being very nice to them.
My mother used to say to me, “It's a wonder we aren’t at war with every country in the
world, if this is how the State Department treats its own people,” and of course, I always said,
“Yes, but we don’t treat foreigners like that, we are wonderful with foreigners. We are tactful,
we labor to understand the language and their culture, we are wonderful listeners, you know, we
try desperately to avoid offending them,” you know, “We have all these terrific, I guess you
[31:00] call interpersonal skills, (laughs) we just don’t waste them on ourselves,” you know,
“Why should we?” Why should be treat a diplomat like with diplomacy? You know, why should
we be nice to people who work for us? You know, so anyway.
I worked very hard on many different grievance cases. There’s another one here, which I
am proud of, which really A, only made it probably more people than anything else I’ve worked
on, this was getting overtime pay for Foreign Service officers. Aha. This is rather cryptic as far
as notes are concerned, but basically I filed one grievance under the old grievance system, the
archaic one and lost. A filed a second grievance under the new grievance board and won and this
had to do with weekend duty rosters. Everybody had to come in on weekends, both in the
department -- [31:53]
Track 13
AP: [00:00] I lost my first overtime grievance case under the old regulations. Won the next
overtime case under the new regulations. This involved the weekend duty rosters, which exist
both in the State Department and at posts overseas, which we all in rotation expect to come in
and work. And the Foreign Service regulations had always provided overtime pay automatically
for people below a certain rank. Many people didn’t know that they were eligible and some who
knew they were eligible felt it wasn’t suitable so they never applied for it, but some applied and
got it. I was trying to get overtime for people above that cutoff point. The regulations said that
people in the, that group could only get overtime pay if it was regularly scheduled in advance, as
150

opposed to suddenly having to work late one night because of some emergency, that was
considered [01:00] “voluntary overtime”, but if you were on a regular basis told ahead of time
that you had to work overtime, then no matter what your rank, you were entitled to get this pay.
So I had been on the duty roster in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research in
Washington where I was working in the early ’70s and had been coming in on weekends when it
was my turn, so I put in for overtime pay and was turned down by my bureau and then filed this
grievance case and won and while -- all of these grievance cases took forever, they took years for
various and sundry reasons and I did research and found that quite a few officers above this
cutoff point were getting overtime pay even though it wasn’t regularly scheduled. I had a friend
in the payroll department and he let me come in on a Saturday morning and just punch it up on
the computer -- that was about the only place we had computers. And I got a list of about 30
names [02:00] of people who were getting this overtime pay. So we submitted that at the
grievance hearing.
So after we won, our American Foreign Service Association, which is the professional
group, up to this point they had been looking down its nose at me and others who were interested
in overtime pay and saying this is really, you know, terribly, terribly wrong for people who are
serving their country and hold the president’s commission and all this stuff. And some of them
even testified before Congress during our annual budget hearing saying that they were opposed
to anyone getting overtime pay and Senator Claiborne Pell from Rhode Island, who was in the
Foreign Service and rumor has it was selected out, can’t verify that but we like to think about it - got very, very stuffy and said, “It was absolutely disgraceful that anyone in the Foreign Service
Officer Corps would even think of applying for overtime pay.”
Nevertheless, after I won my grievance case, then the Foreign Service [03:00]
Association took up the cause and sent out a notice to all of its members saying that people who
met these certain criteria could get overtime pay and eventually the State Department began
paying overtime pay. They also drastically cut back on the number of people required to be on
duty rosters, which is OK by me because if you're not needed, why are we there? If we’re needed
we should get paid, was my basic thesis. But of course, [AXA?] the Foreign Service Association
always took all the credit for it. They never mentioned the fact that it was the grievance case that
I had fought through that had broken through the logjam on that. Anyway, there is a little note

151

that I’ve handed to you. The last major change I brought about in State Department regulations
was that there was security interviews.
Before you join you're interviewed for security purposes and they check all of your
background and so forth and after you're in the service, periodically your own security clearance
is updated. [04:00] But in addition to that, you are frequently interviewed about your colleagues,
when their security clearance is being updated. In other words, a security officer will just walk
into your room and say, “I understand you've served with John Smith in Ethiopia from ’66 to
’68. Do you have any information you’d like to provide? Do you think he was a loyal American
citizen? Did you ever see him drunk or --” you know, so forth and so forth. And all of us found
this rather distasteful and usually tried to be as noncommittal as possible, but eventually a
Foreign Service staff employee came to me, a young man who had been overseas -- his
supervisor had made a homosexual approach to him, which had been rejected and this young
man did nothing about it, he was very upset by it and he did tell a friend about it because he just
needed somebody to talk to. And then the young [05:00] man left his post and went onto another
assignment. The friend, when he was being debriefed by security when he was leaving that post,
mentioned the incident. So then the young man, let’s call him “Joe”, was interviewed by a
security officer at his new post and asked him, “Did this actually happen?”
Well, Joe didn’t want to answer because he was pretty sure the supervisor would get fired
and he had no doubt that the supervisor was a perfectly loyal American and you know, so forth
and so forth and so forth. But the security officer threatened Joe, said that if he didn’t answer
these questions he would be sent home immediately and fired as a security risk and Joe was
married and had a young child, so eventually after two or three days of you know, off and on
interviews he finally caved in and wrote, signed the written report and the supervisor was
immediately called home and was fired. Joe was very upset about all this and came to me for
help and said he felt that his rights had been violated. [06:00] And so I took this on and the
Security Office of the State Department is an awful, awful place. It really has never changed
from the days of the McCarthy era. And I hear constant, horrendous stories of one officer was
called into Security in Washington and told that a woman had said that he had tried to rape her
and they wouldn’t tell him who the woman was and eventually after he got a lawyer and this and
that, it turned out to be a cleaning woman who had been working late and had simply been in the
same room with him. He was working late and it turned out she had a psychological problem and
152

so forth, but you know, you're not given any warning about these interviews. You're not allowed
to have a lawyer present and you're not told who’s accusing you. It's really incredibly bad.
Anyway. So I took up the case for Joe and we fought it through and the ultimate [07:00]
result was that in the course of this a lawyer working in the legal department of the State
Department named Larry Pressler, who’s now a senator from either North or South Dakota, but
at that time he was with State, wrote a memo for the State Department in its defense in which he
said that he felt that security rights should be decided upon and then publicized so that everyone
knew what the ground rules were and that he felt in this particular case that Joe’s rights had been
violated. That he shouldn’t be threatened and intimidated into this testimony. So we got a hold of
that. And -- because Larry gave it to me. And the ultimate result of the grievance hearing was
that the Grievance Board recommended that security rights in what they called [08:00] “third
party interviews”, you're being asked about another person, that these rights should be
publicized.
So the State Department, talk about fine print, in the State Department newsletter put in a
little paragraph on some page somewhere, describing, without using any names, describing the
situation and in the very last sentence said something to the effect, employees being asked about
fellow employees are not required to answer, but they never changed, they never said anything in
the regulations. These newsletters come and go. I mean you know, people get them, read them
and throw them away and people are moving around and you know, and they wouldn’t
necessarily even think about it, you know. It should be in the regulations. But anyway. I wrote to
-- the editor of the newsletter and said that, I described the case and said that I had felt that the
State had failed [09:00] to comply with the Grievance Board’s recommendations that employee
rights in interviews be published, because they should be in the regulations. And so, but I did feel
it was a major victory, unfortunately it was so badly publicized that people probably still don’t
know about it. But after that happened, whenever one of these security officers came to me to
ask me about a fellow colleague, he’d go through his little opening spiel about who he was and
he’d show his I.D. and all that and then he’d start asking questions about John Smith.
And I’d always stop him and say, “What are my rights?” and the officer would look and
he would say, “Well, you're not being investigated. You know, no one is, you're not on the
defensive. No one is accusing you of anything. We’re asking you about John Smith,” and I said,
“Yes. What are my rights?” and oftentimes they would continue to look blank, either honestly or
153

faking it and finally I would say, “Well, don’t, aren’t you supposed to tell me that I do not have
to answer any questions about John Smith if I don’t want to?” and he said, [10:00] “Oh, well yes,
of course, we assume that you know that,” and I said, “Well, I think you are supposed to tell me
and I choose not to answer.”
Q: That’s the Miranda case we know all about.
AP: Yeah, yeah. You don’t assume that people know what their rights are. You have to tell them
and certainly no one in the Foreign Service would know this because they’d never been told.
And then the officer would look a little bit blank and then he would leave. And by word of
mouth I would tell my colleagues about this and I hoped some of them have used their rights, but
we just cannot get the Security Division to shape up in any reasonable manner. But you know,
that was the kind of thing that I was working away at and as I noted on your questionnaire, I
joined and founded a lot of organizations and so forth.
One thing that I did, which I feel very strongly about -- when the hostages [11:00] were
in Iran I was stationed in Washington and very soon after the hostages were taken a group of
people began holding a candlelight vigil across the street of the embassy of Iran and as soon as I
heard about it I went and I went every Sunday evening from about 6:00 to 7:00, I went every
Sunday evening until the hostages were freed. I went in the blazing heat and in thunderstorms
and with lightning and in blizzards and when the temperature was 10 degrees above zero and
what bothered me -- soon after I started going there I thought it would be useful to have a sort of
a guest book, so I brought a notebook along and each time people signed in who they were and
where they came from. Many people were from out of town and so on but I knew by reviewing
the guest book each time that I was the only Foreign Service officer that ever came there and that
really bothered me and we had thousands of officers in Washington and [12:00] eventually, after
the vigil we’d gotten a lot of publicity as time passed, some Foreign Service officer wrote a letter
to the employee newsletter saying, “What’s the point of just standing and holding candles?”
especially after the Iran Embassy had been closed down, it was an empty building.
Well, one of the hostages was released early, a Foreign Service officer named Richard
Queen, he had multiple sclerosis and they discovered this while he was a hostage and the Iranis
didn’t want the responsibility so he came home. And he responded to this and said that the
154

hostages knew about the vigil. Occasionally letters would get through to the hostages and they
said they knew about the vigil and knew the people who were there and it mattered very much to
them, which I thought was an important point. Anyway, this is one news story about it. And -[13:00] I received letters from some of the hostages, after they were freed, including a Foreign
Service, a woman Foreign Service officer named Kathryn Koob, and I have her letter here.
And I wrote to the senior hostage, whose name was Bruce Laingen, who had been the
Chargé d'affaires. His wife Penny Laingen was in Washington, was of course, very active for the
hostages and when they were released I wrote Penny and sent her the guest book with a note
saying that she might like to show it to Bruce and then I wrote a letter to Bruce telling him about
the vigil and I have all of that here and it's important to me and I would like to have that included
in my archives.
Q: Sure. What was the effect in the State Department when the Iran Hostage Crisis -AP: Terrible frustration, of course. [14:00] Because there really seemed to be nothing that could
be done about it. I guess there’s one other project that I worked on which relates to this. I was
very influential in getting our policy on hostages changed. Our embassy in Khartoum, the
ambassador and the Chargé d'affaires were at a reception and it was taken over by the, an Arab
militant group they called Black September and everyone was held hostage for several days. I
was working in the African, in the Intelligence Bureau in Washington and -- the hostages were
asking, or the terrorists were [15:00] asking for some kind of public announcement from
President Nixon about Palestine or something. And the State Department briefed President
Nixon and said, “Don’t say anything at all. Don’t say a single word to the press, because we
know that the terrorists are listening in on radios and they have access to the media. Don’t say
anything. We think we can maybe, you know, work something out,” President Nixon either had a
press conference or one of these informal things and he was asked about the hostages in
Khartoum and he said, “We never negotiate with terrorists. We never give into blackmail in
hostage situations,” the terrorists, that was of course, picked up by the news and the terrorists
heard that and took our ambassador and Chargé d'affaires down to the basement and shot them.
[16:00] And the embassy in Khartoum sent a telegram to Washington as soon as things
got a little bit better, reporting on everything and they said that according to other hostages were
155

not shot but who were present through a lot of this, it was the statement from President Nixon
that tipped the balance that led to the execution. That telegram, all of our telegrams had numbers,
in a sequence from each embassy. That telegram disappeared and there was an effort by a special
envoy who had been sent out, but arrived too late to help the hostages -- as soon as he got to the
embassy in Khartoum and realized that the first telegram had gone out, implying more or less
that President Nixon had been responsible for the execution. He tried, he not only asked to have
that telegram [17:00] destroyed in Washington, but he tried to get the sequence renumbered so
that there wouldn’t be a gap. So I found out about all this.
And also found out that another country had offered, which had an embassy in
Washington, had offered to mediate -- I think it was Saudi Arabia or somebody, and nothing had
been done about this offer. Anyway, of course, we were all terribly upset by this horrendous
tragedy. And I asked for an investigation of how the whole thing had been handled and
eventually I got an investigation, but it was sort of a State Department investigating the State
Department, which didn’t come out too well. I also said I thought we ought to have an impartial,
outside body review our entire hostage attitude. We’d had hostages before, mostly in Latin
America. So this ultimately led to the [18:00] RAND Corporation being hired and a man named
Brian Jenkins, whom you often see on television now being interviewed as a leading expert in
terrorism, this was his first exposure to it and he was some kind of a political scientist with
RAND. So he came to Washington and interviewed me and other people who had many things to
say and he was given classified information, including these telegrams and they ultimately came
up with a recommendation which was -- in a simplified version, it's OK to talk to terrorists.
They may have a demand which we can meet. It may be something terribly simple, you
know. They may want -- and this has happened in the past -- they may want a statement read by
somebody on nationwide television, not read by the President of the United States, but just, they
would just like to get their message out in a way that they hadn’t been able to do before. And the
gist of it was it was OK to talk to [19:00] terrorists, it's OK if they’re holding an embassy, I think
it's OK to send in food and water and doctors and keep it going, keep stringing it out and don’t
say during a hostage situation, “We don’t talk to terrorists, we don’t give into blackmail,” you
want to say it once a year in the State of the Union Address as an abstract theory, all right. But
go ahead, if it makes you feel wonderful -- but when there’s an actual real life hostage situation
going on, don’t say it. Don’t say anything and try to work behind the scenes.
156

So that was the recommendation and that has been more or less the policy since then and
I feel, you know, that that probably has helped in some situations but the State Department just
couldn’t face up to the fact that it had mishandled the Khartoum situation and of course, not
about to say the president has mishandled it, so the whole [20:00] thing was pretty well hushed
up, but something I felt very strongly about and I was very glad that we ultimately did get a
change in the way (inaudible) -- so that was another thing I worked on. Where were we? What
were we talking about before I diverged?
Q: We had just been talking about overtime.
AP: Ah, OK. Well, that was, you know, that was one thing I worked on, that was the other thing.
I guess now we might talk about what I was doing as a Foreign Service officer. (laughs) Where I
earned my bread and butter when I wasn’t fighting with everybody from miles around. (laughs)
OK. Came back from Vietnam. Worked in the Bureau of Intelligence & Research - African
Affairs, which is fine with me except that at the time I came back I was an FSO-4 and I was
placed in the FSO-6 job, which was two grades below my level. I had not occupied [21:00] an
FSO-6 job since I had been in the Congo when I was an FSO-8, at which point I would have
been working at two levels above my grade. And this was discrimination in the Bureau of
Intelligence & Research because they moved a male officer out of the O-6 job to an O-4 job and
put me in the O-6 job, which I didn’t find out about for a while and there wasn’t anything I could
do about it. But this is all covered in the lawsuit and so on. I was handling Tanzania, Uganda and
Kenya, which are not exactly the most earthshaking countries and you know, I enjoyed it
because I enjoyed Africa and I enjoyed reading about Africa and writing about Africa, but I had
no illusions whatsoever that this was of any importance.
Then I was replaced without being given an onward assignment, so in order to have
something to do I took the job of what’s called “current intelligence briefing”, which meant that
every morning I came in [22:00] early, read the intelligence reports for the previous evening and
wrote up -- if there was anything important in Africa, I wrote it up so it could be briefed to the
secretary. Of course, this didn’t happen very often. And that job was abolished when I left it.
Also, let’s see. My job in Ethiopia was abolished when I left it. Obviously my job in Vietnam
disappeared, (laughs) I’m not sure that was sex discrimination, (laughs) I think that’s because we
157

lost the war. Anyway, my job in INR was abolished and then I was deputy director of the Office
of Central African Affairs in the Bureau of African Affairs, handling Zaire and Gabon and a few
other places. That job was abolished when I left. At my recommendation. After I’d been there
about a year I realized there was absolutely nothing to do and I recommended that it be abolished
and the inspectors who were inspecting the bureau agreed with me and so did the boss and
everybody else [23:00] but they didn’t do anything about it, so I just sort of spun my wheels
there.
While I was there I discovered that my supervisor had been encouraging violation of our
sanctions against Rhodesia. Gabon adjoins Rhodesia, which is now called Zimbabwe. Sanctions
had been applied against Rhodesia because of their racial policy and nobody was supposed to
trade with them, except for certain things like medical supplies and so on. Gabon would buy
aircraft from each, a little Cessna or something like that and then sell it under a, they had a front
company, a fake company set up in Gabon, which was a Rhodesian-owned company and they
would sell the plane to that company, which would then fly it into Rhodesia. And it was all pretty
obvious and while my supervisor was away on a field trip in Africa, I was in charge [24:00] of
the office and had to go through files and different things and found this whole file about this
plane that Gabon had wanted to buy about six months earlier and our ambassador in Gabon was
saying, “Well, of course, we know perfectly well that this is going to go to Rhodesia,” because
that’s what they did with the last three planes that they bought and so forth. But since everybody
else is violating the sanctions against Rhodesia, I don’t see why the United States should, you
know, hold back in any way. And my boss wrote back to the ambassador, “I totally agree with
you and I hope very much that we can get the Department of Commerce a change to issue export
licenses for airplanes, to issue the license and we can get the plane out of the country before
anybody catches up with us,” fascinating correspondence. So I was reading through this. I said,
but yeah, “This is conspiracy to do something,” you know.
Q: I’m always amazed at what people keep in their files. (laughs) You know.
AP: Well, these two people didn’t see anything wrong about it. I mean, otherwise they wouldn’t
have done it. You know. [25:00] And -- apparently at some point they had asked the legal office
of the State Department about this and the lawyer who handles African affairs had said it was all
158

right to sell planes to Gabon, because somehow he maintained later during the investigation, that
nobody had told him that this was a front for Rhodesia and he said during the investigation if he
had known it was a front for Rhodesia, of course, he wouldn’t have said that it was illegal
because you know, clearly you're doing something wrong. Anyway, I read all this stuff.
I wrote to the Department of Justice and sent them relevant, their telegrams and letters
and whatnot. And I said, “It seems to me that this is a violation of our law,” our executive order,
anyway, something about [26:00] sanctions and that it should be investigated. Well they, the
Department of Justice referred it back to the State Department for investigation and they had a
three-member panel convened and had a hearing and they agreed that it was illegal that this had
happened, and of course, they couldn’t very well get away from the correspondence, but they
somehow managed to say that since my supervisor and the ambassador, the ambassador was
brought back to testify, said that they didn’t know it was illegal and that they knew that it was
being sold for a front and was going to Rhodesia, but they thought that so long as it was going to
a Gabon-registered company and not a Rhodesian company that it made it legal, therefore
nobody was really guilty of anything. And there was a lot of contradictory testimony.
After the lawyer said that he had never been told it was a Rhodesian front, the other two
people came back and said, “Well, of course you knew it was a Rhodesian company, because we
[27:00] told them,” they never got everybody in the same room as you would in a real hearing.
They interviewed each one of us separately and nobody knew what the other person had said and
then this whole report came out. The report criticized me for going to the Justice Department and
-- but one member of the panel did say that he felt the investigation wasn’t complete, because of
these contradictions and that he said it should be easy enough to resolve these contradictions if
we just pursue it, but it wasn’t pursued. Nobody was reprimanded or anything like that, so there
we were again. So you know, I just seem to go on and on tripping over (laughs) things.
Really, it's amazing. I, there’s something in the State Department called the “Dissent
Channel” which was established I guess in the ’70s when they were trying to loosen up a little
bit. And before that was established, if you disagreed with a foreign policy situation, if you were
at the embassy [28:00] you couldn’t say anything unless, to Washington, unless the ambassador,
all telegrams were signed off on by the ambassador. And you know, if the ambassador didn’t
want a telegram sent, it wasn’t sent and they were and in Washington, if you wanted to say

159

something to the Secretary of State it had to go from your supervisor to his supervisor, his
supervisor and on up. And if anybody didn’t like it, it stopped there. Made life rather difficult.
So eventually, a Dissent Channel was established, which basically said that anyone could
correspond directly with the Secretary of State and the secretary promised to read ever dissent
message that he got. I believe that I hold the all-time (laughs) track record for submitting dissent
messages. Just happen to have one of them here. As an example. Which I guess we’d better get
to a little later chronologically, because this was, didn’t happen while I was still in the African
bureau. [29:00] I -- after this whole thing with this particular airplane had happened and been
investigated and dropped, Gabon asked to buy another airplane of the same exact type. These
were cargo planes and Gabon is a very small country and very few airports and the airports, you
can usually only land a Piper Cub, except for the main one at the Capital Cities so you know, by
this time they had a whole fleet of airplanes of all sizes and description, including, this would be
the third cargo plane. The two previous having gone to Rhodesia. So they came right back in
again and asked for another export license. This time it's going to be bought by the president of
Gabon personally. Although he already had a fleet -- what does he want with a cargo plane?
If he wanted a passenger plane with an indoor swimming pool I wouldn’t have objected
at all, he was that kind of a president, but a cargo plane? So anyway, I had objected to this export
license being given for obvious reasons, [30:00] I said, “This is clearly just one more thing going
to Rhodesia,” and so I sent this dissent message forward and said, “What we’re really talking
about is the issue of racial discrimination in Rhodesia,” which is a moral and humanitarian issue,
basically, as part of our foreign policy. Well, this was fascinating. I used to go to the daily staff
meeting of the Assistant Secretary of African Affairs and he, this was held at 9:00, he had met
with all of the assistant secretaries met with the Secretary of State at about 8:30 for a quickie
review of the day kind of thing. And then the assistant secretaries come back to their bureaus and
tell the assembled masses of anything that was significant.
Twice while I was in the Bureau of African Affairs, our assistant secretary, who was a
very nice person and a very fine Foreign Service officer who eventually got shafted by Kissinger,
but anyway, he came back and said, [31:00] “Kissinger has said he doesn’t want to see any
mention of moral or humanitarian concerns in any policy paper that comes to him and he has
instructed his staff to review with the papers,” which of course, they did anyway, “and if they see
any mention or moral or humanitarian concerns they have to red pencil it and send it back to be
160

rewritten and that stuff left out,” and I said, “That is the most amazing instruction I have ever
heard in the Foreign Service,” and nobody batted an eyelash. Everybody just said, “Mm-hmm,
all right,” and I can just -- so the only way that I could get anything forward was to use the
Dissent Channel because under the ground rules, that would go to Kissinger and he would read
it. He wouldn’t do anything about it if he didn’t like it, but he wouldn’t read it, but isn't that
amazing that they would come back and -- [31:51]
Track 14
AP: [00:00] I was there for two years. In Canterbury, swarms of discrimination. I applied for a
one-week training course -- we have a lot of little tiny training courses, which you’re supposed to
take while you're in Washington to keep professionally alert. So I had applied for one and had
been accepted for it and my supervisor approved my being away for a week and everything was
all hunky dory and then a subordinate, male Foreign Service officer applied for the same course
and the supervisor said he didn’t want both of us to be away at the same time because my
supervisor had the habit of having me fill in for all of the junior officers when they are away -whereas my real job description said that I replace the office director when he was away and he
would replace me when I was away and the junior officers were supposed to replace each other.
The rank has its privileges. I was in the supervisory management category. Anyway. I
had been replacing everybody under the sun, including junior O-6s, [01:00] when they were on
vacation or field trips. And so anyway, the supervisor didn’t want the two of us to be away at the
same time and he said that this officer named Bob Strand was going to be going overseas before
this course would be given again, so this was his only chance to take it and so forth and so forth
and wouldn’t it be nice if I, you know, withdrew. So I withdrew but I felt very strongly that this
was an instance of, it doesn’t really matter whether Alison gets any professional training at all,
but it's very important that this subordinate officer get training. The way they could have handled
it, they could have let both of us go and have a junior officer replace Bob, which is what is
supposed to happen all the time and have the office director handle my work, which he was
supposed to do when I was away. But anyway.
Came to the end of my two years, didn’t have an onward assignment. And was put into
what we call “over compliment”, which means you are still getting your [02:00] paycheck, but
161

you have no, you're not assigned to a funded position, an actual, real job. And I thought, well,
this is very interesting. I’d never seen this happen before to men. And so I filed an EEO
complaint. It basically said that I am the only officer I know of who is not in a funded position
and I happen to be a woman officer and I would like to have this situation looked into.
And they looked into it and they found that I was right, that whenever a man came to the
end of a particular job, if the job was abolished or he was transferred or whatever, he was always
moved from funded position A to funded position B. It might not be the best job in the world but
it was a real job that existed and that I was the only Foreign Service officer that they could find
anywhere who was just simply without a job and I said, “Well, this is too much of a coincidence
that I happen to be female,” [03:00] and I lost that one, but they did, at least in their investigation
confirm the facts that I had established. It's not good for your record to be in an over compliment
position, so you have, every period of time has to be accounted for in your efficiency reports and
basically I had nothing to do. Let’s see. What happened then?
Then I was assigned to the Bureau of International Organizations. This is the bureau that
channels our relation to the United Nations, UNESCO, UNICEF, dadadada, all of the food and
agriculture organizations, all of that group. As well as regional organizations like NATO and the
Southeast Asian Organization, stuff like that. So each organization has its own office. I was
assigned as Office Director for the office handling international labor organization [04:00] affairs
and women’s affairs and the number of remarks that were made about women in labor was -(laughs) it used to be the Office of Labor, Women and Children’s Affairs, but it just got too
much and so they dropped the “children” and left us with women and labor. This is an O-2
position. At this time I was an O-3, so it was a step up for me. But I found out by research at the
same time that I was being assigned to this vacancy, the office directorship for UNESCO Affairs
was also vacant. That was an O-2 job and that office had four subordinate officers and two
secretaries. The ILO job, International Labor Organization job had the office director who
handled labor affairs and a deputy who handled women’s affairs, a woman officer on loan from
[05:00] the United States Information Agency. And a secretary. So it was obviously a smaller
job. And they moved the director of the ILO office over to the UNESCO job and he was a man
and again, we keep seeing these patterns developing of the woman always getting the lesser
thing. But it was a good job. I was interested that I could --

162

The decade for women was just starting. My deputy, [Shirley Hench?] was just off to the
conference in Mexico. Obviously we needed more help. Our relationship with the ILO, which
had its headquarters in Geneva was in a state of flux because George Meany of the AFLCIO
wanted us to leave because he felt it was dominated by Communists or something. And so there
was a tremendous increase in the workload and Shirley’s workload was obviously increasing.
So I struggled along trying to handle everything [06:00] and also I had to go to Geneva
several times a year and then Shirley was supposed to cover for me but she really paid no
attention to Labor Affairs when she was there because she was totally occupied with Women’s
Affairs, so it was a really horrendous situation. So I said, “We need a deputy to handle ILO
Affairs and we need a deputy to handle Women’s Affairs and we really need a separate office for
Women’s Affairs,” and towards the end of my first year I was told by personnel that they had
agreed to establish the Office of Women’s Affairs separately beginning in the next fiscal year,
which at that time started on July 1st or something. I think it's now October 1st.
And they would establish a deputy for Shirley in her new office and they would give me
a deputy. But I said, “We need somebody right away because of major efforts going on at the
ILO,” and they said, [07:00] “Well, if we give you, we can give you the new position and get an
officer assigned to you, but we’re not sure then that we’ll be able to guarantee that Shirley would
get a deputy next year, because, you know, a bird in the hand kind of thing. So I bit the bullet,
made the sacrifice for women’s rights and all that and said, “OK, give it to Shirley,” so Shirley’s
office was established and she got her deputy and I struggled on alone for another six months
and then we did get the extra slot, but I was, I had been fighting and screaming and saying,
“We've got to have a Women’s Affairs Office of its own. The workload is increasing, it's very
significant and it's important that the State Department do this,” and they eventually did it, so I
take credit for that. It was abolished apparently last year. So much for progress.
I encountered discrimination in this job. The head of our delegation, [08:00] when we go
to Geneva is always from the Department of Labor, which is appropriate. And the first head of
delegation, the first year I was there was a guy named [Persons?] who was not able to accept me
as colleague, but my role was to be foreign policy advisor to the delegation, so that if anything
came up, I didn’t have anything to do with labor matters like working conditions or anything like
that, safety -- but if a foreign policy issue came up, which they did practically all the time like
Cuba or the Soviet Union or whatever, I was supposed to be at the ready to say what our policy
163

was and how we should handle it in our speeches and things. And he completely ignored me and
wouldn’t let me speak in various committee meetings, even though my predecessor in the job
had spoken. So this went on for a while. It got so bad that after I’d been to two conferences and
been totally ignored and really sat there doing nothing, I came back and said, “There is no point
[09:00] in my going. I might as well stay home and help with the workload here, backstopping
the delegation,” so they did that and I stayed home in, for the June conference.
Then that delegation had messed things up so badly that he was quietly dispensed with
and they got a new head of delegation, a guy named Daniel Horowitz, who was a Foreign
Service officer who had just retired. He had been a Labor Affairs officer in the Foreign Service,
so he seemed eminently qualified. So he was rehired and detailed to the Department of Labor
and had his office over there and he was the head of delegation. Well, he couldn’t cope with me
and first of all, he started using me as his sort of -- somewhere between secretary and staff
assistant. He wanted his travel reservations made, instead of having his secretary call the travel
section of the State Department, which is very well staffed, he would call me and say, “Alison,
would you find out if I could get a train from [10:00] Geneva to Bern on Friday afternoon? I
want to go down there to see somebody,” and you know, then I would have to go to the travel
section. After this had gone on for a while I said, “Well, Dan, don’t you think that you could find
this out more quickly by just calling the travel section or having your secretary call the travel
section,” he said, “Oh, I’d much rather have you do it, Alison,” so I finally went to my boss who
was the deputy assistant secretary and said, “Look, aside from everything else, I’ve got an awful
lot of work to do and I really can’t wait on Daniel hand and foot,” so it eased up a bit.
But early on we had a foreign policy decision to make and a telegram would be drafted
by Dan over at the Department of Labor and then hand carried over here to be typed up on State
Department cable form. Then I would have to get it cleared by all the different bureaus that had
any involvement and then it would be sent out. And so he sent over a telegram, which I thought
contained [11:00] some recommendations, which I didn’t think were very good. They weren’t
right and weren’t in line with the policy as I understood it at the State Department. So when I
sent it around for clearance, I always signed off on it last because I was the one to take it up to
get it sent out. So I put a little memo on top and said, “Under paragraph three Dan is proposing
such and such and so and so and I don’t think that this is in conformance with our policy and
what do you think?” And you know, different people made different comments.
164

But apparently someone showed this to Dan and he was livid. Called me in, sat me down
in his office, closed the door and screamed at me and he said, “Don’t you ever do that again,”
you know, I was the senior State Department person involved in our relations with the ILO and it
was my assigned task to advise on foreign policy issues and to [12:00] see that the State
Department, incidentally, makes foreign policy, not the Department of Labor -- to see that the
foreign policy was properly executed and presented and all that and he just could not stand the
idea of my objecting to something that he had done, although I was supposed to object to
anything that anybody did, you know, if I felt that it was necessary. He was just livid. He just,
you know, ranted and raved and so forth. I decided after that interview that I would never be
alone with him again, because at least that would give me a little bit of protection and maybe
keep him a little calmer. But I continued to make objections when I felt it necessary.
Didn’t have any major problems until I was at the next major conference, which would
have June 1977. We had -- one of the major problems there was the presence of the Palestine
Liberation Organization as observers. Many private organizations like the Red Cross and many
others had the right to have observers present. [13:00] All of the sessions were open to the
public, anyway. And they could be called upon to speak if it seemed appropriate. In our
instructions, at that time, were that we would -- no one in the United States government ever
anywhere, anyplace, anytime is to have any contact with the PLO. Part of our policy with Israel
and so on. And that was that. And we knew that the PLO made as much trouble as it could at
these various meetings. They were trying to get a resolution saying that Israel was a racist
country and so forth and so forth and we would walk out or boycott or (inaudible). So you know
this is a standard situation and George Meany, who was very pro-Israel, was extremely adamant
about this and perhaps I should explain how Meany happened to be in on this.
The ILO, unlike any other international organization, has not only government
representation, but representation by labor unions [14:00] of each country and from the
commercial side of each country, so our delegation was made up of the federal government
headed by the representative from the Department of Labor, the representative from the
AFLCIO, which was sometimes George Meany and sometimes his deputy, Lane Kirkland and
the president of the US Chamber of Commerce. It was really fascinating. I enjoyed it very much
and I had fun going to meetings at which George Meany was present and watch everybody
quiver and shake when he opened his mouth. (laughs) Talk about centers of power. Anyway.
165

So Meany had said at our policy meeting of the whole delegation before we left
Washington, in case there was any misunderstanding that there was to be no talk with the PLO
about anything. There were a number of issues that we knew were coming up to be voted on and
there was some thought that maybe the PLO would negotiate and give way on this or that and he
said, “No talk at all, no contact, no [15:00] discussion, nothing,” and we said, “Yes, yes, yes, we
understand.” When I got hold of Geneva, you know, we started the conference and we all had
our various duties. Every morning we’d meet at 8:00 at the embassy and report of anything that
had happened the previous evening at cocktail parties or whatever. And at one morning meeting
Dan said that he had run across a PLO representative at a cocktail party and that that person had
invited him to meet the next day to talk over issues of the conference and Dan announced at this
meeting that he was going to do this.
And I sort of waited for people to say things because there were plenty other people in
the room, including people from the embassy in Geneva who were assigned to the conference
and people from the Department of Labor and you know, all kinds of people and nobody said
anything. So I finally [16:00] said, “Well, I thought that we were not supposed to have any
contact,” and Dan said, “Well, I don’t see any harm in just listening,” so the next morning he
reported on his meeting and said the PLO had suggested this or that and he had been
noncommittal but had agreed to meet again and I said, “Well, isn’t it time that we reported all of
this to Washington,” because aside from everything else, Dan was telling other foreign
delegations like the British that this was going on and they knew perfectly well what our policy
was because we worked very closely together and Dan said he didn’t think it was necessary at
this time. There really wasn’t very much happening. I said, “Well, what is happening is that these
meetings are taking place,” and I said, “Also it is very likely that somebody else is going to
report it like to the British Embassy in Washington, which will then go running over to the State
Department,” and then the worst thing that can ever happen to someone who’s overseas is for the
State Department to hear about something in your country from somebody else. You know,
that’s a no-no. And Dan said, “Well, I don’t see any need to report this,” [17:00] and then the
meeting broke up and I thought, oh boy. So I said, “Well, I guess the time has come for me to
send a Dissent telegram,” so I typed it up and I was careful as I could be, you know, knowing
Dan, you know, I made it very factual and noncommittal.

166

It just you know, A, this happened, B, this happened, C has happened and I got it all
typed up and I signed it and it would have to be signed off on by the ambassador, but there was
no way, you know, that it could be stopped. But of course, I showed it to Dan the next time was
in the building. And oh boy, talk about nuclear explosions. He went on and on and on and on and
on for about two hours asking me why I was sending this and I explained and he said, “But why
are you sending this?” and I explained again and there were other people present who said later
that he was obviously just trying to break me, you know. And I explained about Dissent
messages and he said, “But there’s no need to send this in. Nothing’s happening,” I said, [18:00]
“Well, I understand that that’s how you feel but I feel that this is something that should be
reported and you know, that’s what the Dissent Channel is all about,” dadadadada -And finally he said that if I sent it he would fire me from the delegation and send me
home. And I said, well, you know, that would have been really disastrous because it's very
explain this sort of thing to people back home but I said, “Well, I really feel that, you know, we
are wandering into dangerous water, so to speak, with this PLO contact and that at the very least,
Washington has to be informed. They may not respond at all, they may respond that it's OK or
they may tell you not to do it or you know, but we have to tell them, it's important. This is the
only clear-cut policy instruction we have. Everything else has room for maneuver and
negotiation. This is the one that has absolutely no room to maneuver, according to our
instructions,” so I sent the telegram. Dan called Washington, [19:00] which is something you're
not supposed to do because phone calls don’t get reproduced, you know, so that you cut out the
whole community in Washington, they’re supposed to be involved in anything.
But he called Washington and spoke to the deputy assistant secretary, who then called
me, god bless him and I gave him my version and he said, “Well, don’t do anything about
anything, I’m getting on the next plane and flying to Geneva,” (laughs) so he flew to Geneva and
got things more or less calmed down and straightened out and Dan was more or less let know
that he should not have any more contact and so that was that. But the interesting thing was that
another Foreign Service officer, a man, had also told Dan that he disagreed with what Dan was
doing and Dan said, “Well, you know, that’s OK. I think different people can see things different
ways,” but couldn’t see it from my standpoint. And when I got back home [20:00] I filed a
grievance because the Dissent regulations say that there will be no intimidation, harassment,
reprisals, penalties, for someone filing a Dissent message. And so we had a, didn’t get to a
167

hearing because I had so much evidence from other witnesses and so on, on what had happened
that ultimate-- they talked to Dan, and Dan, now that he was back in retirement and calmed down
and so forth, more or less admitted that he had never read the instructions on Dissent messages
when they had been issued, even though he was in charge of a consulate at the time and therefore
would be responsible for administering them.
And so in essence a letter was sent to Dan at my request, which said that he had violated
the Dissent regulation, which may seem like apparent victory, because by that time he was long
gone and the whole situation had blown over. But one of the problems was that the Dissent
policy had only been sent out [21:00] in telegrams overseas and in the memorandum in the State
Department -- never been incorporated into the regulations. Telegrams don’t get kept forever.
Neither do memos. They eventually get thrown away because you don’t want to build up stacks,
unlike archivists, (laughs) we don’t like to accumulate stuff and so I couldn’t find the Dissent
telegram at the post in Geneva. I just had to rely on my memory. Of course, since I use the
Dissent Channel so frequently, I more or less knew what it was, but -- so I had nothing I could
even hand to Dan to say, “This is what it's all about,” so I recommended, as part of my grievance
thing, that the Dissent procedures be incorporated into the regulations, because regulations are
kept forever. I don’t know whether they did that or not, but -- anyway.
This is an example of a Dissent I sent on foreign policy matters, which you can
incorporate into the files. It's most, it's all foreign policy [22:00] issues but I think that I’d just
like you to have an example. Have you had an example of my work as a Foreign Service officer?
So that’s that. And lo and behold I have a letter of commendation from a Secretary of Labor for
the fine work I did in Geneva, (laughs) which I sort of suspect was written by Dan. I think, you
know, when he had really calmed down completely and realized that everything wasn’t as bad as
he thought it was, that he may have even, even possibly even felt that I might have saved him
from a really terrible thing, because I think if he had gone on and it had been reported through
other sources, he would have gotten blasted out of the sky, and so he made himself write, say, I
don’t know, sheer speculation. I would like to think that he appreciated it. But anyway.
Let me take a quick look at my notes and my list here. Oh. After my two years [23:00] in
ILO I took a year’s leave of absence because I didn’t seem to be accomplishing anything in my
Foreign Service career. It was really very depressing to have reached an executive level position,
it's what we call “program direction”, as an office director, more or less equivalent of being a
168

Chargé d'affaires overseas, it's supposed to be an important job, one that everybody wants to get,
one that very few women get and I had had a, by chance more or less, a program direction job
which happened to be a red hot political issue. We eventually left the ILO and that is the first
time the United States ever left an international organization, other than the -- did we ever get
into the League of Nations? I guess we, well, we never joined. Anyway. So this was a red hot
policy matter and I was glad to have been in it, but I couldn’t get anybody to take me seriously,
more or less, so it was all kind of very discouraging. So I took a year’s leave of absence.
Went to England and did a few things over there. [24:00] Came back from my year’s
leave of absence. Was assigned over compliment to the Bureau of International Organizations,
because that’s, when you take a leave of absence you automatically go back to wherever you
were before you went on leave. Didn’t get any substantive work, so I worked on various
conferences that were held in Washington and this was my last title. How’s that for impressive?
Assistant Secretary General. Not too meaningful, but there was an organization called the
Colombo Plan Group, which is a Southeast Asian economic group, which is trying to build up
economic cooperation in the area and they meet hither and yon and it was, they had turned to
meet in Washington and so the State Department was running the conference and providing all
of the support [25:00] and documents and staff and everything.
And so somebody was the Secretary General, whoever is hosting the conference gets to
be Secretary General, so a friend of mine was Secretary General and he wanted me to work with
him and so he gave me the title Assistant Secretary General and that’s how I got that. That was
my last assignment in the Foreign Service. One thing I haven’t mentioned that in about 1974 or
thereabouts I just developed severe arthritis in my neck, which I always smile when I say this, it
basically meant that I had, I was too stiff-necked, which (laughs) -- I don’t know, anyway.
Things were growing that shouldn’t be growing and anyway, it was causing pain and numbness
in one arm and so I saw various doctors and [26:00] had a limited medical clearance, which is
one of the reasons why I didn’t go overseas again. The other reason was that I was so involved in
the lawsuits and grievance cases that every time they tried to send me overseas I pointed out that
this would be a denial of due process because I really can’t carry on from an overseas
assignment.
Anyway, after I came back from my year’s leave of absence, I was due to have my
annual physical exam for the State Department and I applied for, I had been seeing a doctor at
169

George Washington University for my arthritis and I said that I didn’t really feel that I could
continue because this was causing me so much difficulty. And so the doctor issued a statement
saying that I was disabled from work and then I applied for disability retirement and I was given
an appointment to see a doctor [27:00] who -- the State Department, who would examine me. So
I went down to the appointment and walked in and sat down and he said, “Well now, Alison, I
understand that you are a typist and you're having trouble typing because of arthritis in your
hands,” (laughs) honest to Pete, I mean really. My file, including my application for disability
retirement was on his desk and right at the very top it said, “Foreign Service officer” and
whatnot, you know, in the whole thing, but obviously he was in a hurry and he’d just been told,
yeah, there’s this woman who wants to retire because of arthritis and of course, he assumed
dadadadadada. So I said, “No, I’m a Foreign Service officer,” and it was really weird.
He didn’t examine me. He had me stand up and tilt my head from right to left, which I
can do. And then he said, “Well, it doesn’t seem to be causing you any great difficulty,” I said,
“Well, it causes me [28:00] pain and I can’t sleep at night and therefore I can’t work very well
during the day and I’ve been taking naps in the ladies’ room,” and so forth and so on and I said,
“You know, Foreign Service is a very demanding, stressful occupation. You have to be on your
toes all the time and I really am not able to do this anymore,” and he said, “All right,” and I said,
“I have x-rays that have been taken over the last period of four or five years showing the
development of this situation and if you like, I’ll bring them in so you can review them,” since
all previous doctors had taken x-rays in order to see what was going on, I didn’t want him to take
more x-rays because I was getting worried about the exposure, but I’d had a series done about six
months ago and I thought that -- he said, “Fine, I’ll wait to make my decision until you bring in
the x-rays,” and I said, “Fine, I can go home at lunchtime and bring them,” and he said, “No, no,
tomorrow will be fine,” so I said, “Fine,” so I was going to bring them in and lo and behold I
found out that he had, the next day that he’d already written up his opinion, that I wasn’t
disabled. He referred to me at various points in his [29:00] memorandum as “he” or “him”,
which I thought showed a certain amount of haste in drafting and proving, and down at the
bottom, after he signed off saying that I wasn’t disabled, he said, “However, I have agreed to
review her x-rays and if I find after reviewing them that there is a serious situation, I will
reconsider my finding,” of course, raises the question, well, why not wait in the first place.

170

Q: Twenty-four hours.
AP: And in order to get a disability certification, three different doctors have to sign off on this.
So he promptly sent it off to the other two doctors, who promptly signed off on it, in spite of all
these obvious craziness in this little memorandum. And the next thing I know I was told that I’d
been turned down. So I asked to see the file and saw all this and said, “Oh boy, here we go again.
Another EEO complaint,” (laughs) so I filed an EEO complaint saying these doctors had
obviously been prejudiced and I found, just about that time the American Medical Association
had come out with a study that [30:00] out in California that some medical school or something
had done, comparing doctors’ case notes of their examination and it would be both men and
women for back pain, which is sort of a very hard thing to define under any circumstance and
they found without any deviation that in all cases, the notes for the men patients went on page
after page after page of very detailed and a lot of tests and consultations and so forth and so on
and for the women, very short and practically no tests and usually the conclusions often were
that there really isn't a problem for the women, but for the men there’s a problem.
And the conclusion was that this is all being done very, in a prejudicial fashion and that
doctors are not taking women’s complaints of pain seriously. So of course, I grabbed a hold of
that and add it to the stack. (laughs) And [31:00] there are a whole series of other things that
went on with this and basically this EEO complaint, it took them ages to assign an investigator
and then the investigator didn’t talk to any of the doctors and then didn’t finish the investigation
and -- so this is all typical of EEO complaints at that time and still is. I was talking to someone in
the EEO office a while ago and she said they have complaints stacked up to here and they just
don’t get around to them. At one point they sent out a memo to every person who had an EEO
complaint at the State Department saying, “We have such a backlog that it's very unlikely that
we’re going to get to your case for a long time,” and you know, in essence -- [31:51]
Track 15
AP: [00:00] All this time I was in an over compliment status working on various conferences and
I was refusing to take assignments if they were offered to me, on the grounds that I was disabled
and that I wanted to retire. Eventually -- I had a lot of sick leave accumulated, so eventually I
171

wrote to them and said, “Look, I can retire at age 50 anyway. I’m now 49, I have a year’s sick
leave accumulated. Why don’t you let me just take my sick leave and when I reach age 50 I will
retire,” and they agreed to that, which I thought was kind of interesting because to take any more
than three days of sick leave you have to have a doctor’s certificate saying what the problem was
and I had presented this certificate from this doctor at George Washington University Hospital
saying that I was disabled and they accepted that and used that as the basis of granting me a
year’s sick leave and I thought, well, if you're going to take it for that purposes, how could you
turn around and say, “But on the other hand she’s perfectly able [01:00] to work,” I mean you
can’t have it both ways at the same time. If I’m sick, that I have to be out for a year, which is you
know, quite a length of time, it must mean you think I have a real serious problem. Anyway.
So -- I took the sick leave. Left Washington while I was still on sick leave. Came up here.
Reached age 50 in November of 1981 and officially retired. Meanwhile, the EEO complaint was
still rolling along. I’d wanted to pursue it as a matter of principle. And I didn’t hear anything
more about it. I knew the investigation hadn’t been completed. And about 9:00 at night after I
was, because I was sitting right here in this room, the phone rang and I answered it -- complete
strange, completely strange woman on the phone and she said, you know, whose name is Barbara
Smith and she worked for the XYZ Consulting Firm in Washington and could she have access to
my medical records at the State Department. What? [02:00] And she said, “Oh, hasn’t anybody
gotten in touch with you?” I said, “No, about what?” and she said, “Well, they have such a
backlog of complaints that they have hired a consulting firm to investigate all these different
complaints and I’ve been assigned yours and they want to finish it right away and I’m the
investigator and so I need to have access to your medical records,” and I said, “Well, I’m not
going to authorize anything about anything until I have something in writing from the State
Department,” so I said, “You’d better call the State Department and tell them to call me.”
So they called me and explained, as much as you could explain (laughs) a situation like
that and I said, “OK,” and so this lady went ahead with the investigation. Well, by this time the
doctor who had written the original turn down on my disability the “he” and “him” pronouns,
etc., was no longer working at the State Department and he refused to have anything to do with
the investigation, which actually worked in my favor because there [03:00] was some kind of -regulation or ground rule in the grievance mechanism which says that if you make an accusation
and the person accused refuses to respond to it, this leaves you with the presumption that you
172

were right, or words to that affect, so anyway -- and they even sent an EEO hearing officer up
here to interview me. We met over at the National Sea Shore Headquarters and I had to meet in a
federal government building, that’s all we had so (laughs) obvious, so we met at the National Sea
Shore Headquarters in the room and we went over all this stuff and I made my points, such as
they were. And nobody had ever really responded to my criticisms of this inadequacy of this
whole medical procedure. Not been asked to take off my clothes, there wasn’t a nurse present, so
obviously he never had any intention of examining me and so forth and so on.
And eventually they ruled that I had not been subject to discrimination. Oh well, there
goes another one. [04:00] But there are so many things in the medical branch, which are so
sexist. The standard form which you fill out, you know, parents and medical history and all that,
on the back of the second page has a little section for female applicants or employees only, “Are
you suffering from any female complaint?” and I brought this up in the hearing as an example of
the sexist attitude of the medical division. I said, “What is a female complaint?” it sounds like
something left over from the Victorian era and they said, “Well, you know, women’s bodies are
different from men’s bodies and they have things like premenstrual cramps and whatever,” and I
said, “Well, why don’t we have a section for men only saying, are you suffering from any male
complaint, like prostate trouble or whatever,” and they said blah-blah-blah-blah-blah-blah, but
it's still there. [05:00] It's amazing. Are you suffering from any female complaints?
And there were many other instances of that nature. So that was I guess my last goaround with the State Department other than the ongoing lawsuit but you know, I suppose to
somebody listening to all this, they must think I am just absolutely crazy, but when these things
appear in front of you, what are you going to do? Like my finding that file about the planes for
Rhodesia, I mean this is -- which I still have, it's in that -- I had it declassified and I have it in my
drawers in the den here. All these lovely letters about gee, “I hope we can get this plane out of
the country before anybody catches it,” you know and what are you supposed to do with this
stuff, when it looms before you? From the fact that so few other people have involved, been
involved in so many confrontations, I suppose they don’t look at them too carefully. They just
walk away from them. But -- the State Department, a pretty peculiar place. [06:00]
It's very insular. And -- on the one hand there’s an assumption that everything that they
do is right, because we are Foreign Service officers, we are the elite. And on the other hand
there’s an assumption that you don’t talk back to authority. For a long time, you know, you were
173

supposed to stand up every time the ambassador or his wife came into the room. I think they
have abolished that now, I think it finally got to them that this was a little bit like Buckingham
Palace, (laughs) or something -Q: No kidding.
AP: Yeah, absolutely. And they never knew what to do with me as a woman. When I arrived in
Ethiopia the ambassador’s wife who I ended up working for, had the habit of once a month
having a morning coffee hour for all of the wives that arrived in the preceding month. It was a
large (inaudible) a lot coming and going, which is a very nice thing for her to do. So I got invited
to this. And I was a political officer on paper, [07:00] a staff assistant in reality, but anyway, you
know, so I went, (clears throat) but they couldn’t straighten it out in their heads as to what are
women employees doing. Even when I was in Ghana as an administrative assistant and
previously code clerk, they used to have (clears throat) a Thanksgiving dinner at the Consul
General’s residence and everybody brought something. And when I say “everybody” I mean the
wives. The wives were, one wife was assigned to bring 50 hors d’ouevres and another wife was
assigned to bring vegetables and so forth and I was assigned to make 50 cookies.
Well, I was an employee, I wasn’t a wife. Not that I have anything against wives, but you
know, they couldn’t get this category straightened out in the their minds and I don’t think they
can even now, as some of the testimony in the trial, of women being, women Foreign Service
officers being used as cooks in emergencies. Anyway.
Q: A while ago you had mentioned something, [08:00] the WAO? What was that?
AP: Women’s Action Organization. I guess I had left out -- soon after I got back from Vietnam,
the State Department, possibly as a result of my ongoing EEO complaint, formed an official
committee called the Ad Hoc Committee on the Status of Women at the State Department and I
was asked to serve on it. Kind of cute. I did because I thought that was more like a spy in enemy
territory. I thought I might pick up some useful information. And I studied -- we met frequently.
Started out with recruitment. And I raised the question, and this may be of interest to so many in
the academic world, I said, “Well, what is the student audience being reached by our recruiters?”
174

we have recruiters bailing around the country. And I said, “You know, let’s just look at the
population of the universities and colleges where these recruiters are going, how many men, how
many women, [09:00] and see what is, obviously we’re not going to reach all 10,000 people at
Cornell or whatever it is, but you know, what is the potential audience, male versus female?” So
we got some statistics staff together from somewhere and found, as I expected, that overall,
potentially we’re reaching about 2% women and 98% men and I said after that report came in at
the next meeting, “Well, why don’t we recommend to the Board of Examiners that sends out
these recruiters that they try very hard to shift the location of the recruiting team so that we
greatly increase the potential number of women reached,” and we met with an idiot named John
[Stutzman?] who, a Foreign Service officer, the Board of Examiners had presented this to him.
And he couldn’t grasp it. I really think he couldn’t grasp it. I don’t think he was opposing
us. [10:00] He said, “But you know, we send out all these teams and you know, the total
population is, you know, whatever it is 100,000 students that we are in contact with and why do
you want to change it?” and we kept say, “But you know, if there are only 200 women and
10,000 men in a college campus, or whatever it might be, you know, it's not likely that you're
going to get very many women,” he just couldn’t grasp it and after that, soon after that the
committee disbanded. But anyway, that was my real attempt to work within the system, as
people were always telling me to do.
Then separately a group of women started meeting and it was the, it became the
Women’s Action Organization. I was a founding member of that. And that had as its intent to
study the situation of women in the Foreign Service, gather information, statistics and so forth,
review the regulations of, [11:00] make specific changes or recommendations for change for
improvement, meet with the Secretary of State or the Director of Management, so forth and so
on. When they said in their statement, their policy statement, when they were founded, that they
did not intend to go outside the system. I basically left because I didn’t feel that we’d get
anywhere and I still feel that whatever WAO has accomplished has happened only because of
my constant pressure from the outside with these lawsuits and publicity and so forth, because I
don’t think that the department thinks (inaudible) who their attention to (inaudible). And WAO is
practically nonexistent now. They never had very many members. When they would hold
meetings at the State Department lunchtime to, and they would announce it ahead of time,
“We’re going to discuss your efficiency report, how you can work to make it better,” and you
175

know, [12:00] things of career interest, practically nobody would come. And it never had a very
large membership, for whatever reason.
I once went to a film on equal employment. This had nothing to do with WAO, but
generally speaking, you couldn’t find anybody in the State Department who was interested in
EEO matters and the State Department finally made a film on EEO issues and affirmative action
and it was to be sent out overseas and also to be shown in Washington and they announced it
would be shown in room such and such from 12:00 to 12:30. So I went. Partly because I wanted
to see the film, partly because I wanted to see who else was there. Besides myself there were
three other people. One was a black man who was a medical technician from the medical
department. One was the wife of an employee and one was a secretary. [13:00] And myself. That
was it. In the entire (inaudible). And I, as a supervisor was required to take the training course in
EEO. I thought that was a grand opportunity to find out what it's all about -- this is when I was
office director. So I went. It lasted about two hours. It was mostly a lecture about the law and the
history of the law and the regulations. There was no concrete examples given. Nothing.
The State Department newsletter has started, as about five years ago when many, many
people started filing grievances, which previously there had been about one every 20 years. Now
I think they’re up to the 500s. They began publishing the case histories of grievances, without
names but the issue and the resolution and what went wrong and what the remedy was. They
have never [14:00] published any EEO cases, as few as they may be, probably only processed
about three a year, but they have never done anything about that. I think it would be very
educational. People don’t know sometimes that what they’re doing is wrong. You mentioned an
example, people think they’re really protecting people, women or minorities.
Black officers have recently filed a race discrimination suit against the State Department
and I met with a group of Hispanic officers who were thinking about filing a lawsuit -- never did
as far as I know but you know, there’s a lot of discrimination at the State Department and very
little has changed, because I still find that -- even at my trial, one of the issues was this whole
business, assigning women to such places as Arab countries, which was supposed to have been
settled in 1971 as a result of my hearing. They said, “There will be no more of this cultural
[15:00] inhibition,” and we got our hands on a telegram from our ambassador in Khartoum who
had just sent this in, you know, the week before the trial started. A woman officer was being
assigned out there and he came back and said, “EEO considerations notwithstanding, I don’t
176

think it's a good idea to send a woman to an Arab country,” of course, we were delighted to be
able to put that in the record but it just shows you how it goes on. Partly because there’s such a
turnover at the State Department that they keep reinventing the wheel. And there’s no real
education process.
I think we might have come to the end. I don’t think there’s anything much to say about
what I’ve been doing since I’ve been up here. You've got that little list of (inaudible) -(inaudible) my volunteer work up here, it's nice to be able to choose to do what you want to do
and walk away from what you don’t like. (laughs) It's just what I tend to do (inaudible).
Q: We’re done.
AP: Wow!
Q: I don’t believe it. (laughter) [15:59]

- END -

177

