
Jane: Good afternoon, Theresa.
Theresa Elizabeth Gagnon Mellone: Good afternoon, Jane.
J: It’s lovely to meet you.
TGM: Well, it’s wonderful to meet you, too.
J: And it’s April the 3rd, 2012, and I’m talking to you about a long time ago and your time at
Pembroke. So, first of all, can you just introduce yourself to me, to the camera?
TGM: Well, I am Teresa Elizabeth Gagnon Mellone, class of ’39, and got my master’s in ’62.
J: Excellent. Thank you. Now, why did you choose to go to Pembroke in the first place?
TGM: Well, I had a very much of a head start when it came to school, and I was 15 when I
graduated from high school –
J: My goodness.
TGM: – and my mother believed in excellent education, and Pembroke seemed to be the place to
go. So, I came.
J: Did you grow up in Providence?

1

TGM: No, I grew up in Woonsocket, Rhode Island.
J: Hence the French name.
TGM: [laughter] Well, my father’s line came from Normandy to Quebec, and then to
Woonsocket.
J: And your mother’s line?
TGM: And my mother’s mother and father came from Genoa, Italy.
J: Interesting.
TGM: And they came to Boston and from Boston to Woonsocket.
J: And so you were born in 1920–
TGM: Nineteen.
J: 1919?
TGM: Yes, on October 16th, 1919. So, right now I’m 92.
J: That’s pretty good going.
TGM: Well, I once heard a one-hundred-year-old man telling the secret of living a long time. He
said keep breathing, and I’m trying it because it sounds like it makes sense.
J: I think it does. So did you have to take an exam to get into Pembroke?

2

TGM: No, I didn’t. At that time, if one had a – at least – a solid B average, there were no exams
to take.
J: Did the dean interview you?
TGM: The dean of admission did, yes. Her name was Eva Mooar and she was a very, very
personable woman. Very good-natured. And I entered right from high school and I was 15.
J: Did you live in the dormitory?
TGM: No, I didn’t. I commuted.
J: How did you do that?
TGM: Well, at the beginning I used to take the train from Woonsocket to Providence every
morning. It left Woonsocket at 7:25. And then, there were a few high school classmates who
were coming into Providence. Not all to Pembroke. Some were going to the Rhode Island
College of Education, and we’d get off the train at what is now the old train station and walk up
the hill. At that time, there were trolley cars, not the bus type, the real electric trolley cars
running through the tunnel which took you up the hill. And I remember freshman week, the first
day they had all of us freshman women in the auditorium in Alumnae Hall on the Pembroke
campus, and they gave a thumbnail sketch of the class telling the range of ages and places where
the freshmen had come from and at that time most of them were local people from Rhode Island,
but they said there was one member of the class who was 15. And when we dismissed from the
auditorium, I could hear so many of those kids saying, “I wonder who that baby is,” and I
thought to myself, “They will never know it’s me because I’m not going to tell anybody.”
[laughter]
J: Was it a problem being so young?

3

TGM: No it wasn’t because I was kind of mature for my age and it was not a problem. And I
always felt that I was so fortunate to be able to come to a university like this.
J: Tell me about some of the classes that you took.
TGM: Well, there was – there were core classes, subjects that you had to take, and after you took
all the core courses you could start getting into electives and your major field. So, I took the core
courses and I wanted to major in Romance Languages. I was fascinated by other languages and
as a child I used to make up my own foreign languages. [laughter] And I did have to take a
language proficiency test and they said I was very proficient – you know, inclined that way. And
I must say I worked very hard and, you know, commuting did take some of my time. After a
while, one of my classmates whom I had known from junior high school on was also in my class
here, and her parents bought her a car if she would take passengers and charge them for the
expense. So I rode in with her. Oh, and there was another classmate whose parents bought her a
car first and I, for a short time, rode in with Olive.
J: And this is in 1935?
TGM: I graduated from Woonsocket High School in 1935, yes.
J: So this is the middle of the Depression?
TGM: Yes.
J: So what was that like?
TGM: Well, fortunately – my father died when I was five and my mother never remarried, and
my grandmother’s father, my maternal grandfather, insisted that my mother and her two little
daughters move back into the family home. So we did that and my grandfather was a very
enterprising individual. I guess he had a wonderful business head on his shoulders, and he started
a wholesale fruit and produce business and he was very successful and a very good provider.

4

And he called my mother his right-hand man and she went to business school and he said if she
would manage his business office, he would build a nursery adjacent to the office. But he never
had to do that because we didn’t live far from the establishment. So, my mother believed in the
best education possible and since I had such an early start in school because I was – I was four
when I was in first grade. I could read and I could write and my mother didn’t know what to do
with me, so she brought me to the superintendent of schools and he thought that I should be in
first grade for a trial period of a couple of weeks or so. And that’s how I had my head start.
J: That’s great.
TGM: And the teachers decided I definitely belonged in school, so that was it. Went on from
there and I always loved learning, and I always thought I wanted to be a teacher. I used to play
school till I was blue in the face. [laughter]
J: And did you become a teacher?
TGM: I did, and I really loved every minute of it.
J: What did you teach?
TGM: Well, I started out at the high school level back at my alma mater, and I was teaching
medieval and modern European history, and first-year Italian, and a little bit of French. And then
I lived in Germany for a while and I was just about drafted to teach in the American Dependents’
School in the town we lived in, and I was reluctant because I said I’ve always been a secondary
level teacher and children are too precious, I wouldn’t think of damaging a child. Well, they
didn’t take any excuse from me and I taught in the American Dependents’ School in Germany
for a while. And then when I came back to the United States, I went on to get my professional
certificate right up to the minute, and went back to teaching.
J: So did you do your certificate at Pembroke or at Brown?

5

TGM: Well, I did take education courses and then I took some that were only offered at, at the
time, Rhode Island College. And I was certified for secondary level teaching and also for
elementary teaching.
J: Can we go back to Pembroke for a bit –
TGM: Yes.
J: – because you said that you had to do sort of the basic classes and then you specialized, and
were there Brown students in any of these classes?
TGM: There might be a couple.
J: But not many?
TGM: No, but we did have Brown professors and I did want to major in Romance Languages
and I would have been starting Spanish in my sophomore year, but Dean Morriss, who was the
dean at the time, would not allow me to go to the Brown campus to be in a class of men but that
was the only time that I could have fit that Spanish into my schedule. Consequently, I never took
Spanish. I was furious and I thought – I thought the dean was an educator and she’s depriving me
of what I need.
J: So what did you do instead?
TGM: Well, I majored in French and Italian, and I took some electives.
J: But you never got to do Spanish?
TGM: Never got to do Spanish.
J: Did that happen to other women students, that they were prevented from –

6

TGM: I don’t know. I always wondered if the dean thought I was too young to be in a class of
men or there just weren’t women going to the Brown campus at that time. Whether that was a
policy at the time, that women could not go to the Brown campus to be in classes... So...
J: Very strange.
TGM: Yeah, that was strange and I really did not like that a bit.
J: But she wasn’t taking any criticism of that? She wasn’t discussing it or did you try to get her to
change her mind?
TGM: Oh, no. Dean Morriss was not a person you asked questions of or anything like that. She
was rather pompous. Her middle name was – her name was Margaret Shove Morriss, and the
students used to call her Peggy Push. [laughter]
J: I’ve heard that, yes. But only behind her back.
TGM: Oh, definitely. [laughter]
J: So, the Brown professors came and taught you in Pembroke Hall?
TGM: Yes, Pembroke Hall and there were – the psychology building was on Waterman Street.
J: So you’d go over to the Brown campus for psychology classes?
TGM: Well, that was right across the street practically from the Pembroke campus.
J: But you most – where else did you go?
TGM: But then when you started getting into your major area, then it was different.

7

J: So you then might go onto the Brown campus?
TGM: Yes.
J: And do you remember any of your professors?
TGM: Oh, yes. I had wonderful – one of my French classes, I had a professor [McLaughlin?] and
he used to make fun of the Fleet Bank building that was downtown. It had a green light in the
sort of penthouse that was up on top of the roof, and he used to call that the pickle jar. [laughter]
And I did belong to – oh, for Italian I had professor Alfonso DiSalvio. And I really loved foreign
languages, and I thought maybe for two minutes how nice it would be to go to France for junior
year for a year abroad but I never did do that.
J: They did do that a little bit in those days, didn’t they?
TGM: Very little, yeah. Because that would have helped. In foreign languages, you know, you
learn how to read it, how to write it, you learn all you need to know about the grammar, the
literature, but you don’t really learn the right way to speak it. Conversation wasn’t part of it, but
belonging to the French Club, belonging to the Italian Club, that was the only time that you go to
use it a little, but you didn’t have enough experience with it because you have to eat it, drink it,
sleep it, I believe, to really get to be very fluent in that.
J: A lot of people in Woonsocket spoke French.
TGM: Oh, yes. There were a lot of Canadian French people there, but I never learned – I had an
excellent French teacher at Woonsocket High who called on me the very first day of class
because she saw my name and thought here’s a sure bet, and I disgraced myself terribly because
I didn’t know a thing about French and because I was so young when my father died I never
heard it. But she really taught me a lot.

8

J: Did they speak Italian in your grandfather’s house?
TGM: No. No, they didn’t. He was in business and he was eager to be an American, and he
loved to read, he read all he possibly could and he never spoke with an accent or anything. And
the only time I heard an Italian word was really in the Genoese dialect and I – it was when they
didn’t want us kids to know what they were saying. [laughter] I had one sister and she graduated
from Pembroke in 1944.
J: Do you remember professor Israel Kapstein?
TGM: Well, I remember who he was but I never did have a class with him as professor.
J: Were you involved in the sophomore masque?
TGM: Oh, yes we had the sophomore masque –
J: Tell me about it.
TGM: – and Otto was the director of it.
J: Who’s Otto?
TGM: I don’t remember his last name, but he was the man who taught us all the action that was
in it. It was really all action, no words.
J: What was it about?
TGM: Oh, I think if I remember correctly it was all about capitalism and labor.
J: Wow.

9

TGM: And it was all action, all motion, nothing else. I didn’t enjoy it particularly. [laughter]
J: Did you all do it? Everybody in the class was involved?
TGM: Yes, yes.
J: And what clothes did you wear for this?
TGM: I remember we wore those Danskin, if you call them shoes, they’re not. They’re just soft,
rough leather. And I don’t – we didn’t wear any costumes or anything.
J: Interesting. Were you involved in any of the drama or the Brownbrokers or the Komians?
TGM: No, I did not belong to either one of them. I did belong to the French Club and the Italian
Club. And belonging to the French Club – it’s called [Le Salon France?] – and we used to meet
in the Crystal Room in Alumnae Hall, and there were lots of mirrors hanging on the walls in the
Crystal Room, it was a beautiful room, and we were supposed to speak French but I felt I wasn’t
fluent in it enough. So I’d watch in those mirrors to see which groups were together, you know,
speaking French a mile a minute, and I would steer clear of those groups. [laughter]
J: Do you remember President Barbour?
TGM: Not very well really.
J: You were there when President Wriston came.
TGM: Oh, yes. He was a dynamic individual. It was kind of a joy to hear him speak and he was
the one who I believe began to open up Brown to the world. I think he is the one who deserves
credit for that.
J: In what way do you think he did that?

10

TGM: Well, I think we began to have foreign students. And I just think he felt Brown had a
place internationally and he wanted it to be a definite international place for Brown.
J: That’s interesting. So he spoke in your Chapel sometimes?
TGM: Yes, he did. He was always a joy to hear. We had Chapel every Tuesday once – and
Chapel was not religiously – any religious, it was just a convocation. Very often Dean Morriss
would be the speaker and the only good thing I can remember that she said was put first things
first. [laughter]
J: You weren’t very fond of Dean Morriss?
TGM: Well, she was kind of pompous, and I remember my mother died in March of my senior
year, not long before we graduated. She never saw me graduate. And Dean Morriss called me
into the office – her office – and she did not get up from her chair. She sat very rigidly as if she
had a steel rod up her back and she had kind of a cold manner of speaking. We all used to say
she had ice water in her veins. [laughter] And she said to me, “I’m sorry you have to grow up
overnight.” And that was it. And I thought it was the end of the world. That terrified me. It was
like sticking a sword right through my heart. But that was the way she was. And she called me in
again because I was wearing black and white at the time, and I was wearing kind of a charcoal
grey stocking, and she said to me, “You cannot wear those stockings for commencement.” And I
said, “That will not be a problem.” She said, “You must buy your stockings in the bookstore.” So
I went to the bookstore, bought the stockings, and there was one shade, nude. And when you
think of what the commencement procession looks like today, that was so insignificant.
J: Did they have very definite rules about what you wore at commencement underneath your
gown?
TGM: No. I – we’ll get back to Chapel. There was one room on the ground floor of Alumnae
Hall that was called the Cap and Gown Room. And for Chapel the seniors had to wear their cap

11

and gown, and the rest of us all had to stand while the seniors marched in. And, by the way,
attendance was taken at Chapel because you were not allowed to miss, you had... There was an
organist and a very nice organ in Alumnae Hall in the auditorium, and there were maybe a
handful of students who were in what they called the choir. That was four or five people who
would sing as the seniors marched in. And what else...
J: Did they sing hymns?
TGM: They sang – not hymns– there was just one that they sang. And I think the organist was
William [Denine?]. And that auditorium would be cleared out for our dances. All the chairs
would be taken out of the auditorium and we’d have our dances and our special proms there. And
I must say, you know, that was the big band era, and we did have some of the real big bands for
those proms. For my junior prom, we had Artie Shaw.
J: Wow.
TGM: And you could go to any of the proms as long as you bought a ticket, you know, for other
classes. Because we had – oh, we had Les Brown, we had Glen Miller, we had Harry James, and
I do remember one Brown prom, they had Paul Whiteman.
J: So were the tickets expensive for these proms?
TGM: I don’t remember how much they were but everybody did go, yes.
J: And you got a date from Brown?
TGM: I – couple of times, but I knew somebody else who was a marvelous dancer and very
often I went with him. [laughter]
J: So did you work while you were at college for money?

12

TGM: No, I didn’t. Some of my classmates used to work at sm– like small jobs. At that time, the
girls' dormitories had a dining room and they had their meals in there. Those of us who
commuted were called the City Girls and there was a cafeteria on the bottom floor of Alumnae
Hall and we had, stretching from one side of that cafeteria to the other, a long, long, long table –
several put together – and we had a whole bunch of City Girls who sat there. And we used to
have our lunch there.
J: Was it family style or did they serve you?
TGM: Oh, no. You went up to the kitchen counter, you know, to order what you want. But many
people did bring their own lunches. I did. And sometimes you would get other things to fill in,
you know. And there was a group of women students who use– who latched onto one corner of
the cafeteria, there was a piano there, but they played bridge and drank Coke and that was their
territory, just as that long table across the back of the cafeteria was the City Girls’ territory.
[laughter]
J: Did you use West House?
TGM: I didn’t but my sister did – was there was a very, very short time until... She lived in
Miller Hall on the Pembroke campus. Or at first – she applied late for a dorm room and for a
very, very short time she lived on Angell Street in a RISD dormitory. But that very brief until a
dormitory room opened up for her. And mentioning RISD, there was a connection between RISD
and Brown and Pembroke where you could take courses at RISD and I had always loved to draw,
and I took advantage of that arrangement. But first I had to take an art course at Brown, and I had
professor Will S. Taylor for that. He was a little man on the elderly side, and the art department
was on George Street in a little old colonial house, and he would stand at the driveway near the
sidewalk and he’d stop people and bring them in to be models sometimes for us. And I learned a
lot in that art course. I’m glad we had – I had – to take that first because I learned so much in that
course. Then after that I did take courses at RISD and I took a graphic ar– because at one time,
even though I felt I wanted to be a teacher all the time, because I loved to draw – my father was
art– he did a painting when he was only 14 and I thought maybe I should want to go into

13

commercial art or something like that, but you had to be 17 to enter RISD. So that took care of
that. And I’m glad it did because I did take advantage of taking some courses at RISD and I did
enjoy them, too, very much.
J: Can you tell me about the physical education classes?
TGM: Oh, Bessie Rudd.
J: Bessie Rudd, yes.
TGM: Bessie Rudd. She was really a character. Tough as nails. [laughter] And I really liked
playing field hockey. The only thing was I had to wear eyeglass guards which I hated, because I
started wearing eyeglasses when I was two years old, and I used to try to get away with not
putting them on once in a while but Bessie was right on top of me. [laughter] She used to call me
– there was a Virginia Gagnon in the class and she used to call me Virginia a lot by mistake. And
we had to – we had swimming because you had to pass the swimming test or you wouldn’t
graduate. Well, I tell you we had more fun in that swimming class because it was at Lyman
Gym, that was the swimming pool, and we had the most god awful cotton tank suits with sleeves
in them, legs in them, and they were cotton. And when that cotton got wet, it was so heavy. The
legs were almost down to your ankles and the neckline was almost down to, well, too low.
[laughter]
We used to laugh at one another so much. [laughter] And to pass the swimming test, I
could not get up on the diving board. When I was up high I got dizzy, and I just couldn’t do it.
Bessie Rudd said, “I’ll give you 50 cents if you stay down under,” because she thought I was
afraid I wouldn’t come back up. I said, “Miss Rudd, what good would your 50 cents do me if I
did stay down?” She said, “Oh, for that, I’ve got to let you jump right off the side of the pool.”
So that’s what she let me do. [laughter] But she was really a tough one.
And I remember to play hockey, where was the little field we played in at first? It was
down in the corner of Charlesfield Street and, oh my goodness, you had to go to the gym on the
Pembroke campus, change into your gym suit which was really a ridiculous looking thing
because they were brown gym bloomers with a colored stripe down the side of each of your legs

14

with the color of your class. And my class color was yellow and yellow rose was our class
flower. Well, coming from that little field that we had for a while after racing and then racing
back to the campus to change into your clothes and all that, that was really breathtaking and I do
mean it literally because the bell on University Hall would ring every hour, you know, between
classes. [laughter] It was so nice to hear that but, oh boy, you had to hurry up too much.
[laughter]
J: It’s quite a walk over to Charlesfield.
TGM: Oh, yes. Especially after you had been, you know, busy playing hockey and stuff. Oh, but
we survived. I guess it was all good for us. [laughter]
J: You did bowling as well?
TGM: Oh, there was that bowling alley in the basement of Sayles Hall, which was the
gymnasium, and if we finished classes a little early we’d scoot over to the bowling alley and it
was – you had to set up pins yourself, but we had a lot of fun there. And then they said on
Saturday nights if you wanted to bring a date or some friends to bowl you could, you know, sign
up for using them. And we did that quite a bit.
J: How many lanes were there down there?
TGM: Two. But no mechanical setup or anything. But we – we really enjoyed that very much. I
was sorry when they took it out because it’s now a classroom building.
J: I’ve seen pictures of Pembroke women doing archery.
TGM: Oh, yes.
J: Did you do that?

15

TGM: No. No. I liked basketball. I was pretty good at that. And then field hockey. And one time
I forgot to put my shin guards on. I was in such a hurry to get going to start playing and Miss
Rudd noticed that and I got a real dressing down for that because that was pretty bad. [laughter]
Getting hit in the shins with a hockey stick is nothing to let happen.
J: So when you went down to Charlesfield Street in your shorts, did you have to put your
raincoat on top? How did – could you walk showing your legs?
TGM: Oh, no. We wore our coats.
J: Because you can’t show your legs to everybody. [laughter] Did you have to have posture
pictures taken?
TGM: Oh, yes we did.
J: Tell me about that.
TGM: We used to call it in an angel robe, it was something like a sheet thrown over you. And
they took posture pictures of us, and I remember they also did a tuberculosis test on everybody.
And sometimes if the gym wasn’t being used we’d – we might shoot baskets and stuff like that.
We enjoyed the place as much as we could. [laughter]
J: With the posture pictures, what actually were you wearing when they were taking this
photograph?
TGM: As I remember it was something like a sheet over you.
J: Over your underwear?
TGM: No.

16

J: Over nothing? And did that – it was just the sheet? They’d – so how did they see your back?
They’re supposed to be looking at your backbone, so you had to hold it open?
TGM: I don’t remember.
J: And this was when you –
TGM: I guess I forgot about that because I didn’t really like it. [laughter]
J: Did you have it done more than once?
TGM: No.
J: Just once, as a freshman?
TGM: Yes.
J: So, you were there for the second half of the 1930s when there was a certain amount of student
activity about peace and avoiding getting involved in European wars. Do you remember any of
that?
TGM: Well, I remember when – well they had ROTC for a while and when my sister was here
they said if – well, so many had gone off to war and things were a little bit different – they
allowed people who wanted to accelerate and take courses in the summer so that they could
graduate earlier. And she did that.
J: So what year did you come back and do you master’s degree?
TGM: I got my master’s in ’62.
J: ‘62. So quite a bit later.

17

TGM: Right, yes.
J: Things must have been very different by then.
TGM: Well... Yeah, I always loved to learn. And as a teacher I felt my job was to infect every
student who crossed my path with the same love of learning that I always had. I wanted to be a
people maker and not a people breaker. And I really have done everything from kindergarten
through the 12th grade – and because I was so young when I graduated, I was 19 when I
graduated from Brown. And I was teaching at Woonsocket High and they gave me seniors all the
time, and those kids were almost as old as I was. [laughter]
J: Was that difficult?
TGM: No. No. I can remember sending only one student down to the office. [laughter] And the
principal used to come in to visit my classes often because he liked what he called socialized
recitation. I always planned to have everybody in the class involved, not – I didn’t excuse
anybody from participating, so I had a way of checking up to see if they had done their
assignment by having them start off, giving them the opportunity to ask other students in the
class a question. Had to be a thought question, and that worked pretty well, and the principal did
enjoy coming in to see that. So he came in often.
J: So, perhaps bringing this conversation to an end, what is your best memory of your time at
Pembroke?
TGM: My best memory... Well, I did enjoy those special proms and I made a lot of friends and I
enjoyed that very much. In fact, one of my classmates whom I had known from junior high days,
who lived in Woonsocket, her parents bought her the car if she would take commuters in and
charge them. She was taking pre-med and, of course, we all had to take biology and one day in
biology class – the professor was a woman professor, Magel Wilder, and she was teaching about
the skeleton. She had a skeleton – a human skeleton – hanging on a wooden frame and she

18

picked up one of the legs of the skeleton and the knee cap fell out onto the wooden floor and it
made quite a bang. [laughter] She jumped back a mile and we thought that was so funny, here
she was afraid of her own stuff. [laughter] And one day in the laboratory, I enjoyed do– we had a
laboratory notebook which meant you had to draw your specimens and label everything and all
that. I didn’t particularly enjoy the – using the dissecting needles and all that. I did not like
putting my hands on the specimens. But one day, this friend whose name was Olga opened the
wrong jar – we were working on frogs at the time – and she took the lid off the jar of live frogs
instead of the ones that were in formaldehyde and a frog jumped out and we were like a bunch of
fools jumping all over that lab to try to catch that frog and we never did. [laughter]
J: [laughter] Right, so the frog got away?
TGM: Yes, he got away. [laughter] There were – Olga and there was Virginia Kelley – we were
very good friends. Everybody used to call us the three musketeers because, somehow or other,
we, you know – they saw us together a lot. And one time, oh, we were able to use our train
tickets on the New England bus that went by, so one afternoon Olga and I had a little time. We
went to the bowling alley and then we realized it was getting time for the bus so we hurried out,
went down Meeting Street, and there was a set of granite steps in part of Meeting Street. Well,
we were rushing so much I caught my heel on one of the steps and fell down the steps and a
woman who was walking up the hill screamed, “Is she dead?” [laughter] Oh and I have to tell
you, when it was slippery weather, going down the hill, we’d go down to the Benefit Street
entrance of the courthouse. We’d go in the courthouse, take the elevator down because that hill
was treacherous and I was scared to death of the ice. [laughter]
J: That’s a very good idea going in that elevator.
TGM: Yeah, we were clever, we thought. [laughter] So I had fun but I did stay up late nights
studying.
J: It must have been very different being a City Girl to a dorm girl.

19

TGM: Oh, yes. The dorm girls all knew one another and they – you know, living together, they
were together a lot and... But there were a lot of City Girls because at that time it was more of a
local college. Most of the people came from Rhode Island.
J: In your year, were there any African American girls, women?
TGM: Oh, yes there was a woman named Bea Minkins and she had a sister, and they were just
the nicest, nicest people. They were so nice. I don’t know whether they’re still alive. I don’t
think they’re still living. But I used to see Bea sometimes at things because I really always came
back to things. I always used to say I never left this place. [laughter]
J: Well, that happens to some people, doesn’t it?
TGM: Yeah.
J: So you have been very involved over the years?
TGM: Oh, very much so. And I mean after I graduated I really came to so many things here, and
I worked on so many Brown fund phone-a-thons. And I really did pretty well. I used to win
prizes for the amounts I’d bring in.
J: Very good.
TGM: Well, I developed a good line. I was really a good fundraiser and I remember one time I
had this card of a doctor to call, and they used to write the suggested target amount on the card,
and so I asked him for the target amount and I remember distinctly it was $1,200 at the time.
And he said, “Oh, I think I can do that.” I said, “You know what, I haven’t even worked for this.
I tell you what, you hang up, I’ll call you back and ask for more.” [laughter] So right on the spot,
he did raise it –
J: That’s a very wicked move.

20

TGM: – thousand dollars. I know. I really... I know there was one – she was a trustee and she
said one time, she told people at the Pembroke Center, “Don’t ever have Teresa Malone call
me,” because I never let anybody get away. [laughter] One time I had all doctors’ cards at a
phone-a-thon and one doctor said, “Oh, I’ve just given heavily to my medical school,” and I said,
“Well, good for you supporting your medical school, but you know what? If you hadn’t gone to
Brown first, you might not have gone to that medical school, so let’s put first things first.”
[laughter] Quoting Dean Morriss. [laughter] And he didn’t give a lot but he did give and that was
the first time he had ever given to Brown. [laughter] So I really – I worked hard at that. In fact,
sometimes they had students call – making the calls – and any time that was the case they’d have
– the one who was in charge from the Brown Fund for that evening phone-a-thon used to say,
“Tell them to listen for a while,” to me making calls so they could get some ideas. [laughter]
J: That’s great. Well, I think we will bring this conversation to a close. I want to thank you very,
very much. It’s been a pleasure talking to you.
TGM: Well, thank you so much, Jane. It’s been a pleasure to meet you and I hope I have been
helpful.
J: You have indeed. Thank you very much.
- END -

21

