CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  This	  is	  an	  interview	  with	  Eleanor	  M.	  Addison,	  who	  graduated	  in	  1938	  from	  Pembroke	  with	  a	  math	  major.	  She	  received	  her	  Masters	  in	  Math	  in	  1941	  from	  Brown.	  She	  went	  to	  work	  in	  the	  Providence	  public	  school	  system	  until	  returning	  to	  work	  in	  the	  newly	  created	  applied	  math	  department.	  [She]	  is	  recently	  retired.	  This	  interview	  is	  being	  conducted	  on	  November	  29,	  1982	  in	  Charlotte	  Erwin's	  dorm	  room	  in	  West	  Andrews	  dormitory	  on	  the	  Pembroke	  campus.	  This	  interviewer	  is	  Charlotte	  Erwin,	  representing	  the	  Pembroke	  Archive	  project.	  I	  have	  some-­‐	  I	  have	  a	  few	  questions	  to	  kind	  of	  go	  from	  but	  whatever-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  All	  right.	  Go	  ahead.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  I'm	  interested	  in	  is	  any,	  your	  recollections	  of	  what	  it	  was	  like	  being	  a	  student	  here	  and	  I	  understand	  that	  since	  you	  were	  a	  day	  student	  it's	  not,	  like	  you	  said,	  quite	  the	  same.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No,	  it	  isn't	  quite	  the	  same.	  It's	  almost	  in	  some	  respects	  like	  a	  continuation	  of	  high	  school,	  especially	  if	  one	  is	  a	  commuter	  on	  public	  transportation	  system.	  So	  if	  one	  takes	  the	  bus	  and	  comes	  in,	  takes	  one's	  classes,	  [inaudible	  0:01:12],	  take's	  part	  in	  some	  athletic	  events.	  I	  think	  that	  Brown's	  policy	  now	  of	  more	  or	  less	  requiring	  people	  to	  live	  on	  campus	  is	  an	  ideal	  solution,	  if	  one	  can	  afford	  it.	  But	  probably	  at	  least	  [inaudible	  0:01:27]	  I	  wouldn't	  swear	  to	  that	  exact	  proportion,	  but	  I	  think	  it's	  pretty	  close,	  that	  at	  least	  half	  of	  us	  were	  what	  they	  called	  "day	  hops."	  And	  this	  does	  make	  a	  difference	  in	  college	  life	  because	  it	  precludes	  the	  possibility	  of	  sitting	  down	  with	  one's	  classmates	  in	  the	  dormitories	  having	  rap	  sessions…	  [break	  in	  audio]	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  …	  One-­‐third	  increase	  right	  there,	  that's	  a	  lot.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Oh	  yeah.	  It	  used	  to	  go	  up	  50	  dollars	  a	  year.	  I	  think	  it	  went	  350,	  then	  to	  4[00]	  and	  450,	  and	  then	  it	  went	  up	  to	  5[00]	  but	  they	  let	  the	  seniors	  continue	  on	  at	  the	  450	  rate,	  if	  my	  recollection	  is	  correct.	  But	  your-­‐the	  University	  records	  can	  correct	  those	  figures	  if	  necessary.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  How	  did	  the	  Depression	  affect	  you	  personally?	  How	  did	  you	  come	  up	  with	  that	  money	  and	  was	  it	  very	  hard?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No,	  I	  was	  able	  to	  get	  it	  from	  my	  mother.	  She	  had	  enough	  to	  put	  me	  through.	  And	  I	  did	  a	  little	  bit	  of	  work	  here	  on	  the	  campus.	  I	  belonged	  to	  the	  choir	  and	  we	  got	  a	  small	  amount	  of	  money	  for	  that.	  And	  I	  corrected	  math	  papers.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  You	  said	  you	  got	  a	  small	  amount	  of	  money	  for	  being	  in	  the	  choir?	  They	  paid	  you?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes,	  very	  small	  amount.	  And	  then	  I	  did	  correct	  math	  papers	  so	  I	  got	  something	  for	  that.	  And	  did	  a	  little	  bit	  of	  tutoring	  and	  in	  that	  way	  picked	  up	  some	  change,	  but	  basically	  the	  raising	  of	  tuition	  was	  not	  a	  problem	  for	  me	  as	  it	  was	  for	  many	  people.	  It	  was	  not	  for	  me.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  would	  some	  of	  your	  classmates	  that	  were	  in	  not	  as	  fortunate	  situations,	  how	  did	  they	  manage?	  Do	  you	  know?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Well,	  there	  was	  no	  such	  thing	  as	  borrowing	  student	  loans	  in	  those	  days.	  So	  they	  just	  worked	  their	  way	  through.	  They	  worked	  jobs	  on	  campus	  that	  one	  of	  the	  [inaudible	  0:03:24:00]	  jobs	  in	  the	  library,	  which	  were	  very	  popular.	  I	  think	  those	  were	  probably	  the	  most	  popular.	  And	  then	  some	  of	  the	  girls	  who	  were	  here	  on	  campus,	  who	  were	  not	  day	  students	  but	  lived	  in	  a	  co-­‐operative	  dorm	  and	  they	  manage	  to	  make	  ends	  meet	  there	  between	  a	  lesser	  amount	  of	  room	  and	  board	  to	  pay.	  And	  then	  the	  only	  way	  to	  raise	  the	  tuition	  if	  you	  couldn't	  get	  it	  [inaudible	  0:03:54]	  is	  to	  work	  for	  it.	  There	  was	  no	  such	  thing	  as	  student	  loans.	  They	  did	  not	  exist	  then.	  They	  were	  something	  that	  didn't	  come	  in	  'til	  about	  what	  ten	  years	  ago	  or	  something	  like	  that.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  I	  think	  so.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Ok.	  Yes?	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  How	  would	  you	  say	  the	  Depression-­‐I'm	  interested	  in	  the	  Depression	  as	  a	  period	  since	  that's	  the	  time	  period	  we're	  looking	  at.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  That's	  right.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Do	  you	  feel	  any	  residual	  effects	  or	  values	  from	  that	  time	  period?	  Was	  that	  a	  significant	  time	  period	  for	  you,	  in	  terms	  of	  your	  attitudes	  about	  life	  in	  general?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No,	  but	  I	  did	  realize	  how	  very	  very	  difficult	  it	  was	  for	  a	  large	  percentage	  of	  the	  population.	  I	  mean	  those	  were	  the	  days	  when	  men	  stood	  on	  the	  street	  corners	  selling	  apples	  to	  survive.	  And	  if	  anything	  I	  think	  it	  would	  probably	  have	  made	  me	  more	  cautious	  in	  my	  future	  financial	  dealings.	  [5:00]	  Conservation	  perhaps	  is	  the	  word.	  Knowing	  that	  money	  was	  not	  that	  plentiful,	  I	  could	  get	  by.	  I	  always	  had	  a	  job.	  But	  it	  wasn't,	  the	  money	  wasn't	  plentiful.	  And	  schoolteachers	  in	  those	  days	  didn't	  make	  very	  much	  money.	  Don't	  laugh	  but	  they	  were	  paying	  900	  dollars	  a	  year	  for	  teachers.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  How	  did	  that	  compare	  to	  the	  cost	  of	  living?	  	  	  2	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Well	  because	  the	  cost	  of	  living	  was	  much	  lower	  too.	  People	  could	  manage	  on	  it.	  Oh	  yes.	  Not	  happily,	  but	  they	  could	  manage.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  I'm	  interested,	  what	  kind	  of	  family	  background	  are	  you	  from?	  How	  large	  is	  your	  family	  [inaudible	  0:05:41]	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  was	  an	  only	  child.	  My	  father	  died	  when	  I	  was	  four	  months	  old.	  So	  I	  was	  an	  only	  child.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was-­‐	  had	  your	  mother	  gone	  to	  college?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  She	  hadn't.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No,	  only	  through	  high	  school.	  [clears	  throat]	  Excuse	  me.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Did	  she	  push	  you	  to	  go	  to	  college	  or	  was	  that	  kind	  of	  a	  decision	  you	  made	  on	  your	  own?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  That	  was	  my	  own	  decision	  but	  she	  was-­‐she	  backed	  me	  up	  100	  percent.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Were	  you	  born	  in	  Providence?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Born	  in	  Woonsocket.	  Northern	  part	  of	  Rhode	  Island.	  [coughs]	  Excuse	  me.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  Woonsocket	  like	  when	  you	  were	  a	  child?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  left	  there	  at	  the	  age	  of	  two	  and	  a	  half.	  I	  have	  no	  recollection	  of	  it.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  where	  did	  you	  spend	  your	  childhood?	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Providence.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  In	  Providence.	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  Providence	  like	  when	  you	  were	  growing	  up?	  How	  large	  was	  it?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  If	  anything,	  a	  little	  bit	  larger	  than	  it	  is	  today	  because	  people	  have	  now	  started	  in	  the	  last	  ten	  years	  or	  since	  the	  war,	  since	  the	  Second	  World	  War,	  moving	  out	  into	  the	  suburbs.	  So	  that	  your	  surrounding	  communities	  have	  become	  larger,	  whereas	  Providence	  has	  shrunk	  by	  several	  thousand.	  It	  was	  up	  over	  200	  thousand	  when	  I	  was	  a	  youngster	  and	  it's	  what	  	  3	  around	  170	  something	  thousand	  now.	  Something	  like	  that.	  There's	  been	  a	  vast	  drop	  over	  the	  years.	  So	  it	  was	  a	  larger	  city	  with	  a	  much	  more	  active	  downtown	  section	  than	  we	  have	  now.	  We	  had	  several	  department	  stores	  in	  those	  days	  and	  they	  were	  all	  flourishing.	  That	  is	  as	  much	  as	  anything	  flourished	  during	  the	  Depression.	  Once	  the	  Depression	  ended	  and	  the	  Second	  World	  War	  started,	  then	  they	  all	  flourished.	  There	  was	  plenty	  of	  money	  then.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  the	  main	  industry	  of	  Providence	  back	  then?	  Do	  you	  know?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  To	  what	  it	  is	  today,	  still,	  the	  biggest	  or	  largest	  employer	  of	  people	  in	  Providence	  in	  those	  days	  was	  Brown	  &	  Sharpe.	  Then,	  of	  course,	  they	  moved	  to	  the	  country.	  But	  the	  low	  priced	  jewelry	  trade	  manufacture	  was	  and	  still	  is	  one	  of	  the	  biggest	  industries	  in	  Providence.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Like	  the	  factory	  outlets	  and	  that	  kind	  of	  thing?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No,	  I	  mean	  the	  manufacturing	  of	  it.	  I	  don't	  mean	  the	  outlets.	  I	  mean	  the	  manufacturing	  of	  [clears	  throat]	  relatively	  inexpensive	  up	  to	  quite	  expensive	  jewelry.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Of	  the	  people	  that	  you	  grew	  up	  with,	  how	  many	  of	  your	  friends	  went	  on-­‐especially	  your	  women	  friends-­‐went	  onto	  college?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Well,	  I	  went	  to	  Classical	  High	  School	  and	  if	  one	  went	  to	  Classical	  High	  School	  it	  was	  pretty	  automatically	  assumed	  and	  actually	  did	  take	  place	  in	  90	  percent	  of	  the	  students,	  we	  all	  went	  on	  to	  college.	  It	  was	  a	  prep	  school.	  It	  was	  a	  public	  school	  but	  a	  prep	  school.	  Pure	  and	  simple.	  So	  the	  friends	  I	  made	  in	  high	  school	  all	  went	  on	  to	  college.	  Not	  all,	  they	  didn't	  all	  come	  here,	  of	  course,	  but	  they	  did	  go	  to	  college.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Was	  there	  a	  large	  percent-­‐	  was	  there	  a	  lot	  of	  professional	  types?	  And	  was	  that	  a	  big	  part	  of	  the	  economy	  here	  in	  Providence?	  The	  lawyers,	  doctors-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Oh	  yes.	  That's	  always	  been	  a	  big	  percentage	  of	  the	  population.	  Oh	  yes.	  But	  I	  think	  it's	  even	  more	  so	  today.	  Definitely.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  I'm	  not	  that	  familiar	  with	  this	  area	  but	  I	  understand	  that	  there's	  several	  ethnic	  groups	  that	  live	  in	  Providence.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  That's	  correct.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Portuguese	  and	  Italian	  and	  all	  that.	  Were	  there	  several	  different-­‐	  did	  that	  exist	  then?	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Oh	  yes.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Where	  there	  lots	  of	  different	  religious	  groups	  at	  that	  time?	  	  4	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  The	  number	  of	  religious	  groups	  then	  would	  be	  the	  same	  as	  it	  is	  today	  with	  maybe	  a	  few	  esoteric	  [both	  clear	  throat]	  religions	  that	  have	  crept	  in	  the	  last	  few	  years.	  [10:00]	  You	  know	  like	  Baha’i	  and	  some	  of	  those,	  which	  were	  not	  there	  in	  my	  youth.	  But	  basically,	  the	  religious	  distribution	  remains	  the	  same.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  You	  majored	  in	  math,	  is	  that	  correct?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  That's	  correct.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What-­‐	  could	  you	  take	  any	  courses	  at	  the	  University?	  Was	  that	  from	  Brown	  or	  Pembroke?	  Did	  it	  matter?	  Could	  you	  switch	  around?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  When	  I	  came-­‐no,	  when	  I	  came	  to	  the	  University,	  all	  our	  freshman	  courses	  were	  strictly	  feminine.	  Some	  of	  them	  were	  held	  on	  the	  Brown	  campus	  but	  most	  of	  them	  were	  held	  here.	  After	  that	  it	  was	  a	  complete	  mix.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  After	  your	  freshman	  year	  you	  could	  take	  courses	  with-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes.	  Well,	  you	  could	  in	  your	  freshman	  year	  but	  generally	  what	  was	  offered,	  was	  offered	  right	  here	  on	  the	  campus.	  The	  professors	  came	  over	  here.	  And	  so	  the	  first	  year	  we	  didn't	  have	  too	  much	  in	  the	  way	  of	  classwork,	  classes	  on	  the	  other	  campus.	  But	  once	  the	  freshman	  year	  was	  over	  then	  most	  of	  our	  classes	  and	  courses	  were	  over	  there.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  When	  you	  say	  it	  was	  strictly	  feminine,	  do	  you	  mean	  it	  was	  just-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  mean	  the	  classes	  were	  all	  female.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Were	  all	  women.	  The	  subject	  matter	  was	  not	  strictly-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Oh	  no,	  no.	  The	  subject	  matter	  was	  great.	  We	  had	  a	  first	  year	  math	  was	  taught	  at	  Pembroke	  and	  just	  as	  first	  year	  math	  was	  taught	  at	  Brown.	  Biology	  we	  took	  over	  at	  Brown	  but	  it	  was	  an	  all-­‐female	  class	  and	  it	  was	  taught	  at	  that	  time	  by	  the	  only	  woman	  in	  the	  biology	  faculty.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  How	  many	  of	  your	  professors	  were	  women?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  can	  think	  of	  only	  two,	  except	  for	  the	  gym	  instructors.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Oh,	  wow.	  That's	  really	  interesting.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  Women	  professors	  were	  almost	  an	  unknown	  quantity.	  They	  didn't	  start	  coming	  in	  for	  many	  many	  years	  after	  that.	  The	  dean	  was	  a	  woman,	  of	  course.	  And	  Dr.	  [Magel	  Craig]	  Wilder,	  who	  taught	  biology,	  was	  a	  woman.	  And	  then	  there	  was	  a	  woman	  who	  	  5	  taught	  speech.	  We	  all	  had	  to	  take	  speech	  for	  one	  semester	  and	  that	  was	  taught	  by	  a	  woman	  whose	  name	  is	  long	  since	  gone	  from	  my	  memory.	  And	  those	  are	  the	  only	  women	  I	  know	  on	  the	  faculty	  at	  that	  time.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Tell	  me	  about	  the	  dean.	  What	  do	  you	  remember	  of	  her?	  Did	  you-­‐	  because	  some	  people	  had	  specific	  memories	  of	  her.	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  remember	  the	  dean	  as	  being	  somewhat	  austere.	  I	  remember	  her	  as	  not	  being	  in	  favor	  of	  young	  ladies	  who	  wanted	  to	  major	  in	  math	  or	  the	  sciences.	  I	  also	  [laughs]	  remember	  that	  she	  considered	  the	  class	  of	  1938	  the	  most	  uncooperative	  class	  she	  had	  ever	  met.	  That	  will	  give	  you	  an	  idea.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Yeah.	  What	  was	  her	  name?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Morriss.	  Dean	  Morriss.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Dean	  Morriss.	  Yeah.	  So	  she	  didn't	  really	  encourage	  to	  branch	  out	  into	  the	  science.	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  She	  didn't.	  She	  didn't.	  I	  thought	  she	  tried	  to	  discourage.	  I	  can	  remember	  one	  classmate	  who	  wanted	  to	  go	  take	  a	  pre-­‐med	  course	  and	  then	  eventually	  go	  into	  medicine.	  And	  she	  said,	  'Don't	  be	  ridiculous.	  You'd	  never	  get	  into	  medicine.'	  Well,	  the	  young	  lady	  finished	  Brown	  and	  she	  got	  into	  Johns	  Hopkins	  med	  school.	  So	  much	  for	  the	  dean.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  much	  for	  the	  dean.	  That's	  interesting.	  So	  there	  was,	  at	  least	  from	  the	  dean,	  there	  was	  social	  pressure	  to	  take	  the	  certain	  kinds	  of	  traditionally	  women's	  courses.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes.	  I	  think	  one	  could	  say	  that.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Was	  that	  present?	  	  Did	  you	  feel	  that	  kind	  of	  pressure	  influence	  from	  other	  sources?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Why	  did	  you	  choose	  Brown?	  Pembroke.	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Because	  I	  could	  afford	  it	  if	  I	  lived	  at	  home.	  I	  could	  have	  gone	  to	  Rhode	  Island	  College	  or	  in	  those	  days	  it	  was	  called	  Rhode	  Island	  College	  of	  Education	  but	  I	  had	  no	  desire	  to	  go.	  I	  took	  the	  exams,	  was	  admitted,	  and	  then	  said	  no	  way.	  I	  could	  not	  afford	  to	  go	  away	  to	  college.	  But	  if	  I	  could	  live	  here	  I	  [interviewer	  coughs]	  could	  afford	  a	  liberal	  arts	  education.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  Brown's	  political	  reputation,	  in	  terms	  of	  political	  activism	  on	  campus	  and	  stuff?	  	  6	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  think	  it	  was	  pretty	  much	  new.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Was	  that	  about	  the	  same	  as	  on	  other	  campuses,	  would	  you	  say?	  [15:00]	  Other	  Ivies?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  don't	  really	  know.	  I	  have	  no	  way	  of	  knowing.	  I	  think	  the	  general	  feeling	  at	  the	  time	  was	  that	  everyone	  was	  struggling	  to	  get	  through	  the	  Depression	  and	  I	  don't	  think	  they	  had	  too	  much	  time	  for	  activism.	  Many	  people	  were	  working	  hard	  to	  work	  their	  way	  through	  this	  university.	  If	  you	  have	  to	  do	  that	  you	  don't	  have	  too	  much	  time	  to	  become	  active	  in	  other	  things.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  the	  workload	  like	  in	  general?	  How	  many	  hours	  a	  day	  would	  you	  study?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  We	  had	  five	  courses	  a	  year.	  I	  think	  you	  only	  have	  four	  now,	  don't	  you?	  Four	  a	  semester.	  Yeah.	  We	  had	  five.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  You	  can	  take	  as	  little	  as	  three.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Well,	  we	  had	  five.	  Period.	  And	  that	  continued	  all	  through	  college	  and	  it	  continued	  when	  I	  was	  in	  graduate	  school.	  And	  then	  just	  the	  semester	  before	  I	  got	  my	  masters	  degree	  they	  decided	  that	  four	  courses	  would	  be	  sufficient.	  So	  that	  anybody	  who	  came	  along,	  let's	  see	  the	  classes	  of	  ‘40,	  ’41,	  went	  down	  to	  four	  courses	  a	  semester	  instead	  of	  the	  usual	  five.	  As	  far	  as	  the	  studying	  is	  concerned,	  well…	  time	  has	  erased,	  I'm	  afraid,	  most	  of	  that	  from	  my	  memory.	  If	  one	  majors	  in	  math	  and	  takes	  physics	  and	  things	  like	  that,	  it's	  a	  case	  of	  doing	  one's	  studying	  on	  a	  day	  to	  day	  basis	  because	  these	  are	  things	  that	  have	  to	  be	  in,	  have	  to	  be	  in,	  have	  to	  be	  in.	  Every	  class	  meeting	  usually	  there	  was	  an	  assignment	  to	  be	  held.	  This	  is	  not	  necessarily	  true	  in	  English	  and	  History	  where	  you	  might	  have	  a	  paper	  but	  you	  might	  have	  four	  or	  five	  weeks	  to	  prepare	  it.	  You	  might	  let	  it	  slide	  and	  then	  at	  the	  last	  minute	  try	  to	  get	  it	  in.	  So	  with	  the	  sciences,	  I	  think	  it's	  more	  or	  less	  a	  steady	  studying	  rather	  than	  studying	  in	  spurts,	  as	  [inaudible	  0:17:09].	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Did	  you	  feel	  that-­‐	  well	  did	  having	  a	  college	  degree	  help	  you	  in	  getting	  your	  job?	  Would	  it	  have	  been	  possible	  for	  you	  to	  teach	  math	  with	  say	  a	  high	  school	  diploma?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  It	  would	  depend	  on	  the	  school	  system.	  Theoretically,	  one	  was	  expected	  to	  have	  graduated	  from	  a	  university	  before	  getting	  a	  certificate	  to	  teach	  on	  the	  high	  school	  level.	  See	  the	  old	  Rhode	  Island	  College	  of	  Education	  prepared	  people	  up	  through	  the	  junior	  high	  level.	  And	  theoretically,	  regular	  colleges	  and	  universities	  prepared	  them	  for	  the	  senior	  high	  level,	  but	  this	  did	  not	  always	  follow.	  There	  were	  crossovers.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  if	  you	  were	  very	  good	  at	  teaching	  or	  something	  you	  could	  teach	  high	  school	  with	  a	  high	  school	  diploma	  or-­‐	  	  7	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Oh,	  not	  with	  a	  high	  school	  diploma.	  No,	  certainly	  not.	  But	  you	  could	  go	  into	  the	  high	  school	  in	  some	  instances	  if	  you	  graduated	  only	  from	  a	  teacher's	  college	  as	  opposed	  to	  a	  university.	  There	  were	  crossovers	  there.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Did	  you	  go	  straight-­‐did	  you	  start	  working	  right	  after	  you	  graduated?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  I	  did	  a	  year	  of	  student	  teaching	  and	  worked	  part-­‐time	  at	  the	  University	  while	  I	  was	  doing	  it.	  I	  was	  working	  on	  my	  Masters	  degree	  and	  working	  for	  Professor	  [Andrew	  Hamilton]	  MacPhail	  on	  educational	  measurements.	  Working	  on	  a	  project	  for	  him.	  And	  then	  that	  became	  a	  part	  of	  my	  Masters	  thesis.	  See	  we	  had	  to	  do	  a	  thesis	  in	  a	  Masters	  in	  those	  days.	  I	  think	  they	  don't	  so	  much	  now.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  that	  project?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  We	  were	  trying	  to	  determine	  whether	  the	  exams	  given	  to	  students	  entering	  would	  have	  any-­‐	  give	  us	  any	  indication	  of	  how	  well	  they	  might	  do.	  The	  scores	  were	  broken	  down	  into	  language	  and	  sciences.	  And	  we	  tried	  to	  find	  out	  whether	  there	  was	  any	  correlation	  between	  how	  well	  a	  person	  did	  on	  the	  entrance	  exams	  in	  those	  fields	  and	  how	  well	  that	  person	  did	  once	  he	  or	  she	  was	  in	  college.	  And	  as	  I	  recall	  it,	  I	  found	  relatively	  little	  correlation.	  Not	  enough	  one	  way	  or	  another	  to	  use	  it	  as	  a	  valid	  measurement	  of	  what	  one	  could	  expect.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Was	  that-­‐	  did	  they	  have	  the	  SAT	  then?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  [20:00]	  [sighs]	  They	  had	  something	  but	  they	  probably	  called	  it	  by	  a	  different	  name.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  But	  it	  was	  the	  same	  idea?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Same	  idea.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  The	  verbal	  and	  the	  math.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Did	  you-­‐	  have	  you	  been	  married?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  You	  never	  did.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  	  	  	  8	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Okay	  this	  is	  sort	  of	  different	  separate.	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Okay.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  Brown	  like?	  Okay,	  when	  you	  were	  here	  was	  there	  much	  cultural	  diversity?	  ‘Cause	  that	  is	  what	  they	  stress	  now.	  People	  from	  all	  over.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  We	  had	  practically	  no	  Black	  students.	  And	  Brown	  was	  not	  as	  well	  known	  even	  though	  it	  was	  an	  Ivy	  League	  university.	  Not	  as	  well	  known	  in	  those	  days	  as	  it	  has	  become	  since	  then.	  So	  I	  would	  say	  that	  the	  largest	  number	  of	  the	  students	  came	  from	  the	  East.	  We	  had	  very	  few	  from	  the	  Western	  part	  of	  this	  country.	  Few	  from	  the	  Middle	  West.	  But	  they	  were	  mostly	  Easterners.	  I	  can	  think	  of	  only	  one	  or	  two	  Blacks	  in	  the	  whole	  time	  I	  was	  here.	  At	  least	  amongst	  the	  women.	  I'm	  not	  so	  sure	  about	  the	  men	  but	  I	  think	  that	  would	  [inaudible	  0:21:17].	  It	  wasn't	  until	  much	  much	  later	  that	  you	  began	  to	  get	  the	  great	  ethnic	  diversity,	  or	  racial	  diversity,	  I	  should	  say.	  [Interviewer	  coughs]	  There	  was	  always	  some	  ethnic	  diversity	  naturally	  but	  there	  wasn't	  a	  racial	  diversity.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  This	  is	  what	  you	  were	  saying	  about	  the	  financial	  situation,	  were	  there	  a	  lot	  of	  kids	  here	  that	  were	  upper	  middle	  class?	  And	  what	  was	  that	  like?	  Were	  there	  people	  from	  all	  classes?	  The	  whole	  range?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Right	  across	  the	  board.	  The	  whole	  range.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  there	  was	  okay.	  What-­‐	  let's	  see.	  I	  noticed	  in,	  I	  was	  looking	  at	  a	  yearbook	  and	  it	  said	  you	  were	  on	  the	  program	  committee.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Don't	  ask	  me	  what	  it	  is	  now	  after	  all	  these	  years.	  [laughs]	  I	  haven't	  a	  clue	  what	  we	  did.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Do	  you	  remember	  any	  speakers	  that	  came	  to	  campus?	  Any	  memorable	  ones?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  remember	  that	  Lise	  Meitner	  came.	  She	  was	  one	  of	  the	  few	  women	  Nobel	  prize	  winners.	  She	  came	  while	  we	  were	  in	  undergraduate.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  did	  she	  win	  the	  Nobel	  for?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Physics.	  That	  was	  M-­‐E-­‐I-­‐N,	  might,	  M-­‐E-­‐I-­‐N-­‐T-­‐N-­‐E-­‐R	  was	  I	  think	  the	  spelling	  of	  her	  name.	  I	  know	  she	  came.	  One	  of	  the	  early	  deans,	  what	  was	  her	  name?	  She	  came	  and	  gave	  a	  lecture.	  It	  was	  excellent.	  [inaudible	  0:23:05]	  She	  was	  one	  of	  the	  very	  early	  deans	  of	  Pembroke,	  but	  not	  the	  first	  by	  any	  means.	  You	  wouldn't	  have	  a	  list	  of	  the	  deans,	  would	  you?	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  No,	  I’m	  sorry.	  I	  don't.	  	  	  	  9	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  She	  wasn't	  Lida	  Shaw	  King,	  she	  wasn't	  Margaret	  Morriss,	  of	  course.	  She	  was	  in	  between	  there.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  She	  would	  have	  been	  like	  sometime	  in	  1910	  or	  something	  like	  that?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No	  later	  than	  that.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  1915?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  don't	  remember	  the	  dates.	  But	  no,	  I	  would	  say	  into	  the	  1920s	  off	  hand.	  Cause	  I	  don't	  know	  how	  long	  Dean	  Morriss	  had	  been	  here	  before	  I	  came	  in	  '34	  but	  she'd	  been	  here	  a	  few	  years.	  I	  would	  say	  it	  went	  up	  to	  the	  19-­‐	  maybe	  I'll	  think	  of	  the	  lady's	  name	  before	  I	  leave,	  but	  at	  the	  moment	  it's	  gone	  completely	  out	  of	  my	  head.	  And	  many	  of	  the	  other	  speakers	  tended	  to	  be	  local.	  Nothing	  very	  inspiring	  for	  the	  most	  part.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  it	  about	  this	  lady's	  speech,	  this	  dean,	  what	  was	  it	  that	  she	  said?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  She	  was	  a	  very	  interesting	  person	  with	  a	  tremendous	  sense	  of	  humor.	  The	  ability	  to	  put	  her	  thoughts	  into	  concise	  English.	  Without	  any	  hesitation.	  Without	  any	  hemming	  and	  hawing	  as	  I'm	  doing	  now.	  And	  she	  was	  very	  very	  amusing.	  Very	  amusing.	  And	  I	  think	  she	  must	  have	  been	  from	  all	  account	  a	  very	  very	  wonderful	  dean.	  But	  she	  left,	  I	  believe,	  to	  get	  married.	  And	  then	  she	  was	  called	  back	  as	  an	  interim	  dean	  before	  Dean	  Morriss	  came.	  That	  much	  I	  can	  tell	  you	  about	  her.	  I	  can't	  think	  of	  her	  name.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Let’s	  see…College	  life.	  Was	  there	  an	  attempt	  to	  provide	  things	  like	  counseling	  services	  and	  were	  there	  resident	  counselors?	  [25:00]	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Well,	  I	  don't	  know	  what	  was	  true	  in	  the	  dormitories.	  But	  there	  was	  some	  counseling	  service.	  On	  a	  rather	  small	  scale.	  It	  wasn't	  as	  highly	  developed.	  Counseling	  was	  not	  as	  highly	  developed	  as	  it	  has	  become	  since	  then.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  it	  was	  not	  popularized	  to-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  If	  you	  were	  in	  trouble	  with	  some	  subject	  or	  something	  like	  that,	  you	  could	  usually	  go	  to	  the	  professor	  for	  help.	  Or	  maybe	  some	  conversation.	  But	  basically	  there	  was	  very	  little.	  Very	  little.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  Were	  the	  professors	  pretty	  accessible?	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Could	  you	  go	  and	  talk	  to	  them?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes.	  Definitely.	  Definitely.	  	  	  10	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Did	  they	  encourage	  friendships	  between	  student	  and	  teacher?	  Sometimes	  that	  happens.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  wasn't	  aware	  of	  it.	  At	  least	  as	  far	  as	  women	  were	  concerned.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  that	  was	  more	  of	  between	  the	  men?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Very	  likely.	  Very	  likely.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  were	  rules	  and	  regulations	  like	  back	  then?	  Was	  there	  dress	  code	  and	  things	  like	  that?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Not	  as	  such.	  People	  who	  lived	  on	  campus	  perhaps	  would	  dress	  a	  little	  more	  sloppily.	  They	  [inaudible	  0:26:38]	  than	  those	  of	  us	  who	  had	  to	  appear	  on	  public	  transportation.	  Dress	  basically	  was	  fairly	  conservative.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Would	  that	  mean,	  did	  people	  wear	  pants	  back	  then?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Pants	  were	  not	  very	  common	  then.	  You	  wore	  pants	  if	  you	  were	  going	  skiing.	  You	  wore	  pants	  if	  it	  was	  very-­‐	  if	  you	  were	  going	  out	  and	  there	  was	  heavy	  snow.	  But	  other	  than	  that,	  no.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Did	  you	  go	  skiing?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  But	  I'm	  giving	  you	  that	  as	  an	  example	  of	  when	  one	  would	  wear	  pants.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  As	  a	  day	  student,	  did	  you	  have	  to	  go-­‐	  did	  you	  have	  mandatory	  chapel?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes,	  we	  did.	  Once	  a	  week.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Oh.	  I	  was	  under	  the	  impression	  that	  it	  was	  every	  day	  or	  something.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No.	  Thank	  God.	  [both	  laugh]	  No,	  once	  a	  week.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  you	  were-­‐do	  you	  remember,	  what	  can	  you	  tell	  me	  about	  the	  sports	  that	  you	  were	  involved	  in?	  Weren't	  you	  on	  the	  bowling	  team	  or	  something?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes,	  I	  was	  on	  the	  bowling	  team.	  I	  played	  fistball.	  I	  tried	  some	  archery.	  We	  tried	  all	  of	  these	  things.	  We	  didn't	  always,	  we	  weren't	  always	  on	  teams	  but	  we	  did	  have	  plenty	  of	  sports	  activity.	  Actually,	  we	  were	  required	  to	  take	  gym.	  Actually,	  what	  they	  called	  Swedish	  exercises	  the	  first	  year.	  And	  then	  after	  that,	  we	  were	  free	  to	  choose	  from	  anything	  that	  was	  offered	  we	  could	  have,	  we	  could	  take	  as	  long	  as	  we	  took	  so	  many	  periods	  of	  gym	  a	  week.	  But	  that's	  it.	  It	  could	  be	  a	  sport.	  It	  could	  be,	  oh	  yes,	  one	  other	  thing	  I	  forgot.	  We	  had	  to	  take	  a	  	  11	  course	  called	  rhythms.	  [laughs]	  Now	  rhythms	  consisted	  of,	  well,	  what	  shall	  I	  say?	  Cavorting	  around	  the	  gym	  in	  little	  short,	  tight	  fitting	  jumpers	  and	  tights.	  I	  suppose	  it	  was	  the	  precursor	  of	  modern	  dance.	  And	  we	  did	  have	  to	  take	  that.	  I'm	  sorry	  I	  had	  forgotten	  that.	  And	  then	  other	  than	  that	  we	  were	  free	  to	  do	  as	  we	  wished.	  And	  by	  the	  senior	  year,	  if	  you	  had	  fulfilled	  all	  those	  obligations	  you	  could	  forget	  about	  going	  to	  gym	  at	  all.	  You	  didn't	  have	  to	  take	  anything.	  You	  were	  absolutely	  free.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  If	  you'd	  done	  it	  for	  the	  previous	  three	  years?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Right.	  And	  if	  you'd	  passed	  your	  swimming	  test.	  Oh	  yes,	  that	  was	  another	  thing.	  You	  had	  to	  pass	  the	  swimming	  test.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Was	  that,	  was	  all	  this	  in	  addition	  to	  the	  other	  four	  courses?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Five	  courses.	  Oh	  yes.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Five,	  yeah.	  It	  was	  not	  the	  fifth.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Mm-­‐mm.	  No.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  So	  you	  had	  five	  academic,	  then?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Correct.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Was	  there	  sports	  and	  being	  in	  condition	  and	  being	  fit	  and	  running	  around	  is	  so	  popular	  now	  but	  was	  that-­‐	  were	  there	  people	  in	  your	  class	  who	  were	  very	  interested	  in	  the	  athletics	  and	  being	  very,	  very	  fit	  and	  stuff?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  [30:00]	  They	  would	  be	  a	  very,	  very	  tiny	  minority.	  That	  was	  not	  the	  big	  thing	  in	  those	  days	  as	  it	  has	  since	  become.	  There	  were	  a	  few	  girls	  who	  were	  very,	  very	  good	  in	  a	  number	  of	  different	  sports,	  but	  the	  number	  was	  very	  small.	  You	  must	  realize	  the	  class	  was	  small	  too,	  you	  know.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  How	  large?	  What	  was	  the	  size?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  About	  125.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Oh.	  Okay.	  That	  is	  small.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  I	  think	  when	  we	  graduated	  we	  were	  down	  to	  100,	  but	  I	  think	  we	  started	  with	  125.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  the	  more	  popular	  thing	  to	  do	  extracurricularly?	  Well,	  not	  necessarily	  'the	  one	  thing',	  but	  the	  type	  of	  thing	  that	  would	  be	  more	  popular?	  	  12	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  The	  theatrical	  group	  here	  at	  Pembroke	  was	  very	  popular	  for	  a	  number	  of	  people.	  They	  called	  themselves	  the	  Komians.	  K-­‐O-­‐M-­‐I-­‐A-­‐N-­‐S.	  And	  that	  was	  very	  popular.	  But	  other	  than	  that,	  I	  don't	  recall	  anything	  in	  particular	  that	  was	  terrifically	  popular	  while	  I	  was	  here.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  chorus	  like?	  Did	  you	  get	  to	  travel	  around	  with	  the	  chorus?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  No,	  this	  was,	  no,	  no.	  You	  mean	  the	  chapel	  group?	  No,	  we	  just	  sang	  at	  the	  chapel	  on	  the	  one-­‐day	  a	  week	  that	  they	  had	  it.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Oh.	  Okay.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  It	  was	  a	  choir.	  It	  wasn't	  a	  chorus	  really.	  But	  it	  was	  not	  anything	  to	  travel.	  It	  was	  just	  that	  we	  sang	  a	  couple	  of	  hymns	  and	  that	  was	  it.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  How	  about	  glee	  club?	  Was	  that-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes,	  they	  had	  a	  glee	  club.	  Oh,	  another	  thing.	  I'm	  sorry.	  There	  was	  one	  other	  thing	  you	  did	  ask.	  Many	  of	  us	  were	  interested	  in	  the	  very	  good	  mathematics	  club,	  which	  was	  a	  combination	  of	  social	  and	  learning	  experience.	  That	  was	  a	  mixed	  group	  with	  the	  men.	  That	  was	  very	  active.	  I	  belonged	  to	  that.	  That	  was	  very	  active.	  Then,	  I	  believe	  there	  was	  a	  French	  club	  now	  that	  I	  think	  back	  about	  this.	  And	  there	  probably	  was	  a	  German	  club.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  For	  the	  math	  club,	  would	  you	  get	  together	  and	  have	  combined	  socializing?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  It	  was	  socialize	  with	  lectures,	  and	  usually	  the	  lectures	  were	  given	  by	  the	  members	  of	  the	  club.	  We	  would	  be	  assigned	  a	  topic	  to	  get	  up	  and	  lecture.	  And	  the	  staff,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  students,	  came.	  And	  then	  we	  had	  a	  social	  hour	  afterwards.	  And	  then	  we	  had	  one	  or	  two	  really	  big	  parties	  with	  it.	  We	  used	  to	  go	  out	  on	  a	  picnic	  towards	  the	  end	  of	  the	  semester	  and	  we	  used	  to	  have	  a	  big	  party	  around	  Christmas	  time.	  ‘Cause	  it	  was	  a	  large	  group.	  Being	  both	  men	  and	  women	  it	  was	  a	  very	  large	  group.	  So	  clubs	  of	  that	  type	  were	  popular.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  I'm	  just	  curious.	  At	  parties	  what	  kind	  of	  music	  did	  you-­‐	  was	  it	  dancing	  music?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes,	  generally.	  But	  quite	  often	  it	  was	  by	  means	  of	  a	  record	  player.	  We	  didn't	  hire	  anyone	  to	  come	  and	  play.	  Yes,	  it	  would	  be	  dance,	  yes.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  That's	  interesting.	  The	  relationship	  between	  Pembroke	  and	  Brown,	  how	  was	  that?	  Was	  there	  any	  tension	  between	  that?	  ‘Cause	  I've	  heard	  that	  there	  was	  a	  lot	  of-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Well,	  the	  men	  looked	  down	  on	  the	  women	  somewhat	  I'm	  sure.	  And	  sometimes	  the	  women	  got	  snotty	  against,	  you	  know,	  versus	  the	  men.	  But	  on	  the	  whole,	  if	  the	  	  13	  number	  of	  Pembroke	  is	  who	  marry	  Brown	  men	  is	  any	  indication	  all	  I	  can	  say	  is	  that	  the	  friction	  cannot	  have	  been	  too	  great.	  [both	  laugh]	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Was	  there	  a	  lot-­‐Did	  people	  drop	  out	  to	  get	  married?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  don't	  recall	  anyone	  in	  my	  class	  doing	  so.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  But	  they	  would	  get	  married	  after	  graduation?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  the	  structure	  of	  the	  college	  calendar?	  Was	  it	  like	  it	  is	  now?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Very	  much	  the	  same.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Two	  semesters?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Did	  you	  have	  your	  exams	  after	  Christmas?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Mm-­‐hmm.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  the	  student	  feeling	  on	  that?	  Was	  there	  every	  any-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  don't	  think	  it	  occurred	  to	  us	  to	  worry	  about	  it	  too	  much.	  This	  was	  it	  and	  so	  we	  accepted	  it.	  People	  were	  more	  apt	  to	  accept	  things	  then	  than	  they	  are	  today.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Uh-­‐huh.	  Just	  appreciate	  them	  for	  what	  they	  are.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  Right.	  Right.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  [35:00]	  How	  did	  you-­‐	  how	  do	  you	  feel	  that	  having	  gone	  to	  Pembroke	  affected	  your	  life,	  or	  in	  general,	  after	  you	  graduated?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  probably	  would	  never	  have	  come	  to	  Brown	  University	  to	  work	  had	  I	  gone	  elsewhere	  to	  school.	  Because	  it's	  through	  contacts	  here	  and	  working	  part-­‐time	  that	  I	  gave	  up	  the	  teaching	  end	  of	  the	  business.	  Because	  it	  was	  mostly,	  it	  was	  a	  time	  as	  it	  is	  today	  when	  there	  were	  very	  few	  teaching	  positions.	  There	  was	  plenty	  of	  substitute	  work	  but	  there	  was	  no	  future	  in	  that.	  So	  I	  said,	  this	  is	  not	  for	  me	  and	  I	  came	  up	  to	  the	  University	  full-­‐time.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  did	  you	  do	  exactly	  at	  the	  University?	  	  	  14	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  did	  a	  number	  of	  things.	  I	  worked	  first	  in	  the	  office	  of	  the	  Graduate	  school.	  And	  we	  had	  at	  that	  time	  a	  section	  in	  that	  office	  that	  worked	  in	  connection	  with	  applied	  mathematics.	  Now	  applied	  mathematics	  was	  instituted	  at	  Brown	  in	  1941	  when	  the	  late	  Dean	  [Ronald	  G.D.]	  Richardson	  of	  the	  graduate	  school	  gathered	  together	  a	  group	  of	  scientists,	  most	  of	  whom	  had	  left	  Germany,	  and	  started	  a	  School	  of	  Applied	  Science.	  It	  had	  another	  name	  but	  it	  was	  funded	  by	  grants	  from	  the	  government.	  And	  then	  after	  the	  war	  it	  became	  an	  actual	  department	  funded	  by	  the	  University.	  That	  would	  have	  been	  1940…	  I	  think	  it	  was	  '46.	  It	  became-­‐	  the	  University	  decided	  that	  it	  would	  pick	  up	  this	  applied	  mathematics	  work	  and	  make	  it	  an	  actual	  division	  within	  the	  University	  as	  opposed	  to	  pure	  math.	  They're	  two	  separate	  division	  as	  they	  are	  today.	  So	  I	  transferred	  from	  the	  Graduate	  school	  and	  went	  into	  the	  division	  of	  applied	  math.	  I	  worked	  on	  technical	  papers,	  monographs,	  reports.	  I	  even	  did	  some	  of	  the	  drawings	  for	  them.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  kind	  of	  drawings	  would	  that	  be?	  For	  like	  medical	  illustrations?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Not	  medical.	  This	  would	  be	  more	  of	  the	  engineering	  type.	  And	  as	  a	  matter	  of	  fact,	  I	  still	  do	  it	  today	  as	  a	  part-­‐time	  job	  for	  them.	  If	  they	  have	  some	  texts	  that	  they're	  printing	  that	  need	  illustrating,	  I	  do	  it.	  And	  I	  continued	  doing	  that	  even	  though	  over	  the	  years	  with	  the	  division	  my	  job	  changed.	  And	  when	  I…towards	  the	  end,	  I	  was	  the	  division's	  financial	  officer.	  I	  worked	  on	  the	  contracts	  and	  grants	  more	  than	  anything	  else.	  Budgets.	  Preparing	  budgets.	  And	  when	  I	  left	  that	  was	  my	  job.	  The	  job	  just	  changed.	  Evolved	  a	  bit	  over	  the	  years	  or	  I	  took	  on	  new	  things	  to	  do.	  And	  once	  or	  twice,	  you	  know,	  if	  you	  do	  something	  once	  or	  twice	  you	  automatically	  acquire	  that	  job.	  And	  if	  this	  gets	  added	  to	  all	  the	  others	  so	  that-­‐	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  People	  remember	  that	  as	  the	  thing	  that	  you	  do.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah.	  That's	  right.	  But	  that	  was	  what	  I	  was	  at	  the	  end.	  A	  financial	  officer	  for	  the	  division.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  The	  scientists	  that	  you	  said	  were	  mostly	  from	  Germany?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  That's	  correct.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Were	  they,	  were	  they-­‐	  when	  was	  that?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Well,	  they	  had,	  remember,	  they	  had	  escaped	  from	  Hitler's	  Germany	  just	  prior	  to	  World	  War	  II	  and	  they'd	  been	  in	  other	  places	  scattered	  throughout	  the	  world.	  And	  the	  late	  Dean	  Richardson	  and	  some	  people	  from	  the	  National	  Science	  Foundation	  in	  Washington	  and	  other	  groups	  got	  this	  group	  together	  and	  brought	  them	  to	  Brown.	  And	  we	  ran	  courses	  in	  applied	  mathematics.	  They	  not	  only	  were	  funded	  by	  the	  government	  but	  the	  students	  who	  took	  these	  courses.	  And	  they	  were	  all	  on	  a	  graduate	  level.	  Many	  of	  them	  on	  a	  post-­‐doctoral	  level.	  The	  students	  who	  took	  these	  courses	  came	  from	  all	  over	  the	  country	  to	  take	  them	  and	  the	  government	  gave	  them	  their	  expenses	  too.	  Because	  this	  was	  a	  science	  about	  which	  not	  too	  much	  was	  known	  in	  this	  country.	  It	  was	  well	  known	  in	  Europe.	  It	  was	  not	  known	  here.	  And	  it	  	  15	  was	  decided	  that	  since	  we	  had	  entered	  the	  war	  perhaps	  we	  had	  better	  know	  a	  little	  bit	  more	  about	  this	  science	  and	  the	  uses	  to	  which	  it	  could	  be	  put.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  I	  know	  nothing	  about	  it.	  What,	  in	  general,	  what	  is	  it?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Applied	  math?	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Applied	  math.	  Does	  it	  have	  to	  do	  with	  engineering	  or	  what?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  It	  is	  related	  to	  engineering,	  it	  is	  related	  to	  biology,	  it	  is	  related	  to	  economics.	  [40:00]	  You	  can	  relate	  it	  to	  almost	  anything.	  The	  name	  is	  what	  it	  says	  'applied'	  mathematics.	  Now,	  today	  the	  students	  can	  have	  a	  double	  major	  in	  applied	  mathematics	  and	  physics,	  applied	  mathematics	  and	  engineering,	  applied	  mathematics	  and	  biology,	  applied	  mathematics	  and	  economics.	  Or	  they	  can	  just	  be	  straight	  applied	  mathematics.	  It	  was	  a	  graduate	  program	  for	  the	  first	  ten	  year	  or	  so	  and	  then	  they	  began	  to	  bring	  courses	  down	  to	  the	  undergraduate	  level	  too.	  And	  it	  became	  very	  very	  popular	  and	  still	  is.	  It	  is,	  as	  I	  say,	  the	  application	  of	  mathematics	  to	  other	  sciences.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  You've	  lived	  in	  Providence	  all	  your	  life.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Right.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Since	  you've	  been	  here.	  How	  do	  you	  feel	  about	  the	  social	  changes	  that	  have	  happened	  during	  your	  lifetime	  here,	  you	  know,	  since	  you've	  been	  here	  for	  a	  long	  time?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  think	  when	  one	  has	  been	  here	  a	  long	  time	  the	  changes	  become	  so	  gradual	  over	  the	  years	  that	  you	  really	  don't	  notice	  them	  happening.	  It's	  a	  gradual	  change.	  And	  I	  don't	  think	  there's	  a	  great	  deal	  of	  difference	  now	  than	  what	  it	  was	  then.	  The	  same	  tensions	  exist	  to	  some	  extent	  that	  always	  existed.	  The	  same	  social	  structure	  exists	  pretty	  much	  as	  it	  always	  existed.	  Of	  course,	  we	  have	  a	  great	  many	  more	  people	  from	  the	  Caribbean	  area	  and	  the	  like	  than	  we	  did.	  And	  now	  of	  course,	  we	  have	  the	  people	  from	  Southeast	  Asia.	  We	  never	  had	  those	  before.	  But	  the	  Hmong	  people,	  the	  people	  from-­‐	  oh,	  the	  Koreans	  too.	  That's	  not	  Southeast	  Asian	  though.	  In	  case	  you	  don't	  know	  it,	  Providence	  is	  one	  of	  the	  five	  cities	  in	  the	  United	  States	  with	  the	  largest	  population	  of	  people	  from	  East	  Asia.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  Oh,	  no.	  I	  didn't	  know	  that.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Laotians.	  All	  that	  area	  that's	  been	  in	  the	  war	  that	  we've	  been	  so	  involved	  in	  for	  so	  long.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  I	  wonder	  what-­‐do	  you	  have	  any	  idea	  why	  they	  would	  come	  here	  [inaudible	  0:42:35]	  	  	  16	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yes,	  I	  do.	  Various	  groups	  sponsored	  a	  few	  of	  them.	  And	  once	  you've	  brought	  in	  a	  few,	  then	  the	  families	  follow	  and	  others	  follow.	  And	  so	  it	  goes.	  This	  has	  always	  been	  true	  of	  any	  immigration.	  A	  few	  came	  first	  and	  then	  they	  told	  others	  and	  they	  came.	  And	  they	  told	  others	  and	  they	  came.	  This	  has	  been	  true	  of	  every	  wave	  of	  immigration	  that	  has	  come	  into	  this	  country	  in	  general	  and	  Providence	  in	  particular.	  Somebody	  has	  to	  come	  first	  and	  write	  home,	  'Oh	  this	  is	  quite	  a	  place	  to	  live.	  You've	  got	  to	  come.'	  You	  know	  that	  sort	  of	  thing.	  And	  that's	  how	  you	  build	  it	  up.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  I	  have	  a	  question	  about	  that.	  The	  bringing	  of	  the	  group	  of	  scientists	  for	  the	  applied	  math.	  Were	  they	  just,	  were	  they	  fleeing	  from	  Germany	  because	  they	  were	  intellectuals?	  Or	  were	  they	  Jewish	  mostly	  or	  why	  was-­‐	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Some	  of	  them	  were	  Jewish.	  Some	  of	  them	  just	  couldn't	  stand	  Hitler's	  policies.	  One	  man,	  in	  particular,	  had	  a	  lawsuit	  against	  Hitler	  but	  he	  didn't	  stay	  to	  find	  out	  how	  it	  would	  come	  out.	  He	  left	  and	  went	  to	  Turkey.	  And	  then	  he	  won	  the	  lawsuit	  and	  they	  wanted	  him	  back	  and	  he	  said,	  'No	  way.'	  And	  eventually	  he	  came	  to	  this	  country.	  As	  a	  matter	  of	  fact,	  he	  was	  the	  one	  who	  became	  head	  of	  the	  applied	  mathematics	  group.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  He	  won	  the	  lawsuit	  and	  so	  the	  Germans	  wanted	  him	  to	  come	  back?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Yeah,	  in	  Turkey.	  But	  he	  spent	  nine	  years	  in	  Turkey	  before	  he	  came	  to	  America.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  What	  was	  his	  name?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  That	  was	  Professor	  [William]	  Prager.	  P-­‐R-­‐A-­‐G-­‐E-­‐R.	  He's	  written	  up	  in	  that	  Gentlemen	  Under	  the	  Elms	  book	  that's	  out.	  You	  may	  have	  seen	  it	  in	  the	  bookstore.	  He's	  retired.	  Well,	  he's	  not	  retired.	  He's	  dead.	  	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  …I	  don't,	  if	  this	  is	  a	  personal	  question	  just	  tell	  me	  and	  you	  know,	  feel	  free.	  I	  can	  erase	  it	  or	  whatever.	  	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  Okay.	  Is	  that	  running?	  Oh,	  yes	  it	  is.	  Okay.	  	  CHARLOTTE	  ERWIN:	  	  It's	  running.	  Was	  there	  any-­‐	  is	  there	  any	  reason	  why	  you	  didn't	  ever	  marry	  or	  did	  you	  just	  didn't	  want	  to?	  	  ELEANOR	  ADDISON:	  I	  just	  wasn't	  particularly	  interested	  in	  it.	  But	  that's	  not	  a	  very	  good	  reason	  [laughs][45:00]	  but	  that's	  the	  only	  reason	  I	  can	  give	  you.	  I	  just	  did	  not	  meet	  up	  with	  anyone	  I	  particularly	  care	  to	  think	  I'd	  spend	  the	  rest	  of	  my	  life	  with.	