
Barbara Anton: This is Barbara Anton at the Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on
Women. It's June 23, 1992, and I'm going to interview, for an oral history, Bella Skolnick
Krovitz, from the class, Pembroke class of 1933. She's visiting Providence today, from her home
in Florida. Let's start out with a little bit of family background. Tell me about your family. You
were a City Girl.
Bella Krovitz: Well, no, I wasn't. I was a "Dorm Girl."
BA: Why was that?
BK: Well, I'll tell you why. My family felt that I probably needed to grow up and have the
opportunity to learn how to care for myself and make decisions for myself, and my family were
really very, very, wonderful. Even though I was a guarded child, I wasn't allowed to go
downtown alone 'til I was about sixteen, even to go to the "5 and 10."
BA: You mean downtown Providence?
BK: No downtown Woonsocket.
BK: Woonsocket, yes. We weren't allowed to go out at night. I remember when Providence
College came and in the Trinity Hall they had presented Julius Caesar, and we were studying
Julius Caesar in high school, and some of us wanted to go and see what Julius Caesar was like.
And so, what happened was somehow Mother and Dad couldn't go, and we found that [Natalie?],
who was a friend of mine, wanted to go, she was in my class and so we had to have her, her older
brother was old enough to be, you know, almost a father himself he was probably twenty-four or
twenty-five, and we were just fourteen or fifteen, you know, at that time. So, he was our
chaperone. But we could see, and of course we were home at ten o'clock.
BA: Now, did your parents have college educations?

1

BK: No, but they were very well learned, in the sense that they were self-educated. I mean, I
remember Mother and Dad met in this country, but they both came over as children. And then,
Mother went to school and had to go to work. So, she later on went to night school, and even
when we were growing up, she would go to high school and take different courses. And when we
took music lessons, she would take music lessons. And dad was a businessman, and very welleducated in Hebrew, and very learned, because he came from a very, very learned family, and
they all turned out to be rabbis or cantors or something. So, he had the training, but he decided
that he was interested in music, and when Mother met him, he was singing in the "Victor
Herbert", the last perform, the last play that, musical that he wrote - I think it was "The Rose of
Algeria". So, I grew up with those songs being sung to me as lullabies.
BA: Oh, how wonderful.
BK: And, we had a piano, and Dad would sing, and so that was...I mean young people I guess
came to the house, and that was the way they enjoyed themselves, so there was a lot of culture
and reading and books and newspapers, and, and...
BA: And they certainly wanted you to go to college.
BK: Oh, yes. That was from the beginning. And, I have a story that, I couldn't believe myself
when I heard my father say these words, but I'll tell you about it. It was, I think in
June, and close to June, and my father was sitting with my uncle, and he was...my uncle was my
mother's sister's husband. - so the two brother-in-laws were sitting, and they had one child that
they adopted, and the sun and the moon set in that child, and I remember Uncle Morris saying to
my dad, "What's Bella going to do after graduation?" because it was just a matter of a few weeks,
and my father said, "Well, she's going to college." And my uncle said, "What do you want to
send her to college for? She's probably going to get married anyway, and why don't you give her
that as a dowry, instead of sending her to college?" And you know what my father said, he said,
"If you educate a woman, you educate a family." And that was his reply. And I've never
forgotten that, really. So they were very anxious. And I have a brother who's three years younger
than I am, and he too, has had the advantage of going to Amherst College, and then going to law
school, and so, we have been fortunate. And when he was tutored, I mean, we had a private tutor
in Hebrew, and I studied with him. At that time girls, I mean, weren’t interested in that kind of
thing. So that I mean, I felt that I really have had a wonderful family. Very thoughtful and
supportive family. And my brother now, who is three years younger than I am is still very
supportive. He's so concerned about what happens to me....and what I might do...
BA: And he lives near you, a hundred miles away?
BK: No he lives a hundred miles. It’s a little ride and now. I'm not allowed to drive that distance,
because it was me, and he's afraid to have me drive alone anyway, that distance. But while my
husband was sick, I used to drive down there all the time, because he had to go to the hospital
down there. It was the only one where he would get his tests, and things that he needed. So that's
what it was like. But I had a fortunate high school, good high school education.
BA: In Barrington, I mean Woonsocket?
2

BK: Woonsocket, yes, we had a classical...but right in the middle of my well, let's see my,
getting in my senior year, my family moved to New York. And the reason they went, was there
were three brother-in-laws, and they kept saying "Why don't you come here? There will be more
advantages for your children." Well, I don't know why, but they went, and they soon found out
that I was so unhappy in, in...around Thanksgiving time I had just had enough of it, because I
was very upset, because when I got to the schools, I went to...my mother went down and, and
looked them all over before, and she didn't want me to go to this one or that one because there
were seven thousand kids or you know, and I had been used to a high school with 250. Well, I
ended up in [Rasins?] Hall Academy, which had been a private school, but became a city high
school. And, it was a very fine school, but, there must have been six or seven thousand kids
there, I don't know how many but, I mean it was so big, oh so different. And I had to travel an
hour to get there by trolley. And I had lived around the corner from the high school, and could
come home for lunch because I was twenty minutes away. But that didn't bother me so much. It
was the fact that when I got there they said I would have to make up all the New York regent
rule requirements, so I couldn't take my fourth-year Latin. I had to take Home Nursing; I had to
take New York civics; I had to take, I had had ancient history and I'd had United States history,
but I had to take some other history that they required. And so, my schedule was all…I mean it
was just awful, and I was very upset about it. And Mother realized it, and she said, "Well, Bella,
finish the semester and I will make arrangements for you to live back in Woonsocket, and you
can pick up your second semester, because I think I would have, you know, had a breakdown.
But they were very understanding. And so…there were two dear ladies who were widows. They
had no children, and they were very fond of my mother, and very fond of me. And so they were
so excited that I was going to move in with them, and they were going to have a young person in
the house. They didn't have a telephone, or anything. They were quite poor, and this was really
doing them a chance to have a little extra money. One of them worked in a store - second hand
furniture, and the other one stayed home and took care of the house. And they were, I mean to
me they might have been old, old ladies, but maybe they were only 45 or 50; I don't know. But
they seemed terribly old. But they were just so lovable. They would bake certain rolls for me,
and oh gosh. Bella had to have this and that. They really doted on me. I was really spoiled by
them. And so I lived with them and went back to high school, and so I couldn't pick up the Latin
because they said that that we were, we didn't have promotions every six months. It was a whole
year you took the course. Unlike Providence at that time, we didn't have the As and the Bs and
such things. And, so I picked up the pieces, and graduated with honors and was one of the
graduation speakers and gave a talk, I can't believe it…I don't remember how I ever could've
done it but I did write a paper on post-war figures. And I had something about (inaudible),
Mussolini and von Hindenburg. I can't tell you a thing about them today.
BA: And you don't have the paper anymore?
BK, laughing: I don't have the paper anymore, no. But anyway, I graduated and then of course, it
was in, from Woonsocket that I applied to Pembroke, Brown at that time.
BA: Did you apply any place else?

3

BK: I don't think so. I'd always wanted to come here, because I had a cousin who was here many,
many years ago. Uh, not the women's part at that time, in the men's part. We lost contact, I think
he's gone and died. But we used, when he was here, we used to come up and visit and take him
out to dinner. And when he wanted a car, to take out someone for Junior Prom, he
would come to us. So, it was, it was a nice relationship. So I always knew I wanted to go there
too, you know. And the day that I was to come up for my interview - I didn't have to take exams
then, because I was at the top of my class, they didn't expect it - but I, we had to be interviewed.
And I landed in the hospital. They thought I had appendicitis, and that's the day that I was in the
hospital - I was there for a week or more - ten days before they made up their minds, because my
temperature was going up, and my white cells, and they didn't know...well, anyway, I was really
upset. And Mother came to see me, and I said, "I don't know what to do. What shall I do?" And
she said "Don't worry about it, Bella. I will go on the trolley, and get up to Brown and I will tell
the Dean." It was Dean Mooar, Eva Mooar. And so, when I came to college, every time I'd go
along the campus Dean Mooar would ask for my mother. I thought, every single time this went
on. When I got to my twenty-fifth reunion, and Eva Mooar was one of our guests, and we were
talking and sitting around, I said "Miss Mooar, you never admitted me, you admitted my
mother."
BA: Did she remember?
BK: Yes, she did. She remembered that she took that appointment, because I didn't want to miss
it. I was so upset about it. So, anyway it was really fun, and when we came here, I found that we,
I had seven, I think it was seven of us on the (inaudible) at Miller Hall and we came from all
over, we came from Pennsylvania, and, and Cleveland, Ohio, Annapolis, Waterbury,
Connecticut...and, and let's see, oh, New Bedford. And then I was from Woonsocket. And it was
like a little family. We all took care of each other, and because I knew more about Rhode Island
than they did...so they would ask me about Rhode Island, and I'd want to know about their states,
and then when Marjorie couldn't go home...she was from Maine, and the waters between
Rockland and North Haven were frozen over, why she might come and stay with me. You know,
and some, a couple of them came because they had to make up some work. And so they stayed
with my mother and father in Woonsocket. So we had nice relationships. And then, and when we
graduated, one of the girls, when they went down to visit in Florida, when they moved down
there to, uh...they would go visit my mother and father. And when I went to Connecticut, we'd go
and visit theirs. And it…yeah.
BA: I wonder if that still happens?
BK: I don't know, and we visited with her sister and we visited with her brother who was a Yale
Fine Arts graduate, who is now out in Oregon. When we were out there, for a vacation, not too
many years ago, and when the other sister goes south on a dance...involved on a dance crew of
some sort, they will stop and call and we'll see them. So we've kept that relationship. Now that
some of them are gone, it's a little difficult. And when Clarice went out to California, and I went
to see her too. So, we have kept up our relationships all these years. And, I generally hear from
all of them, but now some are very sick, some died, and so after sixty years, yeah.
BA: That's right. Remember your house mother?
4

BK: I sure do. She was a very, very special person. We called her Momma (inaudible) and she
was always very concerned about the girls...you know everything she would like to know. If you
were going out you always brought your date in and introduced him. You wouldn’t think of
going out without introducing your date to her. And I remember I had asked for a double late that
time because Bob had invited me to one of his proms. Because you see, he was a year or so
ahead of me. And, so I would come in at, that time I came in, I think about two-thirty. It had got
over at one o’clock or something like that. Down there...we had to drive back. And she said to
me, "I feel that you're very secure with Robert." Now, if she only knew...that I felt very secure
too, with him. But she, when we came, we were there for one week for freshman orientation.
And there were parties by the Christian Association, parties by the other groups, and you met
your seniors...and Big Sister and we came and the dormitory was beautiful. We had beautiful
colonial furniture, oriental rugs on the, on the floor, a beautiful fireplace, and BA: This was in your room?
BK: No, no, no. This was in the center. It was downstairs. We had a lovely dining-room that had
these tables that you just flicked the top off and they became benches, so if you had a dance or a
party, you could put those chairs, or benches really, and put the table up and it had this round
back, and that was very charming, and we had Sunday night suppers, and we had Wednesday
night was the night that you could invite guests, it was guest night. And the only difference
really, was that we had ice cream and candles. So that was very special. But, as freshmen, I
remember, we were given a list of things to bring. We had to provide our own sheets and
pillowcases, and they were laundered for us. And we were told - one of the things on the list was
linen napkins, with your name on them, and a napkin ring. Well, we came, and for one week
every little freshman had her napkin and her ring with her name on it. And we had little pieces of
furniture that had little pockets in there, where under the number of your room you would put
your napkin. Well, we were there for one week, and then when the classes came in, the others
came in, and we saw that they were using the, not the linen napkins, they were using the paper
napkins, boy it didn't take long for the freshmen to get rid of them and, I think I still have mine.
But it was very amusing, because we suddenly had to do what the others did, you know. We had
to grow up, but Momma (inaudible), as we called her, thought that we should have, and oh she
was very upset to think that we had given up on the napkins, the cloth napkins.
BA: It was her idea then that...
BK: Well, I don't know. It was part of a list and that piece of furniture was in the, in the
dormitory, right in the dining room as you went in. And you could never go into the dining room,
unless you were completely dressed. I mean you couldn't come in with shorts on, to begin with,
but you couldn't wear your bloomers and your long stockings that you had under them, and then
after the first year they changed them, and we had little socks with the colors on the, of our class
on the, you know. So she wouldn't let us in there unless we were dressed. You didn't come in
after riding with your boots on. It just, dinner was very formal. And she would rotate the seating
plan, so that everybody ended up knowing everybody else, which was very nice. And then
everybody else knew everybody else, when we finally got to sitting at her table. That was kind of
special when you were rotated and came to her table. And the seniors generally served. They
5

made them bring the pie, or whatever it is, and serving, and then the freshman was the person
who poured the water. So the water was put beside the (inaudible). And there was a lot of
formality then, but it was gracious living, it really was. I mean, if you had a caller, a maid I think
was Nora, and one was [Laniel?] I think, I can't remember, but anyway, they, they'd take the
message and then they'd come upstairs and knock at your door, because we didn't have bells. Or
if the telephone rang downstairs, there were two telephones, on either side as you came in. They
would tell you there's a telephone call for you. Nobody had telephones in their room. And it was
a time when you got special permission to have radios in your room, and you also had special
permission to smoke. And there were sixty girls in Miller Hall, fifty-nine smoked before we
graduated, and I was the only one who didn't. But I ended up with more ashtrays in my room so
maybe I got some of that smoke in me. But that's what happened. Yeah, everybody liked to
smoke, you see. But we came in in '29, and everybody was you know, happy. It was a good time,
I guess they thought, and when we came during that freshman week, they gave us these frames
that were pink and we were to wear them for a week or more...for the first month, to be known as
the freshmen, you know, who were going to see the world through rose-colored glasses. Well,
October came. And the biggest crash in the stock market that ever happened, was in October,
1929. And it was really a very difficult time, because we heard some of the things that happened.
And it makes me cold now, because some of the girls did not come back in January, because
their fathers had committed suicide or their businesses had gone BA: Your father was okay though?
BK: Well, he didn't have his own business. He had sold it. So he was working for somebody and
it was not easy. And, gone back to being a salesman. It was someone here in Providence. So he
would stop by occasionally to see me and it wasn't easy. I mean it was a very difficult time.
Fortunately, believe it or not, my mother had saved pennies.
BA: Literally pennies.
BK: Actually pennies. She had a big bottle, and she had pennies, and then she had put away
almost two thousand dollars in pennies. Would you believe it? Just from the change over the
years. She had started that when I was young. That was a saving for me from, to go to college.
BA: For your college?
BK: Yeah, that’s right. So, and I mean that kind of helped us. And then, when you think of it,
everything was paid for.
BA: Did you have a scholarship?
BK: No, I didn't have a scholarship. My family felt that they could handle it. But I did get ten
dollars a month, for things like, if we were hungry and we wanted to go down to Castles or we
wanted to get something at the, now, is it still there? Is the Gate?
BA: The Gate.

6

BK: It was the cafeteria.
BA: Downstairs, it's called the Gate. It's called the Gate. That's still there.
BK: Okay, alright. Well, we could go over there - because some of the girls did not always like
what they had on the menu, you know. We're fussy sometimes. And so, we could go to Castles,
and we could get a sandwich for ten cents and a drink for a nickel. Or you could go down to
Wayland Square at the deli and you could get a cup of coffee and a donut I think for a nickel.
BA: You walked down there?
B K: Yes, we walked down there. And we walked down there with our dates, too. That was a
date. We also walked everywhere. It was too much money to pay eight cents or so, for a car
check to go through the tunnel.
BA: That was a trolley?
BK: The trolley, yeah. Yeah...through the tunnel. And we would walk everywhere we went, and
we walked without hats and we had snow piling up on our heads. And then some of us later in
life suffered from all kinds of sinuses and everything else. But, that’s another story. We would
walk everywhere, I mean whether we were going to a concert. Well, but one night I remember,
talking about my house mother, uh, we had gotten tickets - we were fortunate here at Brown,
because they sent over a certain number of tickets to the music department, and you could get
what we called "rush seats." And they were fifty cents, to go to the Boston Symphony. Can you
imagine that? And so we walked down. And then coming back, the house mother was taking a
taxi. So, of course she recognized us, and she asked us to come along with her. Well, I'll never
forget, she was very upset with that concert. To think that Koussevitzky had put in these new
numbers. “Why didn't he stick to the three Bs, and why did he put in Debussy?” she kept saying.
And, it was "Clair de Lune" or something like that, you know, which is so beautiful. And we just
looked. We didn't say anything. I suppose we're doing the same thing with some of the music
today with the young people, you know. But that was so funny. She took us along with her, but
she was a lovely person. She was the wife of a doctor, she was a widow. And she had two
daughters, of her own, and I think a granddaughter. And occasionally they would come and visit
with her and have dinner with her. So they were a lovely family. She really was a dear, and Bob
and I were very fond of her. And I don't know what else I can tell you about her.
BA: Did you, did you live in Miller Hall the...
BK: All four years. The first year we were up on the top floor. And then I had a single room,
almost overlooking fifty-two, it's over...it was the largest one because, you know, because it
sticks out a little bit. That's how they built it... one or two rooms, over you went up the stairs.
And of course we couldn't have men in our room like they do now. The only time we had men in
our rooms, was Mayday, when we had a supper that we could, you know, a buffet supper, we
could pick it up if we had someone like my mother come and visit, you know. And then
everybody's families came up. But otherwise, you didn't have a man in your room. And, I'll never
forget, talking about housemother, I'll never forget. One Sunday, one of the girls had gone in to
7

take a shower. And the bathroom door locked somehow or other. And it was almost impossible.
We don't know what happened, but we couldn't open it. And she's all (inaudible). Well, we called
the fire department and we said, "Well, you know you can come up on the side." The window
was opened. So, in the meantime, we tried to quiet the person who came out of it, I won't give
any names, because maybe she doesn't want it told at this point. But anyway, she, she was stuck
and couldn't get out, after her bath. So, the (inaudible) was open, and we threw in magazines and
we threw in, you know, things like that. Even a pillow for her if she wanted, while we were
trying to get help for her. And she, I guess, was waiting patiently. We call up the fire department,
and we said: "We do have fire escapes, and if you had a big ladder, you could climb up and get
through the window." And they said, they're very sorry, they just couldn't do that kind of thing.
They were on duty. And one of the girls said "Well, if it was a cat up in a tree, you would come
and get him". Well, anyway, finally Bob came to call for me, because I was going out. It was just
about six or six-thirty or something BA: How long had she been in there?
BK: Oh, she'd been in there probably an hour or more. And, you know, we were all concerned.
There were just a few people left on a Sunday afternoon and evening. Because a lot of people
dated, or went out if it was beautiful out. So, Bob came along, and he said, "What's going on?",
and I said, "Well you've got to help us." So, I was a little bit scared, that somebody would report
that I had a man up on the second floor. So, anyway, he went over to Brown, and got someone
who came over for us and they came with a ladder. And they finally got her out. So, the next
morning, I went right down and reported to Mama (inaudible). And I said, you know, what
happened, and said that this young lady and gotten locked in the john, and couldn't get out and
we all tried to get her some help and all. And she said "Well, that's fine". And then she turns
around to me and she said "I hope you invited him to have supper with you." I didn't know what
she was talking about. But she was just that gracious lady, and always thought of the way to be
so polite and so, thoughtful, really she was a dear...
BA: And she was there for all four years, for all your four years?
BK: Yeah, she was there. She died I think, I can't remember if it was last year or not. And we
were going to have our dance. And I think I'd received my corsage, and we'd all decided that we
would not have a dance, a spring dance, I think it was. Yeah.
BA: What courses...do you remember any particular courses that you liked, or some of the
professors?
BK: Yes I did. I had, uh ... I took a regular classical kind of, course. And I wanted my Bachelor
of Arts. So I had to take another year of Latin here at college. You see. because you have to have
five years of Latin, when I was here, to get your Bachelor of Arts. Otherwise, you received a
Bachelor of Philosophy. So, it was hard work. We had eight o’clock classes, we had at least five
classes, plus lab. I mean we really worked. And we had gym. Now, some of our classes were
with the men, and some of our classes were up here. Some of our freshman classes. But when it
came to upper classes, why we would go over to the campus... and I remember, I took a course
with Professor Taylor, an art appreciation course, and we had lab with him too. We had to try all
8

the different media. You know, oil and etchings, and everything else. So that we have some
appreciation how these things are done. And he, we had to walk from Miller Hall, down to
George street, where his home was. He had a studio in back of his home. And many a time, if we
got stuck with traffic on Angel or Waterman and couldn't get across. We' d fin a little note:
“Sorry you were late,” and he'd lock the door - if you didn’t get there in ten minutes, and it was a
long walk to get there. But, anyway, we got so a group of us would get out and we would put our
hands out and stop traffic. We were our own policemen!
BA: They still do that.
BK: Really? Students do that, right, yeah. I mean we took our life in our hands. Really, to do
that. But then, uh, the courses really were very good. I mean, I, I was very fond of our music
professor, Dr. Coolidge, Professor Coolidge. And later on in life, when I became active, after I
married, and became very active in Providence Public Education Council which was then a part
of the National Committee for the Support of the Public Schools. When I was involved with
PTA, he was involved with it. And I said "Well, isn't this nice?" and they, he, they asked me to
be secretary. "Oh, Professor," I said "Dr. Coolidge, I said, I never learned to type." I said "How
could I be a secretary?" He said 'Well, it's a good thing you didn't, because you never would be
doing what you are now." But now I wish I had learned to type. I mean, I think I would have
been more useful, maybe, if I could've typed. But.
BA: What did you major in?
BK: I majored in English, but took as much psychology as I did English. In fact I think I took
more psychology because when I went on to summer school the year after, well the same year. I
went down to URI, it was the first year they had a summer school, not the first year, but the
second year, '34 I went to summer school in '35 down there. And I took oh several courses in
psychology, and some in administration, and school administration, and that kind of thing. And I
remembered they didn't know what to do with me because I was married. And I wish I had saved
the correspondence, because the Dean at that time. Dean Walden would write to me and say,
"Sorry, we cannot put you in a dormitory. You are married." And I'd write back and he'd say
"Sorry, we cannot put you here, there,” you know. Well, I came back for the twenty fifth
reunion, and my husband's twenty-fifth reunion. We parked practically in front of Dean Walden'
s home. And he came out to greet us and he said, "Now, Bella, if you came back I would give
you an apartment, I could, you could send your children to preschool over there at the Watson
House, and it was so different. So, we got permission from the college and the president to open
Bob’s fraternity house and we lived in the house mother’s suite.
BA: So he was with you? Bob came with you?
BK: Yes, yes, oh yes. Well, he didn't go to school. But he worked, he was working in
Providence, and we'd go back and forth, and if I wanted a ride to Providence during the day,
there were people like Superintendent Town, and Mr. (inaudible), over at one of the high
schools. I think it (inaudible) one of the high schools, and they were teaching courses in
administration and school -

9

BA: So you were interested in teaching?
BK: I was interested in teaching then. In fact while I was here, I took courses down at the Rhode
Island School of Education. You know, RICE I guess they call it.
BA: Rhode Island College
BK: Yes, Rhode Island College. And, I would go 4:30 to 6:00 or I would go on Saturday
mornings. So, I took some courses there. And, that was because I wanted my certificate. They
didn't want to recognize Brown, even though we were probably better trained. But we had to
plan all these little things like Rhode Island Education Law, and we had the, such things as, made
me mad years later.
well, things - politics were never involved in education. Can you
imagine that? Well, I'll never forget that when Dr. Carol mentioned that but anyway, it was a
good experience and I had, I mean I had that skill if I needed it, you see.
BA: But were they going to let you teach? Were you a, because you were married?
BK: No, I couldn't teach because I was married. So when I came back to Woonsocket well first
of all, I should say, I guess, that when we were married, I was married between my last exam,
and the time that I got my diploma. We were married secretly, because we knew that after
graduation, our parents could not afford a wedding. And that many of our students did that, they
went off and got married.
BA: Did your parents know you were going to?
BK: They suspected, but we didn’t live together for a year until he got a job. There were no jobs,
dear. This was a depression. And BA: What had he majored in. what was he BK: He was in, he took business administration. But, he took all, he was the kind of person like I
was...taking courses in everything else that he could. I mean he was interested in botany, he was
interested in this, that and the other, so he'd take a course in it. I still do the same thing. I mean
now, if I'm interested somehow, I'll take a course in it. So, it was very difficult, and I mean
people would not think of having a wedding. And I think if people confessed - there were many
of our graduates, several that I know, who went maybe a year later, went off and got married,
had a witness. I mean, had a religious wedding. But privately, privately without inviting
anybody. We lived in Woonsocket, everybody knew everybody and I knew that my family
would have to invite everybody in the congregation. And, it was too much to even think of them
giving me gifts. And this was one way of, you know, not having my dad who was out of work at
that time, even think of it. We just couldn't afford it. Impossible. So we waited until he was, he
had a job. And then we stayed with the folks for a short while. But, in Woonsocket, they were
very upset with the superintendent (inaudible) because he had known me since I was a child, and
we lived with, you know, blocks away around the high school. And, he thought that I had done
the wrong thing, because he wasn't going to have me as a teacher. And, because I was married I
couldn't. So, anyway, it worked out probably for the best, because here was the Depression. And,
10

it was '33, and a time when there had been a big, big Polio epidemic, early in the thirties. And
early in the thirties, I think in 1930, there was a, a conference held by the government, and it was
for children, a conference on children. And the important thing that was discussed was
exceptional children. Now what they meant by exception, was not a child that was very bright.
They meant a child who was physically, emotionally, socially different, and needed help. And at
that time, in our community, and in many other communities too, if you had a child that was
handicapped, you would have to educate them yourself. And, fortunately, there was a gentleman
in Woonsocket, who had a child who had Polio, and he was very upset. The child was very
bright. The school would not take him, even if you provided your own transportation. The only
thing you could do, was have a private tutor. Now, that was impossible for many of the people.
So, the committee was formed, you know, the usual American way of doing things. The
committee made up of the superintendent of schools, the SPCC who were interested because
they felt that these children were neglected, the visiting nurses, the mayor was on the committee.
It was a city committee, and they discussed it, and they felt they should go for some grant. And
at that time, you know, there was CWA, WPA, there was all kinds of money for works program
kind of things, to develop things in the community. And so, they hired me, and they hired
another Pembroker - she lived in Woonsocket at the time. But she was given all of the polio
cases. So, she was doing Polio cases. We were given a paper and pencil, and the names of
children that were born five years ago. Where are they? You go find them. So, it was a matter of
really searching out, finding these children. And that was an experience, because many people
who had handicapped children then, did not want to even say that they had a child, they would
hide them. And we knew that they were either dead, or they were in an institution, or they were
hidden some place. And I remember going to a home, and I'm talking to these people and trying
to explain that we hoped to bring education right into the home, and you know, that it wasn't
going to cost them anything, and how important it was that these children learn to read and write.
And all of a sudden, while I'm there and these people are telling me "no" that they haven't this
child. They didn't say where he was, they wouldn't tell me if he was, you know, in one of the
institutions, or whether he was dead. And all of a sudden, I hear this thud and they got up and
they ran, and they went into the bathroom. And it seems that anytime, I found out later, anytime
anybody came to the door, they would take this child and put him on the toilet and strap him up
and close the door. He knew he had to be quiet. And then that day, I guess we talked a little
longer, it was too long, and he fell.
BA: How old was he?
BK: He might have been four or five. About five maybe, because we'd started them about five
years old. And, so it was really something. So I ended up with that youngster who was epileptic,
we found out, and a slow learner. And then I had a
Spina Bifida case, I had a (inaudible) case, an osteomyelitis (inaudible) case, I had a Scoliosis we
know, with a beautiful plump, fat child. It was a beautiful child. You looked at her and then you
realized that here was a heart condition, congenital. So, I had all kinds of cases and I learned a
great deal, because I fortunately had a good doctor, and I would sit down and talk with him: Why
can't we do something? and all that. And the visiting nurses would get me crutches, if the child
grew out of the size that he needed. They were giving a way cod liver oil. That was a big thing.
And so you'd see me carrying bottles of cod liver oil. We didn't have cars you know. So we went
by bus. Part of my pay was a dollar bus pass, and $14.40 a week. And I would leave the house at
11

about 7:30 in the morning, get to my first, had to go by bus, get to the first home about 8:00 or
8:30. And then I would come home around six o’clock, six o’clock something.
BA: At this time, you and your husband were living with your –
BK: Yes BA: Parents BK: Yes, yeah. that was BA: And was Bob working too?
BK: Yes, he had gotten, well he wasn't working part of the time, but he finally got a job that was
$20 a week. And he needed a car. And so, who has credit? And who had two-hundred and fifty
dollars for a second-hand automobile? So, dad paid the, well he didn't pay it, he signed the note.
And Bob paid five dollars a week to the bank. And after that we said: Well, we're never going to
buy anything on turns like that. Because we're only earning $20 a week. So that fall, after, well,
they didn't raise enough money to go to, this was a couple years I'm talking about. And then,
finally they ran out of money. They’d a fundraising, they had a dance around the world. It was a
time of Wilkie and everything was a one rural kind of thing. And in Woonsocket, we found that
we had, oh we had Polish Nationals, we and Polish Catholics, we had Ukrainians, we had
French-Canadians, we had Italians, and we had - and they all had dance groups at that time. And
so we asked them if they would perform in the high school auditorium, and I think we charged
twenty - five cents. And that was the money that we needed. And then, afterwards they asked me
if I would finish up, or would I leave, because they didn't have any more money. I said "I can't
leave, I've got to, I'm going to finish." There was three or four more weeks. And, I said "No,
these children have to finish." The public school gave me their syllabi and books. So, I was able
to follow what the schools wanted me to do. And the superintendent was very cooperative, the
busmen were cooperative. They saw me walking in the middle of the block, they would pull over
and let me in. Everybody knew me, you know, they just- So, it, it was a real community effort,
and it was a wonderful learning experience for me in community organization. And, also, my
interest in handicapped children.
BA: So, you did everything for them. You taught them....
BK: I taught them and I was like a social worker (BA:...made sure they got everything...) I was
like, yes, yes....and I was right in the homes where I had an opportunity to talk with parents, and
the children would sit there and wait and look out the window. And I remember this little fellow
with Spina Bifida. I had to get off, and he'd be sitting in the bay window, and watch me. And
every day the bus was late or I didn't come he'd start crying, because he thought I wasn't coming.
You see, I was the important thing all day. And it was a learning experience for me too. I had no
children. And, so I have a different point of view about people who have handicapped children.
And, one of the things I learned - I remember it was Easter time. And, I decided to give each
child, they used to have these plants with a bulb in them and then you'd just water them and
they'd grow, you know, and I brought each one one, and I remember this little fellow, I told him
12

that if he gave it the food it needed, that was water. and while he was sleeping it was going to
grow, and he would have a flower. Well, he was thrilled because it came out. I looked in a
couple of times and it died.
Tape 1, Side 2
BA: Where you were?
BK: I think I was telling you about the youngster with the flower that died. And I, it really taught
me something. Remember that I was not even a mother, and I was young myself, you know I
might have been twenty-two, twenty- three, somewhere along that age and it made me realize
that even children are sensitive to death and dying, and I learned a lot. I learned a lot how these
parents had to cope. I learned what it meant to not have things because they just weren't
available. Money couldn't buy them. I mean, and but it was wonderful. I mean I enjoyed it. And
then, I moved to Providence, because Bob found it difficult to commute back to, with my folks.
And we, rented an apartment, $21 a month rent. He was making 19, and we had to provide our
own heat, and we had, well, we had mother's, I still have it - her breakfast set was, so was my
dining room set, and was my kitchen set then. The only thing we bought was a bed and a chest,
and that kind of thing. Our living room had uh, two of those folding beach chairs, which now are
very popular, with the sling-back, and there was a fireplace. And then at home it was a big house
that had been converted to apartments.
BA: Where was it? What part of Providence?
BK: It was up near Roger Williams Park. And my classmate from Waterbury Connecticut - her
husband was working for a construction company here, and they found a place, and I came to
visit her one day, and I said to her, she said to me "Why don't you come live in Providence?" So
that started it all. It being easier for Bob and all. So, she said "You know, the apartment upstairs
is going to be for rent, so why don't you go over there and ...
BA: Were apartments scarce in those days?
BK: No, no, but money was scarce; they weren't scarce as I recall. It was only money. I mean
nobody had a thousand dollars to put down on a house, just nobody. We could’ve bought a house
if we had two thousand dollars down but we didn't have it. We didn't all our life have it. We paid
rent until we moved down there. Then my brother helped me keep the house in BA: In Florida?
BK: Yeah
BA: Oh, you never, you always rented?
BK: Always rented. We never had that amount of money to put down. We never had money, but
we had a lot of friends - a lot of good experiences. I mean happy experiences (inaudible). But
then, we moved into Providence, Rhode Island and I found that, with Edward coming, it was a
13

whole new life, but I didn’t get involved with any community activities then, until I, PTA came
along. In the meantime, my neighbor, down below, had two children. And so, very often I'd help
her or I would take one of her children, so that my son would have a playmate. So, her son and
my son were close, they were six weeks apart. And I remember when they coming around,
inviting people to join the PTA. And your child's going to school this year. They were making
surveys, you know. Preschool surveys. And I said "Yes, I hope so." "How old is this one?" I told
her. "And, how old is this one?" "He's six weeks old." And she looked at me. And she looked at
me like something was wrong with me, and I said, "No, that's my neighbor's child." Because they
were always together. She was a, she was in the neighborhood, so she used to see me out with
Michael and Edward. But I got involved in PTA, almost innocently. Without knowing what I
was getting into. I was asked to participate in something and the next thing I knew, I was asked
to be the vice-president. It was during the war now. And the president whose husband was a
doctor, moved from Broad Street, down to (inaudible). And so, all of a sudden, without ever
having been a vice-president, I'm suddenly inheriting the presidency. So, that was a learning
experience. And we had a principal, that, there was a lot of stories about this woman, but I
couldn't believe that. She seemed like a lovely person to me...I had only known her for one year.
It was in the first or second grade. And, so I don't know. I just better go and see the principal.
And I'd heard stories that she didn't allow you to do this, and she didn't allow you to do that. So, I
went and talked with her, and I asked her what she expected us, as parents, to do and what way
we could help her, and said that we were willing to you know, abide by rules that she had in the
school, that I was brand new, and I just didn't know what I inherited, and I needed some help.
Well, she was a big, tall woman and I was short. She put her arm around me, as we went out, and
she said "You know, no one has ever consulted me about things like this." So, we became
friends.
BA: Oh great. And none of those stories were true?
BK: They weren't true. They weren't true. No, they weren't. She was a person who was very well
disciplined, she ran a good school, and she had certain rules, and that's perfectly alright with me.
I mean that's the way things have to be done. And, but I also feel that you don’t overstep your
bounds, and think because you're a PTA president, that you can come in any time and do
anything you want. There's a certain confidentiality about the files in any office, or anywhere
you work. And, and it wouldn't be right. And then that wasn't helping. That was really hindering
anything that she had to do. So, we then became good friends.
BA: How long were you president?
Bk: I was president that year, and by that time I guess it was time to move on or something, and
then I, then I got on to council, Providence Council...
BA: Providence City Council?
BK: No, Providence Council of Parents and Teachers. It was, every PTA had representatives.
And so I became very active in that, and was chairman of the committee on the exceptional
child, believe it or not, at that point. They were beginning to talk about exceptional children here.

14

And they found that, it was now ’46, and I had gone to some meeting, and that's where I met
Harvey Langdon at Meeting Street School where it was being thought about BA: Oh, it was?
BK: Yes.
BA: In '46?
BK: In forty...well, the year before really, '45. In '46 we were incorporated. But, '45, we spent the
whole year studying what we could do, and we had meetings at the medical society library on
Francis Street, was it? The street that goes up to the State House? They have a BA: No...
BK: I think it's Francis Street. And the medical library was there, and they were very generous.
We used that library for our meetings with different groups and we had CP groups, we had
epilepsy, we had every group that you can think of that worked with handicapped people at that
time, come to us. And then, Dr. Denhall came with his ideas and then we were able to think
about setting up. We had decided that was an unmet need because the philosophy of the Easter
Seals was never to duplicate anything that was already being done, and being done well. There
was no reason for us to do that. So every state in the union that has Easter Seals, does something
different. One may run a sheltered workshop, one may run a camp, one may run a program for
hard of hearing, one may have a mobile unit that does rehabilitation in the home. So that every
state that you go into would do something else. So we, after a year study, and we had all the
doctors in, and we had people like Doctor, Oh God his name I miss, but he was head of Butler at
the time, and people from Rhode Island Hospital, and even some outsiders who came. And we
felt that that was what we needed to do, and so we became incorporated. And we were allowed to
use Meeting Street School, down here you know at the bottom of the hill.
BA: No, where was that?
BK: Right at the bottom of the hill, near North Main Street. It's opposite Shakespeare's Head that
the Junior League had. And that school was built by, from, rather I should say, from the bricks
that were in the ballasts of the boats that came here when Rhode Island was settled. And it was
an old, it's an old building, I've forgotten how many years old it is, but it was always used as a
school, and it was a fresh-air school at one time. And I don't know what else, but when we took it
over, there were, there was a pot-belly stove, big one, downstairs, narrow stairs going up on the
right-hand side to the second floor, no heat, but that pot- belly stove, and these little stairs. And,
Harvey Langdon and I were looking the place over, and dreaming of handicapped children.
Where were we going to put them? What could they do in that space?
BA: And how many could you ...
BK: Yeah, but the point was that we hadn't even found them yet, so we didn't know how many
we were going to have. So we looked at it, we dreamed a little while. We decided we could not
15

have that pot- belly stove, that that had to go, and maybe we could have the offices upstairs
because people, oh the people could walk up, the staff could walk up. And that's what we did.
The first thing we tried to raise money to, you know, clean that building out, and put in heating.
We put in these carrier heaters, I remember they were up on the, you know, like you have air
conditioning out your window. This was inside. Only heat came out of it, so that children could
have the floor with out - and the floor was an old wooden floor that if any of these little
youngsters were on their rear-ends on that floor they’d have gotten splinters. Well, so we had to
think of what we might do with that, clean it out.
BA: And you had to raise all the money.
BK: We had to raise all the money, we had no money. Except, that I think National had taken
care of this year of doing study, and then maybe about five thousand dollars they had given us.
BA: National what?
BK: National Easter Seals.
BA: National Easter Seals, okay.
BK: And we became the Easter Seal Agency of Rhode Island. The Rhode Island Chapter of
Crippled Children and Adults. That's what we were called. Well, we got started, and we had to
do all kinds of things. Harvey and I wrote script, and I remember that day when we went over to
see things and dream a little more. It was so cold, we got back in the car, and we turned on the
radio, and just at the point where they were announcing that we were going to be on the next
week. It was so funny. So, Mrs. K, and Mrs. L were writing scripts, and they we passed it on to
National and they were quite excited. We raised forty-six thousand dollars, the first year. We
thought that was fantastic.
BA: That was for those days.
BK: Male, it was a male campaign, and you know, we never...
BA: Statewide...just the state of Rhode Island?
BK: Yeah, Just the state. Just the state of Rhode Island. And we started with preschool children,
and they had to be evaluated and all that. Dr. Denhall was our medical adviser. And we had a
wonderful board, we had an architect from the School of Design who taught architecture, we had
doctors, we had bankers, we had all kinds of people. I guess I was the only one who was really a
layperson, but my interest had been in education.
BA: Oh, you had so much experience too.
BK: And, yes, and so I was involved that way, and we, as a group, did a lot of educating of the
community. That was a big thing. We also found that a great many teachers, now that we were

16

going to be hoping that these children, after they had help here, would be mainstream. That was
the idea - to get them into public schools.
BA: So you were talking about it way back then?
BK: So we try to get them into public schools. Well, it wasn't easy, because there were no laws,
there were no trained teachers. There was no place for them to train, except in Syracuse at some
study courses of exceptional children. And there were no scholarships, I mean the teachers who
already taught were quite, you know, might want to go off and get a Masters in special
education. Now it's called special education. And, we had to do something through educating
teachers, because not all handicaps are visible. I mean you don't see BA: Dyslexia, or…
BK: Yeah, you don't see sight problems, you don't see hearing problems, you don't see heart
problems, you don't see arthritic problems. I mean they're non-visible. So we formed a group,
and we became part of the NEA, it's called the International Council for Exceptional Children,
which I understand is still going. And we had a person who was Commissioner of Education,
who, Mike Walsh at that time, had his office here, on Benefit Street as I recall. And, we would
meet in his office, and we developed a team. We had a person who was working in sight, a
person who was interested in hard-of - hearing - I'm staying with her now. And she's retired
many years, she started a hearing program - one of the first people to get a degree from what was
then Western Reserve, which was one place that had, and now it's called Case Western, she got
her Masters there, I think, and, I think an honorary doctorate for the work she did here in Rhode
Island. And we had Pauline Langdon, and then we had, oh, a whole group. We had Miranda
Willoughby who, I think, who's interested in the psychological aspects that I don ' t remember if
her husband was a psychologist, but I think her son is, I think her son now is a psychologist, or
psychiatrist. I don't know because I've been away too long. And, the Commissioner made it
possible for us to have seminars around the state. We'd have, for example, one in Providence,
one say in Central Falls, Pawtucket, that area, one down in the southern part, one over in the
Bristol area. They gave them permission to be out of school in the afternoon, and we would meet
them in one central place. And we would put on a program, and then have questions raised, and
then talk about, well where are these children? And there were about 15%, they found at the
Conference, (inaudible) Conference, children in the public school, were in some way
handicapped, in some way different, exceptional. So, where were we? And I remember one
teacher who had taken courses with me at the Rhode Island College of Education who later
became one of their trustees. She was from Central Falls, and we had to, she got up and she said
"Mrs. Krovitz," after we had finished, "you're expecting us to be diagnosticians, and we are
educators." And I said to her, "My dear, a mother is not a diagnostician, but she can see if there's
some pimples on the child, and she doesn't know whether they're measles, mumps or what they
are, or chicken pox. But she knows she needs to go and get some help." And I said, "You have
children in front of you for five hours a day, and you know he's not doing as well as he could.
You think maybe something is wrong. But you don't know, but he's not doing what the rest of the
children in that room are doing. You have a nurse, you have school doctors, you have, you could
find these children. “And believe it or not, we now, we've come a long way, we've got national

17

legislation ...we've come a long, long way. And I was happy to see that you've got a lift in here. I
noticed that immediately.
BA: Yes, we used it one year for, a woman who came back from her seventy-fifth reunion.
BK: Yes, so we've come a long way, and now it's just accepted everywhere. But, there's still
much to do.
BA: Oh, yes
BK: And then I worked on architectural barriers. By that time I had moved to Massachusetts, and
the law that came in that we worked on buildings, public buildings needed to be barrier-free and
we had to do it by persuasion at first. We had to do it by persuasion. There were four or five of
us who would leach together, and I drove one of the women who was a handicapped person. She
happened to have been the wife of the Dean of the Harvard Law School, Dean Griswold. Well,
Harriet Griswold had polio when her child was about two or three years old and she had to take
care of that child. She wore a corset kind of brace. She had to put it on in bed, her legs and all.
She had a car, which was wonderful, but it had a, (inaudible) using your finger to accelerate. And
also, the brake kind of thing. And she could not drive any distance. She could only drive around
Belmont. So I offered to drive her, and I would pick her up and we would got our meetings
together. And what we were trying to do then, was to get churches, school buildings and others,
by persuasion only at that time, no law that mandated it, to think about making the building
barrier-free. And we would get the names of these people from the Dodge reports, which are
used by builders, whenever a new building, I think there still are, when a building is to be built,
there's generally a committee, and they have an architect and they may choose a building. Well,
there evidently was some book that's being used by many people who were in the building trades
to see where new buildings were being built, so as to get some of these sub-contracting jobs, you
know. So, we would look at those, and the, in my area, I was living in Wollaston at the time, and
Milton is nearby. Now if there was a church being built. I was given the name, and I tried to call
the chairman of the building committee, and say "Have you thought about making your building,
making it architecturally barrier-free? And should you like more information, we would gladly
send you what the AIA has now come up with - how steep the ramp should be, and how to figure
out about extending the bannister, so on a, on a stairwell, so the person could reach the last step.
Should be about so you could pull yourself up over that. Little things like that that don't cost
much more to add twelve inches of wood to the banister, I mean cutting it, little things like that
and thinking about making the bathroom a little wider while you're building. And we were
successful in some cases, but in other cases, they you know, their architect probably didn't think
about it, and all the churches have beautiful, beautiful steps coming up, and making a very
elegant but they were barriers. So we had to do a lot of that and then we worked on national
legislation which has passed, and we got Section 502, and Section 504 and now we've got this
new thing that I noticed in the paper just yesterday's paper, I think, in the Providence Journal,
mentioned that businesses that employed handicapped people should make things a little bit
more comfortable for them, help them make their job a little easier for them.
B A: So you, you did all this, for all these years as a volunteer.

18

BK: I’ve been a volunteer, I've been a volunteer in health and education and welfare. I don’t
know which, it all worked in together. And, what is so exciting is that I just met the most
wonderful people in the world. And it was very rewarding when something got done. I mean if
you could see something done. And for me to come back this year and see the changes, even
right around here, I mean is really thrilling. I mean, to see the changes that have been made. I
feel, it’s, it's been wonderful.
BA: Oh, yeah - you have really made a difference.
BK: I feel so wonderful
BA: You have.
BK: Well, then, I found that I have, my son was out of college, and I was involved with
community activities in Quincy, Massachusetts, and I got involved, when I moved there, they
told somebody that I was in PTA here, and I've been on the Legislative committee and I've been
up to vice-president, but I'd moved. So, I was ready to, for another election. But I got there, and
what do I do? Get a call someone says to me, “we'd like to have you help us out in District three.
We don't have a district director to work with the different PTA Association.” And I said, "Well,
I just moved in, and I really don't know Massachusetts", and this person says to me - she had met
me at a national convention - she says to me, "Well, you know PTA", I said "Well, I guess I do
know PTA. I've been with it now for many years" "You can read a map, can't you?" So, I, I
couldn't say no. She invited me to the mid-winter conference, remember I don't know a soul. And
stayed at the Statler Hotel in Boston. So, I arrived at the Statler, and I'm just looking at
everybody. They sent me, they had a monthly bulletin that had articles by the different chairmen,
and had pictures of some of these people. So, I'm in there, I go into coffee shop, and I'm looking
at this one, and I'm looking at that one (inaudible) picture, and finally, I see someone that looks
like their picture, and I go oh, she's sitting at the end of the coffee shop. And so then she brought
me in and introduced me, so I got to know them. And then I was finally, finally went up the "up
the ranks" you might say. And was elected President in '66, of the state commune. But
unfortunately what happened I was there for a while. I'd had a physical before I was to take
office and all, and everything was fine, great, and then during the year I found that what we had
been trying to take care of and prevent evidently just bloomed. And I found myself having a
surgical menopause. And then, problems started so that I felt it was important to resign, and not
have people making excuses that our president is not available and ill. And, I resigned and the
vice-president took over. So I was out of circulation for about a year, and then things started
because I had been involved in Quincy with community action, started during Johnson, Great
Society kind-of- thing. And they had asked me to be on the Board, but I said "I can't be because I
want to get this presidency, and they want me to be President of the PTA". So, what happened
was that the next year, they knew that I had resigned, and I was feeling better and it was right in
my own community, so I went on the Board, and I stayed with it until I left Quincy. And while I
was on the Board, I became very much interested in what was going on in the community, of
course. And, on the Board was a gentleman who was Director of the Council on Aging. And,
they were building public housing at that time...'69, '68, around there. A lot of twenty dash two
money and all kinds of money for universities and all those. Housing for the elderly and the
handicapped. And the, the housing authority director, and the Council on the Aging director were
19

very much interested in seeing if we could get for the city of Quincy, a grant so that we could
have a demonstration project (inaudible) and we got it. And he, he suggested, he and I were on
the same wavelength. And our philosophy was if older people, if they cannot get to the service,
the service will have to come to them. And so I was given again, paper and pencil, and all the
city services - now see what you can do in getting support services. So, we come into a brandnew building with two hundred people from Boston, South Boston - all over. Some had never
lived with high-rise. Yep, this is fourteen stories. Some had never lived with electric stoves.
Never had elevators. It was a whole new lifestyle. They'd never lived where one door was your
apartment and the next door was the next apartment and fire doors, and we had elevators and
incinerators at that time. And janitors and all that. So, it was really an experience. And so first of
all, I devised a well, sort of interview that I would have with each new resident just so I could
know where they came from, what they had retired from, what their hobbies were, what would
happen if there was an emergency, who would they like us to call. And so as a result of this
survey kind of thing, we developed emergency cards which we would put on the back of their
bathroom door so that we had these things you call emergency pulls. So that it would put a light
on in front of their door, and it would also open the door. So that anybody who wanted to rush in
and help them. If they fell and they could, were near where they could reach for, there was one
near their toilet, and one near their bed. So, that was important. And then I had to do tenant
education, I had to bring in people, from the elevators, the people who were, who were, had
installed the stoves, the electric company, so that they would explain because many of them had
used gas, and no flame, and sometimes they didn't know it was on. And they would have their
bathrobe on and reach over to get the kettle, and this one was still burning. So we had to do a
great deal of education. But it was a very exciting period for me, because the questions they
came down and asked me, and I was sort of working with the Council on Aging, but I also had to
abide by housing authority regulation. Two of them, two directors, were really wonderful people,
because they gave me the freedom to try things and to grow. And I appreciated that and they did
too.
BA: How many hours a week did you work on that?
BK: Well that was a full-time, but that was a paid-job.
BA: Oh, it was a paid-job, oh good.
BK: That was my first paid job. I got 80 dollars a week. And that was wonderful, because I loved
the people and I think that we got along beautifully. So, we had to tackle everybody. We had to
tackle the police department - we had them come up and speak and talk, and talk about crime and
crime-prevention, and how older people need to behave. We had the fire department come and
talk about fire safety, and what to do, that we were a fire-resistant building, and please don't use
the elevators. Get out on that balcony, because you'd be safe there. Steel construction and
cement. So it was a fairly, you know, strong building, and fire resistant, and we had to explain
that. Then we had to call the post office. Now there's where I ran into a problem. We had a
mailbox, that was on a post on the- street around the corner, in front of the fire station. So, these
older people had to come out the front door, go to the corner, go down one block, cross this very
busy Washington Street, and put their mail in this nice little box that hung on a telephone post.
Two hundred people living in this building. So we call the Boston post-office, so they have to
20

come down and make a survey. And they make a survey, and then they tell us that, well yes,
they'll move it. So they move it across the street, but they don't have to cross the street. They still
have to come out the building, go like this and around. Well, that was better than nothing, but we
had to complain again. Fortunately, the mayor the Council on Aging people, and the, you know,
the others in the community around there said: "Well, why don't you put it on Curtis Avenue,
instead of way over there. Well, they weren't so sure. They had to come around and make
another survey. Alright. We said "Now the people on this street won't be able to use it. If you
will please put it in front of our building, we would like to have you put it under our portico
because then they can come right out without getting wet or without getting snow on them. Well,
I guess the Good Lord works in wondrous ways, because I came in, about Valentine Day, and the
snow is about two feet, and I look out, and all these envelopes are on top, and the valentines are
just thrown all over the place, and I thought "My God, what has happened?" So I pick them up
and then I realize that many older people put money, not checks but money in valentines for their
children. So I brought them in and I found out what happened. There was this big snow. They
put these letters to go out in the foyer, and they left them for the mailman to pick them up. They
couldn't get out in that snow and go around. And, occasionally if they met the mailman, he was
very nice about taking the mail and bringing it to them. And when he came of course, he opened
all these mailboxes, and put the mail in, and they would wait, because for him to., “Well" I said,
"Now what do we do? This is serious, because these people, this kind of weather - we cannot do
that." Well, again they came down, and they looked the situation over, and they now put it near
the curbstone. They brought a big mailbox this time, and also a box that would be a storage box
for the mailbags to be put. But now it is right there on the curbstone in front of the building.
Well, that looks fine. Well, one day the mailman was coming along, and boy that mailbox was
going, tumbling right down the street, because that street was like a wind canyon.
BA: Oh, yeah, like with the big town buildings.
BK: And here's this mailbox. And so, that was the best thing that ever happened. So then they
came and they finally put it under the portico.
BA: Isn't that something?
BK: Two years, I had everybody writing letters, everybody calling the post office. Well, that’s
that. That was really great. We got that done. Then we, I found that there were some problems.
This woman was going to the doctor, she took a taxi, she was legally blind, she came back and
her doctor had called the pharmacy and had them send five different prescriptions up to her. So, I
didn't know about them. I saw her coming back, and she goes up to her apartment, and when the
prescription came, you know after I had left of course, she calls in a neighbor, and she asks them
to read what it says in that little print. Well, she knocks the number of pills on the top of the
thing and that night that woman, took one of every one of the five different pills. And she
couldn't sleep. And she was having an awful time. She gets up and takes one of those nonprescription drugs, that she was used to taking. I don't want to name any particular drug. And she
was miserable, and I came up, she called me the next morning, and I said "Mrs. S, please call
your doctor immediately, and tell him what you have done." And then I said to myself, "These
people need to have a health counsellor, or health educator, or somebody in here. "We had a
room that was set aside for health. It had a scale, and it had a file, and it had a desk. And when
21

they built the building, they thought in terms of, a health room. But, now, how were we going to
get the money? We had no money. Well, fortunately, I was on the Budgeting Committee of the
United Funds, and we were meeting, and there was five thousand dollars, that we couldn't, it was
too much to give to one organization, because we were budgeting for the South Shore. Boston
was separate at that time. I think now it's altogether. And they wanted suggestions. What are we
going to do? We don't want to turn it back, you know. So, what was the unmet need? And I said
“Well, if I had that, I would like to give it to the visiting nurses, and ask them to come, maybe
one hour a week, or two hours a week. Use that room and counsel people. Let them bring down
the medicine. Explain it to them. Let them take their blood pressures, and refer them to the
doctors. Someone they could talk over, before they went. Well, we didn't believe it, but the
person who was the Department of Health officer and doctor, I guess was not too pleased. He
thought the nurse was going to pack in the medicine. They didn't realize we got signed off by all
the medical associations, and the other people. They thought that was a wonderful idea, because
it would mean that these people would be going to the doctor, because the nurse would say "I
think your blood pressure's high, and you'd better go see the doctor, or your pulse is high, or
anything like that. But he was not too sure that was a good idea. And so he had his patients come
in every week, if he wanted them to have their blood pressure taken. But everybody else - was
very, very happy that we had that, and the nurse was there, and pretty soon, all the other
buildings had, see we were a demonstration building. But every, then everyone wanted what we
had, because we were demonstrating the need. And it worked out beautifully. So I got myself
involved again. I had to be Chairman of the advisory Committee, now, for, for the visiting
nurses. So one thing led to another.
BA: But you had the skills, and obviously you had the leadership skills.
BK: But the linkages. I mean we would be linked. There was Community Action, Council on
Aging, Housing Authority. Well then we had to get some money deposits, and another one that
was difficult, was the school department. I thought that was going to be easy. But they told me,
"Well senior citizens can take the bus, and come up and take classes at the evening high school,
or they can take classes at the evening. VocTech school. And I said "That's very nice, that's fine.
It won't cost them anything." But I said how many of these people are going to get on a bus at
night and when it's snowing and sleeting and raining?" I said "They will not go." I said "Look,
we have a beautiful big hall, we have tables, we have chairs, we have lights, we have heat. We
have everything you need except the teacher. Why isn't it possible for us to get a teacher from,
say 4:30 to 5:30 - an hour in the afternoon? And that would be very nice for the people to have a
discussion group or anything else led by a teacher or perhaps giving a course, I don't care, if it' s
what the people want. I find myself on the Advisory Committee of the adult education. You
know, every time they want to set you up, they put you on a committee. So, anyway, finally they
were convinced. And we did have someone discuss money, and that kind of thing. And that
worked out very well. And then, there was a wonderful doctor who wanted to do some health
education. She had come up with a series of seminars, that was called "HEALTHY,” "Health
Education and Learn to Help Yourself,” the letters spelled healthy. She was a woman who was a
doctor, and she worked with one of the nurses that at the Harvard Public Health School and
develop this series of six, of six - three hour I think it was, two hour or three hours, the morning
or in the afternoons. Six periods when we come together and discuss the aging process, and what
happens when you get older. We talked about such subjects as the skin and the outer change of
22

hair, and all that. And then we had one on chronic diseases, we had one on stress, which was
mental health, given by a mental health person, we had one on pills and vitamins, medication,
finding a person who was the head of the State Commission on Pharmacy. Very fine promises to
have from Quincy. We had dentists, we had visiting nurses - we would discuss chronic illness.
And it was a wonderful series. At the end we gave them a little certificate. We had a little
program, with the Council on Aging director on the, and it worked out very well. So, but again,
when I went to see this big director of the Health Department, the gentleman says" I don't quite
understand", he said, "the less older people know about what’s bothering them the better,” he
says. Of course, I didn’t believe that. So I thought to myself, “well, if I get this show on the road
I had better call Dr. (inaudible) and ask her because I thought it would be better if one doctor
spoke to another, one medical person to another, they’d understand each other. Well, he finally
was convinced and he was going to give the first lecture. We asked him to do that. And it worked
out very well. And, again, we were pioneers, because there were only a few communities that did
that. And I could not have done that without the Housing Authority and the Council on Aging
and they were thrilled. Then I said we were given time by the public service time from our local
radio station and the director and I, he used to call me his administrative assistant. And we would
be on like once a month on a Friday afternoon for about twenty minutes on the radio. And we’d
talk about the health fair and we’d talk about this program HEALTHY. I was specializing more
in health than anything else. I felt that was the most important thing to an older person. So I
tapped in on anything I could get or bring to them. So I said to the radio station people, “Would
you do this for us? Could you extend your fifteen minutes,” or twenty minutes which they gave
us, “on Friday afternoon, and have ten minutes more. We’d like to use that time for health
education for the whole community.” So I handed them the program, complete with the speakers
and everything else we had. Oh, we had written material, we had suggested reading for people,
we had discussion of these things. So it was really a very good seminar. Everybody really felt
they learned something. And, of course, the radio could only answer questions over the
telephone. But that worked out fine because the station won this special award that year and that
was really wonderful. I was thrilled to pieces.
BA: Now, what year was this?
BK: This was back in the early ‘70s.
BA: Is that house still there?
BK: Oh, yes.
BA: Still has the programs and –
BK: I hope so because after I left, the Housing Authority, I think after the demonstration was
over and they felt it was worthwhile they, the Housing Authority, got some special thing from
[HUD?] to do tenant orientation or something like that. It involved everything that I did. And we
tapped in on everything we could tap in. I mean, if anything was going to be available, man, I
was going to get it for them. Bright Eyes came to Boston, at the University hospital. The
National Society for the Prevention of Blindness gave Boston a grant for older people to have an
examination of their eyes if they had not had an exam in five years. And most of these people
23

were poor people. Housing people, people in public housing. And so I called them and I said,
“do you know we’re in Quincy and our hospital doesn’t have anything like that. We don’t have
any eye tests and I know we have people who need help.” So they worked it out so we could
have seven bus loads, each bus had forty. And they said to me, if you will do all the clerical work
and all the, you know, filling out forms Tape 2, Side 1
BK: The "Bright Eyes" project provided the transportation and a light lunch, like a sandwich,
and a cookie, and a drink and then transportation back into Quincy. So we had seven bus loads,
and I asked them for a report, and we found there were 23 different types of problems with eyes
that these people had, not just cataracts, but all kinds of very difficult things. In fact one person
was immediately kept from going back home. Yes. And it was quite upsetting, because his wife
had to go home alone. She went with him. But we took care of that so she got home alright. And
after she, you know, got off the bus. And, we found that was very worthwhile. Now, I was
interested in reading the paper, recently, that finally our own hospital was having eye exams
without optometrists, volunteered to do some examinations. But this was the test that they had,
was the drops, and everything else. It was a complete ophthalmological wonderful test.
BA: Wonderful.
BK: So, those are some of the things, I mean I could go on because it was a wonderful, exciting
period of my life because I was in on the beginning of things. And when you’re in on the
beginning of things, that's what's exciting. I mean that's why I'm saying I'm enjoying my life. It
was really good for me. It was exciting.
BA: Wonderful thing.
BK: And, so then that led to my being involved with the elderly. By that time the National
government had the administration on aging, and we started having each state developing area
agencies on aging, and having state departments. The Department of Elder Affairs, in some
states, or executive offices, or they had different names but there were nothing more than state
branches that were involved with aging. So, again I had the good fortune of being on the
beginning of that and development of area agencies. And so then I served on the area agency, I
served on the homecare corporation, which was an outgrowth of that. And then, after I had
retired, so, you might say from that, a job at (inaudible) Towers, I was asked to be on the council
on Aging. Now I was in a different role. And so I found myself going to State, and area, and
regional meetings that the Administration on Aging had for example, in different parts of New
England.
BA: Forget...now you were back to being a volunteer.
BK: I was back to being a volunteer, yeah, after I left. But I stayed on a year as a volunteer, until
they found someone to kind of take over. But they, I think they changed the focus. I mean things
have changed, you know. So they changed the focus, and I think, I think many of the
departments - my job really was to educate the city that they should pick up and then afterwards,
24

the Council on Aging took up, and we started it, transportation for medical reasons, because
many people could not drive.
BA: A real problem.
BK: And we had, we had trips into Boston, to the hospital clinics, more than once a week and
they were very cooperative to arrange them so that our drivers could take several instead of you
know, one group of people running back and forth to Boston from Quincy. And so there were
groups that would go in. And now they have the RI DE. which is transportation from the MBTA,
you know the agency which is in charge of transportation. We've come a long way. So now that
we've set them in place, you know, now it's accepted transportation. Another thing which I was
excited about, was I had been to a transportation conference, and I had heard that one of the
companies that is involved with retail sales of food - I hate to name, put names down, because I
feel that you know I'm not a commercial, and I don't want to give them applause. But one of the
groups, was going to do something about transporting elderly people. And I thought that's a fine
idea. I've been trying to do that for two years and got nowhere with one of the other, big chains
in our community. Whenever I talk to them they said "Well, there's the insurance problem,
there's this, there's that. We can't do it.” So finally, when I called and told them that one of their
competitors was going to start it north of Boston. “Well, you'll hear from us," they said. And
fortunately again, things fall in place. The, one of the women who lived in another part of the
city, and who was living in public housing, not the building where I was involved in, had asked
her son who was a manager of one of these big markets, she said, "How am I going to get to your
market, we don’t have a car, we can't go shopping on the bus, it's too difficult." And just at that
point, he was interested in how he could help the people where his mother lives. So, when they
called me from their National Office, he said the new manager wants to know, too. And he'd be
glad to talk with you and the head of the Council on Aging. So we made a survey, and we said "
How many people are willing to use the bus once a week and go do their shopping in this
market?” Well, I mean everybody signed it. Everybody signed it. And they made quite a fuss
about the old people, they gave them coffee when they came in, and that kind of thing at the
beginning you know. Well, it wasn't very long before two other chains in the city wanted to
know what day they could come. So I had bought, I had buses pulling up on Monday, Tuesday
and Thursday. Each one wanted BA: They could have their choice then of what store.
BK: That's right. And they also, they could go anytime, I mean they could go all three if they
wanted to. One of the shopping areas had a pharmacy, and the other one, I think was near the
post office or something, and more near downtown, so that was convenient, and I think one of
them was near a liquor store, so it would be convenient for some of them. So they could do a lot.
They gave them an hour and a half, and they made all arrangements. But then I had to explain to
these people that you cannot package your stuff the same way with older people. And I said,
“now look, you got to think. They're going to buy one pear, one apple, one banana. They want a
variety. They might buy one or two pieces of chicken, they might want one lamb chop, and you
just better think about the day that they're coming,” because everything was packaged. So we had
to some educating, again. So then you get yourself involved again, and you end up on a
Consumer's Board. I mean, every time you know, you opened your mouth, you had to, well, it
25

worked out to be very fine. I mean, they were very cooperative. They did a good job. And then
they finally, I couldn't take the time anymore, and I said, you know, "More men are doing
shopping for women." I said "Many of them are coming home and shopping." Well, they said
“Well get me a man," you know, as if to challenge me, "Where can we find a man?" And I said "
Well, my husband's retired. If you want to have him, I'm ready to resign." So they put him on the
corporate board, which was later, they have stores in many states - New England and
Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Jersey. So he went on the corporate board, and
they would come in - delegates from the consumer boards in each place would come in, and they
did a great deal about getting them to do something about packaging, and all of that, and pricing,
and there was a lot of research been done on the colors that older people can see well: Why do
you have your labels underneath there in orange color, and the lighting, and then we finally did a
lot. This company I think this company should be rewarded, because they did a lot in sensitizing
their help to what it means to be an older person. And there was a project when I left, a project
was with AARP and this company in New Haven, and they were going to try it out, and then
whatever kind of information they found would be printed by the FMAS food marketing
associations - national association, of all kinds of food marketing groups. And I haven't seen
reports, but I know that they did work on for example, putting gloves on people, and when you
have an older person who's arthritic and can't pick up that dime, and it drops you know, and you,
you've got the person who's behind the cash register, get into kind of (inaudible) out. And I mean
it took a lot of educating, and also their attitude towards, you know, older people coming in. So
that was an experience. And one thing led to another. That’s all I can say. I find that, I find that,
well, that's what happened. I went from children to the elderly, but the things I learned were so, I
mean I just transferred. Sure. Making a survey, I had to do it when I came in with, you know
teaching, getting new courses, and then, because we had done so much, Boston University finally
got a grant to start its department or gerontology. Well, Brandeis had had a department, but their
department was more in the field of philosophy and policy. They were the ones who did all the
research and study to develop the area agencies on aging, and they reported to a senate
committee on aging, and helped pass a law. But Boston University had decided to make it
interdisciplinary. So, every department, whether it was sociology, whether it was the nursing
school, whether it was the medical school, the divinity school, all had something to study about
the elderly. And an awful lot has happened since. Well, I was in on some brainstorming because
when they got the grant, they asked this other person who had done this demonstration in her
community and, and they asked me, and a lot of other people. We weren't the only ones. They
must have had about twenty-five. We spent two or three or four days, saying "What would you
put into such a course? What do we need to know? We need people who are workers, and we
need people who are workers, and we need people who are consultants to work with them. Well,
what do we need?" Well, that led to what was the material that needed to be presented for this
grant for the original setting up of the school of the, our school at BU, and there was a wonderful
professor, Dr. Lowey, and I had the good fortune of working with him, and never thinking that
we were going to set up these courses, and that I would ever be able to take it. Well, they called
me in, they said “We have some money left, we have a person who is a consultant in training of
consultants, and she had been teaching up at McGill or some place and she will be teaching our
group on geriatric consultation in training consultants. So, they said "If you can get some room
for us and we've got the students, because we knew that a lot of people, were beginning to be
involved with nursing homes and beginning to be involved with setting up the, you know,
homecare corporations, and you know groups like that, that we wouldn’t have any problem in
26

getting students. The important thing was getting a teacher and getting a place. Well, the library
in Hingham offered us the library, BU offered us all of their audio-visual material for
replacement in the in the library, and we had a very intensive course. Not only study, not only
lectures, but actually work.
BA: How many people were involved?
BK: There must have been about thirty, I would say, or forty. And so then we all got a certificate
in social gerontology from Boston University.
BA: Great, wonderful.
BK: So, now we became a little bit more important. But, it was a wonderful thing. And, I mean
and so I miss it all. I really do because I found that my husband became ill just as we were
moving from Massachusetts to Florida, and we couldn't even go down there for the closing. I
mean my brother had to take over. Bob was in the hospital. So, we bought the place over the
phone, and moved out six months later. And that was something. It was traumatic to say the
least.
BA: You went there because of his health?
BK: Yes, yes. We knew that we couldn't, couldn't, he couldn't take the cold anymore. And then
when he got down there he was a very rare case, because he was about the only one in the whole
community and fortunately we had found the right doctors. He was researched, Bob researched
the doctors, because he had heard so much about him, and we had been patients of doctors at
Mass General, and so we wanted very qualified people, we fortunately found them and
fortunately he was guided to be sent down to Jackson Memorial Hospital where he was the
thirty-eighth to have an AICD implanted. And that was only in '87.
BA: This is the heart thing?
BK: Yes, it is an automatic, implanted cardioverter defibrillator. And there were only about six
places in the country where it was being done. It was very expensive, it was experimental
because it only had been approved in '86 by the FDA, and fortunately the doctor where we are
realized what had happened to him, and knew he had to go there because his doctor and his
partner had worked down there for seven years at Drake, so he knew what was going on and he
knew that Bob was a candidate. So he was thirty- eighth to have that implanted. So he lived with
this big thing that was implanted in his abdomen, and before that when he was down there for
seventy - two days, in intensive care, which is another whole story in itself, but the first
operation, he had six different procedures, and one ending up with putting in the wires, the
electrodes from his heart down here, and coming out and waiting for this instrument to be made,
in Minnesota. And so it was finally made, and then he had a pace-maker up here. Well now
we've come a long way. That year, the first year there were about 2,000 all over the country. And
just the other day I received, what they call news "Rhythm and News", which is put out. And
there were 25,000 done last year, and done on much younger people. It, because, this type of
heart condition that he had is silent death. Tricky little arrhythmia, no pain. But this thing, if his
27

heart had gone beyond 152 it goes off, and there's an electric current that's as if somebody were
banging his heart, brings them right back. And it's so powerful, but very painful when it happens.
And every two, every month and a half, every other month, we had to go down and have it
tested, because when it gets to six seconds, that means that it's not reacting fast enough for
anything, and so they had, he had another one implanted. They took that one out, and put another
one in. Soon after that, other things happened, many things happened in the body besides the
heart, so bladder, and kidneys and everything else. But, fortunately, his mind did not go, so I was
grateful that we talked to the last minute, and I mean I was...he knew what he wanted. A
wonderful, caring, delightful guy.
BA: So you had the one son? Edward? And now you have two granddaughters?
BK: One son, two granddaughters. Yes, one is 26 or 27, working for a publication, a publishing
society.
BA: Where?
BK: In the California area. I think her, the company she works for is in (inaudible), they live in
Sherman Oaks. And the other daughter, the other granddaughter, is in Tennessee.
BA: Oh, my. Do you go visit them?
BK: I was out there last year for a short time, but I haven't seen the one in Tennessee, we
correspond, we write, we talk, and recently, she sent me copies of her graduation of her diploma
and her program, and her citation, and her magna cum laude thing. So, I was very pleased that
she's going on, because when she graduated from high school there was a boyfriend. And a car.
She didn't think about college. But
her dad said "Anytime you want to go back you say the word" So I guess her time came when
she realized ...
BA: Are you doing any volunteer work now in Florida?
BK: I'm not because I was a full-time care-giver there, twenty-four hours a day and taking care
of the patients...
BA: Two, three years, or something?
BK: The kind of volunteer work was doing is, for example, I have a dear friend who comes down
from (inaudible) and she's 88 and she no longer drives. I will take her to the doctor, and I will
take her to market and that kind of thing, emergencies. I've gotten involved with adult education,
I've gotten involved with courses, and but I realized I was a widow, and needed to learn
something about, even though I had done income tax with my husband, but now my status had
changed BA: You were responsible.

28

BK: And there was this wonderful course that was given on income tax for the individual. So, I
took it. So anytime I want to learn something I take a course. So, that's one thing I've done. And I
mean, I look backwards feeling so good about so many people. Because we knew people all over
the country, and we travelled a lot. And when Bob retired from insurance after 29 years, he was
sort of stuck in it during the Depression. He really was going to go on and study law. But he
would have been a better teacher or professor, he really would have. But he found himself, I was
involved with mental health which I haven’t even mentioned and the opportunity came, I was on
the board. They wanted someone to consolidate. They had four different offices in the downtown
area of Quincy, and one was a preschool, and one was the guidance clinic, and one was
something else, and they were all over. And the opportunity came for them to rent one whole
floor of a very big building. And, they wanted, they didn't have any money, and they wanted
someone who was retired, who'd run a business, who'd run an office, who knew something about
purchasing and (inaudible) a psychiatrist and a psychologist were running this, I don't know what
to call it, but it was running all over the city, I mean four different places. And some not knowing
what the others were doing. And if they wanted something, they wanted a toy for their clinic,
they'd go over to the toy store, and buy something. There was no order. They knew nothing
about setting up pensions, and they were getting money they were beginning to get a lot of
money from government grants, from United Funds, from fees, because we were beginning to
empty out our mental hospitals and they were having people coming for aftercare, and they were
getting some of their slots were taken by state so they were paying for some of these people. And
125 people working but they were scattered. Nobody knew what was going on. So we had to do
that. One of the big projects was getting them moved, setting up their plans and he knew it was
something he worked himself out of. And so in a couple years he had set up their office
procedures and all of that and pensions. And they moved into this building. Now we had also to
make all the changes, because it was an office building: knock down walls, make space for
libraries, set up a two- way room, with the two- way mirrors that they have, you know, so that
they can look through a watch and observe the business end of it. The telephone for 125 people.
Purchasing - all of that. And he loved it. Oh he just loved it. He just enjoyed every minute of it.
And then, when he finished that project, he was always involved with college youth. That was
his hobby. And very active in scholarship - not necessarily raising funds for scholarship, but in
how -study. There's a book on talking with college students. In fact at one time he was President
of the College Fraternity Scholarship Association. And they were interested in ratings, and
getting the fraternity to be above the all - men's average. So he was involved in his fraternity and
then went up the ranks, and then was involved with the foundation. So he was travelling to the
foundation. And then he became President of the National College Fraternity Conference, which
is made up of all of BA: This was after he retired?
BK: Yup. And so he travelled for them. He was President for about 26 different committees. So
he was well-organized, I mean I’m not as organized as he was. Really he was organized. When I
look through some of the files and I think: How could I do that? All by mail, you know. Talking
to these people. And we travelled a lot. So when I could go with him, I went with him so I'd find
myself all over. We couldn't hassle a college, but there would either be a chapter or a dean, or a
student personnel person, or there'd be somebody that we knew, you know. So we had a
wonderful time travelling, and he had a wonderful time talking at convocation, so now all of that
29

stuff, I haven't put together, and it's all promised to National Fraternities of Indianapolis, the
headquarters of many of journeys that his fraternity took, Alpha Epsilon Pi. So, and there's a
scholarship that started in 1956, when he was, '56 yes, he was President in '46, but in '56 he had
gotten the Order of the Lion, which was their highest award. Some of the brothers were
instrumental in starting the scholarship fund. And he, he wanted it, as I wanted it always to be
broad enough so that it could be used, not just special for one and he wanted it for a young man
who was at the University of Rhode Island, who was a fraternity brother who may need it, but if
there was no one eligible that year, it could go to any of 125 different places where they had
chapters. All the way to Canada or anyplace else, but we wanted it used so I made everything
broad enough without strings attached.
BA: He was a Rhode Islander too, then.
BK: Yes, yes. He was from Providence. And so I'm trying to carry out his wishes. That's why I'm
here and at Meeting Street School.
BA: Meeting Street School has grown. Hasn't it?
BK: Oh, it has grown. And that new building you see, I wanted to see very badly, because the
person for whom it is named, was the director when it started, (inaudible) Langdon, and she
remarried just recently. At eighty she got married, again and we knew her first-husband very
well. He was a pediatrician who at forty-two, I believe, had a stroke. He had extremely high
blood pressure. At that time they performed what was called a sympathectomy, but it didn't
work. And so he was handicapped. And she had been headmistress, at the Gordon School for
many years. They had three little daughters. And we became not only working partners, you
know I was a volunteer, and she was a professional. But we became very good friends, and we
would take her husband out to a special place down at the corner, I forgot the name of it now,
Rhode Island and Connecticut, and there was a beautiful park down there, and on the ground
over one end there was a lake and a playhouse. And they didn't advertise in Rhode Island. They
used to advertise in the New York papers. But it was right on the borders, and we would take
him down, and of course Bob would help her take out the wheelchair. We'd go - he was a boy
scout, so he had been to the World Jamboree, when he was a child. So he used to love to make
the fire, build the fire and then we'd have a cookout or something, and then we'd take him to the
play in the wheelchair. I was just reminiscing yesterday about those things, you know. The times
that we had together. So, it was a wonderful friendship, and wonderful experience. I learned a lot
from her. We traveled to conventions together, drove across the country - Chicago together. It
was just wonderful! No money, but we had fun.
BA: You have certainly led a full, full life.
BK: I feel that way. I've been fortunate and grateful for many things. And now when you ask
what I do, I am very happy to have one thing to look forward to. Because two years ago, five
months after Bob died, I didn't expect to be here. And I don't think the doctor did here either. He
said "Why do you Krovitzes have to be so different?" So they didn't know what was wrong, and I
developed something that was multi-pulmonary clots and so I am very fortunate, so I'm very
grateful that I can do what I do, and if I can look forward to one beautiful thing each day,
30

meeting a new person, getting a telephone call, from an old friend, maybe somebody just
stopping by and saying “hello,” watching the birds whistling to them in the morning we have
loads of birds around, looking after some plants that I have - my little patios, I have two little
patios, and living, in what I call a "Postage Stamp," a condo...I don't call this much more than
...but I do have two bathrooms, and two bedrooms.

END

31

