
Corman: The first thing I'm supposed to ask you is if you could
just, urn, state your name for the tape recorder, and, urn, where you
were born and brought up, you know, just basic biographical stuff.
O.K., go ahead, talk away.
Leonard: My name is Marjorie Leonard, and I was born in Agawam
Massachusetts.

Ann, uh, I went to Springfield Junior College and

then I went to Brown.

And, uh, the thing that I remember most about

Brown was, uh, Latin with Benny Cloud, who was such a 0arlinq.
Everybody loved Benny Cloud and he made Latin poetry and the Latin
plays living things, really lots of fun.

I remember that was, I

think, the most enjoyable courses that I took.

And then I did a

year of research with Professor Carpenter, historical research, and
we had to read a minimum of fifty sources for each paper.
Corman:

(laugh) Yes, that's a lot.

Leonard: Oh yes its terrible.
Corman: Wow, if I ever had to do that I know I'd be in trouble.
Leonard: And we practically lived at the John Hay Library.

They

don't use that now, do they, so much?
Corman: IJm, we use it for, for storing historical documents, but not
for a library.
Leonard: Well I haven't seen the new library.
Corman: It's very nice.
Leonard: I was down for my fiftieth reunion, believe it or not, and
we didn't get to see anything because my, uh, classmate lives out in
the country and she doesn't drive at night.
see as much as I'd liked to.
I


So, uh, I didn't get to

2

Corman: Urn, you said you were born in Agawam, were you raised 

there as well? 

Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: Do you want to tell me anything about your parents or 

your family? 

Leonard: Well, there's not
Corman: No.

m~ch

to tell. 


Were you an only child? 


Leonard: No, there were five of us.
Junior College.

But we went to Springfield 


See the City of Springfield gave, uh, students 


one year of college free.
reasonable rate.

But we could go at a very, very, uh, 


It was very, very good. 


Corman: Were all five of you educated then, at college level? 

Leonard: Three of us.

Two of my brothers and I.

But since then 


all of my spare time has been given to the Equal Rights Amendment. 

I went down to lobby in the Congress long before Women's Lib. 

And we got insulted and thrown out of places. 

Corman: Oh really, where tell me where, tell me how. 

Leonard: - Well, ,one of the places whelJeit was very eaEl
Saltonstall.

It was kind of a blow to me because he was my senator 


and I'd always voted for him.
me.
him.

was ~ Senator 


But his son was, was very angry with 


Apparently, he didn't think much of women who disagreed with 

We were talking about a Supreme Court decision, and he hadn't 


even read it.

Oh, I didn't tell you I graduated from Boston Univ­ 


ersity School of Law.
the Congress.

So, uh, we were insulted right and left by 


And I was told at Trinity Church here in Boston that 


that they didn't think with my ideas I didn't belong in that church. 


3


Corman: Really, you were thrown out of the church because of your
ideas.

Do you remember the, urn, passing of the Amendment that gave

the vote to women?

Do you remember that--­

Leonard: No, I don't remember that.
Corman: Yes, well, I don't know.

That's 1920.

So, when, when you had the prob­

lems with the Senator were you in Washington at the time?
Leonard:

Yes.

Corman: You just gone down there to talk with him or were you
living there?
Leonard: Well I had a month's vacation so I'd go down and stay two
or three days, Saturday, Sunday and a couple of days, uh, and it
gave us quite a bit of time.

We, but, I got to talk to an awful
Its, its such an experience.

lot of people in Congress.

You know

you hear about these people but to sit down and talk to them.

And

you know they'll say, "What do you want to talk about?", and you
take a deep breath, you think here it comes.

And the faces on them,

and the insulting things they'll say, 'course this is years ago.
Corman: I don't know that it's changed yet.
Leonard: It hasn't.

Not that much, no.

Rights Amendment through.

And we can't get the Equal

You stop to think of it, we've got

thirty-five states, we need thirty-eight, and in some of the states
we've been defeated by only one or two votes.

So you've got five or

six men in this country holding up an amendment that millions of
people want.

And you can't believe it.

Corman: What about the millions of people who don't want it, what
are we going to do with them?
Leonard: You mean some of the housewives, well they don't understand.
Corman: You think if that
for it?

i~

they understood that they would vote

4

Leonard: Yes.

They don't understand.

And of course we've got 


Phyliss Schafly, who's a terrible enemy.

She represents big busi­ 


ness and the Roman Catholic Church and when you tack on the, uh, 

Mormon Church.

That woman was excommunicated from the Mormon 


Church for supporting the, that's incredible, because the Equal 

Rights Amendment has absolutely nothing to do with religion in any 

way.

Besides it's the First Amendment forbids any 


Corman: Uh, okay.
was that?

So you went to Springfield Junior College, when 


Do you know the date? 


Leonard: Date, way back in the Middle Ages. 

Corman: Middle Ages, no it wasn't that long ago, my ... 

Leonard: I think it was twenty five or twenty six. 

Corman: Twenty-five-twenty-six, and then you went to Brown,for your 

after, right after Springfield College. 

Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: And you said you worked you way through school? 

Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: What did you do? 

Leonard: Everything. 

Corman: Everything, did you, give me an example, please. 

Leonard: Well, I worked in the college bookstore,

I did babysitting. 


I waited on tables, answered telephones, anything that we could find. 

Corman: So most people didn't work their way through college or they 

didn't? 

Leonard: No, they didn't. 

Corman: Did you get very friendly with people at the school or were 

you too busy working? 

Leonard: No, no I had a few friends. 


5


Corman: Have you kept in contact with them? 

Leonard: Yes, some of them, yes. 

Corman: Because one of the things I'*e

~oticed

is, .moresQ than

tod~y, 


is that people keep in contact with friendships that they made in 

college, they're more lasting

Urn, you graduated in 1929? 


Leonard: That's right. 

Corman: So you were the first class to graduate actually from Pembroke 

rather than the Women's College? 

Leonard: Yes I think so.

I'm not sure. 


Corman: Yes, that was the first year.

Do you remember any of the 


controversy over the Wo.en's College--­
Leonard: I don't remember any controversy at all. 

Corman: Well, because I was told that, urn, some of the men and some 

fo the women wanted to keep it the Women's College at Brown and some 

people wanted to rename it Pembroke and make it a separate school. 

Leonard: I don't remember.
stopped being Pembroke.
been combined.

I felt very badly when they stopped, 


Like at Harvard and Radcliffe you see that's 


And women lose out, they're losing out at Harvard. 


I don't keep tabs on other places but Harvard I have because they're 

hiring fewer women on the faculty and women are getting fewer schol­ 

arships.

So women lose out although they like it.

I think Wellesely decided to stay all female.

But that's why 


They thought the girls 


had a better chance. 

Corman: Was there a particular reason you chose Brown over another 

school, or Pembroke over another school to go to? 

Leonard: Well, some of the teachers at Junior College in Springfield, 

I think Mr. March, he was the mathematics, and there were some others 

I liked very much. 


6


Corman: What was yourmajor at Brown? 

Leonard: History. 

Corman: History. 

Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: Do you remember what courses you had to take for your major? 

Do you remember any requirements you had to fulfill?

Like you said 


you had taken Latin, was that a requirement for history? 

Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: It was ... 

Leonard: And French and German also. 

Corman: So you must have known lots of
them?

lang~ages.

Do you still know 


Can you ... 


Leonard: Well, I try to keep up with the french but its really funny, 

they don't, the didn't teach french the way they do today because 

you'll get a laugh out of this.

A friend of mine married a french 


diplomat, so just once I tried to speak to him in french and you 

never heard anything like the reaction.
speak french.

You know that's how well 
I

But the French are all like that.

sulting in Paris.

They're very in­ 


They pretend that they can't understand you.

You 


know very well that you're saying cinq, and they'd certainly under­ 

stand that. 

Corman: Any, any other requirements, did you take english, did you 

take ... 

Leonard: Yes, we had to take english literature and english composi­ 

tion.

I think the composition is very good.

They're saying today 


that a lot of the college graduates can't write.

But we had, we had 


terrible, we had to write so many short themes and so many long ones. 


7


I think that was a very good course.

But it was so long ago. 


Corman:

Did you enter, did you work 


What about your law school?

your way through law school as well? 

Leonard: Yes I did. 

Corman: When you were working your way through schools did it take 

you an extra year because you were working ... 

Leonard: Oh I did in law school,
~

'cause, I couldn't carry a full 


I just couldn't, the studying is so colossal.

load and work.

law school was, is, a fantastic experience.

But

There were, you know,

in criminal law, there were over one hundred men and three women.
And one woman dropped out, she was discouraged.
out, that left me.

So the professor said, "You'd better drop out,

you'll never make it."
cided I'd stay.

So, I, I worried all the weekend and I de­

So they made me recite all the rape and seduction

cases in the book in front of all those men.
and stamping.

The other flunked

They were whooping

You see how people get to be feminists.

got through law school I couldn't get a job.

Then when I

I notice Sandra O'Connor

who comes along thirty years later, she couldn't get a job in a law
office.

She went to work for the government.

weren't available to me.
and the

t"')AtI

You see those jobs

I took an exam for the Internal Revenue

told me I he said, "Why are you taking this exam?"

took it anyway.
heard from them.

I thought it was a good experience.

I

I never even

They didn't even tell whether I'd flunked or

anything.
Corman: Well how did you finally get a job then?
Leonard: Well, I was working in a law office, and as a secretary,
that's the only thing I could get.

And you see I was in the same

category as girls with a high school education.
they couldn't even spell certiary or anything.

And I told someone
So that's how people

~

-

8


get to be feminists.

It isn't because we're crackpots or maybe we

are crackpots, I don't know.

I've been called that, I've been

called lots of things even by one of my classmates.
that anyone like me is peculiar.
right after college.

She thinks

Well, of course, she got married

She's never really worked.

She has a little

antique shop but that's not the same thing at all.
Corman: So have you worked straight since you got out of law school
just as a secretary in a law firm?
Leonard: Oh no, I went to work for John Hancock as a title examiner.
And I worked on the mortgages.
Corman: Did you encounter a lot of discrimination?
Leonard: Oh yes.
Corman: Do you think that, if you were going to have, choose to go
into law, would you choose to go into law again if you had the choice
today?
Leonard: Yes.
Corman: You still like it even though you found lots of discrimin­
ation.
Leonard: Yes, it's fascinating.

Yes, but, uh, people don't under­

stand you see you've got fifty states and the federal government,
that gives us fifty-one sets of laws.

And people say you can

remove the discrimination, but you can't.
anent and have any

vo~ce

Besides, it's not perm­

is a Constitutional Amendment.

only way you can reverse a Supreme Court decision.

And that's

It's like William

Saltonstall, the Senator's son, he hadn't read the Supreme Court
cases.

What the Supreme Court has said about women, you wouldn't

believe it.

9


Corman: Tell me, what did they say? 

Leonard:

In that

vs. West Virginia, it's uncon­

stitutional to keep blacks off juries in the state courts but it is 

constitutional to keep women off. 

Corman: When was this?

When was the decision? 


Leonard: That's an old decision but you see it's never been re­ 

versed and we've had so much trouble getting women to serve on juries 

especially in the· South.

See that's where the Equal Rights Amendment 


is being defeated in the South.

These are the slave states, some­ 


body said they still believe in slavery only now it's women.
Phyliss Schafly went down to

And 


Virginia and she got hundreds of house­ 


wives all in a stew over unisex toilets.

You can't believe it. 


This friend of mine said she sat there and cried, she couldn't be­ 

lieve that these women believed all that.

She said didn't they ever 


ride on an airplane where you go in and you bolt the door? 

Corman: That's right. 

Leonard: And we've got places if you go down South to Mississippi 

and Alabama where they don't have bathrooms or outhouses or any­ 

thing.

You think they're worried about unisex toilets down there. 


It's silly anyway.

We have a constitutional right to privacy. And 


look at the struggle we had to get the vote,

'course, that's 1920 


and those women that that fastened themselves to the White House. 

They were sent to prison by President Wilson.

You know h2's run­ 


ningaround the world making it safe for democracy while he sent 

women to prison.

And one of the women was so badly beaten by the 


police she died.

If this is the world's greatest democracy, people 


ought to be shot. 


Corman: You've been campaigning for the Equal Rights Amendment for 

how long? 

Leonard: Oh, way back with Alice Paul, you know Alice Paul was the 

one who put through the nineteenth Amendment.

Look what they did 


to her, they put her in, in a prison cell, without any light or air, 

and they had a famous psychologist examine her.

But he knew the 


minute he spoke to her that she was very brilliant.
went to prison seven times
the women in England.
to them.

I think she 


And look what they did to 


They force fed them and did terrible things 


So this, this terrific struggle which is unbelievable. 


Corman: Do you think that the Equal Rights Amendment is going to 

be passed? 

Leonard: I'm afraid not. 

Corman: You don't think so. 

Leonard: We'll have to start allover again and go through Congress 

and it's unbelievable. 

Corman: You're still working for it right now. 

Leonard: Well not much, they don't want the old ladies. 

Corman: They don't let you help at all. 

Leonard: Not much.

The uh, N.O.W. is made up of very young people. 


I think it's good and that they should, but we have a lot of exper­ 

ience and knowledge that could be used. 

Corman: Well, let me go back to Pembroke for a little while.

Did 


you have much contact when you were at Pembroke wit~he city of 

Providence? 

Leonard: No. 

Corman: You stayed pretty much only on Pembroke then? 


11 


Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: What about with the ... 

Leonard: You know that we had to wear hats and gloves when we went 

downtown. 

Corman; No, you did, were there any other kind of rules like that? 

Leonard: Well I can't remember the hours they had in the dorms now. 

But they were very strict. 

Corman: What about the social life at Pembroke? 

Leonard: Well I didn't have very much. 

Corman: What about any mixing with Brown?
at all?

Did you mix with the men 


Did you go over there for classes? 


Leonard: For a seminar in historical research and geology 

Corman: I was told that you had to go over in in twos because they 

wouldn't let one person go over at once. 

Leonard: I don't remember that. 

Corman: Did the men treat you all right? 

Leonard: No. 

Corman:

What did they do to you? 


Leonard: Well some of the girls were very pretty girls and, there 

were some very pretty girls in my class and they were invited to 

dances. 

Corman: Did you ... 

Leonard: There was, there was a group at Brown at that time, very 

wealthy men, they used to have jokes about the Dekes. 

Corman: What were the Dekes? 

Leonard: It was one of the fraternities. 

Corman: What were the jokes?

•

12 

Leonard: Somebody said, "Did you ever see any Dekes?
were always under the table."

No, they 


That was one of the jokes. 


Corman: What else can you tell me about Brown? 

Leonard: It was a long time ago, how many years is it? 

Corman: Well, you said you went for your fiftieth reunion, so ... 

Leonard: Well, it's fifty-three years. 

Corman: Were you parents supportive of your education, I mean were 

they ... 

Leonard: No. 

Corman: No, they didn't want you to go to law school, they didn't 

want you to go to college. 

Leonard: No, my father wanted me to marry the Episcopal minister. 

My brother says if you do, he says, I'll scratch you off my list 

forever. 

Corman: So you listened to your brother and not you father, huh? 

Leonard: That's right. 

Corman: So, did he help you at at
LeonardWell, he was younger.
Annapolis.

~ing

through school? 


He went to St. Johns College in 


That's a very fine school.

I think he ran into discrim­ 


ination because he was a Yankee. 

Corman: When you were at school it was also the beginning of the 

Depression? 

Leonard: Yes.

When we got out that was very bad.

That was another 


reason that it was hard to get jobs, very hard to get a job. 

Corman: Can you tell me more about yourexperience during the Depression? 

Leonard: Oh yes, there was one lawyer who offered me eight dollars a 

week.

Can you imagine? 


13 

Corman: For doing what? 

Leonard: Secretary. 

Corman: Secretary. 

Leonard: But it was very very bad because you see, they didn't have 

unemployment insurance at that time.

And I think that the employ­ 


ment agencies were rackets because if you worked six weeks you had 

to pay the agency a week's pay.
or seven weeks.

I've always

And all the jobs only lasted six 


~hought

it was a racket.

Corman: What did you think of President Roosevelt?
Leonard: Well, I liked a lot of things about him and some I didn't.
Corman: What did you like and what didn't you like?
Leonard: Well, I think he had a, a wonderful personality.
to hear him talk.

I loved

But I don't think he was on the level.

Corman: What makes you think that? 

Leonard: Well, he knew about Pearl Harbor in advance and he didn't 

do anything to stop it.

I always thought that was really bad.

And 


it's been explained that when he wanted to get into the war that 

would arouse the American people so they would support him.~~~how 

it's been explained by a professor at Harvard Law School.
not my idea.

That's 


Oh, there's a professor at Harvard Law School

~hat 


hates women and I had an awful fight with him. 

Corman: What about? 

Leonard: About the Equal Rights Amendment. 

Corman: What did he say? 

Leonard: Well I was talking for instance that I thought women should 

serve on juries.

You're, you're supposed to be tried by

yo~peers. 


So if women couldn't serve in juries in Massachusetts untill 1949, 


14 

I don't know much later in Rhode Island, so he said, "Women shouldn't 

be serving on juries, they should be home getting their husband's 

suppers." 

Corman: What did you answer? 

Leonard: I said, I said a lot of us don't have husbands, we're unfor­ 

tunate, we don't have husbands, oh, --But I've been told he was a 

misogynist, he was.
he was orthodox.

He never even went out with women, and, uh, 


You know in that synagogue down there in Newport. 


The guide was telling us and pointing to the balcony she said "That's 

where the women sit." 

Corman: Yes, they sit separately, they sit above the men. 

Leonard: Yes, they're not allowed to sit with them.

But, uh, I went 


before the Senate House Judicial Committee for the hearings. 

Corman: Which hearings?

Hearings for what? 


Leonard: For the Equal Rights Amendment.

Before it was passed in '72. 


And, uh, oh, the senators are very polite but the Congress are horr­ 

ible.

Mr. Wiggins from Califormia was shouting away.

up, he wouldn't let me read my paper.

He, it ended 


So Alice Paul went to 


Seller, he was chairman of the House JUdiciary then.

She was a 


scrapper,

When you think of how such a small

group and so much prejudice.

It was printed in the official record.

I wasn't allowed to read it.
Corman: Do you have any things to say to the women of today, how
they should fight the discrimination that they find?
Leonard: Oh we've got to get the Equal Rights Amendment because you
see that's the only way that we can overrule the Supreme Court deci­
sion.

It's the only way you can do that.

It's the only way that

15 

you'll have any permanence.
clout.

It's the only way that you'll have any

And why do they object to it?

You know they gave these

righuto the blacks 114 years ago, and they're still denying them
to women.

And under this Hatch Amendment, they're giving these

rights of the Fourteenth to an unborn fetus while they're denying
them to women.

It's unbelievable, isn't it?

Corman: Yes, I agree.
Leonard: I got a big kick.

Do you ever watch Dick Cavett?

Corman: Occassionally.
Leonard: Well, he has Jonathan Miller on, he's very brilliant, he
started out as a doctor and now he's an
so brilliant and witty.

actor of Shakespeare.

He's

So Dick Cavett was asking his views on

abortion and he was saying well ,you

know~when

life actually startsp

he says well you can't determine that by discovery, you've got to
make a decision.

And then he went on,and I thought it was so funny.

He said well you could say that there's life in the sperm and he
says we've got to protect that.

And he says so you have to have

a requeim mass every time you take a bath.

And he's so brilliant.

I mean everyone should have so much talent as he has.

But you see

people like that understand.
Corman: When did you first meet Alice Paul?
Leonard: Oh, way back, 19, before 1950.
Corman: Do you know where you met her?
Leonard: Oh yes, in headquarters in Washington.

I was visiting a

friend of mine and I had seen everything in Washington and I had you
see she was working, she was a lawyer in Washington, at uh Veterans
Administration.

And so she said go up to the Washington Women's

16 

Party, they've got beautiful antique furniture.
some dishes that belong to Louis XIV

They've got
So it was a

rainy day I remember and I rang the bell, and this woman came
out, she had a lot of white hair and vivid blue eyes.
said, "Who are yOU?"

She

I said, "Well, I'm a friend of Ida Awl's."

"Yes, but who are you?"

t~ell and I

never figureHout, but the

first thing I knew she had me at a desk working.
Corman: Right away.
Leonard: Yes, right away and I've never figures out how I got
there, sending out letters and things, oh, I worked there.

That's

a beautiful house, it's a, I don't know whatthey've done to it,
they've made it into a historical monument.
It was attacked in the 1812 War.
ful.

They had some beautiful things there.

great deal of money for the cause.

I think they should
It was really beauti­
Mrs. Belmont gave a

There's a woman who had two

millionare husbands and they tell the story about her second hus­ 

band.

They had this beautiful mansion in Newport and he had the 


horses come right in the mansion.

Well she said I'll put a stop 


to that. 

Corman: When you were at law school what, you were the only woman 

but, what did you specialize in, did you specialize in anything at 

all? 

Leonard: Oh you don't specialize in law school. 

Corman: Oh you don't. 

Leonard: They have so many required courses. 

Corman: Well, the only reason I ask is that I have a brother and a 

sister who are both lawyers and they came out looking to do a par­ 

ticular kind of law. 

Leonard: There, not till much later. 


17 

Corman: Ok, do you remember any of the courses or professors you
had then, in law school?
Leonard: Oh yes, I remember one, he was awfully funny.

We had a

jerk in our class who was always getting up and saying, "Well now
supposing ... " and well we had so much ground to cover, you can't
take time to go supposing.

So this professor one night was really

irritated, this was a night course.

And he said, "Don't you go

around supposing anything," he said, "there are better things in
the books than you'll ever dream up."
cases are the real ones.

And that's true.

We had some

courses they gave in taxation.

The wildest

I did take all the

'Course that's, that's a waste of

time because they keep changing the laws so.

I don't even know what

the laws are now.
Corman: Did you know any professors or find any students who helped
you rather than didn't want you?
Leonard: No.
Corman: There weren't any there, no one said, who thought the way
you did that women should be in school?
Leonard: No.
Corman:

No one did, no one helped you along the way?

Leonard: No.
Corman: Well, you said your brother had helped you, he had support­
ed you.
Leonard: Yes, but my brother died.

So, uh ...

Corman: What kind of a, what kind of problems did your going to
school cause with your family?

You said that they weren't happy

with your going to school?
Leonar~here

weren't any special problems.

18 

Corman: They talked to you? 

Leonard: Oh yes, but my father was very much opposed to women getting 

an education. 

Corman: So how did you get the idea to get an education? 

Leonard: I don't know where I got it but I decided I wanted to. 

Corman: Had he had an education? 

Leonard: He went to Mt. Hermon.

He didn't go on to college. 


Corman: What did he do for a living? 

Leonard: He was a town official. 

Corman: And your mother, did she do anything? 

Leonard: No. 

Corman: Well she did, she was a homemaker. 

Leonard: Yes, I've been reading a wonderful book I wish I'd had be­ 

fore.

It's called The Nature of Women and it's got quotations from 


famotis people all through history.

You know that Aristotle said that 


a woman, a female is a defective male, and st. Augustine

carried~~t 


along and you know the Catholic Church still believes that from what 

I hear. 

Corman: You said before that you had, remember you said you were 

thrown out of Trinity Church. 

Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: When was that and how did it come about? 

Leonard: Oh well I was asked to do something.
I was going to Washington.
Washington?

I said I couldn't 


And they said what are you doing in 


And I said I work for the Equal Rights Amendment.

And 


they said do you favor the ordination of women. And I said well 

I'm against discrimination.

And so then we got into this discussion, 


this women's group, and that's when they told me with your ideas 

we don't think you belong in this parish.

That was said by the women. 


19 

Corman: It was said by the women and not by the men. 

Leonard: Oh yes that was said by the women. 

Corman: Have you had anything to do with them since? 

Leonard: Not much but they call up once in a while and ask for money. 

Isn't that funny? 

Corman: Yes

beca~e

I can't even imagine that happening, maybe the 


men but not the women. 

Leonard: I had

qu~

a discussion with Dr. Ferris who was the director 


and I was amazed at some of the things he said to me. 

Corman: What did he say? 

Leonard: Well I don't know as I can remember but in church you know 

the uh, for years no women were admitted to Harvard Law School. 

It wasn't until 1950 something.

I don't know the date but I called 


them up and asked them just for fun.

I think 19, around 1953, maybe. 


And women weren't admitted to the divinity school at Harvard either 

'cause I know a friend who wanted to go there.

So finally they did 


admit two women to the Theological School there in Cambridge, the 

Episcopal Theological School in Cambridge.

And Dr. Ferris got up 


in church and said, he says, he says, "I hasten to assure you" he 

said.

And I'm sitting there laughing you know, no wonder I thought 


well, "They're not going to become clergymen."

I wanted to put 


my hand up and say, "What are they going to become?" 

Corman: That's right if they're ordained that"s what they are.

Did ... 


Leonard: The bitterness in the Episcopal Church well that appalls me. 

And I have a friend who said she wouldn't go to communion if it 

was a woman serving.

I can't believe it, this is a woman.

difference does it make who serves it?
important is it?

What 


It isn't the server that's 


It's what it, what 1t means. 


20 


Corman: Did a lot, what were the reactions of the women to you 

then, they must not have been very happy with you, woman friends? 

Leonard: Well most of them were working with me, but one of my 

classmates told me she said you can come for dinner if you don't 

mention being iqwomen's rights because my husband won't want to 

hear about it.

But one time when I started to say, I thought it 


would be interesting to tell them about, I'd been down to Washing­ 

ton and talked to my state senators.
know it was an expeiience to me.

It'd be interesting, you 


And her husband said to me 


"If you don't like it, why don't you go to Russia?" 

Corman: What did you reply? 

Leonard: Nothing.

I didn't say anything. 


Corman: Well how frequently then did you go to Washington? 

Leonard: Well I went quite often. 

Corman: Twice a year. 

Leonard: Oh no, I'd go down and stay two or three days at a time 

'cause I had a month's vacation, you see. 

Corman: So you'd take it all during the year, you'd spread it out, 

I see.
Leonard: Yes, I'd go down, take two days, Saturday, Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday.

Work at headquarters Saturday and Sunday.

Go over to

the Senate and I think a lot of people ought to go down in Washing­
ton.

That new building of the House of Representatives that's un­

believable.

That cost millions and millions of dollars and they

have a free barbershop and swimming pool and sauna bath.
can go in and have wonderful meals, at very small expense.
taxpayers pay for all that.

And they
The

21 


Corman: What, when you would go down to Washington, you would go
to the Senate, what would you, would you be talking to the Senators
directly?
Leonard:

Yes.

Corman: They let you talk to them?
Leonard: If you could get

in~sometimes

you couldn't.

Senator Mans­

field wouldn't talk anybody unless he was from Montana.

I thought 


that was wrong because he was the Majority Leader in the Senate. 

Corman: Have you ever done any just door-to-door calling on 

people getting them to sign petitions? 

Leonard: No. I've never done any of that. 

Corman: Very recently someone for the Equal Rights Amendment came to 

my house asking, asking for support, so yes they are trying to get 

people to sign petitions. 

Leonard: Of course.
achusetts.

We have a state Equal Rights Amendment in Mass­

And they said they were, this woman thinks that, the 


professor at Harvard Law School will have a lot of litigation but 

we didn't get a lot of litigation in Massachusetts. 

Corman: Were you active in getting the Massachusetts Equal Rights 

Amendment passed? 

Leonard: Some but not much,

'cause I was working in Washington. 


And working you see and everything else. 

Corman: Did people at uh John Hancock ... 

Leonard: Oh they were very bitter about it. 

Corman: They didn't want you working in Washington? 

Leonard: No they did not. 

Corman: Did they use any particular means to try and stop you? 

Leonard: Yes they did. 

Corman: What did they do? 


22 

Leonard: Well they wouldn't give me time off to go down and I was
supposed to appear before the Senate Judiciary.

And I wasn't given

any promotions or raises.
Corman: Are you angry at them for that?
Leonard: No, I'm not angry I, I just think I'm hurt because urn, well
discriminiation hurts.

And, and, when, when you're doing more work

an~oing better work than some of the men sitting around, that's

what really gripes you.

That's this equal pay.

men worker equal rights means equal pay.
this constitutional controversy.

To the average wo­

She doesn't understand all

And women don't get equal pay,

what are we getting, 59 cents compared to men getting a dollar.

And

I read an article and it said that women, one eighth of one per cent
of women workers get over 25,000.

One eighth of one per cent.

as 12% of the men are getting over 25,000.
case about that Miss Cunningham
a vice-president.

~here

Where­

And did you read that

she was given a position as

So they spread this rumor that she was having

an affair with the dairman of the board.
impossible for her to function.

And she said they made it

Well that's pure discrimination.

Corman: Do you think it's going to change?
Leonard: It has to change.
Corman: Well why do you think it has to change, it's been that way
for a very long time.
Leonard: Because it's right.
Corman: And you think it will eventually ...
Leonard: If you could talk to one of the great Senators, Warren Austin.
He was our firs~mbassador to the United Nations.

Well, he was the

one who rewrote the Equal Rights Amendment, lots of people don't
know that.

'Cause, well but he rewrote it in his report if you

could talk to somebody, a great lawyer and a great man, you see he
can see clearly.

And even President Eisenhower who couldn't be

23 


called a feminist had confidence in the White House, he said,
"Legislation providing for equal pay for equal work for women is
a matter of simple justice".

President Eisenhower said that.

you see some of the really big men can see it.
to be the world's greatest democracy.
perience I had that will show you.

So

And we're supposed

I want to tell you an ex­

I represented the International

Federation of Women Lawyers at the United Nations.
Corman: When was this?
Leonard: Oh back, oh long back twenty years ago, the sixties.

And

they, they used to have a commission on the status of women which
has been abolished because the Third World doesn't want it.
you imagine that?

Well we were over in Geneva.

thing that strikes me.

Can

And this is another

The American delegate was a sweet charming

lady from North Carolina, just as lovely as she could be.

She

didn't know anything about the Women's movement, or anything about
the Equal Rights Amendment, or discrimination.

And she gave up and

gave this little paper about everything was beautiful in the United
States for women.

So one of the women from one of the developing

countries got up there and she called that woman a liar.
right there, in the floor of the Palv..\~

That was

de Nacion in Geneva.

Corman: Did, what was the reaction by the woman who had given the
paper from North Carolina?
Leonard: She was embarassed, I guess.

But that's wrong to send any­

body without any training or, you see, they held up her her appoint­
ment in the Senate I think that was the story.
chance to instruct her on anything.
parliamentary procedure.

So nobody had the

She didn't know anything about

I think tha's a terrible thing to do to

24 


a lovely person.

You know, they send the wrong people. 


Corman: Have you traveled
land.

m~ch

then?

You said you've been to Eng­ 


Have you been anywhere else? 


Leonard: I've been to Africa. 

Corman: Really when were you in Africa? 

Leonard: Oh, about ten years ago, I can't beieve it's ten years. 

That friend of mine who married a French diplomat, well they were 

stationed in a little country in Africa called Malawi.
so small you don't see it on most of the maps.

And it's 


And I think he was 


punished by the French government because he was always complaining 

So I went to visit them.
to see Victoria Falls.

And we went to Rhodesia

Oh that is fantasic.

It's a mile across.

But I didn't see very many animals be­

And its simply fantastic.

cause you have to go to the reservations now.

People can't believe

that we spent ten days in Africa and not see any animals.
two elephants.

We

I saw

went down the Zambeze rever in a little boat.

And they were standing, and when we came back they were still
standing in the same spot.
impala.

And then some monkeys, and I saw some

Those are beautiful little animals.

little, like little deer.

They're red, with

But they're now in South Africa.

would love to go there.

Everybody said I'd be crazy.

ful country, beautiful.

The mountains come right down to the

ocean at Capetown.
in South Africa.

I

It's beauti­

But they had a hard time, Tina had a hard time
They have two capitals, Victoria and Capetown.

And it's a federation and they have this agreement, so every six
months everybody has to pack up and move.

And Tina's got Scottish

ancestors, she says that's terrible, you know, every six months

25 


everybody packs up and moves, goes down to Capetown which is a
thousand miles.

And then she said by the time that you get settled

you have to find a place to live, you get settled and everyone's
entertained you and then you've entertained she said it's time to
go home.

So they finally put the children in schools.

to go there.

I'd like

They say the blue train that goes from Johannesburg

to Capetown is the most luxurious train in the world.
Corman: You'll have to try it.
Leonard: Yes, I'd like to.

It's really beautiful country.

And I

went to Mexico, the International Federation of Women Lawyers had
a convention in Mexico City.

That's fascinating down there.

Corman: When was this again?
Leonard: Oh, I don't ...
Corman: Any idea.
Leonard: Sixty-five.

And at the University which they built, they're

very clever that way.

They built the University outside of the city,

in the section where it's all volcanic, but where they couldn't use
the land for anything.
university there.
buildings.

And I thought it was clever to build the

And they have the mosaics on the outside of the

It's beautiful, fascinating, I think I have, I have a

friend down there.

She's a lawyer.

She's at Unesco now.

Her

family was born in the United States
fascinating country.
Corman: Because, this woman and when you, did you meet a lot of
people at the International Conferences for the lawyers who had
similar experiences to you?
Leonard: Oh yes.

I met two lawyers from Russia when I was in Geneva.

And it was the strangest thing you know.
lunch

I invited them to have
You see in Geneva, they

26 


have the old city.

Have you been to Geneva?

Corman: Yes, I have.
Leonard: Well you know the old city, the walled city.
ican delegate had a friend who was living there.
ness in Geneva.

He was in busi­

So she invited everybody for a cocktail party in

this apartment, not thinking everybody would come.
thought only a few would show up.
an apartment.

Well the Amer­

You know she

Everybody came and it was just

And it was so crowded and the, the host and the maid

were making the drinks.

And people were asking the funniest things.

You know, they were asking for tomato juice and you know the
Mohammedans don't drink alcohol and I was told by someone not in
public.

Isn't that funny?

Anyway, someone was asking for tea and

oh all sorts of funny things.

And it was a cocktail party.

So

I was standing in the door laughing because I had a cocktail party
once and I had problems.

And the man looked up, and he was a South­

erner, and said "What do you want?"

I think he was so tired.

Why I said, "Well at home I drink Canadian Club."
"We got bourbon."

Well, he said,

He says, "That's Southern Canadian Club."

But

the poor man was simply, there must have been over one hundred people
in that apartment.
ent.

And all asking this poor man for something differ­

But the Russians they came to the cocktail party and they go

around and shake hands with everybody and stand in the corner.

And

that's the way it's explained to me that they're not permitted
to fraternize.

And they made the Russian delegate take back some­

thing he said.

But they were both I liked them both very much.

They're very, I think they wanted to be friendly.
Corman: But they weren't allowed.
Leonard: No.

27 


Corman: It's a shame.
Leonard: Yes, I tried to write to them but I don't think she ever
got my letters.
them.

She never answered any.

I think she never got

But you see, they've abolished that Commission on the status

of women.
Corman: Had you served on any post for that?

Did you ever serve

in any capacity for that commission?
Leonard: Well I couldn't be appointed by any government.

I rep­

resented the National Federation of Women Lawyers.
Corman: That must have been quite an honor.
Leonard: And I did make one speech.
very famous, congratulated me on it.
to the point.

Helvie ---------- , she's very
She said it was short, right

Everybody in Finland is a great admirer of hers.

She's a woman lawyer.
Nations, one term.

And she arranged that convention in Mexico

City on women's rights.
they have it, in

She became Undersecretary to the United

And then the one they han in, where did
But she's retired now.

But you see

one of the things Europeans have that we don't have, most of these
European women that do such sonderful things, they all come from
wealthy families and they have servants.
have that.

And American women don't

So they're in a handicap, so she did so much nore than

the Americans.

She had a full time housekeeper and servants.

So

she could have four children and, uh, American women don't.
Corman: Of course.
Leonard: American women I think they're, I think they're the most
remarkable women in the world.

They

h~e

a hard time.

maligned.
Corman: Can you, I have to go back to school again.

They're

28 


Leonard: It's so long ago. 

Corman: I know.
F.

Do you remember, well, have you ever read any 


Scott Fitzgerald?

Or seen ...

Leonard: No, no I don't think I did.
Corman: No, O.K.

Well the twenties are portrayed as a time when

people were when women went a little wild.

You know they started to

smoke and started to wear shorter clothes ...
Leonard: Well they didn't at Pembroke.
Corman: They didn't at Pembroke.
Leonard: You weren't allowed to smoke.
Corman: Did people do it anyway?
Leonard: I don't know.
Corman: You don't know.

But you know when I look in the books of

today, they're portrayed as a very exciting time to live.
Leonard: Well I think Brown was very conservative.
Corman: Well do you think the people who went there were conservative
or was it just the school?
Leonard:

Yes in my class quite a few of them were Baptists.

Corman: Was there a good mix of people?

Did you find

p~ople

from

different parts of the country or?
Leonard: Not so much, no.

Most of them were from Providence.

of them you know lived at home.

Some

They didn't live in the dorm.

Corman: Do you think people liked the school when they went there?
Did they have a good feeling about it?
Leonard: Well, I think so, yes.

But you know when we went back

for our twenty-fifth, this'll show you the difference.

With our

twenty-fifth reunion I was with a classmate, two classmates, and we

29

went into the new dorm and they were explaining how they had four 

rooms and a common I don't know what you call it.
bedrooms plus a common room.
to serve cocktails.

They had four 


And they had a refrigerator and used 


And my friends say, "Cocktails, cocktails. " 


You know when the girl had a fellow come to see her they sb~in the 

parlour. 

Corman: Would someone else have to be in the parlour with them? 

Leonard: Oh, always with other people.

Wow that, and they used to 


tell about one girl who used to practice on the piano.
hilarious.

And it was 


She'd go and practice on the piano. 


Corman: Did you live in a dorm? 

Leonard: I did one year.

I lived at Sharpe House. 


Corman: Do you remember anything, was there like a house mother, 

was there ... 

Leonard: Yes. 

Corman: How big was it? 

Leonard: It wasn't very big.

There were three

~oors. 


Corman: What were your rooms like? 

Leonard: Oh there were two in a room. 

Corman: How big were they?

Were they big rooms or little rooms? 


LeonardI No, it was an old house made over. 

Corman. How did you get along with the house mother? 

Leonard. All right. 

Cormans Was she, was she very strict? 

Leonards Yes she was. 

Cormans She was, did she, so she didn't look the other way when you 

wanted to entertain men. 

Leonard, Oh no, no. I used to answer the telephone and answer the 

door. So I saw quite a bit of, but they had very strict rules about 


30 

hours. You had to have special permission to go to the
Corman. Did most of your classmates get married .•..
Leonard, Yes.
Corman, I mean get married like right out of college, did they drop
out of college? Did a lot of people drop out of college?
Leonard.

Som~

of them did, yes, about a half a dozen. I think that's

too bad.
Corman, Do you think

~t

they were there just to get a husband, or

do you think people wele there because they wanted an education?
Leonard. No.
Corman. Which one?
Leonard, I think they were looking for husbands, 'cause I was considered
peculiar, I thought we were interested in education.
Corman I You were in the minority.
Leonard, Oh yes.
Corman, Did you take your work seriously?
LeonardI Yes.
Corman I Did you, do you remember how many hours, not how many but ,
did you study .•••
LeonardI Oh, I studied all I could but I was working a lot of hours.
I worked in the bookstore and babysitting and what little time I
had I stud ied, And I had a very funny experien 00, There was a convent
down in High Church,St. Stephen's Church, is on the campus.That i s
it used to be High Church. And the sister there

thought I needed

some instruction. Well I probably did, I still do. But anyway she
had me come over one evening. Well I was so tired from working an d
trying to study and everything else and it was very quiet. She had
this monotone _____________ • It was very boring and I went sound

31 

asleep. I was so embarrassed. 

Cormanl Did you have to go to church everyday? 

Leonardi We had chapel. 

Cormanl You had chapel everyday? 

::be9Rardi Yes. 

Corman I Were you required to go? 

Leonardi Yes, although the last year they gave me an excuse. 

Corman I What about physical instruct, physical education? Did

th~y 


make you take it? What di you used to do for that? 

Leonardi Oh, we had dancing. A funny thing. A man came to fix some 

of the apparatus. He was there for hours watching the dancing. Th en
they put on a show

the dancers.

\
Corman I Did you do anything else,you didn't write for thipaper
because

you didn't have time. I mean did you do anything? 

Leonardi No I really didn't have the time. 

Cormanl Didn't have time. Was there any, right now at Brown there's 

a pre-law society. Did they have that back then? 

Leonardi

~o. 


Cormanl No. How about the , why did you apply to Boston University 

Law School ?Was there a reason for that? Was that the only one taking 

women in this area? 

i,eonardl No. 

Corman I Or did you just like Boston? 

Leonardi Well I was working here as a 

Cormanl Well how long after you graduated college before you started 

law school? 

Leonardi Oh I think it was five or six years. You see I didn't have 


32 


---------- .

Those were the Depression years. It was so bad trying

to get a job. So I started in, taking one or two courses, and the n
I'd have to stop.
Corman, What did you, did you have to write a long semior paper at
Pembroke? Did you have to write or do historical research?
Leonard, We had to write these long papers as I told you. We had to
have fifty sources.
Cormanl Right, do you remember anything you WDote on?

Was

the~a

particular kind of history you liked?
Leonardi Oh I can remember one of them. It was the Armenian Massacres.
I thouRht that was a

suject to do. But it's when you

read the Turkish account and the Arernnian account, the Greek account,
and the English and French account. They're nothing
tell~ng

alike. So who's

the truth. The Turkish were very much maligned I think.

And I think the English and

th~

French were anxious to get to the

oil there. And the Germans, the Germans wanted to build a railroad,
from Berlin to Baghdad. But so they1) all had an ulterior motive to
discredit the Turks.
Corman. Did, do you remember any of the professors, history professors
that you had that you did these for?
Leonard. Oh I remember professor Collier, he was head of the department.
Corman I And he was so good.
Leonardi I thought he was very good history professor,yes. But this
will show you. I thought it would be nice

. Turkish history,

that was the subject that year. He was especially interested. We
used to call it the Near East now they call it the Middle East. And
I think he taught at Providence College at one time. So I suggested
we have a Turkish supper

-------- •

But it was a lot of food.

We got a real, I guess Armenian,to cook this supper for us, we didn't
know any Turks. And we had the black coffee that's really thiek

33 

like molasses. And I tho~gt it was a lot of fun but
Cormanl Did other people like it?
Leonardi Oh yes.
Corman I I would think so. What other kinds of history did you study?
Leon8rd~ '
CrB~,

Oh I took Colonial American history. And this professor

he was marvelous. I remember________________________ And one

time he told us Monday we'd have a quiz on eight hundred pages an d
he'd forgotten to assign it. So everybody on th1Hill and in our class
spent the weekend at the John Hay Library. But you'll get a kick
out of this. There was c girl in our clas who was always saying,
"Can you sUbstitute people in rt.assachusetts?" And she kept saying
it. Imean she could have but anyway. So

~

next to last class he

said there will be no assignments, I've got aspecial project, I'm
interested in, on genealogy. And it was the first families in Virginia,
really sometimes. 'Course my mother got into trouble that way too.
She used to do genealogical work when she was in ____________ . An d
she enjoyed it.It was very interesting going around to cemeteries
and _________ . So they said to my mother did you ever hear of so­
and-so in Virginia. She said she was raving about her ancestors

~n

Virginia. And she says oh yes he was the first man hanged in Virginia
for horsestealing.That woman never forgave my mother. They asked
her if she ever heard of him.
Cormanl That's right.
meGnardl She wasn't doing anything vicious,but that woman never forgave 

her. 

Corman I tlb

yO\}

Jiave ·any, anything to add. Any final comments to make

Leonard INo _______ 1 enjoyed it very much, espec ially the
~I

LctiY', ut'lq 


Istoty' We had professor George. He was very handsome. Oh was he 


handsome. 


?


34
Corman. Did all the girls want to take his class? 

Leonard: Yes and we had a class in stuart England and Tudor England. 


