
Richard Patten: Dick Patten, class of 1991 interviewing Susan Weatherhead, class of
1942 on April 8, 1988. Tape 1.
I'm wondering a little bit about your…your family background before you came to
Brown, and what…did your…did your father go to college?
Susan Weatherhead: No, he didn't. He went to a boys' school. He was English, but he
lived in Barbados and went to a boys' school in Barbados.
RP: And was your…was your mother educated?
SW: My mother did the same. She went to a girls' school in Canada.
RP: Oh, yeah?
SW: Yes.
RP: How did…how did they meet? That's interesting.
SW: I think they met through mutual friends, here, in…in Boston, I think.
RP: Uh-huh. Wow. And where was your hometown when you were growing up?
SW: In Barrington…
RP: Oh, it was.
SW: …which is just eight or ten miles outside of the city.
RP: And you live there now, don't you?
SW: Yes.
RP: Wow, is it…
SW: In the same house.

RP: Really? [laughs]
SW: Yes.
RP: That's neat. How did you…well, how did you hear about Brown or Pembroke? I
guess…well, how did you hear?
SW: Well, all my life I knew about Brown and Pembroke.
RP: Yeah.
SW: I came here for different things. And I always knew…
RP: You came to Providence?
SW: I came to the campus for different things.
RP: Oh, yeah?
SW: And I knew about it and we heard about it in school, of course, and it's the school I
chose to…want to go to mother had ideas that I might want to go to Wheaton or
Wellesley, but I preferred Brown. My father's choice also was Brown because, well,
Pembroke, really. Because I think the daughter of some of his friends had gone to
Pembroke, and he thought that would be fine.
RP: Uh-huh. Hmm. And you didn't…you didn't like Wellesley or Wheaton because
they were…I mean, why did you?
SW: I simply liked Brown…
RP: You just liked Pembroke.
SW: …Pembroke better. And therefore made the choice to try to come to Brown.
RP: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. And did you…were…how many siblings did you have?
SW: Well, I have siblings, any kind you want. I have two brothers of my own who are
close in age to me and I have two half-brothers, and then I have a foster brother. Not any
of that entire family lived together at one time, just myself and two brothers lived
together. My own two brothers lived together at one time…
RP: Did they…did they go to college?
SW: One went to Rhode Island School of Design and the other one went to Brown.

RP: Uh-huh. Wow, so he's an artist…
SW: No. He is…he was in the textile business.
RP: Oh, really?
SW: He…they had at the time that he went a degree in textile engineering. My father
had been in the textile business and he followed my father in the textile business, and at
the time, they gave a degree at Rhode Island School of Design.
RP: Mm-hmm. And were there…were there any…sort of…were there any problems
because you were…you were a girl—or a young woman—about going to college? Were
there any…?
SW: None whatsoever. I had…
RP: There weren't. Everyone…supported you…
SW: There was no…there was no rivalry as far as that kind of thing was concerned in
my family. I was given the same opportunities that my brothers were.
RP: Wow! That's terrific. In what…what…why did you…did a lot of your
frien…girlfriends go to college?
SW: Well, yes.
RP: They did.
SW: The school…I went to the Barrington High School, which was a local high school
in Barrington. And I think somewhere…about 80% of the class went to college.
RP: Oh. So you were sort of…were you…were you following suit when you went to
college, or were you going there with a specific…pursuit?
SW: No. I was going to the college of my choice. I was the only one of that class who
went to Pembroke, but one of the girls that I can recall—one of my close friends—went
to…into music, training for music on an individual basis. A tutorial-type basis. Another
went to the Conservatory of Music in Boston. Another went to Rhode Island…what is
now Rhode Island College. Another went to the University of Rhode Island. Another
went to Connecticut…Connecticut College, which was then Connecticut College for
Women. And the men in the class went to…some of them went on to a year in prep
school, but they also went to Brown and…I'm trying to think of some of the
other…University of Rhode Island, MIT, and that kind of thing.
RP: So they all stayed pretty…they all stayed in New England, generally.

SW: Yes. The trend at the time was…was to stay closer to home than after the war, for
example. That is, truly after the war, when people became more…much more mobile.
RP: Yeah. Right. Okay, once you…once you arrived at Pembroke, did you…did you
have a roommate?
SW: No. I lived at home.
RP: You did.
SW: At the time, there was a shortage of dormitory space. You didn't really have an
option of living on the campus if you lived moderately close. So my brothers and I had a
car for our use [overlapping speech, inaudible]
RP: Wow. That's…that's…that must have been fun…to have a car.
SW: I…I could not live at…on the campus, unless there was an urgent reason, which
didn't exist. Then in my last year, when there was a possibility of my living on the
campus, I simply didn't want to make that kind of an adjustment. To begin as a
freshman, so to speak, by living on the campus.
RP: Uh-huh. Did you find…did you find yourself a…you know, did you like you were
missing out on anything, 'cause…
SW: At that time, there were many…girls around the city…around the state, who lived
at home, and there was quite…it was perhaps a 50-50 split, or perhaps even more of a
local split at…at Pembroke, and they were called…theoretically called "City Girls." That
was not necessarily true, because many of them lived outside the city, but they were
daily…they were commuters. And they had their own centers of attraction, and they
missed very little. They…many of them had the use of automobiles and you could get
back and forth readily. So that there was no real feeling that I was missing anything,
because this was an entire group of…of people who did the same kind of things.
RP: Did you have…did you have any sort of freshman initiation that you had to go
through in Pembroke?
SW: Oh, yes.
RP: [laughter]
SW: We had a hazing. It was called Scut Week. And I recall we had to wear a man's hat
and have a black moustache. They were things I would call (inaudible). I'm sure we had
other things. We had to do other fine things at peoples' requests. But the thing I
remember most is that one of my friends had a father who was six feet tall and
proportionately large, and had a large head. My father was not so tall; he was about 5'10"
and was a typical English-type person with a smaller head, and his hat was small. So I

had his hat stuck on the top of my head, and she had her father's hat coming down over
her eyes.
RP: [laughter]
SW: So every morning, we had to trade.
RP: Yeah? [laughter] And how…that went on for, like, a week or so?
SW: Oh, I…I think it was not a full week, I think perhaps five days (inaudible) so I don't
really recall how long.
RP: Did you have a Senior Sister?
SW: Yes, I did.
RP: And…and did you…how did that…how did that relationship work?
SW: Fine.
RP: It did.
SW: Fine, we are friends to this day.
RP: Wow! Was she…sort of a student advisor, or…?
SW: She was kind of an advisor. She was very active in…sports; she was very active in
dormitory life, and in many things on the campus. And she was an advisor if she needed
to be. She was simply a friend. Very gregarious, happy, smiling type of person. And we
are friends to this day.
RP: Did you…I saw…I…I looked through your yearbook; it was really interesting. And
I…I noticed that a lot of the…a lot of the faculty were men.
SW: Yes.
RP: It…it appeared.
SW: Yes.
RP: And would…would…did that…was that…did you all get along well with them, or
were they…?
SW: Yes.
RP: …were they overbearing sometimes, or…?

SW: No. I don't…I don't recall anyone who was terribly o…one or two who were
overbearing then, and in later life, I knew them, and they were still overbearing.
RP: Oh, yeah?
SW: But…I don't recall…having a woman…well, I had one woman professor. A Miss
Wilder, who taught biology. And she was a frail, intellectual type of woman, and that
was the one woman that I had as a…as a professor. There were not a great many women
professors. Most of them were men. And there were very few instructors who were
women. I recall that a class after mine had a speech teacher who was—speech
instructor—who was a woman. But I had missed her.
RP: Did you have a favorite teacher? In your yearbook, you…you
SW: Oh, George Downing!
RP: Yeah.
SW: Was the favorite professor of the…
RP: Was he an artist, or an art teacher?
SW: He was…he was my professor of art history, but he was in the Art Department.
And he was the unanimous choice of the class as favorite professor.
RP: Yeah? For what reasons?
SW: Many girls took art history, for one thing. It was…he had a very popular class, and
it was a very good class, and one that was very… As I look back on it now, it was a very
rewarding class to take, and should have been a requirement, really. For cultural
purposes. And he simply was a nice man who was a…was very popular with…with the
girl students.
RP: The girls in…you know, I noticed that there were tons and tons of different clubs,
you know, the Sock and Buskin, I think it was called…
SW: Sock and Buskin was the…the theater club.
RP: Theater club. And did you…were you involved in those clubs?
SW: I wasn't so much in Sock and Buskin. I did a little bit, but not too much. There
was, when I first came, a women's group called Komians. And that fast changed into—
joined with—Sock and Buskin.
RP: Oh, yeah?

SW: So that by the time I left, it was all Sock and Buskin. And did a little backstage
work, a little…
RP: Tech staff stuff?
SW: Odds and ends…production kind of things. But never to any great extent. But
there were…there were selections of clubs you could join as you saw fit.
RP: Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Were there…I saw that Pembroke was the only school that
required…that had a physical education requirement.
SW: Oh, yes.
RP: And…did you…how did you partake in that?
SW: You had to attend gymnasium classes.
RP: Uh-huh. What was "gymnasium?"
SW: Well, this…gymnasium sports you had to attend gym classes. I think three
days…three times a week as freshmen, three times a week as a sophomore, twice a week
as a junior, and finally, at the end of your…the last half of your senior year, you were
excused.
RP: Oh, yeah?
SW: That was the absolute ultimate.
RP: Oh, yeah? [laughter]
SW: That was it.
RP: What did you do in gym class?
SW: We had a selection of things to do, you took physical exercise of different kinds,
you played basketball…
RP: There were teams, right?
SW: …horseback riding…you…there was some tennis…field hockey…
RP: So, you did a little bit of everything.
SW: You could…yes. You had…you could make your own choices among the…among
the sports that were offered.

RP: Did they…were the sports…were the teams competitive? You know I know that the
men's…
SW: Not particularly. (overlapping speech; inaudible) No.
RP: …the men's sports were very competitive. They weren't…
SW: No.
RP: Was that by choice of the students?
SW: Well it simply wasn't…they had…they played some intramural basketball, but I
didn't ever play basketball. And I recall when I was a senior, being in a round-robin
archery contest with several other schools. But there was not the competition like there is
now.
RP: And…and there was…there was not the competition that there was at Brown, the
men's part of Brown.
SW: No. The men's part of Brown had their regular sports teams, chiefly they had the
football team.
RP: Yeah. Yeah. Was that a popular thing? Did you…
SW: Yes.
RP: …go to the football games?
SW: Oh, yes. Oh, yes.
RP: As a big social event?
SW: Oh, yes.
RP: Hmm. That's interesting. What were your…how did, you know, a…a regular day
go for you? You…I…I know you had classes…you had, you know, tons of time that you
spent in class, but was there a required chapel service in…at…in the morning, or…?
SW: No. There was a chapel service at 12:00 on Tuesday, and there was a Dean's chapel
on Thursday. It was a kind of a current events matter, campus-related matter theme.
Question Club, which was the leader of all…the presidents of all the main groups on the
campus, conducted that sometimes and they…they had…the Dean would speak on
community events and that kind of thing
RP: Is this…

SW: on Thursday
RP: Is this…
SW: and give notices and that kind of thing and usually was shorter. On Tuesday, it was
approximately class length, that is, fifty minutes, and the…the…frequently had an
outside speaker. And we had very good outside speakers; the selection of speakers was
excellent. Chapel…everyone had an assigned seat in Chapel, and attendance was taken.
RP: That was just women, right?
SW: Just women. It was held in Alumnae Hall. And seniors wore their caps and gowns
and marched into…into the chapel.
RP: Wow.
SW: And Margaret Morriss…
RP: She was the dean.
SW: …was the dean, and she was very much the dean, and this was what her regulation
was, and that's the way it was followed.
RP: Uh-huh. How was sh…was she well-respected and well-liked?
SW: Yes. Yes.
RP: She was. She was a good…
SW: If anyone had problems with her, she certainly wasn't, but ordinarily speaking, she
was well-liked and well-respected. Not particularly friendly, she kept a distance. As
befit a dean.
RP: Yeah. Right.
SW: But she was a nice woman, and her intentions, I'm sure, were very good. And in
later life, she was very friendly and jovial and so forth.
RP: Now, was it President Wriston who was president of Brown at…at…
SW: Yes.
RP: …during…? And was he…how was he regarded?

SW: He…I can't exactly recall the year that he came in to be president…about 1937, I
think. He was very highly regarded. He was an excellent Chapel speaker, and a very
popular man. Smiley, popular, friendly type of person, and very definite, as you perhaps
have read, as some of the things he had to say, he was very definite in his ideas. He was
very definite in what he had to say and he had a very high standard. He was a fine
president.
RP: Was he President of Pembroke as well as Brown? How did that work?
SW: Pembroke…College was Pembroke College in Brown University.
RP: Right.
SW: It was the coordinate college of Brown and therefore was part of Brown University.
We had all the advantages of being at Brown, the professors and the buildings and the use
of the facilities and so forth. And he was president of the entire Brown University.
RP: Mm-hmm. Was…were there any sort of ridiculous rules and regulations that you
had then, or did you…did you…did all the women seem to understand...?
SW: Well, I'm not sure we…I'm not sure we thought they were ridiculous, everybody
thought taking gym was pretty ridiculous.
RP: But how about the dress code?
SW: And people who…who lived in dormitories didn't like the hours, the regulations for
hours and that kind of thing, but that was pretty standard.
RP: Yeah.
SW: The dress code was not extraordinary. My mother used to say the worst dressed
girls in the world go to Pembroke, when she used to come up to pick me up. However,
they were pretty much standard: sweaters and skirts and socks. And saddle shoes or
Spaulding golf-type shoes with the flap on the front of them. And that was pretty much
the regulation. I remember wearing reversible coats, which…a coat that was wool on one
side and cravenette on the other side, that was a waterproof material, much like London
Fog, on the other side, and that was pretty much standard attire.
RP: Yeah. How…
SW: No one ever thought that there was anything wrong with the rules. I think people
wore pants then, but not so much as they do now. And I believe we were not supposed to
wear pants on the street, and if you wore them under your coat, you were to have the legs
pinned up so it looked as though you had a skirt on. You were not to smoke on the
street…

RP: How about in the dorms, and…?
SW: I don't think there was a restriction as far as smoking inside…
RP: 'Cause you were…in a lot of the pictures in the yearbook, women students were
smoking. As well as the men.
SW: And there was a smoking room provided…with a Coke machine, and that kind of
thing. Sort of one floor of the building. And there didn't seem to be any restriction as far
as that's concerned. And Miss Morriss was fairly rigid about some things, she liked you
to look respectable on the street and respectable if you went downtown, for any reason.
And she didn't…you were not to travel back and forth between the field house and the
gymnasium in your gym clothes. You were supposed to have the skirt part of your gym
suit on. My…my gym suit did not have a skirt, but some of them had. Although mine
was of the modern style of gym suits, it was not the old bloomer jobs that were around
for some time.
RP: Yeah. Yeah. How…how…how about the men and women, you know, how much
interaction was there? Was it all…was it all sort of Friday/Saturday night, or…?
SW: It was…it was a social interaction, not ne…not necessarily just Friday/Saturday
night, but the men…there were men's classes and women's classes and men, as time went
on, when you were a junior or a senior, you could be in mixed…some mixed classes. But
the…the interaction was largely a social interaction.
RP: How about the Ivy Day and May Day celebrations and…?
SW: They were very traditional. And very picturesque, and everyone looked forward to
them, they were big events of the…they were big events of the school year. And they
were very pretty.
RP: What went on, exactly, at Ivy Day? I couldn't pick that up from the yearbook.
SW: Ivy Day, they…they carried…selected women wore white dresses, and carried the
ivy chain, and more or less walked and made a…a pathway, so to speak, through which
officials of the college, or a speaker, or whatever walked.
RP: Would walk.
SW: And this was quite an honor to be in the ivy chain.
RP: Oh, yeah? And how about May Day? What exactly was that?
SW: And May Day, the Sophomore Masque was put on, and…
RP: Which is…what…what…?

SW: Which was a masque…you had…part of gym was an interpretive dance class.
There was a character who came to town and directed this. And it usually had a basic
theme and then this kind of a dance performance that went with it. And then the May
Queen was crowned, and freshmen presented their Senior Sisters with a May basket.
RP: Oh yeah?
SW: Mm-hmm.
RP: Huh. I saw in y…y…now, how many people were in your class, about 120, I think?
If…I counted in the yearbook.
SW: In later years, I think I have counted end to end, and that is counting everyone who
was a member of the class at some time or other, who did not necessarily attend through
the entire four-year period, 149, something in that nature…
RP: Oh, yeah?
SW: 159. Something like that. Being W, my letter box was 103, and so, there were,
perhaps, ten after me. And so that, probably, in the class at graduation time, there
probably 115 or so.
RP: How did…why would these various people leave Brown? [Tape stops.]
SW: One that I can think of left to be married. Another one transferred to another
school.
RP: Was she unhappy at Brown? Or did she move, or…?
SW: I think various reasons. Sometimes, they transferred because it was financially
prudent for them to transfer. In other cases, one in my class transferred to Radcliffe.
Nobody knew why. Various reasons of that sort. Some simply stopped going to college
and went on to do other things. Some of them were on a two-year plan that they were
going to college for two years and then perhaps went to Katharine Gibbs, or something of
that sort.
RP: Mm-hmm. What is Katharine Gibbs?
SW: Katharine Gibbs was a business school, a women's business school which still
exists here on the East Side. And I don't recall any other…once in a while, you had
someone who left for health reasons, or something of that kind. You had a few who left
for academic reasons…but that's usually…that's usually the answer.
RP: What…now…now…you were in a class of…

SW: Although I will say this. As we got toward the beginning of World War II, many
left because they married and they…and…and went somewhere with their husbands.
RP: Oh, uh-huh. Now what…what…how do you think World War II, aside from that,
affected Pembroke? And Brown, or…?
SW: Well, I got out shortly after the beginning of World…a full semester afterward.
The classes had accelerated, so, World War II affected the classes…I mean, the College,
in the respect that there were more women than men students, for one thing. The class
structure broke down somewhat, because some people went two semesters, some people
went three semesters, that is, they went through a summer semester, and consequently,
they finished in two years or two and a half years or three years, rather than four. And
there were several changes that way. And of course, after the war and the young men
started coming back, and some young women were coming back to attend college, the
college became larger. The classes began going into a more modern phase where there
were many more mixed classes, there many more class times offered, and that kind of
thing. And there were so many people who were coming back, and with the aid of the G.
I. Bill were able to attend Brown…
RP: Right.
SW: …who hadn't been before, and when you looked at it at that time, it…it seemed a
perfectly normal thing to do, now, you look at it from this standpoint and think, "What a
wonderful opportunity it was for so many people to be able to go to Brown, because of
the G. I. Bill."
RP: Mm-hmm. Hmm. What do you…how…what do you think about the…the
assimilation in 1971 to, you know, of Pembroke becoming…
SW: I thought then just as I feel now. That if that was going to move of progress, by all
means, go ahead and do it. But don't be looking backward at what had gone by. Don't
always be looking backward. Look forward.
RP: Uh-huh.
SW: And not backward.
RP: What is…what do you mean by that?
SW: Well, I mean, not to make Pembroke a monument to anything.
RP: Yeah.
SW: It was a…a school at the time that was very appropriate, and had all the benefits it
could possibly have. We had some very good administrators. We had the best that
Brown could offer in that particular situation, and if you wish to join and be a totally

coeducational college, let that be a forward movement, and not…not one that you
were…it was breaking your heart to see Pembroke go.
RP: Right. Right. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Now, after Brown, what have you…what did
you do right after you got out of Brown? Did you go straight into the, sort of,
career…career world, or…?
SW: Yes.
RP: You did. And what…what…what did you do?
SW: Well, I did…I got…kind of got caught in a job that I couldn't move from for several
reasons. When I graduated from college, my father was very ill, and…so that governed
some of the things that I could do and some of the things that I did do. I went into a…an
office to work, and also the office had something to do with…with war work, and so that
you couldn't make too many changes at that time.
RP: Right. Right.
SW: Also it meant that I stayed home in my family house rather than going somewhere
else, or going away to do something because of family kind of responsibilities.
RP: Did…did being a woman in the career world ever inhibit you, as far as you know, or
did…was it ever a problem that you can recall? I mean, it sounds…
SW: I don't think so.
RP: You don't think so.
SW: No. I don't think so. Because I've had…I've had some…I haven't had a lot of jobs,
but I've had some jobs that have been men…that have been jobs that men have had
before me, and have not had a problem with. And I have been associated with the real
estate business for a long number of years, and that…that was when most real estate
agents and salespeople were men, and I had no problem with it. So I don't…I don't think
so. I was also at one time, a member of John Chaffee's staff, when he was…when he was
Governor. And I had followed a man, I took a man's job at that time, and had no problem
with it at all.
RP: Uh-huh. Nobody…
SW: That has not been a big problem. I think I just didn't look for it to be a big problem,
so it wasn't.
RP: Yeah. Now, when did you…when did you once again become affiliated with
Brown? In other words, when did you start working for the University?

SW: When…when…John Chaffee was defeated as Governor. When I had prior to that
time been in the real estate business.
RP: Which…now what year was that? That he was…
SW: 1969. And I came here. He was defeated in the 1968 election, so it was early 1969
and I came here because I did not want, in the middle of the winter, to go back to the fulltime real estate business and kind of be floundering around for a while, plus I wanted to
try something a little more structured. And I came here to the library, as a matter of fact,
and then have stayed since then.
RP: Wow.
SW: So I've been here going on twenty years. And it…in two different jobs.
RP: Now, am…am I correct in that you're…you're not married, are you?
SW: No.
RP: Uh-huh. I think…I think that's it. Let me just make sure I don't have any
more…any more questions for you. You feel like Pembroke…having a diploma from
Brown—it was a Brown diploma, right?
SW: Yes.
RP: And you…do you think that helped you in the job world? Having a college degree?
SW: It's given me a great deal of satisfaction; I don't know whether…I think having a
college degree is very important. I think having a college degree on this campus at this
present time is very important. I have done a great deal of alumnae work and I do it even
now, and I think that is a…is just a…a very rewarding kind of a thing to have, and
it's…it's hard to tell where this helps and doesn't help. It guides your…it guides your life
along certain paths, anyway.
RP: I think that's everything. Do you…do you have anything else you might want to
add?
SW: I don't think so, I'm happy to…to cooperate, and hope that someone gets some
satisfaction out of this kind of thing. I'll be interested to hear the tape played back.
RP: Yeah. Thank you very much.
SW: You're welcome. Thank you.
-END-

