
Carol Lamry: [00:00] This is Carol Lamry and Louise Newman interviewing Rosemary Pierrel
Sorrentino, December 7, 1988. Dr. Sorrentino, why don’t we start with some biographical
information. Why don’t we start with where were you born.

Rosemary Sorrentino: Worcester, Massachusetts.

CL: And did you go to school there?

RS: No, I left there when I was two. I did most of my schooling in Providence. I went to Lincoln
– I graduated from the Lincoln School and then I went to Boston University and I got a
bachelor’s and a master’s there and then later returned to Brown and got my PhD here and then
taught here on the faculty. This frog may bother your tape. I don’t know.
CL: No, I think it’ll do OK.

RS: OK.

CL: When you came to Brown as a graduate student, [01:00] that would have been in what year?

RS: Nineteen forty-nine, fifty.

CL: And that was in psychology?

1

RS: Mm-hmm.

CL: And who did you work under?

RS: I worked under Carl Pfaffman, who later became vice president of the Rockefeller Institute.
Rockefeller University.

Louise Newman: How did you choose Brown for graduate work?
RS: Well, I had done a master’s degree and I taught for three years at Wheelock College in
Boston, by which time I was totally – well, after the first year I was convinced that I didn’t know
the difference between what I knew and what psychologists knew and decided I’d better find out.
I knew a little bit about different kinds of schools of psychology and I knew that the best place to
become a behavioralist was Brown University and that was kind of a problem for me because my
family lived in Providence and I didn’t want to go back and live at home. [02:00] As it turned
out, that was no problem because the graduate student stipends in those days were so small that if
I hadn’t lived at home I don’t know how I would have managed.
LN: So you lived at home during your entire tenure as a graduate student? Is that –
RS: That’s right.
CL: And then you finished your graduate work in ’53?
RS: Yeah. I got my PhD in ’53 and I stayed on here on the faculty until ’55, at which point I
went to Barnard College at Columbia and I taught there and on the graduate faculty at Columbia
until 1961 when I returned.

LN: Was it normal in the Psychology Department at Brown for a person to get their PhD and
then to remain?

2

RS: No, it wasn’t. The problem had to do with the fact that I was female and Dr. Hunter did not
like any of the offers I got. [03:00] Wellesley made me an offer. And I think they offered me
about 50% of what they would have offered a male faculty member.

CL: In salary?

RS: Yes.

CL: Yes.
RS: And I did get several offers. It wasn’t a problem that I didn’t get any offers. He just felt that
they weren’t worthy offers. Besides, they really did need somebody, so they hired me.

LN: And so the two years you were here, what did you teach?

RS: I taught Introductory Psychology. I taught a senior seminar.

CL: And did you continue your own research?

RS: Yes.

CL: And what was that (inaudible)?

RS: I was doing research and learning, in auditory learning, and I continued to be involved in
audition and deafness throughout my academic career.
CL: That’s interesting. Did you knew we have the papers of Mary Ann Balch Lippit, [04:00]
who founded the Rhode Island School for the Deaf?
RS: Oh, that’s interesting.

3

CL: Yeah, that’s interesting.
RS: Unfortunately, it’s not terribly relevant to what I do because I did animal research and
working with chinchillas for the most part these last twenty years or so. And I know a great deal
about how chinchillas hear and what produces deafness in them. They hear a lot like people,
which is why we got interested in them.
CL: Hmm, isn’t that interesting.

RS: Yeah.

CL: And so you left here after two years, though, to go to Barnard?

RS: Right. Actually, by this time Professor Schlosberg was chairman of the Psychology
Department and he had requested that I be promoted to assistant professor. We had instructors in
those days. And Mr. [Rusten?] told him that – words to the effect that they’re very happy, the
psychology department liked me and [05:00] would like to promote me but that I must
understand that Brown was primarily a men’s institution and that I would be the nicest whitehaired assistant professor Brown ever had. And I always kind of enjoyed that story in view of
subsequent events.
CL: [laughter] Isn’t that interesting. So did you actively look around for another position?
RS: No, I’ve never looked for a job, really, excepting while I was a graduate student.
LN: How did you hear of Barnard’s opening?

RS: They approached me at the spring meeting of the Eastern Psychological Association. I was
not very anxious to go. I didn’t think I’d like living in New York, and I didn’t at first. But I

4

remember Professor Pfaffman saying, “You know, you’d better go. You’ve got too many fathers
around here. You’ve got to go and try your wings somewhere else.” [06:00] So I went.
CL: And so you taught there also. Was that also Introduction to Psychology or – ?

RS: Well, the major thing that I taught everywhere was Experimental Psychology, which was an
upper-level undergraduate laboratory course. I did part of the time teach Psych 1, though.

LN: I presume that the students that you taught at Brown were both men and women?

RS: Oh, yes.

LN: And the students at Barnard, were those mostly women students?
RS: Well, they were women. I did some lecturing at Columbia College but for the most – my
early period my appointment was just at Barnard. But I had graduate students from Columbia
and then later an appointment on the graduate faculty. I was actually acting chairman of the
Psychology Department at Columbia for a while. [07:00] And had I stayed at Columbia, stayed
in New York, I would have switched over entirely to Columbia College probably and then the
graduate faculty because things were getting to be politically difficult at Barnard.

LN: In what way?

RS: Well, the two psychology departments were not very well integrated. Some of the
departments were and some weren’t. Psychology was not. And, unfortunately, the kind of
research I did and kind of interests I had fitted better with the people at Columbia than they did
at Barnard, although I enjoyed teaching at Barnard tremendously. Very, very bright students.

LN: And up to this point had you observed differences between men and women in the
classroom?

5

RS: I don’t know what you mean by that. I guess the answer’s no. I mean, obviously they’re
women. [08:00] I think I ought to say somewhere in the script but – I really have just never seen
any reason for teaching men and women differently. Certainly in the liberal arts and sciences I
think that’s true. And I certainly didn’t find any differences in ability. Women maybe are a little
more conscientious as a group but, you know, there are exceptions. But, no, I don’t think so.

CL: So when the deanery opened up at Pembroke, how did you hear about that?
RS: Well –

CL: Is this in your script?

RS: Of course, I can tell it directly if you want.

CL: OK.

RS: Do you want me to go through it?

CL: Yeah.
RS: OK. Well, one afternoon I returned to my Barnard College office. I’d just been to a PhD
oral. [09:00] And I found all my graduate assistants in this great state of excitement and saying,
“Call the president’s office.” And I said, “Oh, I wonder what Mrs. McIntosh wants to consult me
about.” And they said, “No, no. Not Mrs. McIntosh,” who was president of Barnard. Grayson
Kirk’s office, who was president of Columbia University. So I sobered up and called Mr. Kirk’s
office and found that Barnaby Keeney was there and wanted to get together with me. And I said,
“Fine. I’ll meet you over at the men’s faculty club.” And he said, “Haven’t you got an office?”
And I said, “Yeah, you can come over here if you’d like.” And I thought he was just being
neighborly and dropping in. I had known the Keeneys casually because I had chaperoned
fraternity parties at Sigma Chi –

6

CL: Oh, really?
RS: – with another graduate student. And Mr. Keeney, it was a little known fact, but he was a
Sigma Chi and [10:00] he used to occasionally drop in on their parties. So that was how I knew
him really. So after a few pleasantries he started talking about Pembroke and how they needed a
dean at Pembroke and would I be interested. And I said, “Absolutely not.” And he said, “Why
not?” And I said because I had never run anything other than a grant and I was doing exactly
what I wanted to do. I was very happy with my graduate students and my teaching and so on. He
kept coming back. He had a lot of business in New York and he kept turning up. Going over the
same ground. He was. He was terribly persuasive. And he finally convinced me at least to come
to Providence and talk about it. [11:00]
Prior to that time Professor Schlosberg had talked with me about coming back to the
department as a regular faculty member, psychology department. I was trying to decide. By this
time I loved New York and I wasn’t so sure I wanted to leave. And I had graduate students in
process and I felt I couldn’t, particularly one of them, I just couldn’t take off and leave them.
Well, I ended up being convinced by Barney Keeney that being dean of Pembroke would be fun
and I could continue to do all the things I was doing then. Teaching, doing research, supervising
registers and so on. And I even brought a graduate student with me. Well, actually, he made
application to the graduate school in the normal way and he got in. I don’t think it was my pull at
all. So that’s how I happened to get here.

CL: [12:00] Let me backtrack. You had said that when you were here with [Rusten?] he said this
was a man’s university.
RS: That’s right.

CL: And you would remain an assistant professor. Did the change to Barney Keeney make it
easier for you to come by?
RS: Sure. Of course, time had passed, you see. And I’m sure Mr. Rusten believed that. I think he
was simply being conscientious and in terms of the way he saw it there was no future for a

7

woman on this faculty. Mr. Keeney, of course, was a different generation. Harold Schlosberg
was always very liberal about things, so that whether I was a woman or not was really irrelevant
as far as he was concerned. It was all to the good because we needed more women faculty. I
guess that he would have felt that way, too. But, no. I think by that time nobody seemed to be
worried about whether I could be promoted. [laughter] [13:00] I’m looking for a Kleenex.

CL: Did they say anything to you when you accepted the job about what they saw would be
important qualifications or conditions for employment?

RS: Not really. You wrote a question about was there any interview process and what was the
nature of the interview process. The nature of the interview process was extremely informal. It
consisted of these visits of Mr. Keeney’s. Somewhere late in the game, when I happened to be in
Providence visiting my parents, I was invited over to Sally Beardsley’s house. I guess you know
she was a longtime member of the corporation. And I met her and I met Pauline Hughes, who
was also a Pembroke [14:00] (inaudible) who was a member of the corporation. And we had a
pleasant chat. I later became very friendly with both of them, of course. But I remember Sally
taking me out and showing me the lovely view from the back of their Condon Street house.
LN: Yeah, it’s this beautiful view.

RS: Simply gorgeous. I had never seen that view, you know. It was really pretty impressive. The
only other thing I know of about formalities is that Doris Reed told me later that they had made
some inquiries about me. And I never really went into detail as to where they were made or what
they were. I suppose they had some non-academic qualifications. Obviously they preferred a
woman and they obviously preferred a woman who was an alumna. Unfortunately I was not an
alumna of Pembroke. [15:00] But I guess they decided they had to relinquish that particular
criterion. As far as I know, I guess they wanted somebody who knew what fork to use and maybe
who had a pair of white gloves and a hot. Sure got a lot of mileage out of my hats and white
gloves in those early years.
LN: Did you make any conditions for coming, given that you initially weren’t so –

8

RS: Well, you see, Mr. Keeney told me I could do everything I wanted to do. And, of course, it
became obvious after a while that I couldn’t do all of these things, that nobody could. So I ended
up teaching one course, not several. I ended up having my graduate students bringing each other
up. I did try and manage to keep one day free to get into the laboratory. Certainly in the early
period I was able to do that when I was not in town. But I was out of town a great deal. So as a
result [16:00] I selected graduate students who were quite independent, who could work fairly
independently. And, as I say, they kind of brought each other up. There had been a long tradition
of graduate students bringing each other up in the psychology department anyhow. So that was
not a terrible thing to do. And if they really, really had a crisis I was available. It worked. But the
longer I was dean the more difficult it became. And, finally, toward the very end, when we were
putting down riots constantly and the acting president’s house was fire bombed and I had a
Pinkerton man living in my house because they thought it might happen in my house, too. When
things got that tough I finally quit teaching because I couldn’t think sensibly. [17:00] Couldn’t
think of illustrations. I’d walk into class and I’d say something and I couldn’t think of a way to
expand on it. I couldn’t turn off the other business. So I decided it just wasn’t fair to the students.
So the last two, three years I did not teach although, as I said, kept my lab going throughout. So
it was there to the (inaudible).
LN: What were your expectations when you got here besides you thought you’d be able to do all
of those things?

RS: Well, I was really extremely naïve, you see, because my total background had been as a
teacher, as a student and as a teacher. And I really didn’t know much about what administrators
did except that they presumably did the things that allowed the faculty to teach and do research.
And I thought that was a good idea. [18:00] So that I don’t think I had any real defined
expectations. Perhaps one of the arguments that got me here most was wouldn’t I like to have a
hand in shaping the curriculum and wouldn’t I like to have a hand in important academic
decisions that effected not only the women but the university and so on. Well, as a faculty
member I had sat around saying, “Now, why doesn’t somebody do something about the
academic calendar? Why do we have to have final exams after Christmas vacation and this lame

9

duck week and a half of classes? Why do you have some of the silly minor requirements in the
curriculum and so on? Why doesn’t somebody do something about it?” Well, here was an
opportunity to do something about it. You know, I have always thought, [19:00] well, put your
money where your mouth is. I think that was a very important aspect.

CL: What was your idea of what Pembroke was like prior to becoming dean or as you became
dean?

RS: I immersed myself in whatever documents I could get hold of prior to the time I took over. I
guess I took over officially, I don’t know whether it was the first of August or first of September.
And so by that time I guess I had read a lot of old (inaudible) mails and Pembroke records and
some files in what had been Nancy Duke Lewis’s office. She’d died over a month [20:00] before
I actually began, which probably made it much easier for both of us. I did not know her. I had
met her. Only time I ever met her, I guess, was when I was a graduate student and she called me
in one time and asked if I would be interested in being a housemother. Apparently one thing they
did was to get female graduate students to be housemothers. And I said, “No, thank you.”
(inaudible) my cup of tea, plus the fact that I was running animals day and night at Hunter Lab
anyhow. I doubt if they ever got anybody out of the sciences to do that. That was the only time I
met her.
LN: So when you came here, how did you view the dean’s relationship with the students, for
example? You might have this in your script because I think we had this question.
RS: Yeah. [21:00] Do you want me to –

CL: I think it was 14.

RS: Do you want me to do the job description of the dean of Pembroke College as I began to see
it?

CL: Sure. That sounds good.

10

RS: OK. Well, as soon as I began to take Barney at all seriously I said, “Well, I don’t really
understand the setup here. Where would I leave off and you begin or whatever?” And he said,
“Well, it’s very simple. You can do anything you want to as long as I don’t mind.” Well,
actually, that wasn’t as flip a definition as it sounds because usually – maybe because he brought
me up as an administrator – but usually the things that I wanted to do he didn’t want to do. And
there didn’t seem to be any real conflict there. [22:00] When he delegated, he delegated. I think I
described my responsibilities in 1966 as consisting in the immediate overall supervision of
Pembroke College.
I spent a lot of my time, in addition, on university committees. I think there are very few
committees in the university I have not served on, most of them simultaneously. The ones I
enjoyed most and I think made my greatest contribution to, were the committees on the
curriculum and the committee on academic standing. Committee on the curriculum is now
known as educational policy committee. It’s restructured, of course. I met ex officio with several
corporation committees, committee on student life and the Pembroke Advisory [23:00]
Committee.
And another aspect of the job I enjoyed a great deal was my work with the faculty, in
helping to attract faculty. I frequently interviewed possible potential faculty members. And
sometimes interviewed them out (inaudible) and sometimes on campus. And then another very
substantial portion of my responsibilities was devoted to public relations and fundraising, dealing
with alumni and alumni clubs, visiting them and visiting foundations, writing grant proposals.
For example, during my first two years at Pembroke I tried to visit at least once every one of the
38 Pembroke College clubs. Plus meeting with some round [24:00] Pembroke clubs and some
round clubs all around the country. My third year here, I guess it was, no second, was the
bicentennial year. And so we were heavily involved in fundraising and bicentennial events and
so I visited a lot of round clubs either alone or with Mr. Keeney or some other member of the
administration in conjunction with that.
I guess one aspect of the job I enjoyed most was dealing with the curriculum, dealing
with faculty, dealing with educational policy essentially. Now, then there was a whole other
world which I loved, which was dealing with the students. And then, as I told you earlier, I did
continue to teach. [25:00] And I think I would do that again if it was possible, if I were maybe

11

starting over. I think not only was it good therapy for me to get into the classroom, for the most
part, when therapy was still possible, but also I think it made my dealings with the faculty much
more credible because I not only had been there, I was there. And I didn’t get any of this stuff
about, “Oh, well, you administrators don’t understand the problems of faculty.” So I think that
was helpful.

LN: What sorts of things did you do when you were on the curriculum committee? What were
the issues that were being resolved at that time?

RS: Well, every new course which was proposed had to be brought to the committee and had to
be justified before it. The people [26:00] who wanted to teach the course would prepare a dossier
on it ahead of time, which would be submitted. And in this, Mr. Keeney, the dean of the college,
and the dean of Pembroke College functioned as kind of a triumvirate, which in some institutions
would be the academic provost. Would be essentially many of the functions that are performed
by Mr. [Glickman’s?] office now. So that we met very frequently. Several times a week we
would be getting together, one way or another. And prior to the curriculum committee meeting,
usually the three of us would know what we thought about something. Sometimes we didn’t
agree and there was a pecking order, obviously. The president was the president. [27:00] But he
was a very good listener. He really was. And in his absence, and that was frequent, too, then I
would chair the meetings. So we approved courses. We tried to eliminate dead wood. That’s a
terrible problem in a university. Is courses multiply and then they just seem to go perpetually. It
turns out that if you allow that to continue you have to keep increasing the size of your faculty
because you keep increasing the number of offerings. And obviously the faculty can be expected
to teach only so many courses per capita. So that was another major problem.
I experienced only one sweeping curriculum reform [28:00] in the 10 years that I was
here. And, actually, this occurred during the year when I was on leave, so that I’m not very good
at talking about it. I think I might have been reasonably vocal in throwing out quite as much in
the way of structure as we had in the curriculum at that time. I think we were over structured.
Are you both alumni?
LN: I’m now enrolled in the graduate school but we both know about the (inaudible).

12

RS: You know about distribution courses –

CN: Curriculum (inaudible).
RS: – and all that sort of thing?

CN: Right. Yes, yes.

RS: I think we were a little heavy on the required courses all right but I am not certain we ought
not to have some means of forcing, if necessary, students into areas that they might never be
exposed to. I don’t know that it’s still true. I’ll bet it’s even truer, though, [29:00] because they
say that secondary school students don’t read and I certainly discovered that my freshmen
couldn’t write, a lot of them, although they were very bright and verbal. But I used to have
students say, when you were counseling during freshman week, “What’s philosophy? What is
it?” Well, I have a feeling that we had generations of students going through a so-called liberal
arts curriculum who still don’t know the answer to that question. I really am concerned about
that. I know the faculty is concerned about it and they have been having discussions about it. I
would suspect that in a fairly short time, as these things go, there will be changes to the
curriculum. I think the faculty realizes now they threw out some of the baby with the bathwater.

LN: Do you think it was just merely an overreaction at the time because of having so much
(inaudible)?

RS: I think they were scared.

LN: Scared of what?

RS: [30:00] Well, remember, this took place in an atmosphere of activism and so on and Brown
had been lucky and actually was lucky. I happened to be visiting Columbia –

13

CL: Columbia.
RS: – during the riots and, you know, we never had anything of that sort here. And I think the
faculty were willing to do almost – or many of them were willing to do almost anything to avoid
that sort of thing. Well, I can understand why because that’s a pretty terrible thing to happen to
an institution. That takes a very long time to recover. I think they got sold a bill of goods on the
new curriculum and I know that a lot of them, deep down, really didn’t buy it, just as they didn’t
buy satisfactory no credit grades across the board. I think the idea of having some is a good idea
but I’ve always counseled students, if you have any thought – if you want to keep your options
open [31:00] and you may want to be going on to graduate school or professional school, and if
you’ve got a transcript that has nothing but S’s on it, believe me, the graduate school is not going
to sit around and read little paragraphs that the faculty may have written. So that I’ve always
encouraged, certainly pre-meds, to take all of their pre-med requirements with grades and to take
everything in concentration, whatever it is, for grades because it can potentially be a
disadvantage in applying for advanced study.

CL: When you were on the curriculum committee, were you there as a representative of a group
of people or as a representative of the women on campus?

LN: Because you had this position being both on the faculty of the university and as dean.
RS: That’s right. I never [32:00] saw myself as only one thing. I saw myself first as a member of
the university community and I saw myself second as representing women’s interests. But for the
most part of the curriculum committee, there weren’t any special interests for women at that
time. Now, remember that this was before we began having special courses in the psychology of
women and all of this kind of thing. I wasn’t involved in that era. But as far as the courses, the
one curriculum change I did spearhead that was sexist was when I came we had a four-year
physical education requirement at Pembroke. I think they had a one-year physical education
requirement at Brown. [33:00] One of the first curricular changes I tried to effect – I immediately
discovered – you know, all these students would be processing into my office with sixty-five
good reasons as to why they couldn’t take phys-ed. And Bessie Rudd, who retired the first year I

14

was – we overlapped, I guess, a year. Or no, we didn’t. We didn’t. She had just retired before I
came.

CL: In the fall, yeah.

RS: And, of course, she was a very formidable opponent and I suspect Nancy [Gillespie?]
wanted to do something about this because they’d required it, too. But she couldn’t cope with
Bessie Rudd. I was very happy I didn’t have to. And, of course, Ronnie Gordon had just arrived.
And I told her, as soon as I met her – I did not hire Ronnie. Ronnie was hired by Pat and by
Professor Kenney [34:00], who was acting dean for a few months before I took office. And he
actually hired Ronnie. When I got here I said, “I don’t want there to be any misunderstanding or
want you to feel it’s personal but I have the impression we’re going to have to do something
about the physical education requirement.” And naturally she wasn’t too happy about it. We did
in fact effect that change. I don’t know whether it was all within the first year I was here or not.
It did seem to me to take an interminable period. And most of the faculty, either they couldn’t
have cared less or they thought it was ridiculous. The other part of the phys-ed requirement was a
requirement that before graduation you must be able – or it was a degree requirement. You had
to be able to swim to graduate from Brown University. Well, this, of course, went back [35:00]
to the sinking of the Titanic –

CL: Titanic.
RS: – which was in 1913 or something. I remember making a speech about how many years it
had been since then. And we were still teaching people to swim and requiring it as a degree
requirement. I really didn’t see what this had to do with a liberal education. Well, we abolished
the swimming requirement and we reduced the physical education requirement. The voluntary
physical education programs were really quite well adopted. We had a recreational club at
Pembroke at that time, the Athletic and Recreational Association here already, and they, with the
help of the phys-ed department, launched a number of programs which the students viewed with
great enthusiasm, as long as they weren’t required.

15

CL: [36:00] When they weren’t forced to they took it with pleasure.

RS: Yeah. So that was the one thing in the curriculum, I guess, that I took on and did something
about, the four-year requirement that applied only to the women.

CL: What was also a course that only women took?

LN: Freshmen (inaudible)?
CL: Was that it? Did you –
RS: Oh, that was quite a ways back. It was long before my time. As a matter of fact, I don’t
know exactly when that was. There was at one time a part-time faculty member who taught
physiology to women but I think it was called hygiene, maybe. And probably, not unlike when I
was a freshman, we had a course called hygiene, too. And you weren’t supposed to sit on men’s
laps, things like that. I think that was supposed to be sex education. But, actually, there wasn’t
anything [37:00] of that sort in existence when I came. And as far as I know, with the exception
of physical education and this course, which was a long time ago, I think early 1900s, I think,
maybe even earlier, which was taught by a lady faculty member –

CL: The one in hygiene?

RS: Yeah. Yes. It was called physiology but I think it was really a hygiene course. As far as I
know, those are the only really different courses that were offered for women ever.

CL: How did you view or what evolved out of the relationship with students?
RS: Well, let’s see. My relationships with the students – got a question here some –

CL: I think it was on page four. It started on (inaudible) you have it.

16

RS: Yeah, oh, four.
CL: I think it’s four, yeah.

RS: OK. Well, I met every [38:00] student when they arrived freshmen week. We had a whitegloved tea with white gloves and hats. The junior big sisters informed the freshmen that they had
to wear hats and gloves on. And so I shook hands with every freshman and I shook hands with
every senior on that baccalaureate Sunday and bade them farewell. And unfortunately that was
sort of almost the extent of it for a great many of the students. I hated that. I really was very sorry
it had to be true. But when you have a student body well over a thousand students –

CL: (inaudible).
RS: – you can only get to know a fraction of them. I had regular coffee hours at 100 Brown
Street, the dean’s house, and tried to invite every student. They came in groups of twenty-five or
thirty. Tried to invite every student [39:00] once a year, get them on the guest list. Now, whether
they came or not was something else. Some students didn’t want to come, although in the early
days, of course, they thought it was a great privilege to be invited to the dean’s house and get a
fancy invitation and so on. Those were completely informal sort of at-homes. People talked
about whatever they wanted to talk about. And insofar as I could, I scattered the student leaders
around in these groups so I would have a spark plug or two in each group insofar as I could.
Later when I had a dean of students I’d get her to help me get the spark plugs in there, just so
we’d get some kind of conversation going. Because these at-homes, these coffee hours, were
really a great source of good suggestions and with discussion going both ways, suggestions
coming from both sides actually. [40:00] And I think it was a useful device.
I did, of course, see the student leaders, the editor of the Pembroke Record, the president
of SGA, I saw them each, I guess, once a week. We had senior heads of house. We had senior
students as heads of house in smaller dormitory units where we didn’t have resident fellows.
Incidentally, when I came we had a number of older women who were serving as housemothers,
some much more effectively than others. And it struck me that probably in the long-term that
was not a good solution to the problem of having some – obviously you’ve got to have

17

somebody responsible [41:00] in a housing unit so that if there’s a fire or anyone’s ill or
whatever there is one person who is responsible. But it didn’t seem to me in 1961, ’62 that the
housemother was necessarily the way to go. And so as these housemothers reached retirement
age, which sometimes it happened a good many years before this, they were permitted to retire
and we replaced them with senior assistants and they worked out very well. And I think that was
good for morale, too. See, in the first few years we still had regulations about signing in and out
and having to be in at whatever the hour was, depending on your class and the night of the week.
So you knew if a student was lost, for example, [42:00] or if a student was ill. And it seems to
me we had a much better handle on how things were going once we had the senior assistants than
when we had the housemothers.

CL: How long would you say you kept doing the informals at your house?
RS: I don’t know. I’m sure I didn’t do them the last year I was dean. But I think I kept them up
for most of the time. Somewhere in my script I drew a distinction between old and new
Pembroke. I think I could just about draw a line down the middle of my ten years and say that
the first five years I would call old Pembroke and the next five new Pembroke, [43:00] because
in the first five years the Pembroke I knew then was not different from the undergraduate college
that I had known as an undergraduate. The kinds of regulations, the kinds of value system, and so
on. Well, this is relationships with students. In that period it was almost always possible to
resolve problems, no matter how rough they seemed to be or how stirred up the student body was
about them, by appealing to a common set of values. Well, by ’66 the common set of values was
beginning to erode and by the seventies they had essentially eroded almost to the vanishing
point.

CL: What do you mean?

- End of Audio File 1 -

Track 2

18

RS: [00:00] That’s been the statement because I have been looking at it off and on for the last
week or so. And yeah. By the seventies there really seemed to be very few common values. And,
of course, the “Don’t trust anybody over 30” doctrine was extremely strong. And at that point, of
course, nothing worked. Nothing worked for anybody anywhere. The only thing that gave me
any hope – I remember Professor [Lopes Maria?] saying – went over his house one day and we’d
had a riot the night before. Everything was just a terrible mess. And he said, “Well, the thing I
can assure you is, supposedly that, from my knowledge of history, the pendulum always swings.”
And I said, “Yes, I know that, Juan. I know history, too. But how long does it take to swing
back?” [laughter] [01:00] Because at that point it was hard to see that it was ever going to swing
back. Since I did associate with other college presidents and get around the country a good deal,
it seems as though these student movements, whatever they are, seemed to hit on the two coasts
first and then work their way in. And usually they hit the West Coast first. I learned fairly early
that if I found out what was going on in California, that I had some idea of what was going to hit
us in maybe a year or so. And, in a way, that was kind of an encouraging thing to learn because
then you weren’t quite so surprised when it happened. I enjoyed being dean very much the first
five years and enjoyed it progressively less [02:00] as time went on. But I think probably
anybody who was in academic administration in that era would tell you the same thing.

CL: In 1966, which would have been just in the beginning of the chain that you spoke of, was
also I think the year the McGrath report came out that recommended that some of the parietal
rules and sign-ins be liberalized even more. And from my reading the record, you welcomed the
suggestions of the McGrath report and (inaudible) implemented them over the summer, so by the
time students came back there were many less regulations.

RS: Oh, yeah.
CL: Did you need a university to sanction that sort of change for you? You couldn’t or didn’t
want to?
RS: No, we’d been working away at it.

19

LN: Moving in the direction.
RS: Yeah. We’d been working away at it little by little. Well, the problem lay in two areas, I
guess. Three areas, I guess. [03:00] First of all, I came in with an administration already
established here. I had a director of residents who was due for retirement in, I don’t know, five or
six years. She was a very able gal, a terrific gal. She’d been with the Red Cross overseas during
the war and absolutely nothing phased her. It was really terrific. But she had her views of how a
residence had to be run. And, obviously, as long as she was director of residents we had to take
account of that. That was also true of some of the other people who were in the administration at
the time I arrived, so that in some cases you live with old traditions that you know ought to be
changed because they cannot be changed as long as you still have the same people present
[04:00] in the setup and so you must wait until they retire, unless you’re going to go around
cutting off heads and that’s not really the way we do things at Brown University.
I might tell you, and that’s in here, too, that as early as my second year here I went to Mr.
Keeney and I said, “You know, this coordinate business is not going to work and we ought to be
thinking about where we’d going.” It’s a little fakey right now and it’s getting fakier all the time.
I started it as a convocation speech. I did a history of coordinate colleges, which I guess was
published in the Pembroke Alumna in ’64 but I think I did it a year or so before that. It was very
interesting to me [05:00] how many of those coordinate colleges were no longer around. And
many of them were established for just the same reasons that Pembroke was established, which
was to give women an even break in a separate but equal setup because the women would be
distracting to the men and all the endless arguments that were made back in the 1890s about
these things. So the coordinate model was a practical way of solving the problem in the 1890s. It
also has many real virtues. I don’t think that when they wrote all these Pembroke view books and
so on and said that it gave the girls an opportunity to show leadership in a group without
competition [06:00] with the men and so on, I really think it was true. I think it grew
progressively less true as time went on. But I was amazed, for example, when I went to Barnard
to see how much more vocal the women students were than the Pembrokers I had been teaching
in mixed classes here. Now, there were a couple of reasons for this. One of them was Barnard
students were mostly New Yorkers and New Yorkers are vocal.

20

CL: Vocal.
RS: And I don’t know. I can’t weigh up how much of it was because there wasn’t male
competition. But I don’t think there’s any question that earlier male competition did keep the
women from talking as much because they saw themselves as less potentially datable and what
have you if they appeared to be too aggressive. [07:00] Well, plus the fact that in a mixed group
very often the major jobs, such as editor of the newspaper and so on, went to a man. Now, they
had the first editor of the Brown Daily Herald, who was a female in my year. So this sort of thing
was changing, no question about it. I’d love to take credit for all the liberalization that went on at
Pembroke in the 10 years I was there because I thought that it should occur, much of it. But it
was occurring everywhere in the country. It wasn’t just Pembroke. The world was changing and
the way women were being brought up was changing. That made a lot of a difference.
But getting back to Pembroke becoming an anachronism. Pembroke was publicized
[08:00] as being a great place for a young woman to find herself without competition but yet
having all the virtues of being in a university and having co-educational classes and so on. Well,
there’s no question there was a period in which this was a great idea. It really was. But it was
getting to the point where we had less and less of a constituency who wanted all these lovely
things that we had. They didn’t want a separate newspaper. They didn’t want a whole array of
student activities that were separate. And so no matter how nice it was to have father/daughter
weekend and Christmas ball and candlelight dinners with faculty guests on Wednesday nights, if
nobody wanted them – they were lovely. And I share with the students of the old Pembroke era a
real sentimental [09:00] love for those traditions. But unfortunately they became anachronistic.
So I spelled this out to Mr. Keeney and he said, “You're quite right. Take it up with my
successor,” because he then was planning to retire within two years. I had a little trouble finding
his successor because between 1966 and ’71 I served under four acting or new presidents and we
couldn’t take that kind of an action under an acting president. Next to Mr. Keeney I know of no
one I enjoyed with more than [Mert Stolz?], who was acting president both times when [10:00]
when we needed an acting president. But we couldn’t take that kind of an action. And the only
reason I stayed as long as I did was I had hoped to see Pembroke integrated into Brown in what I
saw as an orderly fashion as my bequest, as it were, to Brown women. It didn’t quite work out
that way.

21

CL: You say that it had become fake. Are you speaking specifically of those nice traditions that
you were talking about but also about the in loco parentis or is that a separate issue?
RS: Well, in loco parentis really didn’t have anything to do with Pembroke per se. It had to do
with women’s colleges. It had to do with how college educated society [11:00] or the parents of
would be college educated students viewed how women should be treated and how they should
be protected. Here were young women of childbearing age, which is not irrelevant, being sent
away from home, many of them for the first time, and the view ran you send them away from
home, you send them to a surrogate parent of some sort. Hence in loco parentis. I was never
comfortable with this at all. And I think that was the aspect of the deanship with which I was
most uncomfortable. There was an additional problem there, too, and that was that when serious
disciplinary matters arose I was both the court of first and last resort [12:00], which wasn’t really
a very good system. Because if a student had to be dismissed, under the old in loco parentis type
rules, I dismissed them. And then if there was any appeal the appeal was made to me. Well,
unfortunately some of those bounced into the president’s office or into the corporation and they
didn’t like that. And I said, “Well, there’s only one way to solve that and that is to not have me
the first and last courts.” Plus the fact that I never saw this aspect as being appropriate to the rest
of the deanship. And in 1964 we appointed our first dean of students. [13:00] And that made a
great deal of difference because now the student activities and the residents could be overseen
much more personally and much more consistently. And she also handled the disciplinary action.
And then if there was an appeal, OK, I was the court of appeal, not the president’s office, the
corporation. So that did work out much better. No, I think in loco parentis existed at Pembroke,
as it did at most women’s colleges, because those were the expectations that people had of
colleges which had women. That they’d just protect them.

CL: Did you get any commentary back from parents, for example, as you became increasingly
more liberal?

RS: Sure. Ooh, yes. Everything from [14:00] biblical tracts and irate letters to letters of
congratulation. “You finally joined the rest of the world” –

22

CL: World. [laughter]
RS: – kind of thing. Oh, yes, I got lots of mail. Lots of mail. Of course, our biggest mail-getter
was the pill. Got a great deal on that.
CL: When that happened in ’65, were you aware prior to it erupting in the newspapers of the
policy that Dr. Johnson had?
RS: Sure. Of course. [laughter] They didn’t do that without discussing it.

CL: (inaudible).
RS: There was a little known cooperation between my office and the chaplain’s in the case of
pregnancies and so on and abortions. I guess we better not talk about that, though. The abortions,
I mean. [15:00] I got to know early, many times, if a student was pregnant and between the
chaplain’s and the health service and myself we tried to help to figure out, help the girl figure out
what was the best thing to be done. Because I think all three of us, all three sets of us were
convinced that marriage wasn’t necessarily –

CL: The best.
RS: – the appropriate thing under the circumstances and then we’d try to help the gal to follow
through on it. How’d we get on pregnancy?

CL: We were talking about the pill.

LN: Because of the pill.

RS: Oh, the pill. Sure. Well, you know, there were a lot more pregnancies than people ever
believed. And certainly a lot more than I ever knew about, I know. But [16:00] again, I think it

23

probably was the chaplains originally. I’m not certain. I’m not sure the initiative was chaplains
or the health service to begin with. But at any rate, they were together on it when they came and
talked with me and said, “What would you think if the students are suitably knowledgeable about
the situation and are planning to have sexual relationships anyhow, if we are asked to do so or
we see a situation we think it’s desirable, we’d prescribe the pill?” I said fine. And they began to
do it and they did it for, I don’t know, years before somebody from – a gal on the Herald heard
about it through a roommate or something and so she went over to the health [17:00] service and
got herself a prescription and then came up and wrote it up in the Herald. Well, happily
somebody called me from the Herald before I went to bed that night because I knew that
anything like this – once it was in the Herald, you see, it was public domain and the Journal
would have it probably by the next day. So when my phone rang at seven o’clock the next
morning and it was the Journal wasn’t surprised and I already had my response ready. And I
said, “Well, I felt this was a medical matter and I had total confidence in our health service.” So
we rode with that one. But, of course, I’d known about it from before it started.

CL: What I find interesting is the extent to which pregnancies would come to your attention as
dean. Who would –
RS: Well, I don’t think they did.
CL: They didn’t usually?
RS: No, I don’t think – you know, I would know about an occasional one. [18:00] But these were
probably the squarer kids. I think probably some who may have been a little more sophisticated
in other ways found other resources. But those who couldn’t find anything else found the health
service or the chaplains or a faculty member. I don’t think a student ever came –

CL: Ever came directly to you.
RS: – directly to me. I think she came via –

24

CL: A referral.
RS: – one of the chaplains, yeah. Usually somebody would come in and run interference first and
tell me about the situation. I said, “You want to come in or you want her to see me alone or how
do you want to do it? And I’ll do anything I can to help and I know Dr. Johnson will and so
forth.” No, I’m sure I knew about only a very small fraction. But I knew about enough that it was
a matter of real concern.

CL: [19:00] Were most of the men with whom the women were involved, were they Brown
men?
RS: I didn’t really go into that usually. The answer is yes and no, I’m sure, in terms of who
people went with and who they married. A lot of Pembrokers did marry Brown men. A lot of
them dated Brown men. A lot of them married people from other colleges, too. Excepting for the
fact that Brown men are more convenient.
LN: I don’t know exactly when the policy changed and I’m not specific to Pembroke. I’m
actually thinking of Barnard. But if a women would get pregnant under your tenure and wanted
to have the child, would she be asked to leave the college or would she be allowed to attend
classes pregnant? Did this ever come up?
RS: Never came up. Never came up. [20:00] There was a rule. That’s such a far cry from the way
things really were. But this gives you a little sample. When I arrived, I hadn’t been there very
long, a student came in and she was a senior. Yeah, she was a senior. And she had gotten married
in the summer to a guy who was in the Navy who had been stationed at Newport. Well, he was
going to now go on sea duty and was not going to be around much at all for the rest of the year
and so she asked if she could live in the dorm. I said, “Oh, sure, if there’s room. I mean, what’s
the problem?” And she said, “Well, you know, there’s a rule that married students can’t live in
the dormitory.” I said, “What?” [laughter] You know. And there was. Well, we eliminated that.
These were some of these holdovers. But I guess the theory was that married women knew

25

things that virgins shouldn’t know [21:00] and since all the girls were virgins we’d better not
have them contaminate.
CL: In, I think it was ’66 or ’67, you had a response to students requesting to abolish dormitory
requirements, all the dormitory, you know, sign-in/sign-out rules. And in it you talked at great
length about premarital sex and the problems that will ensue from early premarital sex. And –

RS: I did?

CL: Yes.

LN: (inaudible) I think we have (inaudible).
RS: That’s interesting. Yeah. I’m interested. That doesn’t sound like me.
LN: Well, I think your back was against the wall –

RS: Must have been.
LN: – and you had to make a statement at this stage. (inaudible) In reading –

RS: I usually tried not to get in that situation.

LN: Yes.

RS: [laughter]

LN: One would imagine.
RS: You see, I couldn’t really say what I thought publicly [22:00] about some of these things.

26

LN: Well, that was my question because you talk about premarital sex is against the law in
Rhode Island.

RS: Well, yeah.

CL: All right. So you remember that?
RS: Now I remember. Yeah, sure. I say things like – that was true. That was a fact. Didn’t say it
was against my law.
CL: OK. That was –

LN: That was really our question. Because the statements really do sound very formal. Your
appeal to Rhode Island law as a way to not have to state your own views.
RS: Well, I’ll tell you why I was concerned about linguistic matters at this point. See, we were
into the drug era by now. I guess the first thing I knew about anything, about drugs was one of
the students in the special master’s degree program, which I had done a proposal to the Carnegie
Corporation on and a special foundation [23:00] grant we had. And a very bright Brown student
who was in the program I knew well, took LSD once and had a succession of bad trips which
kept occurring to the point where he had to leave school. And that really stunned me. I didn’t
know then. I don’t think we did know then that LSD had lingering, long-lingering after-effects.
Wasn’t long after that when security brought the shoebox of marijuana to my house one night.
Well, there’d been a lot of uproar about marijuana about that point. Nobody really knew whether
it was bad for you or not. But we did know it was against the law. And also some heroin turned
up on the Brown campus about that time. [24:00] And at that point I think we all felt, OK, when
students blatantly break the law we cannot protect them. All right. Now you begin to see in loco
parentis eroding. I think the drug scene was a thing that made the major thing happen, which
was, OK, if you break the law we are not going to protect you. And that probably was what
influenced me to retreat into legalisms on the sexual intercourse routine. As I say, I just was

27

never happy with this in loco parentis business at all. I didn’t want to have that a part of the
picture but I really couldn’t [25:00] avoid it, you see.
CL: You said that Barney Keeney said, “Take this up with my successor.” And let’s assume for a
second that they had gotten a president who would have stayed for a while. What was your idea
about what would have happened? You said the successful integration.
RS: Oh. Well, I’ve got that here, too.

CL: Oh, OK.
RS: That’s interesting. I kind of felt as though I was getting some things off my chest when I
wrote up some of these. I said, “Even though nearly 20 years have passed it’s still painful for me
to think about the atmosphere and the manner in which the merger took place.” Well, there’s no
question in my mind that the women should be finally totally integrated into the undergraduate
whole. But I really was deeply sorrowful about the way in which it happened, [25:00] essentially
by fiat overnight. It had seemed to me that the process of preparing for this integration should
take a year or two, during which we plan for alternate means to provide for the special services
for women, which I think was Pembroke’s great strength still at the time of the merger. I think
that the kinds of opportunities that the students had in placement and career counseling, in
academic counseling for graduate and professional study, the Pembroke staff had special
expertise in these matters because women’s life patterns are different from men’s and therefore if
you’re planning for post-graduate whatever, study, career, and so on, you’ve got to take account
of the fact that if a woman wants to have children there are going [27:00] to be some gaps here
and you’re going to have to kind of take account of this and try and make arrangements to handle
this sort of counseling. So it seemed to me that we needed to have in place what we were going
to do about these special services before integration took place. Now, in the twenty years since
the merger took place, most of these services have in fact been replaced. But it sounded at the
time as though they were reinventing the wheel. Sometimes I really, really felt – the other aspect
of it had to do with the alumni. I felt that the alumni should be informed well in advance about
thinking about it, that their opinions should be solicited, opinions, [28:00] suggestions, so that

28

before it actually occurred you had an informed constituency, that your students and the alumni
were well-informed. And your special functions were in place. And then fine. Now, what
happened was that it happened so quickly and with so little fore planning that as far as many
alumni were concerned they were extremely unhappy. They felt they’d been disenfranchised.
They had held Pembroke in high esteem, as well they should. And suddenly it wasn’t there
anymore and they didn’t understand it. They hadn’t been consulted. They hadn’t been informed.
I felt very badly about that and I still do. Had a hard time passing alumni for a long time [29:00]
because I couldn’t speak against the administration publicly but I was very unhappy about that. I
have no doubt that the university lost some bequests.

CL: (inaudible).

RS: So I think it should have been accomplished much sooner than it was, no question.
LN: But not in the way –
RS: By ’63 I would have been happy to have it done as rapidly as possible. By ’63 about, I
guess, we talked about it. So had it been accomplished, say, by ’65 – well, the late sixties and the
seventies were going to be tough anyway. But it would have been one less whipping boy, I think.
One of the things that happened in the course of this unpleasantness was that [30:00] the dean of
admissions at Pembroke was crucified really. She’s a fine person and she had done a fine job.
Unfortunately she didn’t know how to cope when they put her on the spot. I don’t know as
anybody would know how to cope when they put her on the spot. She had been very liberal in
her thinking and in her efforts to recruit black students, for example. And Pembroke was well
ahead of what other institutions of our ilk were trying to do even in this. And yet it was made to
appear that we were highly backward in such attempts. We were highly provincial in the way in
which we selected students and so on. And it finally got so bad – well, it was [31:00] the
beginning of the end then. But we could have avoided that if we had – and we could have
avoided the bad scene with the alumni. And I didn’t much enjoy those last (inaudible) either.

29

LN: Do you associate the merger then with the difficulty over the admission of blacks? In other
words, I had never made the connection.

RS: No. No, no, no, no.

LN: No. Those were just separate (inaudible).

RS: I just mean that if the merger had not taken place in the atmosphere it did and had taken
place in an informed fashion, I think that Pembroke’s banner would still be waving high instead
of, you know, nobody mentions it very much. [32:00] I began to think that the development
office – it’s hard to know because the development office has had so much change in personnel –
that they were actively not talking about Pembroke.
CL: Well, I don’t think they know how to deal with the alumni anger over this.
RS: I don’t blame them. I didn’t know either.
CL: And they’re loathe to bring it up. Because I know from my own experience, you bring it up
and people have very strong feelings one way or the other.

LN: To this day.

RS: I know that.
CL: Because they’re not as well-versed in the history of Brown and Pembroke as they should be,
I feel they do not know how to respond in the way that –
RS: Plus the fact they weren’t really clued in. As far as I know there’s nobody in development
now who was here when there was a Pembroke College. And that certainly makes a difference.
So they don’t really know what Pembroke College was to begin with. [33:00] But, you see, it
makes it worse that they never mention Pembroke because it’s like your idiot child that you don’t

30

talk about. They make it sound as though it is. It’s too bad because that perpetuates the wrath or
hurt or whatever it is that the alumni feel. And I don’t know. I think maybe now, after all this
time has passed and we’ve got a new president, maybe I will try and take some leadership in
doing something about this. I was too numb myself right afterwards to be able to cope with it.
And, I guess, as I say, this was kind of catharsis to try and write out something about it because
all of this took place in the atmosphere of the student unrest, too. [34:00] But no, no, I don’t link
the two at all.
CL: No, I didn’t think so.
RS: I just meant it’s too bad that they coincided in time because that made it worse.
CL: Let’s digress all the way back. When you came in ’61, who was in the Pembroke deanery?

RS: Gretchen Tonks was assistant dean. Doris Stapleton was director of the alumni office and
secretary of the alumni association. Kit –

CL: Erwin?

RS: Well, yeah. Kit Erwin was the director of placement. Dottie Horton was registrar.

CL: Was Alberta Brown (inaudible)?

RS: Alberta Brown was dean of admissions. Ronnie Gordon was director of physical education.
Simon [McPherson?] [35:00] was director of residence. I can’t remember whether we had a
director of student activities or whether the job was vacant.

CL: I think there was an advisor.
RS: We hired –

31

CL: [Randy Marsh?]?

RS: No, she came much later.

LN: She was later.

RS: I think it was the next year we hired Elizabeth Baird. But I have a feeling maybe there was
nobody in that job at that point. But we did and then that really was not a good solution. It
seemed to me that instead of having that job, director of student activities, it would be far better
to have a dean of students office and then some kind of an assistant to the dean who handled the
student activities. And so it finally evolved. Speaking of assistants to the dean, I had a number of
faculty members – since Pembroke was so very female as far as the administration was
concerned and the [36:00] faculty was essentially male. And I needed help with the academic
advising and some of the curriculum (inaudible) dean’s office. I instituted some faculty assistants
to the dean who worked part-time in the dean’s office. And I don’t think that had been done
before. I don’t think it had been done at Brown at that time. And that worked extremely well.
Most of the people came from the sciences, I guess because when I first came the people I knew
best were the ones in sciences. And that was good, too, because I think it was very useful to have
that kind of academic influence and emphasis in the dean’s office.

CL: So when you changed the deanery and you invented dean of students and then, what was it,
dean of academic [37:00] counseling or Gretchen Tonks position. What was it?

RS: Well, she was assistant dean. Later Charlotte [Mahoney?] became associate dean. She had
been director, placed by (inaudible) here as director of placement and from Wellesley. And then
I brought a gal I had known, not well, but I knew they had a good operation. Was director of
placement at Barnard. Became director of placement here. [ Leigh Pokman?]. Yes. I’ve lost your
question now, I guess.

CL: When you reorganized it, what was the reasoning behind the reorganization besides taking
out the disciplinary matters from your hands? Was it to divide up the duties more equitably?

32

RS: Yes. [38:00] And also to try and put – one of the things I had always kept as my baby was
graduate and professional school counseling and also special fellowships, national and
international fellowships, which Pembroke did extremely well on. We had many students who
got Marshall Fellowships and Fulbrights. Marshalls are the English analogue and Woodrow
Wilsons and so on. Well, it seemed to me that Dean Tonks greatest strengths were in the area of
freshmen counseling and the counseling system. She was extremely good at enlisting faculty to
counsel Pembrokers. And she got up early in the morning, a little earlier than Brown dean
(inaudible) and did that. [39:00] And it was too big a job. Plus the fact that even though I liked
doing a lot of this academic counseling, I was either away so much or just physically didn’t have
the time to do it. See, the college was growing all this time, too. I think it was 800 when I came
and it was, I don’t know, 12 or 16 hundred when I left. We had a lot more bodies around, too,
and they were awfully good bodies. Because at one point we had at least 10 applicants for every
space we had available. Pembroke was really one of the most competitive colleges anywhere
around. And we were skimming off the top of a very, very rich cream.

CL: When you did something like reorganizing the deanery, is that something you would do and
present as a fait accompli or would you have to promote [40:00] it to Keeney or whomever?

RS: Depended on the level of it. Yeah. Certainly if it was at the level of my directors, heads of
departments. I guess we had nine departments. I can’t remember now. I had an administrative
council that met once a week and each of these directors was on that counsel. And I think there
were nine of us. I’m not sure. But at any rate, at that level I certainly would discuss it with him. I
also talked with him informally sometimes just to knock around ideas. He was very good about
being willing to listen, which was particularly useful since I was a novice administrator, at least
for the first couple of years. You learn fast.

CL: [41:00] did he ever disapprove anything you want to do? Did you have any conflicts with
him?

33

RS: Yeah. I remember fairly early – had to do with a disciplinary action. I have forgotten now
what the nature of it was. This was when I was court of first and last resort. And a student or her
parent, I’m not sure which, went to Mr. Keeney. I think she was dismissed. As I say, I don’t
know what the infraction was but it must have been something, you know, fairly stiffish. And we
were going to a meeting or something and he said, “I think you made a mistake on that one.”
And I said, “Well, maybe I did. It was a tough one to call.” He said, “Well, I think you should
reverse yourself on it.” I said, “I can’t do that.” And he said, “Why not?” [42:00] And I said,
“Because if I do, I’m making a reverse statement about what our policy is on this. I think it was
like being AWOL or something, which was considered a serious infraction in those days. And
was found in a guy’s apartment or some stupid thing like that. And he said, “Well, I think you
should.” And I remember now I had a meeting downtown in the afternoon and in the course of
the meeting I got up and went and phoned him. And I said, “Barney, I can’t do that.” And he
said, “You're right. You can’t do that.” Okay. So yes, we had our disagreements but he never
publicly undercut me. And by and large we got along extremely well. But I remember that
[43:00] very clearly because I knew it was going to make it very, very difficult for me to do deal
with the students once it got known that I dismissed somebody and then reinstated them when
there weren’t any mitigating circumstances.

- End of Audio File 2 -

CL: [00:00] Interview with Rosemary Pierrel Sorrentino, tape two. When your relationship, well,
the deanery’s relationship with UH, would you say that was largely free of any sexism?
RS: Yes. See, excepting when I was looking for my very first job, post-doc, I don’t think I ever
really experienced sexism. Because jobs always fell in my lap. And I feel I was treated fairly as
far as promotions went and salary and this sort of thing always.

CL: So do you feel that [01:00] when you came here your salary was roughly equitable to
another parallel deal in UH?

34

RS: Yes, I think so. Well, see, there was no parallel. There was no parallel. I think it was fair.
Actually, I probably was making a bit more because of the fact that I had been in New York and
the cost of living is so high in New York. Salaries tend to be high.
CL: Oh, so the salary when you came –
RS: And then, of course, they had to increase it considerably over what I was getting –

LN: To get you to leave.

RS: Well, no. But they did.
CL: And one of the perks apparently was the dean’s house.

RS: Oh, yes.

CL: Hundred Brown Street.

RS: And a full-time housekeeper. And, of course, I had an entertainment budget, travel budget,
and I had quite a lot of discretionary funds that could be spent, oh, for student –

CL: Social activities for students?
RS: Well, they could be spent at [02:00] at my decision. There was a dean’s aid fund, for
example. Say a student’s father died, had to go home. I could produce money from that fund
which might or might not (inaudible) that. But once in a while you’d hear of some case of real
hardship. Somebody was having trouble paying for their books or something. This was before
tuition was so monumental. You could produce enough to help out on something like that. Yes.
Sometimes I had funds that could be channeled into student activities if that was desirable.

35

LN: Did you ever feel strapped for money or was it a fairly – because I know today everybody
has a –

RS: Yeah. See, I had to fight for my budget, just as the chairman of every academic department
has to fight for theirs. [03:00] I think in general the salaries were low at Pembroke. I’m not
talking about my own. And there was a feeling that was sexist. But the women, they were mostly
single women. They were all but one single women who did not have families to support. And
that was an acceptable view in those days. It wasn’t very acceptable to me but that view had a
certain face validity among a lot of people at that time. But no, I never thought it was fair. I’m
sure, for example, that Alberta Brown was not paid as well as her counterpart at Brown. And
(inaudible) replacement was probably, you know, that kind of thing.
LN: We’ve actually seen some of the advisory committee meetings before you were even
approached about the deanship, [04:00] where they were discussing some of the qualifications.
And they had a long discussion about whether or not they wanted to hire a new dean for
Pembroke who would be married.

RS: Yeah, I saw that, too.
LN: You saw that recent –

RS: Yeah. Matter of fact, I quoted it in here.

LN: Did they ever say anything to you about it?

RS: No.

LN: No.
RS: They not only said, “Can she be married?” they said, “What will we do with the husband?”
[laughter] I quoted that on here.

36

CL: Yeah. As Pembroke dean, in your dealings with faculty did you ever bring up – for example
you talked about women in mixed classes not speaking up as much as in segregated classrooms.
Did you as a faculty member or you as dean ever try and deal with that issue or was it just taken
for granted?

RS: There was one department that I felt was sexist. Well, they were blatantly [05:00] sexist.
And that was math. The then chairman, who’s now deceased. Professor Bennett, said there had
never been a first rate woman mathematician and women simply did not have mathematical
minds.

CL: I wonder how he got along with Nancy Duke Lewis. [laughter]
RS: Well, I don’t know that she taught.
LN: She didn’t.
CL: I don’t think she taught after she became dean but she was –
RS: No, I don’t think she taught.
CL: – a mathematician.
RS: She didn’t have PhDs.

CL: Right, right.

RS: Which put her immediately at a disadvantage.

CL: In a lower, yeah.

37

RS: That was another thing that helped me with the faculty, and that is even if they didn’t like
me or didn’t like my field, they had to allow as to how I got my degree from a pretty good
institution. [laughter]
CL: Right. They couldn’t protest your training.
RS: Yeah. Couldn’t protest my training. Brown Department of Psychology has had an
international [06:00] reputation of considerable magnitude for a good many years.

CL: You were beginning to say something about the math department.

RS: Oh.

CL: Yeah.
RS: And I’d get kids coming in in tears because, you know, they’d been told this. So I took him
on. I don’t think I ever changed his opinions. I tried to point out to him that one of the things that
– that Pembrokers tended to be self-selected as high in mathematical aptitude, because, since
Brown was known for its strengths in the sciences and mathematics, we tended to attract women
who were particularly interested in that. Obviously if they were interested they probably had
high ability in that area. But that’s the only really blatant [07:00] case where I felt that there was
a department that was sexist. Engineering, for example, they kept saying, you know, “We want
more women engineers. The girls are lonely over here and they quit because there aren’t any
other people to talk to, any other females to talk to.” Now, I never heard it but I wondered if they
got closed out by the men sometimes. I don’t know. The engineers. The men students. But we
increasingly had more students in engineering. It did work.

CL: With the advisory committee, did they have any real power whatsoever?
RS: Well, it’s interesting about the advisory committee. I knew Margaret Morris well. [08:00]
When I was a child I used to go to her home for dinner because her father was an older friend of

38

my father’s. And one of the first things I did when I began to think seriously about coming here
as dean was to come to Providence just to see her and talk to her about it. But she told me one
time that the advisory committee was appointed as a sop to the alumni. The alumni, until ’64,
and I talked about it in here – is one of the things I felt I did accomplish – it would have been
accomplished anyway but it happened I was the instrument. When I arrived the Pembrokers had
no vote for alumnae or alumni actually. Alumni representation on the [09:00] corporation, nor
were they allowed to nominate from their numbers. Apparently there had been considerable
chronic irritation about this, of course, and Margaret Morris said that this committee was setup as
kind of a sop to the alumni. I reported to them, as you know, annually on the state of Pembroke
College but I really don’t remember that any major changes were effected through the school. I
did get to know several corporation members well, better, at least, through the fact that the
committee existed. And then I’ve described it here, that in 1964 the chancellor – I talked to the
chancellor about this voting business. Or in ’63. I guess it would be effected in ’64. [10:00] And
he said he thought it was terribly unfair and actually, through the help of the then president of the
alumni association, Earl Harrington, and who else, Harold Tanner, who was the chancellor and
Libby [Canyon?], who was president of the alumni association, we managed to get established a
vote for women on the same basis as men and also a regulation to the effect that four of the 14 –
at least that’s the way it was then – four of the 14 elected members of the corporation would be
filled – at least four of the 14 would be filled by women. Which was actually a generous ratio in
terms of the number of men and number of women [11:00] alumni/ae. And, of course, they
would vote on the same terms as did the men. So that was a major accomplishment. As I say, it
was going to come but it happened that it came quite soon after I came.
See, I attended all meetings of the corporation and I attended a lot of the advisory
executive committee meetings of the corporation, as well. I always attended if there was
anything specific to Pembroke or to curricular matters with which I was particularly involved or
departments with which I was particularly involved. Incidentally, president had the habit of
delegating some departments to me and appropriate monies went with these delegations, of
course, otherwise you haven’t got anything.

CL: Which departments did you take charge of?

39

RS: I think I really don’t want to talk about that. I’ll tell you off the record that –

LN: We can turn the machine off.
RS: No, [12:00] I’ll just say I –

LN: Oh, okay.
RS: No, I’m still talking general terms. That usually they were departments where there were
problems and where he wanted a little closer supervision and maybe felt that there was a person
that might conflict with him. No, I wasn’t going to mention who they were because the
departments have changed now anyway. It’s not terribly relevant. But it’s a nice thing about
having academic deans. You see, you can delegate to them. Actually, that was very valuable.
That one time I dealt very closely with the English Department, for example, which is such a
large department and they have two sometimes incompatible factions, the creative artists and the
literary types. A situation, I might say, that also (inaudible) in art and music. And almost always
there’s a problem [13:00] when you have –

LN: (inaudible).

RS: Yeah. In many universities the factions are so disparate that they turn out to be two different
departments. We always tried very hard not to have that happen here because we figured we had
all the departments we needed, as it was.

LN: You mentioned Libby [Canyon?] and the alumni association. What would have been your
level of communication with someone like Libby [Canyon?]?

RS: Oh, I know her well and like her very much. I got along extremely well with most, if not all,
of the presidents of the alumni association that I worked with, I think. Gene [Focarelli?] and
Libby [Canyon?] and [14:00] Sophie Blistein wasn’t – Sophie Blistein I had known for many
years. We were old friends from when I was – well, Professor Blistein and I were graduate

40

students together so it goes back. Which was helpful, too, because when I was trying to learn
about the alumni association, Mrs. Blistein had always been so active in the alumni association.
She was able to fill me in on a lot of the history and issues and so on.
From the beginning, I felt that part of my job was to try and – having the ultimate
integration of Pembroke in mind from pretty early, I felt it was important in the course of my
travels to do what I could to try and bring the Brown clubs and Pembroke clubs together, or to
encourage those that already were together in what ways I could. It’s very interesting. [15:00]
There are very strong regional differences in how the clubs had functioned. Usually in places
where there weren’t very many alumni or alumnae they had come together because just the sheer
force of numbers was too small to effect much. I remember being invited actually by a
psychologist friend who was a Brown alumnus to come to Tucson and speak to then the
Brown/Pembroke club. And, you know, they were happy as clams together and they’d been
together for years. In San Francisco they were testing joint functioning. They would get together
once or twice a year and that seemed to be working well. That, again, was part of what I had
hoped [16:00] I could help to accomplish as part of what I left behind me, was help to get the
clubs together before there wasn’t anything else for them to do. Of course, there still are a few
Pembroke clubs, Pembroke club in Providence, I know.
LN: Right. And there’s the county.

RS: Are there any others outside of the immediate area?

LN: Rhode Island, no.

RS: No, I assumed probably not. No.

LN: Because Rhode Island has such a large number.

RS: Now, see, California was showing a willingness way back. And a lot of them were. And one
reason was, of course, particularly 30 years or more ago I think more Pembrokers married Brown
men than did later, you see. And so there were a lot of Pembroke/Brown couples around the

41

country. You discover when you start (inaudible). So that makes it a lot easier, too. [17:00]And
they were happy to have a single club to support, a lot of them.

CL: When you would go around to these clubs, and certainly as Pembroke became more and
more liberalized, did the alumni ask you questions about that or did you bring it up?
RS: Oh, yeah. I tried to anticipate them. You know, I usually had an alumni/nae speech. I didn’t
usually write a new one for every club I visited. I would add a few paragraphs that were
appropriate to that club or something. But, no, usually I would build on the state of Pembroke
College thing and also what was new in the university and so on, so that – (inaudible) again. I
lost the question.

CL: I was asking about when you went to the clubs. Did you talk about the [18:00]
liberalization?

RS: Oh, yeah, sure. I tried to talk about anything that was different or changing, yeah. And then,
of course, Chet Worthington did a very good job in the Brown Alumni monthly, I think, of
keeping the alumni abreast of changes, too, so that they would ask questions as a result of things
that had been published in the BAM. I’m not implying they don’t still do that, it’s just that I
don’t read it from the same point of view now.

CL: Did the alumni respond in a negative way to the [localization?]? Did they understand that it
was part –
RS: Some did. Some did. Particularly those that had college age daughters. [laughter] It’s very
interesting. I tend to find that the younger and the older alumni were the most liberal. The older
ones had this lovely perspective, you know, aloft from the mountain tops, and the younger ones
had this perspective of being young and close to it and [19:00] therefore more liberal. It was very
interesting. I remember the first time I talked with the alumni about the merger. I guess it was
probably the fall of ’71 at alumni council. And I had worked very hard on the speech and I’d
built in some history about when the women’s college became Pembroke and so on. And after it

42

was over, opened it to questions and there were quite a lot of questions and quite a lot of
hostility. And this gal from the class of, I don’t know what class she was from now, she got up
and said, “Well, I’ve been considering myself a Pembroker for quite a few years now but, of
course, I never went to Pembroke. I went to the women’s college in Brown University.” And she
said, “I really [20:00] think it’s better that it not have a separate name if we’re all going to be
together.” And there was applause. It was really great.
CL: [laughter] Oh, they still go on about –

RS: Oh, I used to love my 50-plus classes. I think if they made it past the 50-year reunion they
were usually kind of special people. I used to entertain the 50-year class and then I had a
luncheon for the 50-plus classes, too. And I really had an awfully good time with those alumni.
CL: With the liberalization – I hate to keep harping on it but it’s a thing that we have the most
questions about, I think. With the liberalization you mentioned that, you know, you had become
convinced very early that a coordinate system was not going to work and it becomes clear in the
advisory committee minutes that the student organizations are merging, camp club and SGA
[21:00] basically sub-merge or whatever you want to call it. And so what seems to be left are the
residence requirements as the remnant of the system.
RS: That’s right. That’s exactly right. There’s a remnant.

CL: And so it seems clear from our discussion today that, you know, you were ultimately
moving toward complete liberalization. Is that an accurate way? Or did you believe that they
should have some regulations?

RS: By this time I was being very strongly led by Ann [Dork?], who was dean of students and a
darn good one. Well, she’s still dean of students at Brown. And we were taking it step-by-step.
Yes, every year we were getting more and more liberal and getting rid of more and more of this
baggage of sign-in/sign-out, [22:00] hours when you had to be in and all this kind of thing. But
to some extent a university responds to the pressures in the society as far as the extracurricular

43

aspects of it is concerned. Not so much the curriculum necessarily. And the pressures were
toward liberalization. So, sure, as far as I was concerned, I would loved to have said, “Look,
you’re all adults and don’t bother me about these things. Look after yourselves. If you have
problems, we’ll have people to help you cope with them. But we’re not going to try and build
fences around you.” Sure, that’s what I would love to have said. And at Barnard, about 85% of
our students were non-resident anyway, [23:00] so that this sort of thing was not really much of a
problem. And these kids were savvy New Yorkers. They’d ride the subway an hour and a half to
get to college or it was both ways. And if they were having an affair they were having an affair.
That wasn’t our problem. So I think that was the kind of thing that came as the greatest and most
unpleasant shock to me when I became dean of Pembroke, that that was part of the package. So
yes, I would certainly have been aiming toward the highest degree of liberalization that society
would allow us, consonant with the safety of our students and so on.
CL: So when, I believe it was in ’66 then, on the second day of classes that student was
dismissed because she was found in a boy’s apartment. And, you know, the big brouhaha came
about. [24:00] That must have been very difficult to deal with.

RS: It was. Unfortunately she did it in such a way that it became public, you see. If everything
about it hadn’t been so public –
LN: You could have overlooked –
RS: Yeah. Or not noticed. But you couldn’t not notice.

LN: Yeah. But the students actually call attention to the fact that it had been occurring frequently
–

RS: Oh, yeah.

44

LN: – and nobody ever knew because nobody called up to see if you were actually at the phone
number at which you had said you were going to be at overnight. So clearly signing out
overnight and getting false addresses.

RS: Sure. Probably always have. I doubt if that was ever monitored. Certainly not when I was
here. I think the only time a student would have been called would have been if, say, a parent
called and somebody was ill or something of that sort. But that was never seen [25:00] as part of
the director of residences bailiwick.

LN: Did you have any other questions before I ask?

CL: No, no. I have still a question about the Pembroke Study Committee, though.

RS: OK.

CL: From my readings of the documents, it was basically formed quickly and lasted a year and
you met over a year’s period of time.

RS: Oh, the study committee. Yeah.
CL: The committee that eventually –

RS: Oh, yeah. I have a thing on that. (inaudible).

CL: Eventually it was split, I take it, eight and four, and there was a majority and a minority
report issued.

RS: Yeah. Well, that was part of all that unfortunate business.
CL: Yeah. I’m just curious, though, to what extent you thought that the decision had been taken
previously.

45

RS: Oh, yeah, it had been taken.
CL: Oh, you think so? And then they just established –

RS: I know so.
CL: – a committee to window dress?

RS: Sure, it was a fake.

CL: How? Because it solicited a lot of opinions. You know, students gave [26:00] reports. You
know, you met I don’t know how many times but eight times (inaudible) this period of time so
it’s hard to tell whether or not –
RS: No, that’s part of what I meant –
CL: – (inaudible).
RS: – when I said the decision was taken like by fiat and overnight. No, it had been taken.

CL: Previous to the establishment of the committee? I thought I had interpreted subsequent to
your issuing reports. But even prior to the formation of the committee you think the university
pretty much knew what it wanted to do?

RS: I think the president did.

CL: The president did. Yeah.

RS: I think it was (inaudible) decision.

46

CL: Because Stoltz was acting president?

RS: No.
CL: No? This wasn’t –

RS: Hornig was president.

CL: Hornig was president.
RS: And Hornig did not – this is off the record but he did not operate by consensus. He did –
CL: You’re not the first person to say that.
RS: I’ve heard some rare language with regard to him.

CL: [27:00] So when the Pembroke Study Committee was formed you said that the decision had
already been made.
RS: That’s my recollection.
CL: And was it the kind of thing where action –

LN: But nobody on the committee probably knew that, I take it.

CL: Yeah, that was my question.

RS: Except me, yeah.

LN: Right.

47

CL: Had he told you that the decision was made or –
RS: I really don’t even remember. I think there’s probably something Freudian about all this. But
I don’t remember because I do not remember the precise circumstances under which I was told
that the merger was going to take place. But I know I was told. I was not consulted. And as far as
I know no one else was consulted either. Anybody I thought might have been consulted I know
was not.
CL: So while your watch –

RS: Such as Mr. Stoltz, for example, who had been acting president twice and was provost.

LN: Right, yeah.

CL: [28:00] So you knew then, while the study committee was going on that it was a waste?

RS: I think so. I think I did. Yes. Yeah. I think I had been told bluntly and in so many words. I
hate to say that because, as I say, I really cannot remember the specific instance in which it
occurred. But I knew that this Pembroke Study Committee was just a stupid waste of time
because the decision had been taken.
LN: This is the one that Elizabeth (inaudible) chair? I’m just trying to make sure we’re thinking
of the same committee.

RS: Pembroke Study Committee.

CL: Right, right. The big one.
RS: Yeah, yeah. [Dukie?] probably didn’t know that a final decision had been made.
CL: Well, I’m sure she didn’t because that –

48

RS: I don’t think she would have done it. I know her well enough to know that.
CL: Well, I’m interviewing her next week so –
LN: We could find out. I’ll find out if she knows.

CL: Yeah.
RS: [29:00] Let’s put it this way. There was no question in my mind at the time the Pembroke
Study Committee was appointed that it was already (inaudible), that the study committee did not
exist to make a decision. And it really didn’t exist – it wasn’t even a decent public relations
function. This business that I said about a well-informed constituency, about the alumni being
informed and asked for suggestions, it takes time for people to accept something like this and
you don’t pop it on them overnight. You ask them what they think and you listen to what they
think. And they have useful things to offer. I don’t think anybody listened to what people
thought. I feel quite certain that that was not the function of the Pembroke Study Committee. It
was a belated [30:00] attempt to give it some legitimacy, I guess, because that’s not the way
things are usually done in Brown University. Had been. Had been. Yeah. I would be interested to
know what [Dukie?] thought but I doubt if she would ever have chaired the committee if she
knew.
CL: I don’t think she did. I did a pre-interview with her and I think she thought it was a very
serious –
RS: She’s a very honest gal.

LN: Interesting.

49

RS: She was the first academic female full professor and I was the second. And she was ahead of
me but I guess I knew her when I was a graduate student. I think she may have already been on
the faculty in a minor capacity at that time.
LN: [31:00] I think so. I think she finished in ’47.

RS: But I did a lot of my graduate work in the biology department. No, it was very difficult. The
other thing was that Mrs. Blistein was on it and she and I are very close friends and that made it
also difficult because there are some things you can’t talk about when they’re administrative. If
you disagree that’s tough, you can resign, but I’d already done that. [laughter] I couldn’t exactly
make it immediate. Just as a matter of interest, you might like to know, I resigned –

CL: Several times.

RS: Well, Mr. Stoltz had my resignation before. I had become convinced [32:00] that Ray
Heffner was going to stay longer than he did and we weren’t getting anywhere about Pembroke
then. Perfectly nice guy, he was just frozen.

LN: Frozen by other things?
RS: He wasn’t an administrator. He wasn’t a top administrator. He couldn’t handle the heat and
he was just frozen by the responsibilities. He had been an excellent assistant to an administrator.
I knew the chancellor to whom he was assistant. (inaudible) And he was very strong
administration (inaudible). I just knew that if he was assistant to that guy who was such a strong
personality, that he probably wouldn’t be. [33:00] He was a nice guy and he meant very well but
the university didn’t go very far. We still taping?

CL: Mm-hmm. We could take that off.
RS: OK. I think that –

50

CL: We’ll ultimately delete it in the transcription.

RS: Yeah, I think you might keep off the record any of these personal comments about former
presidents.

CL: You said earlier that you ended up having a Pinkerton in your house?

RS: Pinkerton man, yes.

CL: When did that happen?

RS: Well, this was during one of the Black Power riots. Mr. Stoltz was then acting president and
they didn’t live at 55 Power Street. They stayed in their house on Keene Street. And one night
somebody threw a Molotov cocktail at his front door and actually didn’t do much damage.
Singed the paint a little bit. [34:00] But things were so difficult and, of course, I was one of the
targets of the wrath of the blacks, too, since they, I think, mistakenly thought Pembroke wasn’t
doing enough. Maybe we weren’t doing enough but we were doing more than a lot of people.
And so there was some thought that since we had both been being defamed by the blacks, it
seemed logical they might also try the same thing. There had been some riots on my lawn and so
on. It wasn’t known at the time, of course, but they hired a Pinkerton man. I guess it was
probably Mr. Stoltz who thought it was a good idea. So I would come home and he would take
up his post in my living room or dining room. I’d tell him, “Feel free to make coffee,” and go off
upstairs and go to bed. [35:00] [laughter] He never had to defend my honor or anything. But he
was there for several nights.
CL: You just said that they had riots on your lawn. Was that with the black students or –

LN: Can I ask a few questions?

RS: Sure.

51

LN: I’ll delete it on the release form. I’ll write it down right now. Because I’m curious if you
ever found that your personal behavior was watched carefully or monitored because you set an
example for students. Had you ever felt constrained in any way?
RS: Well, I felt awkward about smoking, because I smoked incessantly. And we didn’t know
then, you know, that that was a terrible health hazard.
LN: But it wasn’t “ladylike” as well?

RS: Yeah. If I saw a photographer in the vicinity I tried to ditch the cigarette but there are all too
many photographs (inaudible) smoke [36:00] (inaudible). [laughter] Crazy.

LN: But that really was it? OK.
RS: Yeah. In a job like this you’re too busy to have much private life so I didn’t have to worry
very much about that. My public life was my private life. I couldn’t say it interfered with my
private life. No, I don’t think so.
LN: I’m thinking maybe also in ways that you might have dressed or not have dressed.
RS: Well, I didn’t have to answer the doorbell if I didn’t – if my housekeeper wasn’t there and I
wasn’t dressed I just didn’t answer the doorbell. And I would go away when I had vacation. I
used to go off on banana boats, these fruit freighters, [37:00] for a couple of weeks in the winter
to the Caribbean and I went off down to Westport Harbor, usually, for a week or two in the fall
just before college (inaudible). So then I could laze around and I could wear what I wanted to
wear. Yes, I did feel constrained. I think yes. I didn’t feel I could run around the neighborhood
looking sloppy, though, which I now feel I – I don’t know. I don’t –
LN: You still don’t do it, right? [laughter]
RS: Well, I run around in a tennis warm-up suit quite a lot. I guess that’s sloppy.

52

LN: I was also wondering, too, altogether different topic, if you knew [Jackie Mathard?], either
here or at Barnard or at some point.

RS: I never knew her well. I knew her.

LN: Do you have any insight into the difficulties she had here?
RS: Are we on or off now? We’re off?
CL: We’re on. I can delete it on the release form.
RS: Let’s just eliminate any references to former [38:00] presidents, excepting Mr. Keeney
because I don’t think I’ve said anything nasty about him.

CL: No.
RS: And I tried in this report – I don’t mention personalities. I mention incidents. If you want my
opinion about her I’ll give it to you off the record. She wasn’t an administrator. She was an
attractive gal but certainly not appropriate to the position. The position, as I saw it, it could have
been a very important job because we now had a president who was not himself an academic
dean type and so she really [39:00] – the world could have been her (inaudible) on that. And I
guess she had the title. What, she was associate provost.

CL: Provost.

RS: So she could have been the academic provost of the university.
CL: That’s right.

53

RS: It was a lovely job because it didn’t have any nonsense about in loco parentis. It was too
bad. Again, we’re still off the record. No one asked me anything about her, which I think is
interesting because, while I did not know her, I still knew people at Columbia who did know her
and I had heard she wasn’t effective. I suspect maybe it was out of some sort of mistaken
delicacy that people didn’t ask me. Because some people kind of saw it as a successor to me. It
wasn’t, of course, because the job description is quite different. But that may have been why
nobody asked me. [40:00]

CL: I think, in summation, what would you say that you liked most and disliked most about
being dean?

RS: Well, what I disliked most is very easy. The way in which the merger was accomplished.
And next to that I disliked in loco parentis. What I liked was the opportunity to effect changes,
even though sometimes you had to wait several days to see them effected. And I ran a seminar
for new faculty and they were usually young in those days, which was no effort to propagate any
theory [41:00] of education or anything. We had some money from the Ford Foundation to do
this. They met at my house and we had beer and pretzels. Senior members of the faculty who are
known to be very good lecturers, and get them just to come over and talk about how they felt
about teaching. It was a terrific experience for me because I got in on the ground floor with the
young faculty because I got to know them in this informal setting. There wasn’t anything
threatening or punitive about it (inaudible). And I got to have some of my favorite people over,
talk to them. So it was a very nice thing. One of the things I enjoyed were my contacts with the
faculty, development of curriculum, my contacts with the students [42:00] particularly the just
terribly able ones. And just a succession of awfully nice kids that I knew because they were
senior assistants or because they were in special honors programs or whatever. Or they were
student leaders or they were academic leaders. I also knew some awfully nice kids who weren’t
doing well, too, and sometimes we were able to help them. Of course, that’s what professors do
anyway.
CL: I think that’s it.

54

RS: OK.

CL: Thank you very much.

- END -

55

