
Whitney Pape: [00:00] It is September 8th, 2016, Thursday, at 2:03 p.m., and I’m Whitney Pape,
a project archivist, here at the Pembroke Center Archives. We are in Pembroke Hall, Room 202,
one of the former library locations. And I’m interviewing Meryl Smith Raskin. [laughs] And she
is from the class of ’66 and missed her reunion interview this year, so she’s come in on her own
to record some of her memories. And why don’t we start with just a general description of your
childhood and family background.
Meryl Smith Raskin: So I grew up in Providence, born and raised. Both of my parents had lived
in Providence my father’s whole lifetime, and my mother spent two years in Holyoke,
Massachusetts before moving to Providence. And I grew up at the corner of [01:00] Brown and
Bowen Streets, 134 Brown Street, which is two blocks from here, two short blocks. And I had
previously lived at 124 Congdon Street, another two blocks away, so always right here. So
Pembroke, especially, and Brown, a little less so, was always in my upbringing. So that was it.
And it was always known that I would probably try to go to Pembroke. That was it. Actually, if
you want to get to this, I was given a choice of only two colleges to which I could apply by my
very protective parents. I could either apply to Pembroke, which was across the street, and I
would commute, or I could go to the Stern College for Women, the Women’s College of Yeshiva
University in New York, where I would not get much of an education, but the goal, then, in the
’60s was to find a husband from the men’s college. It was no problem for me [02:00] to choose
Pembroke, and I was an early-decision applicant. I had three brothers: two older, one younger,
and one – my oldest brother and many of my family members had gone to Brown, fewer to
Pembroke, mostly because there were fewer women in the family. But I had a few Pembroke
1

relatives and lots of Brown, and so that was it. [The speaker has added that her mother’s father,
Joshua Bell, emigrated from Russia at the turn of the 20th century and graduated from Brown in
1911, making Meryl a third generation Brown graduate and her son Eric a fourth.] I was early
decision to Pembroke. Applying, I didn’t realize it until I located some correspondence from the
Admissions Office from 1961 that I submitted my early decision application in June of 1961, and
I got my letter of acceptance in October. So these days, you know, you apply in the fall, and you
find out by December 15th or something, but it used to be earlier.
WP: And you obviously had quite a presence in your mind of [03:00] Pembroke and Brown
before you came here. What was different about being at Pembroke and Brown than what you
were expecting?
MSR: Well, it was pretty much what I had expected. We’d grown up with babysitters from
Pembroke for the years that we had babysitters, and, you know, some relatives. And so I was
pretty well-prepared for what I was getting. I had gone to Classical High School in Providence,
which was a very rigorous academic program. Lots of homework, lots of memorizing. Not really
devoted to thought or thinking – not so much abstract reasoning, but memorizing. So I was used
to many hours of homework a night. And when I came to Pembroke and Brown, I had much less
homework. It was really [laughs] much easier, [04:00] because instead of being in school all day,
classes all day, and then home, and four hours of homework each night, and a longer commute
than I had going to Pembroke – at Pembroke, I had 12 hours of class a week, from Monday
through Friday, and so the homework could fit in and left me plenty of time for other activities.
So not much of a surprise. And I thought when I applied that this was the best of all possible
worlds, with a women’s college, with separate things for women, but the co-ed academic
environment. And so I thought it was perfect. And it was my most idyllic four years. I think I can
[laughs] say that now.
WP: Oh, that’s wonderful.
MSR: Idyllic might not be the right adjective. But anyway, it was a great four years here. It was
pretty much what I expected, but better.
2

WP: Oh, that’s wonderful. [laughs] I think admissions is going to want to use the recording.
[laughter] [05:00] You mentioned that you participated in a lot of activities because you had so
much free time on your hands all of a sudden. Do you want to talk about some of those?
MSR: So, to start with, one thing that was not necessarily Brown or Pembroke-related, but I did
it here, was play bridge. I had learned to play when I was a child. My mother had taught me. But
I hadn’t played for many years. And then, when I started Pembroke, I found out that there were
lots of bridge players here. In the ’60s – ’50s and ’60s, there were Brown and Pembroke. And in
just – in every dormitory, there would be groups of people looking for a fourth, because for
bridge you need four people. So somebody hollering up the stairway, “Fourth!” meant they were
looking for somebody to fill in, in the bridge game. So I learned to play again. I was at West
House, the commuters’ dorm. I would walk across the street two blocks and plunk my books
down [06:00] in West House, and sit on the floor, and play bridge. Not the best way to spend my
time, but it actually was very good. I improved my bridge game. I made a lot of friends who
played bridge. And eventually, I – with the help of my mother, who was a bridge player, and
who had connections to bridge directors, we had what may have been the first ever Pembroke
bridge tournament, as part – under the Athletic and Recreation Association, we had a bridge
tournament, I think, my junior year. And I continued to play. And then, after I had left and
moved to Philadelphia, I met my husband playing bridge. So he was an excellent player. And he
thought that – I played against him, and I happened to play a hand correctly, and the thought I
knew what I was doing. And by the time he found out that it was a fluke, it was too late. I still
follow the game of bridge, but I have not played actively for [07:00] many years. So that was one
of the things I participated in was way too much bridge, and way too much smoking cigarettes.
And actually, there was a contest, sponsored by Marlboro cigarettes for collecting the most
empty Marlboro boxes. I’m not sure if it was over the summer, or over the year, or whatever, but
then a prize was given to the dorm that had collected the largest number of boxes of – empty
boxes or Marlboros. And West House was the obvious winner because we had access to all our
friends and family who lived in Providence. So we had I don’t know how many thousands of
boxes collected, and we won a television for the dorm. There was not previously a TV in West

3

House, and we won one, and I think it was my sophomore year. It might’ve even been freshman
year. I’m not sure.
But it meant that there was a TV in our dorm on that fateful Friday, November 22nd, 1963
when I was a sophomore, [08:00] that we all gathered around the TV in the living room or – I’m
not sure. I can’t remember the layout of West House. But there was a room there on the first
floor, where we had the TV and everybody was gathered around it. I didn’t have that much to do
with people in the dorms. I mean, I knew people in the dorms. I was over there occasionally, but
mostly I was at West House my first couple of years, anyway. And I’m not sure whether they
had TV – they must’ve had TVs in the other dorms, probably bigger ones, but there wasn’t such
a competition for large screen TVs back then. But that’s the way we spent that weekend. That’s
probably the most memorable event of – for sure, of my four years, was that weekend in
November, 53 years ago. I still have pretty vivid memories of that. It was a dreadful weekend.
And classes were supposed to start again – I think – I can’t remember [09:00] how long they
were cancelled for, but I know I had a Tuesday class, Classics D1 or D2, which was the way to
get through the history requirement. It was two semesters that consisted of reading, in one
semester, Herodotus, and in the other semester, Thucydides, and that was it. That was all the
reading we had to do. And the instructor was a young graduate student who came in the day that
he was supposed to start teaching again, after the assassination. And he walked into the
classroom, and some of us were there, and he went up to the front of the room, and he said, “I
can’t do this.” And that was it. That was the end of class. So trying to remember how many days
it was postponed for. Well, it probably – just the weekend. Well, that was the week before
Thanksgiving. So it may’ve been a – when we came back after Thanksgiving. That might’ve
been when things were supposed to start up, but he [10:00] wasn’t up for it on Tuesday.
WP: That’s quite a memory. That’s interesting. I don’t think any of your classmates talked about
that?
MSR: Really? Being here for that event? Yeah.
WP: Yeah. Or only briefly.

4

MSR: That was more memorable than – another thing was a blackout in – I think in ’65, in the
spring of ’65 [The speaker has indicated that it was the fall of 1965.]. The power went out in –
I’m not sure if it was the whole Northeast, or where. But there was a fairly lengthy power outage.
And, you know, that changed things a bit. You hear about that?
WP: [laughs] No.
MSR: No? I think it was ’65. Yeah.
WP: And wasn’t there a birth spike nine months after? Isn’t that the fa –
MSR: Was it that one? Or there were, you know, other blackouts. I’m not sure. There may well
have been. Not in my personal life, so –
WP: Well, congratulations on that. [laughs]
MSR: I was being a good girl. And [11:00] I did have a story. I mean, you can ask questions, or I
can just be – do my –
WP: Please go.
MSR: – rambling in my way that I’ve prepared some – you know, wanted to remember to talk
about some stories. And one was – so I was involved in a fair number of activities. I mean,
smoking and bridge were just two of them, not so much – but one thing was I was an Orthodox
Jew, and my brother was four years ahead of me at Brown. He had graduated in ’62. And he had
never had a problem doing things like requesting changes of exams, exam – if an exam was
scheduled for a Saturday, our Sabbath, he couldn’t do it, and they would, you know, change it for
him without any question. And so I think it was till I was a sophomore that I had my first
Saturday exam scheduled. And I went to Dean Tonks, the Assistant Dean of the College,
Gretchen Tonks. And I told her that I needed to have the date of my final changed. [12:00] And
she told me that Pembroke was no place for an Orthodox Jew. So that was kind of a shock to me.
5

And so I did what I would be inclined to do, which was to go across the street to my father and
cry. And my father was well connected. He was Brown ’29, and he knew Chaplain Charlie
Baldwin, who was the Chaplain of the University at the time. And he called him and told him
what had happened.
And the next thing I knew, I was taking a makeup exam on a different date, and Dean
Tonks wasn’t smiling at me at all. [laughs] And, in fact, at the end of that year, they were
choosing junior counselors. All the dorms had two junior counselors for – to oversee the
freshmen each fall. And there were two women chosen from West House, also. And [13:00]
because of my involvement, you know, in a variety of activities, it was assumed that I would be
one of the junior counselors. But I wasn’t. And I felt that it was probably because Dean Tonks
was choosing them, and she wasn’t about to choose me. So she chose someone else, plus a friend
of mine. And over the summer, the person who had been chosen got married and pregnant, and
dropped out of Pembroke. So then, suddenly, there was a need for another junior counselor, and I
got the call. So I was a junior counselor. I’m not sure what happened to Dean Tonks. I did not
follow her career. I mean, I’m the only person I knew who had a terrible experience with her,
and it was pretty terrible, but, you know, she was definitely there, through the rest of my time, I
think. I was friendly with – there was Dean Dewart, my senior year, Anne Dewart. Her husband
had a position on the Brown [14:00] staff, I think, or faculty. I’m not sure. And her title, I think,
when I was a senior, was sh – let’s see. Dean Tonks was the Assistant Dean of Students. I’m not
sure what Dean Dewart was but I had a lot of contact with her my senior year when I was Senior
Head of House at West House, which meant that I got a room on the first floor there, a private
room to myself, and had meetings with Dean Dewart. I knew Dean Pierrel. She knew me.
But my senior year, I had a lot of contact with Dean Dewart. And I remember telling her
at the end of the year – hadn’t gotten an official notice that I was graduating, and I had some
concern about one of my exams. I can’t remember which one, you know, but I was supposed to
be a Class Marshal because I was in – Question Club was this group of 10 of us, [15:00] I think,
who were Class Marshals that – supposedly, we did some other things, but mostly, I just
remembered being Class Marshal. I think, if I read what Question Club was supposed to do –
they had something to do with planning Freshman Week activities. I don’t remember that. But I
remember being a Class Marshal and checking with Dean Dewart whether I was definitely

6

graduating, and she looked it up and said yes. So that was how I knew that I passed whatever I
needed to pass, I guess.
WP: Quick question. What did it mean to be a Class Marshal?
MSR: So it meant that you marched in the front of the procession. The 10 or 12 of us, however
many, were at the – were in the front of the line. And it was – you know, I mean, I felt great
about it. It was an honor. And my grandmother, who was born in 1892 – so in ’66, she was –
well, she was only 74. She was not that much older than I am now. But she [16:00] marched the
whole way – the whole procession alongside me. You know, there were the 10 or 12 of us Class
Marshals and Grandma Bell going the whole route, because then we marched down and up. And
she did the whole thing. And people were saying, “Look at Meryl’s grandmother. She’s still with
us.” [laughs] “She’s doing it.” So that’s what a Class Marshal meant. And I was told fairly
recently that Question Club continued one more year, but after the class of ’67 somebody
complained that it was too elitist, so they did away with it.I don’t know who the Class Marshals
were after that, but that was it. I remember there was a picture in the Pembroke yearbook of all
of us, members of Question Club, standing on a stairway, all photographed, lovely. [17:00]
And I think, you know, once they digitized the Pembroke Record, which I thought was
the most fabulous thing they could ever do, I didn’t realize how much I would appreciate it, but
besides just having access to all that print material, all the ads were the ones that had appeared,
you know, in those days: Arthur Palmer, Jr., the store that’s now Starbucks, and all those ads
were really pretty impressive. But in one of the Pembroke Records, they had a picture of us, the
Question Club people, and a few other things.
Another great thing that happened at Pembroke was that I found the field of linguistics. I
went in as probably a French major. I loved foreign languages. And I realized, after maybe two
semesters, that being a French major was the same as being an English major, but it was in a
foreign language. And I thought, that’s not really what I like. I like language, grammar, structure,
[18:00] and all of that. And lo and behold, there was a subject – linguistics – that was what I
liked about foreign languages. And a lot of colleges didn’t have linguistics courses. And I was
told at the time that only Brown and Georgetown had undergraduate Linguistics majors. I don’t
know if that’s East Coast schools, or over the country, or whatever. But it was not such a popular
7

major. And it was an all-honors major here. So it means I had to be accepted into the Honors
Program, and I was playing a lot of bridge. So my grades weren’t stellar, but I – and I think you
had to have a 3.25 to get into it. And I think I was a bit below, but I was close enough that they
let me in for other reasons. So I did get to major in Linguistics, and ended up being a computer
programmer, which was actually related, because they were doing computer science – computer
uses [19:00] of grammar, and language translation, and things like that. It was really fairly
popular in the ’60s, and Brown was doing a lot of it. And so when I – I went to graduate school
for a semester at Penn, but it was not nearly as good as Brown – or I didn’t like it anyway. That –
I was definitely biased. So I dropped out after a semester, but I got a job as a programmer
trainee, hired by a company that would – you just had to do well on an aptitude test, and then
they would send you to IBM school and train you. So that’s what I did, and that’s how I got a
career that lasted many years. So that’s some of that.
WP: I was wondering what the transition was between linguistics and computer programming.
But now that you lay it out like that, it makes perfect sense.
MSR: It really is. It does. And the reason I didn’t like Penn – actually, it’s nothing so much
against the school, or that I liked Providence better than Philadelphia, whatever – [20:00] very
few of the students in the graduate program were undergraduate Linguistics majors, because
there were so few schools that offered it. They were coming from different fields and studying
linguistics. And I really wanted to concentrate on the computer and mathematical applications of
linguistics, not so much on the historical or comparative linguistics. But to do that, I needed to
take a lot of undergraduate math courses that I didn’t really feel like taking, because I had not
taken much math in college, and so I would’ve needed to do that. And I didn’t want to, so I
ended up just taking courses that were basically repeats of ones that I had had at Brown. And
why pay tuition for that? And I did want to say something about math.
I loved math in high school. I was a good math student. And the first math course I took
at Brown was a calculus course, [21:00] which I’d had a little – I’d had advanced math in high
school. Classical was a very good school, but it didn’t have any AP classes, and it had a pretty
fixed curriculum. You were either a Latin student or a non-Latin. Everybody had to have two
years of Latin, but the Latin majors had to have four years of Latin. And it didn’t leave that many
8

extra courses. So, anyway, I took this calculus course, here at Brown, that was taught by a
foreign graduate student whose English was very difficult to understand. I had a terrible time in
that class, and I thought it was me. I didn’t see other people complaining. I don’t know. I didn’t
talk about it too much to anybody. It was not good. My next semester, I took another math
course that was actually both in the Math and Philosophy department. It was Math D1 – I forget
what the Philosophy number was. But it was Probability and [22:00] Statistics, Symbolic Logic.
Something like that. And I aced that. I was like – I got nothing wrong in that class, the whole
semester, so I thought, whew, that calculus experience was an anomaly. But I decided I didn’t
need any more math courses, so I didn’t take anymore. So that was it for my math. If I had, you
know, had a better calculus course, maybe I would’ve gone on to do more in graduate school
with what I wanted to do. And the story could be all different, but this is what it is.
And also, I don’t know if people have mentioned to you that our sophomore year, we
were overcrowded. Every year, pretty much, there were 225 students in each entering class. And
there were in my class, in the fall of ’62. And in the fall of ’63, but I guess we knew about it in
the spring or summer of ’63, there were, [23:00] like, 350, or something. They were way overenrolled, over accepted. So they were making triples out of singles, and we had an overcrowding
situation. And then I think it evened out the next two years with the smaller classes. But that
class of ’67, which was really a great class, and I had a lot of friends in that class – because once
you have a few hundred more people to choose from I had friends in all the years around me.
And I just, today, attended a high school alumni luncheon that they have at Classical for people
who have been out at least 50 years. And I thought I’d like to go to it because you get not just
your classmates, but the ones who were there at the same time, you know, in different classes.
And we don’t have that at our Pembroke Brown reunions. It’s just the five-year classes. And you
usually don’t overlap your time in college with somebody who was five years ahead or [24:00]
behind you. So except that this past spring, there was a West House luncheon. I think they may
have had one last year, also. But it was – again, it was only the reunion classes, so ’60s – there
were four of us from the class of ’66 over there, and several from the class of ’61. But it’s nice to
have an event that brings together the people from the period, the whole four-year period that we
were there. So I don’t know if there’s anything that does that, but anyway, that’s one thing I
wanted to remember to mention. [24:38]

9

WP: I just wanted to ask another point of clarification. Being a commuter, and being based in
West House, had the term “city girls” gone away by then, or did you consider yourself one?
MSR: No, it was ci– I guess so – city girls and townies. But one thing is I didn’t drive to school
because I walked across the street. [25:00] I parked in my parents’ driveway. You know, the car
to which I had access was in the driveway. So I probably was referred to as a city girl or a t –
although townies actually, I think, were the high school kids from the area. They were – the local
kids, but not the Pembroke students. So I guess I was a city girl. And there were some who
started out as commuters, who wanted to move into the dorms, but didn’t start out right away in
the dorms, but eventually got in. So some of those had, you know, started in West House, and
then moved into the dorms, and still retained their friends from West House and all that. So it
was okay. I didn’t mind commuting. But I had very overprotective parents, so there really wasn’t
much choice for me. I just did what I had to do, even though I was two blocks away from home.
I mean, they could see everything that was going on. They knew what was going on. There was
no chance for me to misbehave. And that’s the way it was for four years. So I looked forward to
getting out of the house and coming to Philadelphia [26:00] or wherever I happened to go.
WP: How did you wind up in Philadelphia?
MSR: So I didn’t have anything else to do with my linguistics degree except go to graduate
school, and Penn had a good program, and I got in. And I had a couple of great linguistics
professors at Brown-Pembroke, and one of them was Henry Kučera, who died a few years ago.
He was the Head of Slavic Languages and Linguistics. And he was sort of a mentor to me. He
was not my thesis advisor. I forget who that – I think that was Mr. Meskill. But Henry Kučera
had encouraged – he thought I was great at what I was doing. He was very proud of me because I
did very well in a couple of linguistics classes, where I feel that I really did well [27:00] because
of some previous classes I had taken that not everybody in my – in these classes had taken. So he
thought I did a great job just because I had Linguistics 158, I think, or something like that. That
was it. But anyway, he was proud of me, and he said that Penn had a good department, and
whatever. And I thought Philadelphia’s a nice place, and I had a friend from Pembroke, who was
a dorm resident, who was from outside Philadelphia, Margie Satinsky, who was – she was here
10

briefly for this reunion, but I didn’t actually even see her. So anyway, she was going to graduate
school at Penn, also, so we roomed together there, and her parents lived a few miles away, so my
parents felt a little more comfortable about letting me go. And so that’s how I ended up in
Philadelphia. [28:00] And I stayed there. I didn’t like graduate school at Penn, but I liked
Philadelphia, and then I got a job that I really liked. And then a few years later, I met this guy,
and he has never lived anywhere but Philadelphia, so we’re still there. That’s what happened
there. And we have four sons, and our second son went to Brown, and is coming next spring for
his twentieth reunion. So, [laughs] which –
WP: How’s that possible? [laughs]
MSR: All right. It’s all very scary to me when I see this, just from this high school reunion,
hearing about the people who didn’t show up at this luncheon because they’re having various
ills, you know, so I’m doing just fine, thank you, but I might as well record when I can.
WP: One of the things that you mentioned in your questionnaire was that all the students who
were keeping kosher would actually eat at your family’s home. I would love for you to talk about
that a bit.
MSR: Sure. So that started before I came. In the fall of 1959, [29:00] a student came from New
York to Brown who kept kosher. His family was from New York, and he could’ve gone to
Columbia, but he didn’t want to go to the local college. He wanted to go to Brown. And his
parents went to the Hillel director at the time, Rabbi Rosen, who was the Hillel Rabbi for many
years. And they went to Rabbi Rosen and said, “Our son wants to come to Brown, but he needs
to have kosher food. What can you do?” And he said, “Call Mrs. Smith down the street.” So
[laughs] he wasn’t doing much to help himself, so they called my parents, and my mother offered
to feed him – his name was Richard Hirsch. So the class of ’63, the guy who came to Brown. He
was the first one my mother fed. And the university wasn’t set up to give any refund for not
eating the meals. So you had to pay full [30:00] room and board. It was not a problem for his
family.

11

But he came every night for dinner at our house, and Jewish holidays, also, and it was
fine. So I was a high school freshman then. He was three years ahead of me. So if he was a fresh
– I was a high school sophomore, I guess. And so I had this guy coming to dinner at our house
every night. It was awkward. [laughs] And I was very shy. And my three brothers who liked to
torture me, you know – it was not ideal, but it was fine. He was a very nice guy. And my mother
wouldn’t take any money for the meals. She was happy to serve more people. She was that kind
of person. So the next year, people found out that there was kosher food available at Brown, so
she was feeding more people. And there was a guy from Bryant College, also. And there were a
few more from Brown. And the next year, there was a Pembroker, also, who came. [31:00] And
then, the year after that, there were more still, and another Pembroker from the class of ’65. And
then, I mean, my mother wasn’t complaining, but the students felt it was, you know, outrageous
to have my mother doing all this work, feeding all these extra meals. I think there were about
seven or eight extra kids coming most of the time. And my mother never ran out of food, but it
wasn’t necessarily always the best.
So anyway, the students arranged that the Hillel House should have kosher food there.
My mother shouldn’t be having to prepare it all. And so they got a caterer, at first, I think. A
caterer came and prepared the meals. And then they – there – at other times, they got the meals
delivered from some outside caterer. So there were a variety of configurations including, at one
point, the students cooked themselves, [32:00] and they invited my parents over to have a meal
after my parents had been feeding them for so long. So it was really a very nice relationship, and
the students remembered my parents for years afterwards. And on the Jewish holidays, they’d get
a lot of extra kids, not just the ones that they’d been feeding. There would be others. And so
when my mother died almost 12 years ago, I had emailed two of the guys that she had fed: that
first one, Richard Hirsch, and another one Mark Shapiro, because I had their email addresses,
and told them about my mother passing. And my mother had been in touch with their mothers
over the years, but I’m not sure – I think they might’ve both been gone by then. Anyway,
Richard Hirsch, after hearing about that, made a donation to Hillel so that there’s a plaque –
there are actually two plaques in Hillel, in the main dining room and also, I think, in the kitchen,
honoring – sort of an interesting verbiage there, but honoring my parents and Chaplain Baldwin.
I’m not sure what his role exactly was, but he’s on – his name is on the plaque, too. And it’s
from Richard Hirsch, class of ’63.
12

So the memory lives on. And there was something written about it. There’s a Rhode
Island Jewish Historical Society notes, or something. And there’s an article about that – I have
copies of it somewhere. So that was the story with the kosher food. So – but interestingly,
nobody had come to Brown before the class of ’59, from outside of the area, who cared about
keeping kosher. I mean, the local kid – there may have been some other local kids who were
kosher, and they just ate at home. You could not have a refrigerator in your dorm room, either at
Brown or Pembroke, so I do know that Richard Hirsch had a little refrigerator [34:00] that was
covered with a tablecloth. [laughs] But it was not convenient to be providing your own meals or
anything, so it was about time. I mean, in Boston, you know, Harvard and MIT and other
schools, they had kosher food available for the students. And New York and Columbia, I’m sure,
did, also. But we were a little behind the curve here. So it wasn’t until about ’62 or ’63 that Hillel
actually provided any food. And I came back a couple years ago for something or other, and
came to services, and – oh, it was my high school fiftieth reunion, which was downtown. And a
group of us came to Hillel for Friday night dinner. We had dinner at Hillel, and showed
everybody my parents’ plaque, and very proud of that. And they had a great crowd. So – because
Hillel didn’t really thrive when I was an undergraduate. [35:00] I was not involved with it. My
parents didn’t push me to. I’m not sure why not. But anyway, I wasn’t too involved with it, and
that was it. But they’ve, you know, got this beautiful new facility. It really is – it’s very nice, so
I’ve been happy to be in there whenever I can.
WP: Oh, nice. And for people keeping kosher in Providence, was there – were there a lot of
options for markets that were providing kosher meat and all that?
MSR: Not so much markets, then. There was a kosher butcher, I think, maybe two. There was a
kosher deli, which is actually still – or I think it’s still there – Davis’s on Hope Street. And, you
know, so some food could be found. But it was not much. But an hour away in Boston you could
find something.
WP: I’m trying to think of – with our limited time, what you wanted to – do you want to talk
about any of your [36:00] student activities? Because there was the Question Club. There were a
few other things.
13

MSR: Yeah. And so, you know, Answer Club, which came before Question Club – that was
when we were sophomores. There might’ve been juniors in it, also, but we were the ones that
gave the tours to the visiting high school students. That was called – that was Answer Club. I
was in that.– so I gave a fair number of tours. One of the things that I did every summer was the
Blueprint, which was the freshman Pembrokers’ album with pictures of everybody. And they
were looking for a local student – I don’t know who did it before me – but somebody to type up
all the information. So I did it, I think, for three – after freshman year, sophomore year, junior
year. I don’t remember who I handed it to after senior year, but at least for three years, I did this
under the direction of Miss McPhee – Miss McPherson, her name was, who was something in
the housing office, [37:00] I think. Sally McPherson.
But as I say, she was called Miss McPhee. She had a dog named Tori. And I remember, I
went over to her unit in one of the dorms. A couple of us went over and she was giving us some
background on this. And I was very much afraid of rodents. And it was one of the newer
Pembroke dorms. It wasn’t completed, I think. And a mouse scurried across the floor. I got very
hysterical, and Miss McPhee said to Tori, her dog, “Oh, Tori, look, it’s our little friend.” So
[laughs] that’s the kind of thing that stands out in my memory. But what I would do – they would
have the pictures, and I would type all the information: name, address, high school, so that before
all the freshmen came, I had already seen all their pictures, and addresses, and high schools. I got
to know all the high schools that Pembrokers came from. You know, it became familiar to me,
[38:00] to know the private schools, wherever. When Jean what’s-her-name, who was accused of
shooting Dr. Tarnower, the Diet Doctor. She had been the head of the Madeira School,
Greenway, Virginia. I could just recite it, “Madeira School, Greenway, Virginia,” because there
were many Pembrokers who had been there. And so it was a year later when her name came out.
And I know that school.
WP: What was her last name?
MSR: I’m trying to remember that. Jean Harris, I think. Jean Harris. She was the head of the
Madeira School, and she had – you know, had some kind of relationship with Dr. Tarnower, the
Diet Doctor. And I forget whether she did or didn’t shoot him. I think she did. I think that may
14

be known. It matters not. So that was an activity that kept me busy in the summer. I also – I had
summer jobs. And I worked at Brown. I worked in the John Hay Library [39:00] after the Rock
opened. I don’t remember what I did in the John Hay, but for one semester, I had a job there. It
was an unpleasant smell. I’m not sure what it was.
So one semester was about all I could put up with for that. We also had jobs of bell duty,
which was – you know, there was only one phone. I’m not sure how it was in all the dorms, but
definitely in the house-type dorms, there was just one phone on the first floor. And somebody
had to answer the phone and then locate the person for whom the call was coming in. So that was
called bell duty, and I had that sometimes. (inaudible) paid something for that. And that was
about it for actual paid work. I continued to do a lot of babysitting because I – you know, I still
lived near my clients, so I could do that. By the time I was a senior, I wasn’t doing so much. But
[40:00] I – you know, I stayed every summer. I did not go away. And after I graduated that
summer, I worked at the Providence Athenaeum, which was the private library that my family
were members of. From the time I was a kid, that was our library was the Athenaeum. And then I
had a job there the summer after my senior year as – what it showed me – because this was, you
know, the last time I get to see it – handwritten card catalogue cards, or hand – beautifully
handwritten. Not just handwritten, but beautifully. And, I mean, a very archaic system. I haven’t
been there in many, many years. I don’t know the status of the Athenaeum. I’m wondering if
they ever came into the twentieth century, let alone the twenty-first. I don’t know. They were
very nineteenth-century when I was there.
But another classmate of mine worked in the Athenaeum after we graduated, also. And
after my junior year, I had a grant [41:00] from the Ford Foundation to do some – it was some
project for linguistics. And I don’t think I did a great job, but I got whatever credit I was
supposed to get for it, and it had something to do with my thesis. [It was?] something about
machine translation of languages, machine – or generating grammars, something like that. It’s all
over my head now. And I remember that when I had to defend my – you had to defend your
Honor’s Thesis – that one of the comments from one of the professors was that how beautifully
typed it was. I think you know you’re in a little bit of trouble when they’re commenting on the
typing, but it was beautiful. [laughs]
WP: Do you think that was some sort of chauvinistic dig, or was it –
15

MSR: I don’t know. I mean, they had some good things to say about the thesis, also, but it was
very well typed. I certainly didn’t know the word chauvinism back then, although I could’ve
figured out the derivation from all my good Latin, French, and everything [42:00] background.
And actually, another thing. I just want to mention a couple of important professors in my time
besides Professor Kučera. John Rowe Workman was a Latin professor. You know, I’d had four
years of Latin in high school, but I didn’t take it my first two years at Pembroke because I had a
full schedule without it. And somebody said, “You know, you can take Latin again without
having studied it for two years. It’s really not that hard.” So – and it turned out to be true. It all
came back to me. I mean, I’d had it for four years of high school, plus, actually, the s – last
semester of eighth grade, I’d had it, also. And you don’t forget your Latin. So – [laughs] I can
still recite those things I had to memorize in high school. And so he taught two popular courses,
one in Plautine Comedy, and one was Satire - Horace, and Juvenal, I think. So there were Latin
courses that – [43:00] I think, actually, I may have taken one my junior year and one my senior,
as opposed to two my junior year.
But it all came back to me. It was good. And I really enjoyed that. And he was a very
popular teacher. And I enjoyed it. You know, other than the math teacher who couldn’t speak
English, I had mostly pretty good professors. And thinking about whether there were any
women, there was a French – she was just a graduate student, I guess, and – but she was an
instructor in one of my – in a French class that I took. I remember her. So there was a female.
And then, interestingly, when I was here, Arlene Gorton was a Phys Ed teacher. And there was
another person with her. I forget the name of the other one. I meant to go back, and look in my
yearbook, and see who it was. But in – the Phys Ed teachers were mostly famous for the posture
pictures. So – you’ve probably heard all about that already, [44:00] so we won’t go there any
further. But, however, 31 years later, when my son, Eric, came to Brown, his freshman English
course – he had to take a freshman composition class of some kind. And he took Sport in
American Society. And I looked in the course catalogue and see that it’s taught by Arlene
Gorton. And I said, “Woah.” I said, “When you take this class, you go tell her your mother went
to Pembroke many years ago.” He tells me that she remembered me. Who knows? But I never
thought of her teaching anything. You know, she was a gym teacher. But, you know, he liked

16

that course. He was very interested in sports, and still is. And anyway, who knew that she would
become that? But you have heard more than you want to know about posture pictures, probably.
WP: I really can’t hear enough. [laughs] Frankly, I find it such a bizarre thing.
MSR: So I was the only girl in my family, with three brothers. [45:00] I was as modest as they
come. I never stayed at anybody’s house. Mostly the Orthodox thing, the kosher thing, whatever.
I never went to overnight anything. I come to col – oh, and I had had one terrible experience in
junior high. We had to take showers after gym. And you – there were – you had a private side of
the shower, but there were two sides, you know, for each shower, and half the girls would go in
once, then they’d go out, and the other half would go in. And the gym teacher would be standing
on the top of a stool, making sure that everybody got into the shower. I was not being naked in
front of anybody. So, I mean, how I survived that, I think I claimed to have my period, regularly.
And I’m not sure what happened there. But anyway, then I got through that, and then I find out
about posture pictures. And it was a – such a mortifying experience, really. And I still remember
the conditions they were looking for: hyperextended knees [46:00] and forward pelvic tilt. If you
had either – and that would show up in the posture picture. So if you had hyperextended knees or
forward pelvic tilt, you would have to take remedial gym or something like that. There was some
course that they – that you had to take. I don’t know if they retook the pictures or anything, but
they at least checked for those conditions. But it was an embarrassing experience. And do you
know when it ended?
WP: I don’t know the year.
MSR: I don’t know.
WP: It was in the ’60s that it ended, but –
MSR: Really? Okay. And the other thing was the swimming test. Well, that wasn’t so
embarrassing. But I’ve since found that, apparently, some people did get out of – or they were
passed when they shouldn’t have been passed, or something like that. I dreaded that, because I
17

grew up in the ocean where I didn’t have to swim. I didn’t go to camp or take swimming lessons.
So that was it. And then, when I found out I was going to have to do this, I said, “Well, I’m not
going to put this off till senior year,” because there were stories about people taking their
swimming test the morning of commencement. So I took Swimming my sophomore year, as a
gym class, [47:00] or something. I took swimming. And then I took the test and got it out of the
way sophomore year. And I still remember having to tread water for 30 seconds, I think. And
you had to swim the length of the pool or something. And I think I did actually cheat a spec, and
kick the side of the pool at one point, and that didn’t get noticed. But it was okay with that. Do
you have any idea when that ended? Because I don’t –
WP: No.
MSR: They don’t need to do that anymore, either.
WP: I bet it’s similar, too.
MSR: So – it could be. And my father, actually, was class of ’29, was the only person I had
heard of who he got out of taking the swimming test because his father didn’t want him to have
to take the swimming test. And somehow he got out of it. So there you go. We’re – [laughs] he
got out of it; I took it.
WP: Congratulations. [laughs]
MSR: Anything else you’d like to know?
WP: Well, I’m sort of interested in male-female student dynamics. What was the percentage of
female students in linguistics, for instance?
MSR: Linguistics was probably more women. I can’t think of the men. There were only a few of
us linguistics majors [48:00] in my class. Yeah. There were not many men. The professors were
men. But students were mostly women. And I was not socially active, popular, anything. I had a
18

lot of friends, and I also had some friends because – “Oh, you live here and you have a car?” So
– [laughter]
WP: Let’s not minimize that.
MSR: Right. So I did get to drive some men around places that they wanted to get to. I did get to
house girlfriends from other schools, rather than have them stay in a dorm and have to keep
whatever the rules were there. They could stay in my house, where my parents were, with no
rules at all – well, no. Not true. But whatever. I did, you know, put up some people, and things
like that. So I had a lot of friends at Brown, but dated minimally. There was this Plantations
House, also known as P House, which was the male commuters’ dorm. [49:00] And so there
were – we were friendly with them. There were some joint events. And my high school had sent
a bunch of kids my year to Brown and Pembroke. I forget how many, but lots. So there were –
you know, there were kids I knew from high school here. And I was pretty shy, and I was mostly
just involved in bridge, smoking, [laughs] and making friends. I had lots of friends, and I did –
you know, there were some people here at the same time that I was, like Nancy Buc, class of ’65,
who was a wonderful person. And she and I were friends back then, and I saw her at something a
couple of years ago. She remembered me. And from the class behind me – so Charlie Bakst’s
wife – if you know – I don’t know if you know Charlie – M Charles Bakst from the Journal. So
he married – she was Liz in my day, but Elizabeth Cowgill Feroe. [50:00] And she – so she and
Nancy Buc, and I, and Janice Cooper, from the class of ’67 – we were friends. I mean, they were
in dorms. And I can’t remember the connection so much, but Jan Cooper actually tells me that it
was bridge, because I would be in the Gate, which was the cafeteria in alum – in the basement of
Alumnae Hall, is – what’s there now? Is there still a cafeteria of some kind there?
WP: There is no longer the Gate, I’m told. And – but that’s a relatively recent development.
There were students that were graduating last year, when I mentioned the Gate, and they were
like, “Oh, the Gate.”
MSR: Oh yeah, the Gate. Yeah. So I hung out there a lot. I would – I think I would bring my
lunch. I don’t remember paying a lot of money. But – and we would play cards there, too. And
19

so there were a lot of friends that hung out there. And then I got involved in the ARA, Athletic
and Recreation [51:00] Association, and made some more friends from the dorms. And then
what was the other thing? Oh, and I ran for Class President, senior year. And if you came in
second, you were Vice President, I think. And so that’s what I was. [Lydia Briggs Poole] was
President and I was Vice President. And so I had – you know, I had made a lot of friends through
those kinds of activities. I occasionally wrote letters to the editor of the Pembroke Record. I
found this from just searching my name. Well, I would just actually search ‘Meryl’ in the
Pembroke Record, and I found that there was actually another Meryl sometime before me,
because it’s a fairly uncommon name. But anyway, I – so I had a great time. I mean, there were
bad things that were going on. And I’m also remembering before I came – like, I think a year
before, [52:00] there was this stabbing at Pembroke. Stephanie Stilwell – does that – have you
heard of Stephanie Stilwell?
WP: Yeah.
MSR: I think she was class of ’63, and I think his happened in ’61. She was stabbed walking
maybe from the library to her dorm or something. And she survived, but she had multiple stabs.
And I’m not sure when she graduated. I think she eventually did. But that was the beginning of
“don’t walk alone,” because before then, people did. And then they started making all the
Pembrokers be in – at least in pairs, and so forth. And then a girl who was, I think, supposed to
be the President of SGA, the Student Government Association, had been – this was maybe from
the class of ’64 – she had been in Europe the summer before, or the year before, for – I forget if
it was study abroad, or what, but she was killed in Europe. [53:00] Blank on her name. Anne – I
think something – and she was supposed to be Student Government President, but she never
came back. So these are some events that I remember from – you know, from my time. And I
don’t – didn’t know whether they’d been documented. First you’ve heard of them. [laughs]
WP: First I’ve heard of them.
MSR: So, yeah.

20

WP: Yeah. Interesting. Wow.
MSR: And, you know, political involvement. So when I was in high school, JFK came to – in the
fall of 1960, he came to Providence, and we were allowed to go in late to school that day, go see
him. I went downtown and I saw him. I was, you know, swooning. I was very happy about that. I
was not so involved in the Civil Rights Movement because – I mean, I believed in it, but my
parents wouldn’t let me go to anything like that. You know, so that just – no crowds like that.
I’m not sure how they let me go downtown when JFK was here, but they may not have known.
So – [laughs] I’m not sure. But I couldn’t do anything [54:00] on the Sabbath. I – my weekends
were sort of tied up. So they didn’t, you know, like me doing anything like that. But I got more
involved as an adult, in politics, and social issues, and so forth. And I’m – I was a volunteer for
the Democratic National Convention that we just had in Philadelphia, and I’m working on the
Clinton Campaign now. And we’re registering voters first. And we register any party. We have
the forms. And actually, I’ve spent many hours doing it, and so far, have only registered
Republicans, I think.
WP: Oh, no. [laughter]
MSR: That’s it. We’ll see if that – if there’s any impact to that. But those are the things I’m
involved with now. And my kids are grown, but I have grandchildren to take care of, and I
retired nine years ago. And I’ve been busy ever since. But Pembroke is very special to me. From
the moment that I had babysitters from Pembroke as a kid, [55:00] through, you know,
everything after that. So anything else, before you have to leave?
WP: Any final thoughts on how your life would’ve been different if you didn’t go to Pembroke,
or what it has meant for your career and life?
MSR: So it was harder to get into Pembroke than it was to get into Brown. When I came to
Philadelphia, most people didn’t know from Pembroke. I mean, maybe at Penn they did, but not,
like, once I went to work. They didn’t know Pembroke. They didn’t even know Brown. Then, a
few years later – and I started doing the alumni interviewing in 1984. When my youngest son
21

was four years old, and I had some time free, I started doing that. And I found out how – and I
guess I knew before then how prestigious it was and how competitive it was. And so fairly early
on, I realized that I would not be getting into Pembroke now. I should be glad [56:00] that I went
in the ’60s. So – but just knowing that I had gone there, to this school that people say – “Woah,
she must be really smart if she went there.” Okay, fine. So it did definitely improve my selfesteem.
And I just – you know, the friends, the values, I can’t remember the convocation
speakers, but I remember I went. And they were good ones. The things that we did – I remember
sherry hours, but I don’t recall drinking any sherry. And just learning to be ladies, you know,
which we did learn – the tea, and things like that. Not eating in the dorms, I didn’t have the dress
dinners that they – you know, there were, I think, two meals a week that they had to be dressed
up. But pretty much every meal, they were wearing skirts. I mean, there were not much in the
way of slacks in those days. But – so it definitely gave me self-confidence and it’s something
that’s carried with me [57:00] through the years. Whenever I’m traveling anywhere, if I see a
Brown t-shirt or any – or a Rhode Island license plate, you know, I’m always making
connections. You know, if I hear a Rhode Island accent on the phone, because I can still
recognize it – so, and this happens. I hear Rhode Islanders and we bond. So I have a t-shirt that
says, “I may live away, but I’ll always be a Rhode Islander.” And that’s it. And because there are
so many people in my family that went to Brown and Pembroke and, you know, it’s our school.
Tuition now is so exorbitant. I don’t – we’re saving for our grandchildren’s college, but I think –
you know, my daughter-in-law at least thinks, like, it couldn’t possibly be worth it. [laughter]
But even the state schools are so much more expensive now. It may not be out of sight, because
if my granddaughter Olivia were to go to Brown, she would be class of 2029, [58:00] which
would be 100 years after my father, class of 1929, so isn’t that special?
WP: It has to happen. [laughs]
MSR: We’ll see. And she’s visited, and she likes it, you know, but she’s visited Penn State, too,
and she likes that, too. So whatever. But it was a great four years. I learned a lot. I really did. I
mean, it seems like I didn’t spend that much time on the academics, but I did. There were some
courses I really liked and really made an effort to do well in, and some that were really very
22

challenging, and wore me out. And I’m – you know, still have the friends, and the fiftieth
reunion was fabul– I mean, I was here for the reunion. I couldn’t come to whatever the event
was, for which I now have the DVD. Is that right? Or is it a DVD or a CD?
WP: It’s a DVD.
MSR: I can actually see people.
WP: Yes.
MSR: Okay. This is just sound, isn’t it? This is just audio.
WP: This is just audio.
MSR: Audio. Yes, okay. [laughter] [59:00] All right. But anyway, okay. So – and you have to
get onto Worcester. Is that right?
WP: Yes, yes. That’s too bad. That’s too bad. But I thank you so much. I’m so glad you came
and took the time.
MSR: Oh, it’s a pleasure. I’m sorry you’ll probably have a lot of editing to do, but you’re up to
it.
WP: That’s all right. Well, thanks.
-

END –

[The speaker has indicated that she meant to mention Father-Daughter Weekend and MotherDaughter weekend. “These were major events when I was at Pembroke. I remember that one
year my father won a prize for ‘the father who traveled the shortest distance.’”]

23

