
Q: [00:00] This is January 16th, 1985. This is an interview with Hilda Calabro, Pembroke class of
1945. And maybe we could start with your family background. Can you tell me where you grew
up, and if you have siblings, and what the occupations of your parents were?
HC: OK. I grew up in Providence, Rhode Island, and I’m of a family of four girls, the third in a
family of four girls. My father was in the jewelry manufacturing business and my mother was a
schoolteacher, and I think that’s where I really inherited my love of teaching, from her.
Q: How did you decide to come to Brown?
HC: Well, Brown has always had an excellent reputation, and in those days, [01:00] it was so
well-known. I had gone to a girls’ academy, Elmhurst Academy in Providence, Rhode Island,
and my parents wanted me to continue along those lines of a very private type of school. So
having learned of the educational background of many of the professors here, we looked into
that, along with other universities and colleges, but I ultimately decided to come to Brown, and I
am very glad I did.
Q: Did you encounter any opposition, either from family or community, about being a woman
and going to college?
HC: Not at that time. I can’t honestly say that I did.
Q: Did you ever feel like you were doing something unusual?
1

HC: To go to Brown University?
Q: To go to college?
HC: To go to college? Well, it was an accepted thing in my family, and all my sisters had gone.
It was not considered too unusual for me, I think. Yes.
Q: Do you feel like your family had expectations about what you'd do with your educations?
HC: [02:00] Well, certainly, they had hopes, but I ultimately made up my own mind, and I knew
that they really wanted me to go on to higher education, which I did. But, I was the one who
decided to do what I actually did later on.
Q: Do you remember having expectations about what you would do, yourself, before you went to
Pembroke?
HC: Well, I know that in high school, I developed a love of modern language, and somewhere
back then, at that time, there was an inkling that I would go into modern languages, and I
actually did major in romance languages at Pembroke College at the time. I actually didn’t know
what I was going to do, but I did decide to go into teaching, and I took education, along with the
modern languages, and I started out as a high school teacher first.
Q: Where did you live your freshman year at Pembroke?
HC: I lived at home. I was a city girl, as they called us in those days, [03:00] and there was quite
a nice group of us and it was a close bond of friendship among us, which was very, very nice.
Q: Did you live at home all through your time at Pembroke?
HC: Yes, I did, yes.
2

Q: Did you feel like you had to make an extra effort to be part of campus activities because you
lived at home?
HC: Well, I was at Pembroke in the war years, and there were curfews at night, blackouts, things
like that, so it was difficult to come back to functions and social events that I would have liked to
come to. So, I think, the time – the historical period – made it difficult at that time. But had it
been normal times, in those days, when Pembroke was isolated by itself, I don’t think there
would have been too much of a problem. But, perhaps, today, it’s quite different.
Q: Can you talk a little about the participation in the war effort that went on at Pembroke?
HC: There was an all-out effort [04:00] for the war at that time, and it wasn’t unusual to see girls
between classes rushing out to roll bandages, to be involved with some kind of patriotic work.
And, it really was quite inspiring, and I think they deserved a lot of credit for doing this and
carrying on their studies at the same time.
Q: Was there any kind of interaction with community women, during the war effort years?
HC: Yes, I believe there was. First Aid, for example, that was something that everybody took.
And, you did that voluntarily, and there was a lot of community participation in that effort, to
come here and to help out, and to give instruction in first aid at that time.
Q: Did you take any classes that were specifically geared to go into war-time work?
HC: No, I really didn’t. It just didn’t fit into my major. I don’t think there was too much [05:00]
offered by way of special courses that gave academic credit at that time. Is that what you meant?
Q: Well, I thought I had read something about certain courses, like, urging people to go into
certain areas of engineering or chemistry...

3

HC: Oh yes, well, there were. Yes, there was a Pratt Whitney course that some girls did go into
that, but my interest did not lie in that area, so I continued with my own particular interests at
that time.
Q: How did the war change the atmosphere of Pembroke, besides the war effort work that you’ve
been talking about?
HC: Well, they did start the accelerated program whereby – Brown had never given courses in
the summer – where girls could come back and take courses and speed up their education, which
I didn’t do. I didn’t want to speed up my education at all. And I’m glad I didn’t. Many of the
girls who did that decided to go back to [06:00] the normal four years anyway, and there was that
feeling of rush, of at having to get through. But, these studies were intensive. It didn’t affect the
quality of the education at all. I must honestly say that.
Q: Did it affect social activities?
HC: To a certain degree, where I say there were curfews. But, then when the time came for
social activities, we went all-out for them, and, I think, there was a greater enjoyment in it,
knowing that the time was so limited and so restricted.
Q: Did the war seem very far away? How real did it seem to all of you?
HC: It was real, in a sense. When you had a blackout and when there were curfews, you knew
that you couldn’t walk the streets at night – it was real in that sense – and those of us who had
relatives and friends in the service, I think, had a sense of reality. But, there may have been some
of us who it was just an imaginary thing, it seemed like a far-away thing. Actually, it didn’t last
too much longer, because those were actually the last few years [07:00] of the war.
Q: Can you tell me something about your major and the sorts of courses that you took while at
Pembroke?

4

HC: Yes. I majored in French language and literature, and Italian language and literature, and I
took many courses in Spanish, so I had a good background in the romance languages. And the
courses were of high quality, high caliber, very demanding, and we had very good professors
who demanded a lot of us. And I’m glad for that, now; I don’t regret it one bit.
Q: What was the gender composition of most of your courses?
HC: Well, as you got into your major, even at that time, there were Brown men. When you got
into your major, the classes were small, and that was very enjoyable because you had not only
got to know the other members of the class, but the professors had a close relationship with their
students, and it made it quite congenial and very good. [08:00] There were some classes that
were all girls. For example, courses in writing that were required, those were strictly Pembroke
sections. But then –
Q: So there were still separate classes?
HC: There were still separate classes.
Q: Were there some classes that were together?
HC: In the major fields, yes. As you got into your junior and senior year, yes.
Q: The more upper level courses were mixed?
HC: Right. That’s right. You got into courses where it was very common to have Brown people,
and that was stimulating – that impact of mind upon mind. I think that was very stimulating and
good. It was enjoyable.
Q: Did you ever encounter any tensions in class because of gender relations or with male
professors?

5

HC: I really can’t say so. No. I think we were treated equally and fairly. I don’t remember
anything like that, no.
Q: Can you talk about some of the people who were important for you during college?
HC: Oh, yes, there were [09:00] many important people for me. First of all, I remember very
clearly and very well, Dean Morriss, who was dean at that time. She was just an inspiring person,
and I recall, most of all, the Tuesday morning chapels we would have in Alumnae Hall and we
would convene there and you’d wear your cap and gown and march in. And there was always a
very good speaker, and she would introduce the speaker. Many times, she spoke, herself. And,
she always inspired us to go on in our academic work, and to search for professors who would
challenge us, and I think that as a dean, she gave us extremely good example. I was very, very
proud and happy to have such a person leading Pembroke in those years.
Q: She sounds like a wonderful –
HC: Oh, yes.
Q: – role model.
HC: She was, she really was. Yes. And friendly, too.
Q: Did you have any personal contact with her?
HC: [10:00] From time to time, we had conferences. For example, I like the type of counseling
we had. We had a counselor we met with periodically to advise us academically, and, sometimes,
they would advise you on other matters, too. But you did see the dean, and I believe there was an
assistant dean, Dean Mooar, at that time. And, by some way, we seemed to have appointments
with them, not as often as with our counselors, but they did get to know us – they knew our
names – and there would be teas, where we would meet with them, too – student faculty teas,
which made it all very nice.
6

Q: Is there anyone else who was important for you?
HC: Yes, there were many professors that were outstanding in my mind. For example, Charles
Smiley, an astronomy professor. I took that as one of my requirements. I believe I was a
freshman at the time. And he was a person who went all out for his students. We would go to the
observatory [11:00] to study the constellations of different times of the years. And he and his
wife would invite us, quite often, to their home for teas, and the class was so small so th–
Q: Oh, that’s nice.
HC: Yes. And there were men, also, in that class, probably because of the field of astronomy.
But, he not only was a good professor and known to everybody at Brown, he was a friend of the
community. Everybody in Rhode Island looked up to him, and he made astronomy something to
be looked up to, and he encouraged the desire to learn more about it, and there would be open
house at the observatory very often. So I remember him very, very clearly, yes.
Q: Did you get a feel for what the relationship between Brown and the greater Providence
community was like at that time?
HC: Well, I think, being a student, sometimes, you don’t stop to think of things like that. I know
that it always held a prestigious position in the community – people [12:00] looked up to it. The
Brown professors were highly thought of, and they did contribute to the community, which I
think was very good. For example, Charles Smiley and others, they didn’t just stay closed into
their ivory tower. And that helps a great deal to establish an image of a university. I think it did
have that image, and I believe it has that even more so today.
Q: Can you talk about some of your best memories of Pembroke?
HC: Well, my best memories, the things that I love to do. They developed not only our minds,
but also our aesthetic senses, and I loved modern dance, and I did belong to the modern dance
7

group, and I’m so glad to see that that has grown into a really fine dance center now. But, that
was in its beginnings, and Flora Hopkins was our director, and she was absolutely wonderful.
She taught us [13:00] grace and movement. She was a charming person. She worked with us for
long hours. Then, we would have recitals and programs that were open to the public and to the
rest of the university.
One of the nicest things was May Day, when we performed on the lawn at the Pembroke
campus. And, of course, we had bear feet, and we had our leotards, and –
Q: Oh, that must have been beautiful.
HC: Yes, it was very beautiful. And then, after that, there followed the crowning of the May
queen, which, I don’t know whether they s– I doubt that they still have that. That’s a beautiful
tradition that has gone. It was always a very beautiful Pembroke girl who was picked, and there
were many in those days, believe me. And the whole thing centered about that. And that seemed
to usher in springtime, and all that it seemed to mean to everybody at Pembroke.
Then there was BrownBrokers] also. I did partake in that. And, I don’t remember what
they called it, but I did some dancing [14:00] for BrownBrokers also, and I noticed that the last
BrownBrokers this past year, they had photographs up around Faunce House of all the past
BrownBrokers. And I looked around and it brought back so many memories. That was a joyous
thing. In the time that I came to Pembroke, we had BrownBrokers just before final exams, which
was quite hard because –
Q: (laughter) I can imagine.
HC: Yes, it was. Because you’d spend hours practicing, and then on top of you, you knew your
exams –
Q: Your exams...
HC: – were just around the corner. But now, I believe they do it in December. It’s entirely – the
setup is entirely different, isn’t it?
8

Q: Yeah.
HC: But that was nice, too. You made close friends, and you loved to practice, and you knew
you had readings to do for your assignments. You got them done somehow, but –
Q: Must have kept pretty busy.
HC: Yes, they did keep you very busy, but it was just exciting. It was marvelous, really.
Q: Were there any other extracurricular groups you were involved with at Brown?
HC: Well, I did some work on the Pembroke – I don’t remember what they call the paper. Do
they still have a paper? I know Brown has.
Q: The Brown Daily Herald.
HC: Yes, [15:00] but Pembroke had its own at the time. I think they had their own publication.
Q: Did that merge while you were here?
HC: Not –
Q: Or was that in ’46?
HC: – while I was here, no. Because Pembroke stayed – it must have been after I left, because
Pembroke was still Pembroke for quite awhile.
Q: Right, but I thought that the papers had merged.
HC: They did. I don’t remember the exact year. But we did have our own publication for a
9

while, and I enjoyed working on that. That was another good thing, among many other things we
had, too. But I remember those things in particular, because I enjoyed them so much.
Q: How about some of your worst memories or times at Brown?
HC: Well, worst times, I think when final exams came around. I think students must still feel the
same way that – tremendous pressure. But somehow, you got through it. And we did have a
reading period then, which helped us. Everything stopped – no classes. And it freed [16:00] you,
and you really hit your books, and you read, reviewed. And I think that was very productive
because you didn’t rush through the exam period and memorize a lot of things. You really went
over your course work, and, to this day, I remember some of the things I straightened out during
that period. It really was very productive, very good. Yes.
Q: Do you remember any political organizations or political work that students were involved
with during the war?
HC: Political, not really. I can’t remember anything of that type.
Q: Was there any opposition to the war among students at Brown?
HC: I’m sure there was, but being a Pembroker, and being apart, you didn’t feel – I’m sure there
was, yes. I know girls who had fiances who were in the war, they felt it greatly. And I’m sure
there must have been some feeling of opposition among the Brown students and families of sons
who were away, too. Certainly, that exists all the time.
Q: [17:00] Did you receive any career advice while you were at Pembroke?
HC: Oh, yes, definitely. We had appointments. We had regular counselors. And –
Q: Oh, right. Yeah.

10

HC: And, once you decided on your major, with the help of a counselor, you saw your major
professor periodically, and they really mapped out your course for you. I understand you have
much more freedom now. You take almost what you like, right?
Q: Yeah.
HC: But, I felt that guidance was good. And they would advise you, for example, a history
course that would go well with a course in French literature, which, I think, that sort of advice
was good.
Q: That is good.
HC: Yes. Because I wouldn’t have realized that on my own.
Q: How about advice for once you graduated?
HC: After that? Well, they did have the student placement bureau. They sent us forms regularly
to fill out and keep in touch with them, let them know what we were doing, and if we were free
to take on any other kind of [18:00] employment. They kept up with that. I don’t know what
happened. Does that bureau still exists?
Q: There’s a career services office.
HC: There is?
Q: Yeah.
HC: Yes. That’s good. I think that’s very necessary. But they did call you in to fill out papers and
to have interviews. Yes.
Q: Can you talk about some of the social rules, or the norms, during the years you were here?
11

HC: During the years that I was at Pembroke, they did have curfews at the dorms. The dorms
were for all girls, as you know, and dating was – at a certain hour, you had to be back, and...
Now, of course, it’s quite different and much freer. And, girls went along with that, as well as
they could.
Q: As well as they could, (laughter)
HC: As well as they could is right. I know it. I’m sure at times, it must have presented
difficulties. But that’s the way it was every place at that time. That was expected. Of course, girls
could not be students if they were married, either. That was [19:00] another thing.
Q: Oh, really?
HC: Yes.
Q: So everyone waited til after they graduated to get married?
HC: They did. And usually in June, there were loads of June weddings. They would go around
showing off every diamond or (laughter) engagement rings, and... So, that really was a rule at the
time, but that’s different, too, now. I imagine you can be married and pursue your studies at the
same time.
Q: Did you feel like you were less restricted because you were living at home? Or did you feel
more restricted than in the dorms?
HC: Well, I suppose there were restrictions in both places, actually. In the dorms, you had to
follow the rules and regulations there, and, of course, at home, you had your family obligations
to tend to, so I would say it was about the same in both places.
Q: Was there much chafing against the restrictions?
12

HC: Yes. At Pembroke, you mean, because of the dorms? Yes, you’d hear students rebel about
it, but there was nothing they could do. And I’m sure it [20:00] wasn’t malicious or anything like
that, but... There was a little bit of that, I’m sure.
Q: Do you think you developed the notion of appropriate roles for women while you were here?
HC: Well, that’s difficult because we were a women’s college. I must say that being a student at
a women’s college gave me a sense of being important as a woman. And I think the leaders we
had, like Dean Morriss, she really inspired that in me, even though the women’s movement was
not yet at the place where it is today. We had leaders who really gave us those ideas. And it was
through them, I think, that we attained these roles. And even people like – you may not see any
connection here – but [21:00] even my dance group instructor, for example, Flora Hopkins, who
was a woman, herself, and really outstanding in her field, she gave me that sense that I wanted to
imitate her and be as good as her.
So, you see, we did have that type of thing to give us an idea of our importance. But,
maybe if you’re thinking of roles in society, maybe we hadn’t reached that point yet, where you
have today. We had to kind of work that out for ourselves.
Q: Thinking back to senior year, what were you and your friends thinking about for yourselves
for when you graduated?
HC: We were thinking of jobs, primarily – jobs, graduate school. Those were the things that
were first and foremost on our minds. I think that most of them did pretty well, considering. And
then, of course, there were many people who married right after graduation. That took up a large
segment of the female population. But, [22:00] those were the things that consumed us at those
times. Is it pretty much the same today?
Q: Yeah. I think it’s usually been the same. Was there pressure to marry right away?
HC: No, my family didn’t pressure me. Some girls felt that – they felt, before a certain age, if
13

they weren’t married, but... I never felt that pressure, and I’m so glad that I didn’t because I
developed on my own and felt free to pursue the things that I liked to pursue.
Q: Was there a lot of dating between Brown men and Pembroke women?
HC: Yes, there was. And, if a girl had a date with a Brown student, it was a great event.
(laughter) And that still is, I’m sure. It was something to be happy about. And even though we
were Pembroke and they were Brown, I think the fact that we were separate made the social life
even more intense because we weren’t together all the time.
Q: Oh, I see.
HC: Yeah. You enjoyed the little time you had together even more, probably.
Q: So you felt like gender relations were pretty good?
HC: [23:00] I thought so. Yes. I really did.
Q: Whether in classes or socially?
HC: Or socially, yes.
Q: Was there much mixing in extracurricular activities?
HC: Well, to a certain degree. For example, there were clubs, foreign-language clubs which were
opened to both male and female students, and you could socialize there. Other clubs on campus,
there were church-oriented, like the Newman Club and – I’m sure there are many of those, now –
for boys and girls. That was a good place for socializing, and you learned something also, like,
going to something like that. But, the opportunity was there.
Q: Can you tell me what you did immediately after you graduated?
14

HC: Yes. After I graduated, my first job was teaching romance languages at North Providence
High School. And I taught there for several years. And then, I decided – at the same time, I kept
[24:00] taking courses at Brown toward my Master’s degree. After I completed my Master’s
degree in 1950, I decided I wanted to go on to further study, and I went on to my doctoral studies
at Boston College, where I went into education and received my Ph.D. in education. And then, I
taught at the University of Rhode Island in the education department. And I love my work very,
very much.
Q: It must be real interesting.
HC: It is. I trained students to become teachers, mostly, and I supervised student teachers. I
taught courses on campus in education and I enjoyed, very much, going out into the schools of
Rhode Island and helping these people to find themselves within the world of education.
Q: Have your students changed a lot since you started teaching?
HC: Students have changed a great deal, yes. If you recall, during the 60s, because of the
Vietnam situation, there was a sense of [25:00] rebellion on all the campuses, and, while I kept in
touch with Brown through the news, it wasn't just Brown, it was all over. You can’t blame them
for that sense. And, since then, students have been given much greater importance. And, if you
notice, now, at the end of each course, you’re given an evaluation sheet to fill out. Your voice is
much stronger in the working of a university, and I think that’s very good, because students have
their own ideas to contribute to the whole setup. And they sit in on all committees. Yes. Their
influence is good. It’s very good. So I have seen that change – it’s a very big change, and a good
one.
Q: Do you feel like you‘ve encountered any obstacles, in your career or your educational path,
because you’ve been female?
HC: Yes, I have. As a woman professor, I felt that the men would get their promotions and get
15

[26:00] their raises much faster than the women did, and that is actually a fact in most places. So,
I did go through that. In my doctoral work, I didn’t feel that. I felt that men were treated equally
as women. But, it was actually in the world of work that you felt this more. And, I think that
we’re going to overcome that very well, now, with this women’s movement, probably.
Q: How did you feel about the merger, the Brown Pembroke merger?
HC: Well, there was a sense of nostalgia, naturally. Being a Pembroker, I would say I remember
this, and I remember that. I liked it and I didn’t. I can see the psychology and the logic behind it.
It was a necessary move. But, the tradition of the women’s college seemed to end abruptly with
the merging of Pembroke and Brown, and it lost, somehow, its identity. You don’t hear – the
girls don’t talk about themselves as Pembrokers anymore; they’re Brown students. So, [27:00]
that did change the tradition quite a bit.
Q: Do you have other memories of Pembroke that are important to you, or people that you think
about?
HC: People that I think about... Well, as I say, there were some outstanding professors. I don’t
remember. Some of their names are gone, now, but they were leaders in their field and were very
good.
Well, I’ll tell you another thing that had an influence on my life. The Pembroke library.
We really did most of our studying there, and they had top-notch librarians that would advise us,
and if we went to them with a problem, if we were doing a research problem, they would spend
hours with us, seeking out material for us, which is not the thing today. You have to go do your
own material. [28:00] Many times, these librarians would be guest speakers at our chapel, and
they would urge us – One thing I remember in particular, one speaker said “Develop habits of
reading,” which have stayed with me to this day. And she said, “If you have an interest, read
along those lines and you’ll find how that area of interest will grow.” And she was absolutely
right because, the more you grow into one field, the wider your interests become and the field
becomes fascinating to you. So, we did get that, and I’d have to say that that had a tremendous
influence. Besides, it was a very nice, quiet place to study.
16

Q: It still is.
HC: Yes, I’m sure it is, yes.
Q: Do you feel like the way that you teach was influenced by the teaching methods of the
professors you had here?
HC: To a certain degree. Actually, I went into a different area, the field of education, and
methods have changed, so I had to adapt myself to these new methods and to the [29:00]
changing times. But, some of the things they developed in me, for example, the thoroughness
and the reading lists, that stuck with me, and I think that I have passed that on to my own
students, and it has tremendous results. I think they appreciate it because they like to know where
they’re going and what you want. So, that really had an influence on me.
Q: We’ve talked a little about some of the ways in which Brown has changed since you’ve been
here. Are there other changes you see, and how do you feel about the differences that you see
now?
HC: Well, I realize that times change and they change all over, and you have to expect change. It
cannot go on the way it always was. I think the whole of society is – it’s a societal thing. The
woman’s role is different, and naturally, it’s going to be different even in the university, again I
think it’s good that they start to assume that importance here as students, because otherwise,
[30:00] when they graduate and go out into business or whatever field they’re going into, it
would be very difficult. So that, keeping up with the times, that is very good. I like to see the
tradition of Pembroke perpetuated. Now, there were some things – there is a Pembroke club
which meets periodically and they conduct seminars, and they’re all Pembroke graduates.
They’re very good – very good, instructional, enjoyable.
For example, one of the ones that I liked the most was on all the old mills of Rhode
Island. We took trips out to many of these mills, had seminars, and then there would be a coffee
hour, and that sort of thing keeps you in touch, brings you together with your fellow Pembrokers,
17

and it’s inspiring. It’s in touch with the true tradition of Pembroke. It wasn’t just a social
function, but it’s educational and intellectual. That’s the word that I want to use, intellectual,
[31:00] its intellectual function.
Q: Do you feel like your ideas about appropriate roles for women has changed since your time at
Pembroke?
HC: Oh, definitely, yes. I can see that. For example, just in the world of careers, there’s so much
more open to women than there was before. When I was a student, we could think of teaching,
nursing, and, what else – social work, probably. And. of course, marriage – that was the number
one career. But, today, look in the field of communications what it has opened up. Media. We
never had women on television, before, the way we do now – anchor women, which is a
wonderful – and women doctors, look at the medical school. That is one thing I approve very
much of, and they turn out so many women doctors every year.
Q: Have any of these changes been difficult to accept?
HC: No.
Q: Or have you felt like –
HC: Well, I felt –
Q: – we were moving in wrong directions?
HC: No, I think these changes were... [32:00] The time had come for these. For example, the
medical school that was long overdue, and all these other things. You have some new
departments, now, at Brown which we never had before. And your department of theater has
expanded enormously, and writing. Those are things which are very good.
Q: Have you ever felt that not being married has been a disability or have you felt pressure to
18

marry?
HC: No, I’ve never felt that. No. I was perfectly free to do what I wanted to. And...I haven’t felt
any pressure at all.
Q: That’s good.
HC: No.
Q: It sounds like your family’s –
HC: I think the idea has changed about that. Many years ago, they did. They’d say, well, you
should marry this person before you reach such-and-such an age. But, I think that has passed.
And girls go out – they go out and pursue their own thing now, anyway, which I think is very
wholesome. I like that.
Q: [33:00] It sounds like your family’s always given you a lot of leeway.
HC: They have. They were very supportive all the time, yes.
Q: Have you had any contact with the Alumni Association?
HC: Oh, very much, yes. As I say, I go to this Pembroke Club regularly. And the Women's
Center, which has recently developed, that has given me another avenue of contact, and I like to
cooperate and come to their lectures. They’re very good.
Q: The women’s center here?
HC: Yes, here at Pembroke. Yes.
Q: Oh, OK.
19

HC: They have those noontime lectures throughout the year.
Q: Any other alumni involvement?
HC: Alumni involvement... Well, I go to a number – I keep up – I don’t know if you would say
that going to the Brown Theater, I go to their productions. That’s not really alumni, but I support
most of those things. Oh, yes – I’m [34:00] a Friend of the Brown Library, and they have some
very good conferences and very excellent, good speakers, and that takes place mostly at the John
Hay Library.
Also, I’m a Friend of the List Building. I go to that. That is another new development
since I was here, and it’s very good. And I’ve been to many of their summer seminars. The
continuing college puts on a summer seminar for a whole week in a field. There’s no credit, but
it’s an area of interest. For example, it might be the theater or music. And they had this every
year until last year, where, I don’t know what happened. It wasn’t held last year, but that is
another very fine function that they carry on.
Q: From yourself and some of the other women I’ve interviewed, everyone I’ve talked to has
really stayed in close contact with Brown. How do you think that sense of almost family [35:00]
was developed? Was that developed while you were at Pembroke or was that more once you
left?
HC: No, that started as an undergraduate, and I’m sure – and you wanted to continue this, and I
think it’s wonderful that Brown offers all these avenues whereby you can continue these
relationships. And it isn’t just like alumni day once a year, but it’s throughout the year. And
these functions are open not only to us but to people of the community, which, I think, is very
much appreciated.
Q: Do you think it had something to do with the small size of the classes and the small size of the
college when you were here?

20

HC: Yes, I think that certainly had a great deal to do with it because I’ve heard people talk with
students now, and they seem to think it is not quite that close. It’s so large, the sections are large.
They can’t describe it as a family situation at all, but our classes were quite small, maybe seven
or eight sometimes, when you got into your major field, which is good – you could do [36:00]
intensive work and get to know one another very well.
Q: Are there any other memories or observations you have that you’d like to add?
HC: Well, I think I’ve mentioned most of the things. I think perhaps that’s about what I seem to
remember at the time.
Q: OK, well thank you very much.
HC: Oh, you’re very welcome.
Q: This has been very interesting.
HC: Thank you.
