Story_ID: 665765
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you place- please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Henry Louis Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron], H-E-N-R-Y is the first, middle name is L-O-U-I-S, and the last name is spelled A capital, A-A-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: Now there's--is there a story behind the spelling of your last name 'cause I hear it was--I read it was spelled different ways at different time it, but it finally?
Speaker 2: Not, not that I know of, but.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it you know many times my name has been out there, I'm sure somebody probably decided that they're gonna spell it a little bit different, but I spell it--I know how my mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] spelled it and she says this is the way it should be spelled (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is there a story at all behind it being Aaron 'cause I know that's a name from the Bible, but I don't.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't think so.  I don't think so.  I think that we were originated--my parents came from a little town called Camden, Alabama.  So, I don't know that there's a story behind it other than working hard and doing some things that needed to be done.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now nothing (laughter), I played baseball, I played baseball for twenty-three years and of course, I got into business once I got out of baseball, automobile business and now I'm in the food business, restaurant business and actually I don't do much of anything now.  You know, just try to duck work now if I can (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well you're known as the home run king or, for many years, for at least thirty-three years home run king.  Some would still say that you are because of the steroid controversy and whatnot, but you're in the hall of fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York].  I just wanted to establish that before we get started.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  October 1, 2016.
Story_ID: 665766
Speaker 1: All right well before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that just require a short answer.  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Whew! Do I have, do I have a favorite food?  Yes, I would say yes, I do and I love, I love lamb chops.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Gray, I would have to say.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Gray and blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think that I ever owned a car, it had to be some, some blue in it, had to be in it and gray.  My wife [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron] say every time I go downtown I buy a gray suit.  So, she wouldn't let me put on anything gray today (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I guess summertime, I love summertime because I guess that's when I did, that's when I played baseball in the summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I love--not a destination I don't have, but I love going on cruises.  We've had the--well, we've been able to go on several cruises, and that's the thing I like to do, and I think the reason for that is because I lay around doing nothing, just lazy that's all.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Story_ID: 665767
Speaker 1: All right, now I'm going to ask about your family history, your mother's side of the family, your father's side of the family.   What do you, what--can you give us your mother's full name?
Speaker 2: Esteller Aaron, E-S-T-E-L-L-E-R, Aaron [Estella Pritchett Aaron].  Her maiden name was Pritchett, but when she married she, of course, she married into Aaron, and my father's name was Herbert Aaron [Herbert Aaron, Sr.], H-E-R-B-E-R-T, Herbert Aaron.
Speaker 1: Okay, when were your parents born, I mean?
Speaker 2: Ooh, my goodness no, that's, that's a no, no (laughter), that's definitely a no, no.  I don't know and I, and I--it's, it's pitiful but I don't know when my parents were born.
Speaker 1: Okay, I think read where your father was born in 1908. That sound about right?
Speaker 2: Somewhere thereabouts, yeah, it, was, it was in the early '8s [1908], or '9 [1909].
Speaker 1: Were they born the same time?
Speaker 2: They were born, I know they were born in the same city.  When I say city, same country, Camden, Alabama, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there--now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  Are there any stories from that side about what they did for a living or what they, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, back then you know my mother, on my mother's side of the family there wasn't much to do and they did little or nothing.  You know back then everything was segregated and I'm sure that my mother's mother, my, my--worked in the kitchen of white folks, that's what mostly black folks did back then.  They was uneducated, my mother and father both were uneducated and they both probably worked, not both, but my mother probably worked in the kitchen of, of helping, helping the white maid.
Speaker 1: Okay, what about your father?
Speaker 2: My father worked at the Alabama Drydock and Shipbuilding Company [Mobile, Alabama], and that was an area where he probably worked two days, was off four days, and that was bucket rivets.  Now, what that was I guess, somebody would have to explain it to me, they've been trying to, that's just holding something down and trying to buck rivets, and he was a little man, you know, and I think he had somehow cut part of his finger off doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so it was rough work (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was very rough work, but you know the thing about it is the fact that it wasn't regular work.  It was work that you did for two days and, and sometimes you were off the rest of the week.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story about how they met or how they fell in love?
Speaker 2: If it is, they never told me (laughter), no my mother never shared that with--at least with me.  She might've shared it with my other sisters and brothers, but she--I guess I got away from home so soon.  After high school [Josephine Allen Institute, Mobile, Alabama] I kind of skated on and started playing baseball.
Story_ID: 665768
Speaker 1: Okay well tell me this, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, what they looked like, what they talked like, and walked like, who do you think you take after.
Speaker 2: I think I take after my mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron], I really do.  I, I--you know my father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.], I don't know--and the reason I say that is because I think that she had the way of disciplining you, and she had the way of telling you to do something and you may look at her two or three times, but the third time you got the message.  I think, I think I took after her you know, she, she wanted things did proper.  She wanted things did the right way even if it take you all day long, she was gonna make you do it right.  My father on the other hand was an absent--well, wasn't an absentee father 'cause he lived with us, he stayed with us, but when I say absentee he worked all the time so he wasn't home.  So, he would give you some chores to do and he would get home say about seven or eight o'clock after coming from work and if they were done that was fine, you know and I would always try to shortcut myself and have my brother to help me do it, and he never would know it. My father never knew that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So he'd tell you to do something, but he wasn't necessarily around to enforce it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nah, to make sure that you did it.
Speaker 1: Make sure you did it, or did it right, I guess yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 665769
Speaker 1: Now what about your brothers and sisters, they were--you've got--you, you were the third of eight, right?
Speaker 2: I was the third oldest, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, can you name them from the oldest to the youngest?
Speaker 2: And let's see now, let me try it.  My oldest sister was named Sarah [Sarah Aaron Jones], Sarah and my oldest brother was named Herbert Aaron [Herbert Aaron, Jr.], after my father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.], and I was the third, which was, I was named Henry [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron], and after that I think my sister, who is no longer with us, named Gloria [Gloria Aaron]; Tommie [Tommie Aaron]--my brother was the next, he's no longer with us, he died and Alfred [Alfred Aaron], he was with us and then along came James [James Aaron] and Alfredia [Alfredia Aaron Scott].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so this was--everybody--so, this is the household that you grew up in, your mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] and your father (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't grow--and I grew up in that household, but you know I left really, really, really early and the people that I left behind were the people that I just mentioned, Tommie, Gloria and James and I came up and with Sarah and Herbert, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 665770
Speaker 1: Now, your family, when you were eight years old the family moved to (pronunciation) Toulminville [Mobile, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Toulminville, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Toulminville?
Speaker 2: Yes, Toulminville that was right outside, a little country, a little town right outside of Mobile [Alabama], yes.
Speaker 1: Now, this is where you basically grew up in Toulminville?
Speaker 2: I would say yes, I grew up in Toulminville, didn't--it was city, city country I would say.  I--you know I don't know any other way to put it you know.  It was, we had city lights, and then of course later on we moved to--no, no, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  I take that back, Wilkinson Street was Down the Bay [Mobile, Alabama], that's where I grew up at.  Toulminville was the country in the country, that's where I grew up.  That's where I was learning how to do all of my walking and playing baseball and doing all the rest of the things I did, but Wilkinson Street, Down the Bay was where I was born, but then my father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.] and mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] moved to Toulminville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: This was away from the bay?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was away from the bay area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what was the bay area like in those days?  Mobile's right there and what, we know this is like pre-Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was it like?
Speaker 2: It was a typical southern city, I mean you--I don't know that, it's been so long ago now.  I don't know that I can tell you anything special about it other than to say it was, it was a southern city, and we lived in a southern area, I mean we lived in a segregated area.  So, I--that, that's all I can tell you about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now reading they had--actually, the presence of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] in, in--is that Toulminville?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yeah, Klu Klux Klan [sic.] was, was visible all over Alabama back then you know really, especially in Toulminville, of course, you know I mean it was an isolated little area there.  You know my mother--in Toulminville, my mother--we lived on a street where there no water, there were no electric lights and so we lived back there when it was dark, it was dark so I mean you know I mean you know it was a haven for the Klu Klux Klan to come in play around, throwing bombs and things like that really.
Speaker 1: So, they were actually doing that?  That's what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, that was, seven o'clock was time for my brothers and sisters to go to bed and for them to come in and go down the streets and throw lights, and--.
Speaker 1: Fireworks or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Intimidation, intimidation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the fireworks and things like that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, intimidation, that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Just intimidate the black community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665771
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school now, you, did you--where'd you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in, in Toulminville [Mobile, Alabama] and graduated from a school called--oh, what was it now?  I'm trying to think.
Speaker 1: I got it here, but I don't want to get you that far yet.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I just wanna ask you about the first--now, you went to Central High School?
Speaker 2: Central High School, yes.
Speaker 1: And that's in--no, that in Mobile [Alabama], right?
Speaker 2: That's in Mobile.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what about in Toulminville did you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: They had a little school in Toulminville where you've--where everybody went to school at you know, first grade.  You sit on a bench about the size of I don't know what, where three or four students sat on a bench and did work, homework, yes.
Speaker 1: One, let's see one of the people that we interviewed, Roosevelt J. Lewis [HistoryMaker Colonel Roosevelt J. Lewis], grew up in Toulminville.  Do you remember him?
Speaker 2: I don't, can't recall that name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well it's difficult 'cause you became famous, so he remembers you, but he remembers--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --you were older than him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he remembered you, he said you were like a shy, bright, easygoing kid in the neighborhood that all the families liked you 'cause you were a good kid.
Speaker 2: Well, he just got it, he got it about right.  I was very shy, I, I didn't do anything you know and I guess that was the reason why I was able to get out of Mobile. I was shy and easygoing you know, so.  I guess some of that trademark is still with me.
Story_ID: 665772
Speaker 1: I know your family and the rest of the community was fairly poor.  Did you have any baseball equipment to play with or did you have (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, no equipment, you know we, we played with old rag dolls, old rag balls.  We would ball it up and make it into a ball.  We played with tin cans--nah that wasn't no, no bats, no balls, no gloves, nothing, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, what you used for a bat, a broomstick or something?
Speaker 2: Broomstick--that's exactly what you use, a broomstick, yes.  You wouldn't use anything else 'cause you didn't have a bat.
Speaker 1: Did you have time to play a lot (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Just in the afternoons you know, maybe an hour or so every day you know, but not, not too much time to play.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was there--did you get a chance to go see the Negro League teams play when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I saw--I didn't see a Negro League team, I did see--I saw, I saw Jackie Robinson when the Dodgers came through Mobile [Alabama] and he played, when he played with the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I saw that, I didn't see a Negro League--didn't come through, didn't come through Mobile.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought that--with the Birmingham [Birmingham Black Barons], the--I'm sorry, the Mobile Black Bears (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, you're talking about the team that I, I played against, it was the Indianapolis Clowns that I played against, but I was playing in, in--I wasn't playing in the Negro League, I was playing sandlot ball with Mr., Mr., Mr. Tucker [Ed Tucker].  He was paying us to play against certain teams, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was the Mobile Black Bears (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was not the Negro League--well, it was--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right, I understand, yeah, 'cause in those days if you had enough money to put up a team and the team would just kind of barnstorm (unclear).
Speaker 2: There you go, that's right, that's what they did.  They just bo- we just barnstormed--we, we'd play one Sunday and, and at Tucker field, then the next Sunday we'd probably go fifteen miles away and play in another place you know.  They were all fields you know (laughter), they wasn't, wasn't baseball fields.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't an organized league.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't organized, it was not organized at all.
Story_ID: 665773
Speaker 1: All right, all right, I understand. And in '46 [1946]--as you were saying in, was it '47 [1947] you saw Jackie Robinson play, is that?
Speaker 2: I don't know what year it was, in '47 [1947] I, you know, I was still in, I was still in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just played hooky one day and decided that I was gonna see the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] and, and Jackie play, you know and so they came.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so they came through Mobile [Alabama] and I skipped school to go see 'em play.
Speaker 1: Now, they were playing the Mobile Bears [Mobile Black Bears], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were playing the Mobile Bears which is an organized white team, that was their farm team, so they played them, and after they finished they left and went someplace else.
Speaker 1: Okay, so had you heard about Jackie--you heard about him I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I had heard about Jackie--sure, yeah, Jackie was, was--we didn't turn the radio on until we heard about Jackie Robinson.  Jackie Robinson and Joe Louis were the two of the names that we heard rapidly, all the time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, well I forgot to ask you about the Joe Louis fights, on the radio.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well the Joe Louis fight was something that I'll always remember because there was maybe one radio in the whole block, and everybody was huddled around the radio to see what was happening, you know and yes, you, you'd listen to Joe Louis fight, whenever he fought you know you would listen to it.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite fight that you heard or?
Speaker 2: No, no, you, you didn't know who he was fighting, but you do know that Joe Louis was fighting, and that's all you cared about and the only thing you cared about was Joe Louis winning (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No matter who it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well, now when you saw Jackie Robinson play, was he impressive?
Speaker 2: He's very impressive, yeah well you know I'd never seen anybody, I'd never seen a game like that you know really.  He took infield and, and we never took infield when I was, when I was playing round the sandlot ball in Mobile, you know.  Took infield and just did all the right things.
Story_ID: 665774
Speaker 1: By this time now you were like, from what I understand, from what I have here you were fourteen then when you saw Joe [Joe Louis], Hank [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron], I mean Jackie, Jackie Robinson (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I guess I was, it was somewhere thereabouts, yeah.  No, I was--might have been a little bit older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you already playing for the high school [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama] then?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, we didn't have a baseball team in high school, only, only softball and we only had softball that we played in and around Mobile [Alabama] you know, we didn't have a baseball team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we had a baseball team [Mobile Black Bears] on Sunday when I played with Mr. Ed Tucker.  That was when we had a baseball team, but during school, the school couldn't afford to have a baseball team.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had softball.
Speaker 2: Softball.
Speaker 1: And you'd just catch it with your hand right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and then actually, actually they didn't have a softball team. I played softball in the little, in the, the leagues that they had in this--out of the recreation league.  Baseball, I mean softball at school was not played.  The only thing they played in soft- in, in school was football, that's the only thing they played.
Speaker 1: As a team?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As such, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665775
Speaker 1: Now, I read that you were a Boy Scout?
Speaker 2: I was, that was one of the great things, great thrill of my life was being a Boy Scout.  I, I always remember, I remember my scout laws, and I just, I had, I had a lot of fun being a Boy Scout, yes.
Speaker 1: Who was your scout master and how did the team--I mean the group get formed?  Was it formed by church or something?
Speaker 2: You know I, I don't remember.  I think it was formed by a church or just formed by him, himself, but I, I'm sure it was not formed by a church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he, he started it himself and he was, he was pretty strict, he was pretty strict and we--you know I can remember way back when the--of course, my father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.] couldn't afford to buy me any long pants for Boy Scouts, and I remember that if you knew all your scout laws like you could repeat 'em, they would give you an area during Mardi Gras, which was in Mobile [Alabama], what they called directing traffic on Lafayette [Street] and Davis Avenue [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue].  Now, this was a four lane street like this and you stand in the middle, but a policeman would stand there helping you, but you stand in there you know trying to direct traffic, and I always wanted to get that corner, 'cause I said boy if I get that corner, that means I'm learning my scout laws, I know all of my scout motto.  Yeah, yeah, I had, I would say that aside from baseball, I don't know of anything else in my life that I enjoyed more to do than being a scout, Boy Scout.  I mean, I took it, I took it very serious you know.  It was something that I enjoyed doing, I took it as a challenge and I think I learned a lot by being a Boy Scout.
Story_ID: 665776
Speaker 1: Was church important when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was very important, yes, oh yeah.  My mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] insisted upon us going to church, you know, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of your church or did you have a specific one?
Speaker 2: We--what was the name of?  Whew! I'm having an eighty-two year old mental lapse (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was it Baptist?
Speaker 2: A Baptist church [Greater Morning Star Missionary Baptist Church, Mobile, Alabama], oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: All right was it a big church or a little church?
Speaker 2: Just a small church, neighborhood church, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Reverend--I know my reverend, Reverend Peterson [C.H. Peterson] was my pastor, I, I remember that very well, but I can't--it was a little church in the, in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have any special role in the church?  Did you sing in the choir or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nah, I had, I had no special role, no, no.  I couldn't sing, I tried to sing, I wanted to sing.  I wanted to do a lot of things, but I (laughter), they wouldn't let me do it.  No, I, but I had no special role in the, in the church at all.
Story_ID: 665777
Speaker 1: So by the time you got to high school [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama], were you, were you recognized for any special talent at all?
Speaker 2: I was a very good athlete, I could, I could play football, I could play baseball, I could play all of it.  But I didn't want to play football, that was my doing it.  I wanted to play baseball and I knew that the team, the high school team had no baseball or no softball, so I didn't know what to do, and the principal at the school wanted me desperately to play football.  Now, I, I could run, I wasn't afraid of anything.  I, I could catch the ball, you know, but I didn't want to play football, and I didn't play it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why not? What was the--
Speaker 2: Well I don't know, I just, I don't know why, I wasn't afraid.  I was just--I had my mind set on baseball, I had my mind set on something with a ball you know rather baseball or softball.  I just didn't, I just didn't want to play football.
Speaker 1: Now, in those days, now just to set the stage for it, in those days, football didn't have the status that it does today?  I mean, is that true?
Speaker 2: No, football did not have the status, no.  A few guys, a few--I would say maybe one or two players left Alabama and went to schools like Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and some of the other schools to play football, but like the Big, Big Ten [Big Ten Conference] schools, they wasn't looking for, for black talent.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the big southern schools had no black players at all?
Speaker 2: No, no had no black players at all.  They had to go to Grambling or one of the black institutions [HBCUs].
Speaker 1: Okay, so baseball, but you heard baseball games on the radio and the World Series and all that kind of thing and Jackie Robinson (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If, if--the radio was the only thing.  You know I, I didn't get my mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] a television set until I got to Jacksonville, Florida, when I won everything there was to win and, and they gave me a television set and I sent it to Mobile [Alabama] and she was able to sit there and watch television.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I knew when I check back here, the only--Amos Otis was a football player [sic.].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That came from Mobile.  He was younger than you but he was good, a good player (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And very good too, yeah, yeah, Amos Otis was very good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he played for Denver [sic.], didn't he?
Speaker 2: You mean baseball?
Speaker 1: No, football, yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know that he played professional football.
Speaker 1: Amos Otis, yeah.
Speaker 2: Did he?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know more than I do (laughter),
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry (laughter).
Speaker 2: No I'm serious. I don't mean that to be--well, I didn't know but--
Story_ID: 665778
Speaker 1: In 1950 it says here that you transferred from Central High School [Mobile, Alabama] to Josephine Allen Institute [Mobile, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: My father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.] did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He wanted to make sure--that was one of the things that he always insisted upon and, and I had no interest in school at the time and he wanted to make sure I went to school so he put me in Josephine Allen Institute, which was a private school, you know really--a semi, well I'd say private.  I don't know how much money he paid, he couldn't afford to pay that much.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are you saying Josephine Allen was more focused on academics than the other school?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was more focused on academics than anything else.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was not like, like the other schools that--well, I'll tell you what happened.  I tell you I was--the principal of Central High School wanted me to play football and I refused to play football so I decided I wasn't going to school, so I didn't go to school for about twelve or thirteen days, and my father found out about it, and I got a little strapping, a little whooping, whatever you want to call it.  It wasn't a little, it was a big whooping and then he said he was going to put me in Josephine Allen Institute.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you remember who Josephine Allen was, or who they named it after?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, no I don't.
Speaker 1: Was it a black person? It sounds like it might have been (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It, it was a--black what?
Speaker 1: Was it a black person, a black woman?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, she's black [Josephine Blackledge Allen].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a black school, yeah it was right, it was right by the side--it was right beside Heart of Mary [Most Pure Heart of Mary School, Mobile, Alabama], which was a black school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Heart of Mary was located on Davis Avenue [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue] which was.
Speaker 1: So that was a black Catholic school in the area?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: All right so, how did you like it there, did you like it at all?
Speaker 2: I told you I had no interest, and I'm sorry to say I wished I had, but at that time I had no interest in, in school, I wanted to play baseball you know.  I wanted to be a baseball player.  When I say baseball player, I wanted to play and I guess seeing Jackie Robinson play kind of fused me up a little bit, made me wanna play more and so I was more interested in baseball than I was any other thing.
Speaker 1: Did you dream of being in the big leagues?
Speaker 2: I don't think I ever dreamed of it, but I--well, I did dream about it.  I did a lot of daydreaming (laughter), yeah, I dreamed about it.  I dreamed about being in the big leagues and never knowing that I probably would never make it but I thought at that time that if you know that if Jackie could make it, that it would certainly give me all the hope in the world of making it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so at this time like your last couple of years of high school, you're playing for Mr. Tucker's [Ed Tucker] Birming- I mean Mobile Black Bears, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, just went on Sunday.
Speaker 1: On Sundays, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now did you, did you graduate from Josephine Allen?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right did you have a favorite subject in school at all?
Speaker 2: I don't think I did, I don't think I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You were just glad to get out (unclear) (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I was, I was glad, I was glad, I was, as I said before my mind was set on baseball, trying to play baseball you know and I was, I was pretty good around the--around Toulminville [Mobile, Alabama], you know.  I, I--everybody wanted me to play on their team and I did pretty well.
Story_ID: 665779
Speaker 1: Now, some, some scouts came and looked at you when you were in high school [at Josephine Allen Institute, Mobile, Alabama] even.  I hear, I hear I have here that the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers] came and looked you over?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had 'em to look, I was just too skinny.  I was very, very frail, you know I didn't--when I grew up I must've weighed eighty, ninety pounds.  I, I wasn't that big a guy you know really where--they, they just thought I was too skinny you know and, and plus the fact this was the first time that they had eyeballed a black player, you know.  They, they, their subject was white players, and they, they looked at them a little bit different than they looked at us you know, and me being so skinny certainly didn't catch the eye of any scout that was there, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so well tell us about the Indianapolis Clowns.  Now, by this time now were you like--I know they weren't keeping like, I don't think they were, correct me if I'm wrong okay, were they keeping any kind of statistics on how many home runs you hit and that sort of thing when you played for the Mobile Black Bears?
Speaker 2: No, none whatsoever, they didn't keep no records at all.  They just said after the game was over with if you had--, "Oh, boy you had a great day.  You got four hits, you got two home runs," and stuff like that.  Nah, they didn't keep a record.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your reputation as a ball player was based on word of mouth and acclamation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Word of mouth and what you did that day, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so what happened with the Indianapolis Clowns?  Did they come to town to see you play?
Speaker 2: What happened, we played an exhibition game against them and I had such a great day against them, I think I had three or four hits against 'em and Mr. Bunny Downs [McKinley "Bunny" Downs], who was the traveling secretary, told me that after the game was over he said, "We're gonna send you a contract."  So, he got my address and all that and sure enough he sent me a contract to come play with the Indianapolis Clowns, and so, I told everybody I was just like, I had graduated from high school and got to be the, the team doctor and you name it I, I had made it.  So, I, I told everybody around Toulminville [Mobile, Alabama], I told everybody I could think of that I had a contract to play with the Indianapolis Clowns.  Well it was, well, Indianapolis was the big leagues back then you know I mean to black folks, to black kids and for me to say I got a contract to go play with the Clowns, was something that I thought was the greatest thing in the world.  You know and I told everybody, but no- nobody else, aside from my family was happy, was enthused about it but my mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] and father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They, they were enthused about it but to the point that they said that they were gonna give me a chance to go and make the team, and if I didn't they were gonna expect me to come back home.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the Indianapolis Clowns they were in the Negro American League?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, Negro American League.
Speaker 1: And it was organized baseball?
Speaker 2: It was organized Negro League baseball, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now the Clowns from what I heard--I know I first saw the Clowns mentioned, first mentioned--I was a kid when you played, you know.  But the, I saw in the Jet magazine they were doing clowning, a lot of clowning as they played (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, yeah, yeah, you're right.  They.
Speaker 1: An oversized mitt or like a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, had a, had a, had a mascot Bebop [Spec Bebop] a little small, a little small guy on the team and we would what they call a shadow act before innings--you know act like you're throwing the ball and catch it and all that you know.  It was a--the name of the team was the Clowns and that's what we did, we did our act (laughter).
Speaker 1: Like the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] in a way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of like the Globetrotters with the basketball, right.
Speaker 1: In fact, the Globetrotters probably patterned themselves after some baseball teams right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or we patterned ourselves after them, some--yes, you're right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have to do a lot of that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I had to do it just like everybody else.  I would go to shortstop and act like I caught the ball and throw it to second base, throw it to home plate, throw it to another guy and that's what they would call a shadow ball act.  You didn't have a ball, but you pretend like you had a ball.
Story_ID: 665780
Speaker 1: So how did things go in Indianapolis [Indianapolis Clowns], did you--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went--it went well for me.  I got off to a--well, I didn't get off.  I didn't get started because they wouldn't allow me to play and eventually I got to get in the game and I had such a great day, they gave me a regular position and I started hitting the ball and catching the ball and doing some great things and the, it--I just got off to a great start with 'em you know, really.
Speaker 1: Okay and I know that--we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Ted "Double Duty" Radcliffe a few years ago.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And he remembers meeting you know.  I guess he's playing with the Chicago American Giants.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the players you played against?
Speaker 2: Oh boy!  I don't--you know I don't recall anybody that I played against that got to the big leagues, but I do remember one thing, that if any of those players--I can't recall their names, but if any of those players had, had an opportunity to play baseball when they were young, half of 'em probably would've made the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball].
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were quality players (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, oh, yeah, they were great players.  In fact, I would have to say that the class of ball that I played in the Negro League was the same comparable to the league that you played in professional baseball, I would say Double-A ball.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: In, in the semi-pro, in the semi-pro league.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did you meet Satchel Paige during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I didn't meet him during that time, but I did meet Satchel Paige.  I was teammates for Satchel in the big leagues, but I didn't meet him in the, in the Negro League, he, he had gone on someplace else.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, by 1948 he was playing with the Indians [Cleveland Indians], right?  Wasn't he playing with the Indians? He pitched for the Indians in '48 [1948] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Satchel was pitching with Cleveland.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, when they won the World Series [1948 World Series].
Story_ID: 665781
Speaker 1: So, now tell us about James Jenkins.  I hear, I hear that he played a pivotal role in your life with the Clowns?
Speaker 2: That was my seatmate, well you know we only got two dollars a day, meal money and I made two hundred dollars a month. That was my salary.  Well, most of the money that I made, the little money that I made, I sent, I sent it home to my mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] and Jenkins was a seatmate of mine and back then we would travel, Indianapolis Clowns.  We would play in Atlanta [Georgia] today, and play in a city that was a hundred miles away at night, and we never did stop at a restaurant.  We slept on the bus and it just so happened that I was young enough and I say this with no pun intended, but I was playing with older guys and I felt--really felt sorry for 'em because me being young, I could go through a lot more than--my body would take a lot more than they--their body could take and we got two dollars a day meal money and he and I use to take his two dollars and my two dollars and we would buy a big jar of peanut butter, about that (demonstrates) so size, and we'd buy a loaf of bread.  Now, we didn't care about whether the bread was--we'd eat half of it today and then half of it tomorrow you know, but that's what we would eat off of, peanut butter and jelly, not jelly but just peanut butter, and this is real and I tell a lot of people, this is real peanut butter.  This is not peanut butter with oil on top where you can mix it up.  This stuff is, it gets in your throat right and if you don't have the right thing to digest it, it would choke you.  So, he would--he and I, he and I were seatmates and he would ta- he would help me understand that life is gonna get better, you know.  Things gonna get better you know, just hang in there a long time you know, and he was much older than I was and he was my seatmate.  Seatmate, and that's what we called, we didn't call 'em roommates, we called 'em seatmates because (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Y'all didn't have a room (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, we never stayed in a hotel, we never stayed in a hotel so, I just, I would say that the little I learned from him, I mean I learned an awful lot from him, that he helped me in so many ways that he probably don't even remember.
Speaker 1: Now, did he help you with your grip on the--?
Speaker 2: No, he never helped me with anything at the bat or baseball, but he helped me with just trying to live life, trying to be understanding that things going to get better with life, you know but he never did--he never bothered me with, with telling me how to grip (gestures) the bat or run the bases or anything like that.
Story_ID: 665782
Speaker 1: Is there any person or just describe for us, I guess, how you developed your technique as a baseball player, I mean offensively and defensively?  First of all, I think I'll ask about offensively, because you know, when I was a kid, people used to talk about your wrists and how you employ them hitting the ball and people would try to do it, but of course not everybody can do it (laughter), there's only one [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron, so.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Even though people try to have a technique it's not necessarily going to work for everybody, but did you develop it as a technique or it's just something naturally that you do?
Speaker 2: I think most of it was just natural you know.  Well, first of all I did everything wrong (laughter), that's number one, nothing right.  I'd hit cross hand, batting right handed and the most amazing thing was the fact that all I had to do was turn on the left side and I would've been more comfortable, but I didn't know how to do that, and before--
Speaker 1: Are you left handed or right handed?
Speaker 2: I'm right handed.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right handed.  So, all I had to do is get on the left side and I would've been naturally a switch hitter, but I didn't know that.  I just, I just was happy with what I was doing you know and, and playing the level of ball that I was playing in and playing with and against, I did well you know, I, I was doing well until one day I was in--what was it I think?  Buffalo, New York and the Clowns [Indianapolis Clowns], I was with the Clowns and a scout by the name of Dewey Griggs who was with the Milwaukee Braves, well he wasn't a scout for the Braves, he was a scout for the Boston Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves].  It was kind of drizzling, it was drizzling a little bit, it was kind of raining and I had hit two home runs in a game and he came up and said, "Come here, let me ask you something."  So, I went over and talked with him.  He said, "Take your right hand and drop it. I mean (gestures) take, take--oh, it's like this, take your left hand (gestures and drop it down over your right hand," he said, "and see how that feels."  And sure enough, I walked to the plate and hit another home run.
Story_ID: 665783
Speaker 1: And I had four or five scouts there you know.  I almost signed with the Giants [New York Giants; San Francisco Giants].  I almost signed with the Yankees [New York Yankees], which I'm very thankful that I didn't because I'd probably have been in the Minor Leagues [Minor League Baseball] for another twenty years (laughter), the Giants--I would have probably got to the big league a lot quicker and had.
Speaker 2: The Giants had Willie Mays (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I'm saying--
Speaker 2: They just got him ahead of you right?
Speaker 1: --yeah, I would've had a chance to play with Willie.  There were one or two other teams but it's--even, even back then I was having such a great year, a great year in the Negro League.  They were hounding, when I say hounding, scouts was clawing for Negro talent, but they still wasn't clawing like they should have been.  They were wanting you, but they wanted you to be everything that they wanted you to do.  He'd want you to be hitting .400, fifty home runs, you know all these things you know.
Speaker 2: So, it's hard for a regular good player, I mean a regular good player, they'd have a hard time getting in the Majors because (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, yes, it's still, it still was tough.  Even--it was tough even when I got to the big leagues you know, really, because they only had a, a few of us, maybe one sitting on a bench and maybe one playing, but you were not going to sit on a bench and make money like some of the white players were.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, a run of the mill, top tier talent for a black person wasn't gonna get in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] really 'cause it's no room for him on the--he's not just going to sit there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 2: That's a spot a white guy can have.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I see, okay.  So, you had to be a super star basically?
Speaker 1: Anytime, anytime that you got to the big leagues you had to be one of the nine players that go out on the field every day.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, but I think the story's amazing though that the scout actually told you to stop batting cross handed and--?
Speaker 1: Yes, well that's what I'm saying that I had all this talent, I had a lot of--a bundle of talent.  You know I, I could do everything I wanted to do.  I could run, I could field, I could run the base, I could steal, I could do everything I wanted to do.  You know I, you know it wasn't, it was, the game came quite easy for me at that level and then after I signed with the Braves [Boston Braves; Atlanta Braves], with the Braves and went to Eau Claire [Eau Claire Bears], it still kind of felt like I was in a league that I shouldn't have been, I should've been a little bit higher playing baseball because I, you know I played very well.
Story_ID: 665784
Speaker 1: Okay, so when the, when the Braves signed you they were just on the verge of moving to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], right?  They would be the Boston Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves] at first.
Speaker 2: Well, the next year they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to--I've stayed at Eau Claire [Eau Claire Bears]--they signed me to a contract, half a year and I played at Eau Claire in the Northern League, and then the next year I went to Jacksonville [Jacksonville Braves] and I played there for a full year and that's the year that they moved, the next year that's--they moved from Boston [Massachusetts] to Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: Okay, a lot of us wonder just and I heard [HistoryMaker] Billy Williams' story and I know it was tough to join one of these white Minor League teams [Minor League Baseball] in Major League Baseball (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, for everybody not only, for all of us.  You know I know exactly what Billy's talking about you know.  Even if you played with the New York Yankees you just couldn't find some place that you felt good at being at all year playing baseball.  You know the city was, the country was so segregated you know, really.
Speaker 1: Are there any specific stories about how you were treated that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, in Jacksonville [Florida] I was treated horrible, I mean I was treated horrible.  In fact, I was, I was just telling someone the other day.  I said I played in Jacksonville and I played second base and I said I got more knots on my head than anybody because over the right field fence they would throw nothing but pebble rocks and you'd be, you know.  Oh, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the fans were throwing rocks at you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we, we--it was horrible, it was horrible, but you know God, God works in mysterious ways you know he kind of made me ignore some of those abuses that I was getting you know really, and that was the greatest thing.  I was able to, to play well, and tell a lot of people I say I led the league in everything but hotel accommodations you know and other than that you know I led the league in everything.  I think other than the home runs, I think I came in second in that, but I lead the league in everything and but, but it was, it was terrible.  It was, it was horrible, it was just--we had, had a rough time.  It was me, it was myself, Felix Mantilla and Horace Garner.  There were three of us and what they did, really what they always did was they always put an older player there with two of the youngest players and Felix and I being the youngest player, we had to settle in with Horace, because Horace could always carry himself in such a way that he could keep myself and Felix out of trouble.  So, that's why they always put an older player with us.
Speaker 1: Now, was Felix from Cuba?
Speaker 2: Felix was from Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you all you know stayed together when you?
Speaker 2: Yes, we stayed together, yes.
Speaker 1: All right how did (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And stayed at houses, rooming houses, you know.  We had--it, it was, it was segregated all the way down (laughter) the line, it was, it was just.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all didn't stay with the rest of the team?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, we didn't, no we didn't stay with the team at all.  The team that, they would drop us off--in fact, this is what they would do.  They would take the white players to the hotel first, and then take us to the second, you know instead of taking us first, but they would take us last you know, (laughter), and so it was, it was, it was tough.
Speaker 1: So, you went to the rooming houses in whatever town you were playing in?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, stayed in a rooming house.
Speaker 1: Did any of the towns have a black hotel that you remember?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think did we stay in any black hotel?  Did we stay at any black--?  I think it may be--where was it?  It'll come to me in a few minutes.
Speaker 1: I thought Detroit [Michigan] had one around that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we didn't stay in Detroit.
Speaker 1: You didn't? Okay.
Speaker 2: No, we didn't play in Detroit, I'm sorry, didn't play in Detroit (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 665785
Speaker 1: I know [HistoryMaker] Billy Williams told the story that he was shot at in the outfield once.  Somebody actually shot (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't--I believe him. I believe him. It--you know we got into more trouble, I mean really, I mean I played with a guy who was hot strong and Felix Mantilla from Puerto Rico who had never been through anything like this you know, and he just refused to adopt to their rules you know, and they would throw at him and he would get in a fight.  So, I, I believe, I believe what Billy was saying, I believe that because I you know I mean I had all kinds of problems you know, really.  I was supposed to have been the first black to play in an All-Star Game in the Southern League in, in the South Atlantic League and I got a run down five days before the All-Star Game, and some guy just bumped me like this and it wasn't anything, I mean got in a run down, he bumped me like this and I got a letter that's stating that I better not show up for the All-Star Game from, from the governor and I'm trying to think who the governor was at that time.  I don't want to say the wrong thing.
Speaker 1: Where was--what state was it in?
Speaker 2: This was in the South Atlantic League, the All-Star Game at the league.
Speaker 1: But tell me what state (unclear)?
Speaker 2: And, that's what I was saying, I, it was true but I don't know who he was at the time but--.
Speaker 1: Oh, is the, is the governor of the league?
Speaker 2: Nah the governor.
Speaker 1: Governor of the state?
Speaker 2: The state, yes.  Telling me that I'd better not play in the game you know.
Speaker 1: So, did you play or what?
Speaker 2: I didn't play, no I didn't play, they kept me out of the game.
Story_ID: 665786
Speaker 1: How did white management handle these situations?  Did they--?
Speaker 2: Ben Garrity was my manager [in Jacksonville, Florida].  Ben was--how would you describe Ben?  You would say that he was an old country boy, felt like--in fact, he used to come--loved to drink beer, loved beer.  He used to come around after every game and sit on the back porch, all three of us [Aaron and his teammates, Felix Mantilla and Horace Garner], all four of us rather, would sit down and talk and would talk about baseball.  For some reason, he, he--we got along very well.  Ben Garrity was his name, in fact, he came that close of getting in to the big leagues and the reason that he didn't get into the big leagues was because they claimed that he couldn't handle the press well and that's why he didn't get in the big leagues.
Speaker 1: Okay, they thought he was too country to talk to the press?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, he was considered as a manager himself of a Major League team (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so you're in the Minors, and you're leading in all these categories and so meanwhile while you're in the Minor Leagues [Minor League Baseball] I guess like Willie Mays debuts with the Giants [New York Giants; San Francisco Giants] and then you come in the next year, right at '52 [1952] with the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, or '53 [1953], when did you start--you started playing actually for the Braves in, was it '53 [1953] or '54 [1954]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953] I believe it was, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 665787
Speaker 1: Now, you got married in '53 [1953], this is the year that you--just before you started with the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves], I mean in the big leagues.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: And where, where did you meet your first wife [Barbara Lucas]?
Speaker 2: In Jacksonville [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, and, all right so, in '54 [1954] you started a rookie season with the Braves and well tell us how you found out?  Were you surprised that they called you up?  Or were you, did you think it was about time or what?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody had speculated that during the regular season when I was playing in Jacksonville I was gonna be called up, but they didn't want to call me up because they wanted me to finish the year in Jacksonville [Jacksonville Braves] to see whether we could win the championship.  So, the next year of course from Jacksonville, I went to Puerto Rico and played.  I played in Puerto Rico that winter and had the same kind of year in Puerto Rico.  I had a big, great year in Puerto Rico and I found out that they were gonna call me out to the big leagues in spring training.  Not give me a Major League [Major League Baseball] contract of course, I was gonna have a Triple-A contract, but they were gonna call me up to the big leagues for spring training.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had made a trade in the offseason for Bobby Thomson who was a--who had been an all-star outfielder and hit the shot heard around the world in the World Series [1951 World Series]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, but he got hurt or something didn't he or?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was that I was playing in Puerto Rico at the time and when they made the trade I--actually, I was supposed to have been in that trade myself.  They wanted me in the trade and they were gonna trade me for Bobby Thomson, but the Braves refused to do that so they traded two other players to the Giants [New York Giants; San Francisco Giants] for Bobby Thomson, and Bobby Thomson came and, and (background noise)--are we all right?
Speaker 1: Yeah I don't know what that is okay.
Speaker 2: And what they did was the Braves had come very close to winning the championship.  They felt like one more player that they needed in order to get to the big, to the World Series, and Bobby Thomson was that player, and in spring training that year, in St. Petersburg, Florida I had--I'll never forget I was playing in St. Petersburg and Bobby Thomson slid into second base and broke his ankle and I remember they told me that the job was mine at the time, but I had to play myself into it.  Well, I wasn't a favorite of the managers.  I found that out later on, I didn't know it at the time.  I guess I was too stupid and didn't know enough about baseball--that he didn't care too much for me, my style of playing, you know.  And so, but anyhow I guess the people upstairs kind of outweighed everything else and they kind of told them that I had to stay on, on the team and, and so I kind of played myself into, into, into the team.  I didn't get off to a good start, I was slugging and batting .250 or .260 or somewhere thereabout and the last second half I hit well over .300.
Speaker 1: Now, .250 or .260 is okay for the average guy (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, .250, .260 is--will get you a million dollar contract (laughter).
Speaker 1: And today there are guys hitting that making a million dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's right, but, but you know I wasn't satisfied with the way I was hitting.  I wasn't satisfied with the way I was playing, but I, I did bring--I brought, brought everything up.  I started doing very well in, in the second half and I was very well pleased with my ability, my--the way I was playing.
Story_ID: 665788
Speaker 1: And what was your, in those days, I know you, you played shortstop, second base, I mean centerfield, I mean how--what was your natural position?  Or what--what position did you think was your best position?
Speaker 2: I think my best position was outfield, although I came up.  In Jacksonville [Jacksonville Braves] I played second base, yeah, I played second base and Felix Mantilla played shortstop and that's the only year I was in the Minor Leagues [Minor League Baseball], but I thought my--and I went to Puerto Rico that winter and played the outfield--learned how to play the outfield.  That's what they wanted me to do, so I learned how to play the outfield in Puerto Rico.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you think that was the best position?
Speaker 2: I thought outfield was my best position.
Speaker 1: And I know you're a career right fielder basically but.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought the outfield was my best position, right field.  I thought that I did well in the outfield, rather than shortstop.  I, for some I just didn't never, never felt comfortable at shortstop.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what's the--what does a right fielder have to do that's special?  I mean of all the outfielder positions, what makes a good right fielder?
Speaker 2: A good right fielder you have to have a good arm, that's number one and you got to be able to hit the long ball.  You got to be able to because in baseball if you'll notice that most of your power comes from people in the corners, like right field, left field, third base or first base, and everybody in the middle, that's where your defense comes in at, but that's what they expect you to--they expect you to hit a lot of home runs in right field.
Speaker 1: Okay, but defensively a strong arm is a better (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A strong arm is the most important thing.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you got the furthest, well I don't know depends on the park I guess as to how far you have to throw it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you got, you got the longest throw 'cause usually if you're trying to throw somebody out from third base, from third to keep 'em from going to third base, you gotta learn how to throw the ball correctly and keep it in the infield or keep it low enough for the infielders to handle it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now so you had more balls hit to you from left handers if you're playing right field?
Speaker 2: No, no, you, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't they pull the ball more too?
Speaker 2: You have just about the same amount, but you--I would say that if, if you had your man focused in right field, in center field.  Let's take center field, center field is the position that a guy has gotta know how to play it, When I say play it, he gotta know how and what to do and where to throw the ball at and to handle the position for the left fielder and right fielder--you, if you got a right fielder.  I played right field because I had a strong arm that's all.
Story_ID: 665789
Speaker 1: So, so you came up in '54 [1954] and the second half of the season, you say, was your better half?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, I got off to, I got off to a good start, you know.
Speaker 1: Well were you surprised by the strength of Major League pitching when you came up, was it that much different from Minor League pitching?
Speaker 2: I would say yes, I was somewhat surprised you know because when I played at Jacksonville [Jacksonville Braves] what they did they threw a lot of fast ball, fast ball, fast ball in the Minor Leagues [Minor League Baseball], in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball].  They threw fast ball, change up, curve ball, change up and that might get you three, two.  They get you three, two and you're looking for fast ball they might throw you a three, two change up.  I would say they think a little bit more, they don't throw any harder, but they think a little bit more in the big leagues than they do in the Minor Leagues.
Speaker 1: Okay, but what is it--one of the managers said that your strike zone was from the bottom of your feet to the top of your head, you could him 'em anywhere (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: But, it--from your perspective what was--what was the hardest pitching for you to hit?
Speaker 2: I would say a moving fast ball, but, but whoever said that told--said the right thing, because I, you know, as I came up the one thing that I think--I, I learned myself was as player was, as a young player, you can't hit with the bat on your shoulder you know, you gotta swing it, and that's why he said from the tip of my head to--down to my toes.  And I did, I hit a lot of balls, you know.  I did a lot of balls up in my eyelid, you know my head and down below, but I think the reason I did that is because I didn't have--we didn't have at that time a hitting instructor that said, "Hey, wait for the strike zone," and I'm glad I didn't because you know I mean, the little I learned in baseball is that you can't hit, now to repeat myself, you can't hit with the bat on your shoulder.  So, I would rather see a kid a little more aggressive than being too conservative up to the plate.
Speaker 1: Okay you hear a lot on television when they broadcast the Major League game about being patient, a patient hitter and all that sort of thing?  You don't really subscribe to that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's newspapers and guys, the guys that broadcast the games talk, you know really 'cause they're not up to the plate you know.  It's hard to, it is hard for you as a hitter to stand up to the plate and somebody's throwing a baseball a hundred miles an hour and you gotta make up your mind to hit it, you know.  You've either got to say I'm gonna strike it, I'm looking for a fast ball, you gotta be a good guesser, put it that way rather than anything else you know, and I, I just always thought that my mind and things I thought about at the plate were strictly as trying to adapt to the pitcher's style of pitching you know and they have a different style of pitching, just like you have a different style of hitting.
Story_ID: 665790
Speaker 1: Well who were some of the toughest pitchers that you faced?
Speaker 2: One, I think you may know him that gave me a little trouble was Curt Simmons, and I know a lot of people say, "Well, why Curt Simmons?"  Because he threw a lot of junk pitches you know, and never threw me a good fast ball.  I knew in the back of his head he had a good fast ball.  He was one.  You know I would say, I would say as a whole, you know, in the era in which I played in, I had good luck against some of the top pitchers and they had good luck against me, you know Drysdale [Don Drysdale], Gibson [Bob Gibson], Koufax [Sandy Koufax]--all those guys had good luck, Seaver [Tom Seaver].  All those guys had good luck against me and one day I might on, I might get three or four hits against 'em.  You know so, it's hard to say this one pitcher--each time you went out there got me out, you know.
Speaker 1: Was there any pitcher that every time you saw him, he just licking chops at you (laughter) (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was one (laughter), I, I'm gonna remain anonymous to that.  I'll leave that alone.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're not gonna--?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not gonna tell you who that is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even now (laughter).
Speaker 1: But there are some guys you saw them coming, you knew, you knew you were gonna tear them up right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's some guys, it's some guys that I felt very comfortable at the plate with hitting.  Yeah, but you know baseball is a lot different than it was when I was playing, yeah--when I mean when I say different, it's different in the sense of--I think most of these kids throw a little harder now.  They might throw a little harder but they, they don't think as much as some of the guys do when I was playing, you know.  I mean these guys just think that they can rear back and throw a fast ball ninety miles an hour by you all the time you know.
Speaker 1: In teams of pitchers I think, you had one of the best pitchers in baseball on your team [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves], Warren Spahn?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And Spahn, I'm just amazed at the stamina from Warren Spahn can throw hard all from nine to ten innings, just keep going (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was, he was--well, he was, he was a controlled pitcher and he knew how to pitch, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you never really had to face him, which is a good thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I, I did, I did.  They traded him to Giants [San Francisco Giants], and I faced him and I don't know whether I got, I don't think I got a base hit off him.  I think only hit him, hit for one time.  I think he got me out, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the era that you said like Koufax, Drysdale (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know you had like some really decent pitchers (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And the National League, correct me if I'm wrong, the National League was known more as a pitcher's league than the American league?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah it was, you mean known for pitchers?  Oh, yeah had quite a few of 'em over there.  Well, they, they were known for--the National League was known for a lot of things because they were the first one to integrate.  You know they had the best ball players because when I first--and Willie [Willie Mays] and I first started playing in the All-Star Game, we were about twelve or thirteen games behind.  The American League was so far in front and we caught 'em and passed 'em and, and that's what it was all about.  We went there with the idea of winning you know.
Story_ID: 665791
Speaker 1: When I, when I came into your living room today, I was telling Matthew [Matthew Hickey], our videographer about this chess set that you have here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And I looked at it and I was trying to figure out if it was a Negro League chess set or what it was and I was, then I saw, I said, black players on the left side and they were all white on the right side.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I said this is the American League and the National League.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's exactly right (laughter), that's right.
Speaker 1: Not all the National League players are black but you can see Willie Mays and you, you know, Campanella [Roy Campanella].
Speaker 2: We had our share.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so it was like that when I use to watch the All-Star Games on television.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: So, and when--kids would play outside, we played the All-State Game and I grew up in a black neighborhood, and everybody wanted to be in the National League 'cause if you were in the American League, you had to be white.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And you know it was that, that--it dawned on us then 'cause we thought when we started playing, well you'd be the National League.  Then we--okay, I'm Frank Robinson, he's Willie Mays, he's [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well you on the other side, you got to be Rocky Colavito or somebody.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, these are good players but you know there's a difference (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You try to be the best you could be, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, interesting dynamics in those days.  Why do you think the American League trailed the National League in terms of black players?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know.  You know for some reason they just, just--they refused to integrate.
Speaker 1: They had some, but they just--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they had some but they, they--you know some teams were late, like the Red Sox [Boston Red Sox], they was late and in black ball players.
Speaker 1: I think Pumpsie Green was their first black player.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think of what other team, one or two other teams that they, they would just refuse--I mean they just refused to, to even think about integrating, you know I mean of going after black ball players.
Story_ID: 665792
Speaker 1: Tell us about the championship season.  Now, you all won a championship [1957 World Series], right, early on (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty-seven [1957], '57 [1957], and '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], '58 [1958].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You had like, who was on that team with you and?
Speaker 2: You mean black players, or just players (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, just you know everybody.  What, who was playing and why did you all--well why do you think you all were champions?
Speaker 2: We had a very good team, that's number one, we had a very good team and I, I can't name all the players but I can name some of 'em.  Well Andy Pafko, Johnny Logan, Wes Covington, we had Eddie Mathews, (Unclear), Joe Adcock, Del Crandall, Wes--did I name Wes Covington?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wes Covington, we had Spahn [Warren Spahn], Bob Buhl, Bob Buhl--we had Juan Pizarro, was one.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember him.
Speaker 2: We had both Joe Torre, not Joe, Frank Torre, had his brother.  I don't know who else.
Speaker 1: Well, the starting lineup is?
Speaker 2: Oh, the starting lineup?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh the starting lineup was Crandall, behind the plate, either, either Torre or Adcock at first base, Schoendienst [Red Schoendienst] at second base, Logan at shortstop, Mathews at third base, Wes Covington, left field.  I was playing center field, and Hurricane Hazle [Bob Hazle] or somebody was playing right field.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the starting lineup.
Speaker 1: And the terror for all the rest of league when you and Eddie Mathews at the plate from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eddie and I got--we, we had some good years back to back, yes.
Speaker 1: Eddie Mathews was a great homerun hitter and he was on right.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: So, how did you get along with the teammates in the--on the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Major Leagues [Major League Baseball]?
Speaker 1: I mean--yeah how do they you know?
Speaker 2: We had--it was typical.
Speaker 1: It was a time of social change, I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was typical, the same way you know we had, you know some players which I care not to name they, they, they didn't treat--they still was like the old days you know in some ways.
Speaker 1: I think I'll name one, Joe Adcock, that I read about.
Speaker 2: Joe Adcock.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But he, and he was--he, Joe Adcock was one of the ones that I got along with very well, you know but one or two of 'em I had a problem with you know.  I kind of stayed my distance from 'em and they knew I was there to play baseball and I knew they were there to play baseball and I was not going to dinner with 'em after the game was over with so, that was it.
Story_ID: 665793
Speaker 1: Is baseball basically, was Major League Baseball [MLB] then, I get a sense that a lot of professional sports were dominated by, I mean the--even if they're all white, they're dominated by southern whites, is that true, you think or?
Speaker 2: And, and you may be true in saying that, I don't know that.  I couldn't say that's true but that, that's, that did, that still--even though they were from some other area, they would still be in some way segregated, I mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah, like Ty Cobbs [sic. Ty Cobb] from Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But he was, he played for Detroit [Detroit Tigers] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah you know so.
Speaker 1: Pee Wee Reese.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know but you know you got guys you know--when Jackie [Jackie Robinson] was coming up you know, all of 'em was against him except for somebody like Pee Wee Reese, and Pee Wee was from Louisville [Kentucky], I mean that's southern, but you know you had a lot of guys that didn't like him.  I ran into the same situation, and most blacks did the same thing, you know, it's, it's kind of tough, it's kind of tough to say that, that you can play a game of baseball back in the day and when I played that they cared for the responsibility of giving you the same thing that they, they had, you know.
Story_ID: 665794
Speaker 1: When you all won the World Series, when the Milwaukee Braves [Atlanta Braves] won the World Series in '57 [1957], the World Series MVP was Lew Burdette, I mean right?
Speaker 2: The year that we won--the first year we won I was the MVP.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I won MVP that year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You won National League MVP?
Speaker 2: Yes, National, that's I mean, yes.
Speaker 1: The series MVP was Lew Burdette?
Speaker 2: Right, right you're right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were National League MVP, now this is a big--you hit forty-four home runs?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And hit for average too--I mean so is it--you all beat the--the Braves beat--
Speaker 2: The Yankees [New York Yankees].
Speaker 1: --the Yankees.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And this is the Yankees with young Mickey Mantle I guess and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Mickey was hurt, Mickey got hurt that year in the series, but they had, they had a very good team.
Speaker 1: Yogi Berra, Whitey Ford, yeah that crew.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so how many games, I mean what was it--what was?
Speaker 2: It was seven games.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We beat 'em, we beat 'em in the seventh game.
Speaker 1: Was there a dramatic finish for the seventh game?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether it--I mean we beat 'em in Yankee Stadium [New York, New York], I don't know whether it was dramatic.  I know Eddie Mathews made the last out, I mean the last--he made the last put out and it was, it was great for us you know.  We, we felt quite proud of ourselves you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the final score of the last game?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay it's always interesting to me that the players don't really care about those things (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, I don't, I, I really don't know.  I don't know whether it was 5-2 or 6-2 or--I don't know what it was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all went back in '58 [1958], right and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, went back in '58 [1958] and they beat us in seventh--they beat us in the seventh game.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were--you had a very productive year in '58 [1958] too, right?
Speaker 2: Not as good as I did in '57 [1957].  You mean in the World Series [1958 World Series]?
Speaker 1: No, in the season, during the season.
Speaker 2: No, in the season I did.  I had a pretty good year at far as playing every day.  I don't know what I ended up hitting, but not as good as I thought I should have had.
Speaker 1: I think it was--I have here .326, you hit .326.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you won a Golden Glove [Rawlings Gold Glove Award], you were playing center field, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because what had happened Billy Bruton [Bill Bruton] had gotten into a collision with Felix Mantilla in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and they moved me to center field, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't think, you know I never see you in my mind as a center fielder, but you won two World Series as a center fielder.
Speaker 2: Well, there--it was, it was a pressure moment in the first series 'cause they had nobody else to put out there, so they just--Freddy Haney [Fred Haney] just told me to go out there and play center field, and I played it you know, and it, it wasn't bad.  I mean it was--to be honest with you it was easier than playing right field you know because the ball most of the time came off the bat the same way, you know.  In right field, it sliced and this and that you know but in center field (gestures) it usually comes straight you know.
Story_ID: 665795
Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't expect you to be able to explain this but I, having seen you play as a youth, in person and on TV and you know, we were always, we always kind of marveled at how easy you made everything seem and it never, nothing ever seemed hard.  I mean when you think of Willie Mays, you think of his hat flying off and tumbling and catching, it's like everything you did was so easy.  It looked like you're just gliding down the field and catching the ball and throw it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: To get to the plate, you just flick your wrist and ball flies out of the stadium.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Your job looks so easy.
Speaker 2: It wasn't (laughter) easy, it wasn't easy.  I guess I had my own little mindset in some way that made things a lot harder for me, you know I, I, I guess I, you never, I never showed it on the field.  I think the one thing that (background noise)--.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I guess one thing that I tried to, try to do is--was make things easier for me, the way I approached the game, and sometimes you know, I, I--the game would be a lot harder than I anticipated, and then I would go home and practice sometimes in the mirror and try to correct my swing and try to do things to make myself a little bit better the next day.  I couldn't play any other way but to play the way that I wanted to play.  You know if I tried to make the game hard--I see some players get hard and they wanna show off and do things, I couldn't do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now '58 [1958] is the last time the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves] won the World Series [sic.] when you were playing with them.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what happened after that?  I mean what was the?
Speaker 2: Like everything else you know.  You get into a pattern, that's why you have to admire teams like the Yankees [New York Yankees] who've back to back to back series and the Boston Celtics who won championship after championship.  It's hard, it's hard to keep repeating.  I, I think that we made some changes.  We traded away some players.  Joey Jay was someone who later on went to Cincinnati [Cincinnati Reds], I thought was a pitcher that they should've held on to because he was very good and Juan Pizarro was another one, but we made trades, and I didn't have anything to do with them, but they didn't, they didn't, they didn't work out very well.
Story_ID: 665796
Speaker 1: How were they paying you?  I remem- well, let me say, in 1959 the year after the World Series--you know I have a note in here that you were getting like thirty-five thousand dollars from the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, I only know it 'cause it's an article about 'Home Run Derby.'
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And it says the prize money was thirty thousand dollars in the 'Home Run Derby.'  You said that's almost as much as you paid (laughter) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You won derby, you won, you won it (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, I did, I won, I won the derby and, and I was living in Mobile at the time and I remember Frank Scott who was the agent for most--all ballplayers including myself, called me and said he had a deal that he could get me to go to, to Los Angeles [California] and play in 'Home Run Derby,' and he said, I said yeah, he said who else gonna--I said, "Who else gonna be there?"  He said, "You gonna have to face players like Mantle [Mickey Mantle], Mays [Willie Mays] and all these top ball players."  I said, "Well, okay," I said, "all right."  I said, "I'll do it."  I said, "Sign me up," and I dreamed about that.  You know I said if I go and play at 'Home Run Derby,' I'm gonna only get one chance, yours truly gonna get one chance and is I said if Willie get out in the second round, they gonna bring him back.  If Mantle get around, get out in the second round they gonna bring him back, but they ain't gonna bring Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] back.  I'm gonna be it you know.  I said the best thing for me to do is be prepared when I go there to win everything, and that's exactly what I did.  I practiced two days a week and when I got ready to go to California, I stayed there and I won more money than anybody on--any of those other players, any of 'em, and I never will forget, my father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.] used to pass by a grocery store and it was about the size of my living room here, and he wanted that grocery store so bad.  And I said well, and I said this is the time for me and I bought that grocery store for him out of that--I, I won--I think I won something like twenty-five thousand dollars or thirty thousand dollars from that, from that 'Home Run Derby.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was thirty thousand dollars?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I won more money than any, any of the other players did, but all the rest of the players got a chance to go back twice.  I knew I wasn't gonna get back twice.
Speaker 1: I watched it on TV, we watched it every week.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was big drama.  It was a half hour show.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Black and white, it's a white announcer, and they had a pitcher, was throwing you all straight ahead (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: I thought that was the part of it that was the weakest.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The guy could cheat.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I knew he wasn't gonna cheat for you (laughter) we knew that.
Speaker 2: Nah, they wouldn't, nah.
Speaker 1: So that he would pitch and, you went up against Harmon Killebrew, (Unclear), Mickey Mantle (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I played 'em all.
Speaker 1: Everybody was there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you ended up being the winner.
Speaker 2: Yes, I won more money, yes, I sure did.  I was, I was, but I was prepared.  I was kind of like, well I hate to say it but (laughter), I'm kind of Hillary [Hillary Rodham Clinton] was when she you know did the debate.  She was prepared (laughter).  I was prepared the same way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I prepared myself the same way and I was (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Preparation meets opportunity.
Speaker 2: I was, I was ready to go.  I was, I didn't go out there, I went way out to California from Mobile, Alabama and I didn't go out there to lose, I went out there to win (laughter).
Story_ID: 665797
Speaker 1: Now how did they put, did they put you up in a hotel or in the?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they put us in a hotel, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So by this time in the Major Leagues [Major League Baseball] when you're traveling--now, you're going to hotels, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: With everybody, with the rest of the team?
Speaker 2: You mean when?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what--in your time with the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves], when you started with the Braves?
Speaker 2: Oh, with the Braves, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: In the Major Leagues?
Speaker 2: In the Major Leagues, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So they didn't play that stuff by sending you to a--
Speaker 2: Well, most of the cities was, was--gave you a little, you know like Chicago [Illinois], St. Louis [Missouri], all those cities you know, you could stay with the team you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there are no rules like, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There were no southern teams then really to tell the truth, no southern teams in the Major League except maybe if you want to count St. Louis [St. Louis Cardinals], I guess.
Speaker 2: St. Louis and Cincinnati [Cincinnati Reds].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Cincinnati would be--
Speaker 2: Cincinnati [Ohio] we, we--I'm trying to think--Cincinnati, St. Louis [Missouri] was probably, would've been the probably the hardest team, the hardest city because the straight up, the Chase--I believe it's the Chase Hotel [Chase Park Plaza Hotel, St. Louis, Missouri].  The Chase Hotel was still somewhat segregated, you know.  They just gave you a room that had no wall (laughter) you know and you'd look outside your window and you didn't see nothing (laughter), so they--it was still so--it was segregated.
Speaker 1: And you say Cincinnati was a little rough too?
Speaker 2: Cincinnati at--I'm trying to think of the name of the hotel down at the, the hotel was all right.  We didn't find too many places to eat there.  Well, we found places but they were a little slow at serving you, so you had to go somewhere to eat.  I had a good friend of mines, a very good friend of mines that I knew very well and he used to pick me up all the time and we used to go somewhere and eat.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the implication is though that there were some restaurants that would not serve you?
Speaker 2: Oh som- well, they would serve you but they, they would be, it would be late in getting to you no matter whether there was two people in the restaurant or whether it was twenty and you'd sit at the table and you'd be a long time being served you know really.  So, that tell you, a tip off to tell you that they didn't want you in there.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's how they would do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was a de facto segregation of the--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665798
Speaker 1: Felipe Alou joined the team at some point, right and--you remember him?
Speaker 2: I know, I know Felipe.
Speaker 1: I got his name--I remember him more with the Giants [San Francisco Giants] though than with you.
Speaker 2: He, he started with the Giants, he did, yes.
Speaker 1: And Rico Carty?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so you all were in the rest of the '60s [1960s] you were kind of like in the middle of the pack, right, and--?
Speaker 2: In the team you mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah in terms of the standings?
Speaker 2: I don't remember?  What year was that?
Speaker 1: Well, in the '60s [1960s], '61 [1961], '62 [1962] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we, we never did, we never did challenge anybody (laughter) to be honest with you.  You know I don't know, I'm sure we were probably in the middle of the pack.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, we never did challenge anybody?
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in 1966 the Braves [Milwaukee Braves] moved to Atlanta [Atlanta Braves], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I--to be honest with you, I had no feelings one way or the other.  I just felt like no matter whether they put a baseball field behind my house I had to play in it, you know.  That part didn't bother me at all you know, a lot of people say well I was--didn't want to come back to, didn't want to come to the South, but that was not true.  You know I was born in Mobile [Alabama], it was a good place for me to be in the South 'cause my mother [Estella Pritchett Aaron] and father [Herbert Aaron, Sr.] and the people I grew up with got a chance to see me playing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I that, that was not true.  The only thing that I thought I had some reservations about was the fact that my kids were in school in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] you know and I--it's hard for you to uproot your family, that's the only thing was to uproot your family and have them to move out from one area to another one and come someplace else.
Story_ID: 665799
Speaker 1: Now how did--now I didn't ask you this before, but how were you embraced by the Milwaukee [Wisconsin] community?  Did--
Speaker 2: I thought--I got along with 'em fine, you know.  They, they--you know it's funny how things work out really and I came here and I had, had--one of my best years was the year that we moved here.  I thought the fans in some ways were very good.  The only thing that was different was the fact that I think the newspaper, you know I had a--it's, it was and I don't mind saying this, he's no longer here, but he and I didn't get along very well.  You know I got--I didn't get along very well with Furman Bisher, you know he's died.
Speaker 1: The sportswriter?
Speaker 2: The sportswriter, you know he was the--he and I just didn't see eye to eye for a lot of reasons you know really.
Speaker 1: What were some of the reasons you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I think some of the reasons was because I was black, that's number one, you know.  I mean and Furman had, if you checked your records, Furman had gotten into some serious trouble with, with I believe it was with one of the football teams, not, not the, not the team, not the Georgia Bulldogs, but I think with two teammates accused somebody of betting or something.  So, he.
Speaker 1: The college team [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so you know I mean--but he and I didn't get along very well.  He and I just, for some reason, just didn't see eye to eye you know for some reason you know.  He didn't like me and I didn't care too much for him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is how Atlanta [Georgia]--but I mean the rest of Atlanta (unclear)?
Speaker 2: But I didn't have--you know, they was like fans you know.  They'd come out, they boo, talk, boo, talk you know.  As I said before I thought I had, I thought I'd had the great--one of the greatest years I had in baseball so.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I was trying to ask before, I know I threw you off with it but, how were you embraced back in Milwaukee before you moved here? I mean how was, was life pretty good in Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: Milwaukee was very well, and, and the reason for that is because I think--there's two reasons.  I started my career in Eau Claire, Wisconsin [Eau Claire Bears].  I was one of the first players to come up through the system and play with the Milwaukee Braves [Atlanta Braves], and people kind of took that to heart and they said, "Oh, we got one of our own," you know so.  I got along very well with the fans in Milwaukee you know, really.  I, I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sportswriters too?
Speaker 2: Sportswriters, you know here, we had one sportswriter (laughter), so yeah, I got along with him very well.  No, we, we, I, I did well with him.
Story_ID: 665800
Speaker 1: So, '66 [1966] with the Braves [Atlanta Braves].  Now, by '67 [1967], you are climbing into the career home run leader's list and I think you were in '67 [1967] you were trailing Willie Mays by a few runs, a few home runs.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were climbing you know, so did you start--did you think after 1968 when you hit five hundred home runs, did you think you had a chance (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I got to five hundred?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you think you had a chance to beat Babe Ruth's record or were you even thinking about it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never thought about his record.  I, I'd never given it any thought at all you know.  I just thought if I just continued to play my game, do what I was supposed to do and be blessed to stay healthy, that all of these records was in my reach, you know all of 'em.  No matter whether it was a home run record, or runs, batting and no matter what it was, I had to continue to be healthy you know, and I was blessed that I was healthy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you stayed healthy most of the time. You never--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I, I had, I broke my ankle, my first year that we moved here and I don't think--never was on the disabled list, so, I, I think I was pretty healthy you know my twenty-three years.  You know, I didn't have any problem you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you hear a lot of about little, I don't know they seem like ticky, tacky.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: To keep people off of (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: I didn't have that problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I played, I played a lot of baseball.  When I say a lot of baseball, I, it, you know we--I played over a hundred and some odd games every year, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, did you play with minor injuries very often (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I, I was pretty healthy, you know all, all my career, you know.  I must say that I was blessed with being healthy and I didn't have any--like some players I know had problems being hurt all through their career, but I didn't have that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that--yeah, some just don't, don't seem like they--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --can make it through a season without something major.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay all right so, as you continued to climb the list--now, the Braves reached the playoffs in '69 [1969] right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: First team to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you all had a--(unclear) throw a knuckle ball.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And that you all ran up against the New York Mets?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And the Mets featured two players from Mobile [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Well, they had two players there from Mobile, they were, they certainly was instrumental in helping defeat us, but they had that pitching staff that was even worse than that.  They'd had a great pitching staff, Koosman, Gentry [Gary Gentry] and Nolan [Nolan Ryan].  All those guys was very, very good.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was, when was that?  Now that was Seaver, right there.
Speaker 2: Tom Seaver, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Jerry Koosman and--.
Speaker 2: Jerry Koosman and, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, Cleon Jones and Tommie Agee are guys that you knew from Mobile (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, they, they both had, they both were from Mobile and boy they showed off.  They played very well, they were, they were very good ball players and Cleon and Tommy both did well in the series.  They, they played well, they were good ball players.
Speaker 1: Right, they kind of took people by surprise.
Speaker 2: But you know Cleon and Tommie both were very good football players.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that Tommie Agee, Cleon both of those boys were very, very good in football.  Yeah, they could've, they probably could've gone into--back then of course, when they was hiring and scouting black players, they probably could've played pro ball.
Speaker 1: Okay it says here that Jones was a bat boy for the Mobile Black Bears when he was a teenager, right?
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah I don't know, I don't recall but he probably was but he, he--I think he was, I don't remember him very well you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 665801
Speaker 1: All right so in 1970, now you're thirty-six years old in 1970, you get your three thousandth career hit.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So this is a big milestone. There aren't many players (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a very big milestone.
Speaker 1: There are not a lot of players who make that?
Speaker 2: Not too many, not, not back--not then and I, I think the happiest moment for me was having Stan Musial come to Cincinnati [Ohio] to see me hit it.  That was the greatest moment, one of the greatest moments I had.
Speaker 1: Stan the Man Musial.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, from the St. Louis Cardinals.  Okay, so you know okay, so and was there a ceremony at least?
Speaker 2: Can I take a break?
Speaker 1: Sure (unclear).
Speaker 2: I want to get a little water here.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, now I have a story here that you, Stan Musial, Joe Torre, Mel Allen, Harmon Killebrew went to Vietnam together later on?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay and Stan was your roommate in Vietnam?
Speaker 1: Sure, that's exactly right, we stayed over there for about two and a half weeks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What they call, what the government call the hi neighbor tour just entertaining the troops that was in--what you say, Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Vietnam yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that's why we were over there.  General Westmoreland [William Westmoreland] was the general over there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got a chance to meet him.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is while the war [Vietnam War] was going on and--.
Speaker 1: Was strictly going on, you know it was at full blast (laughter), yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 665802
Speaker 1: Now in '72 [1972] you surpassed Willie Mays', Willie Mays for second place on the all time home run list in '72 [1972] and you also became the highest paid player in baseball?  You had a two hundred thousand dollars a year salary?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Nah, I don't know whether that part is true, I think one or two other players, I think Mickey [Mickey Mantle] was making--now, I don't know whether Mickey was retired then?
Speaker 1: This is '72 [1972], '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: Oh, '72 [1972] yeah, yeah, he was, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was out of baseball.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's out of baseball.  I'm trying to think--who else?  Well, yeah, I might've been at that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now and so now you surpassed Willie Mays for second place on the all time list.  I just wonder, when you think about that era you think about you, Willie Mays, Frank Robinson, you know being like the three like kings of the National League basically?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ernie Banks, right, Ernie Banks and you got McCovey [Willie McCovey] who's a good player too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You got Maury Wills stealing the bases and there are other good players but I just wondered--a few weeks we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson and he was saying that when the other black players would come to town, Bill Russell and Sam Jones and some of the others, they would all eat together afterwards.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you have the same kind of camaraderie in baseball?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, we usually get together or somehow--in baseball it's a little bit different than football--basketball.  They play a one game series no matter what.  We would play a four game series, usually you know and it's a little bit different.  If you didn't get together within the first day, you probably saw 'em the second day or you probably ran into them somewhere where they were at the restaurant eating or something.  So, it was a little bit different than basketball.  Basketball, you know I mean you--the Celtics [Boston Celtics] would play the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks], and they play a one game series and they leave the next day, but usually most athletes get together and they talk about things.
Speaker 1: What kind of things would you all talk about?
Speaker 2: You would talk about a lot of things.  You'd talk about--in my case of course, and in the case of baseball, you would talk about the pitchers, you know him, all the guys that you mentioned Willie, myself, Ernie and who else.
Speaker 1: Frank Robinson.
Speaker 2: Frank Robinson.  We would be hitters.  We were all hitters and we would certainly discuss pitchers, you know and that's what we would talk about you know.  So, I wouldn't know what the basketball people would talk about, but we would talk about how did you hit against certain pitchers?  How did he pitch to you and you'd try to put something and file it in the back of your head and the next time you see him, you know you'd try to apply it.
Speaker 1: Now, Frank Robinson had a reputation of crowding the plate (unclear) so he used to get beaned a lot.
Speaker 2: He used to get hit a lot yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: That's just the way he played, he played that way, you know he--I'm sure that if, if some hitting instructor had came along and told him to move off the plate and get back up, he probably couldn't do it.
Story_ID: 665803
Speaker 1: Willie Mays, to this day people says he was probably the greatest all around player.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In baseball.  Do you have that--is that your impression of him?
Speaker 2: I think Willie was certainly great, a great player you know.  He played in a great city, in New York [New York], that you know that took everything for granted.  I would have to say that he did things that, that no other player could do.  You know a lot of, a lot of players couldn't do, but he was a great player.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there anything that he could do that you wish that you could do?
Speaker 2: No, no, no I don't--I could do everything that he did and probably do, could hit a little bit better.
Speaker 1: Do you think that if you'd been a player in New York or San Francisco [California] or Los Angeles [California] or Chicago [Illinois] you'd had been a bigger name when you were playing?
Speaker 2: Probably, probably, and probably would've been--a lot of other things would've happened you know being in New York City and coming from a small town like Mobile [Alabama].  I wouldn't have been able to adapt to the styles, the way they live in New York.
Speaker 1: So, are you kind of glad that you went to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm very glad, I'm very glad.  I am very glad that I did have the opportunity to play in Milwaukee where the fans were a little bit more cordial.  I got along with the fans very well, so I am very glad.  I have no, I absolutely have no regret at the cities in which I played in.
Speaker 1: Okay, now at age thirty-nine and a lot of people are considering--a lot of people are out of baseball by their mid-thirties and you're still playing.  Some players that last and they keep playing and you're like thirty-nine, and--were you the oldest player on the team [Atlanta Braves] at thirty-nine?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I was, I don't recall some of the player on there, I'm almost certain I was probably the oldest.
Speaker 1: Okay, a young man in real life, but in baseball life (laughter).
Speaker 2: You're old.
Speaker 1: You're thirty-nine, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 665804
Speaker 1: So, you're up, you're right up on top of Babe Ruth's record.  You've got like 673 home runs and that season, 1972 you hit forty home runs at age thirty-nine, so this is, this is phenomenal, a thirty-nine year old man hitting forty home runs.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I was, I had a great year that year.  You know I played with, you know the most important thing I think that my career was and I, I don't take all the responsibility of what I did. I played with some great, with some players that really kind of helped me a little bit.  When I say helped, hidden behind 'em or in front of 'em, kind of took a little of the pressure off me you know and when I, that year that you are referring to was the year that I think that we had David--I think it was David.
Speaker 1: David Johnson [Davey Johnson].
Speaker 2: David Johnson and had the third baseman I think--I forget his.
Speaker 1: Darrell Evans?
Speaker 2: Darrell Evans, and all three of us hit forty or more home runs I think that year.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I came in, I think they both--they came in one or two home runs ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Eddie Mathews was the manager now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He's a former teammate [on the Atlanta Braves], that gives you some idea of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, so at any rate so you, so you come close to setting a record by the end of the season and so, it was pretty much taken for granted that the next year, if you play, that you're gonna break a record.  People are starting to really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think people were starting to believe that, yeah.  I was getting close enough and if--here again, I had to stay healthy in order to do anything you know really because at my age, thirty-nine and you hurt, you hurt yourself seriously in baseball, at thirty-nine you don't recover.
Speaker 1: Right, so this is--in fact, you finish with 713 home runs in '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you know you're going to break it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, if I stay--again.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I know people say, "Well, you gonna walk across the street with the green light--whatever light?"  And I said, "I'm gonna take life the same way, you know?"
Speaker 1: You know a lot has been written, there was a lot of celebration in the African American community, and otherwise about you, you being able to break the record, but also there's a downside of this, right?  People just didn't want to see it happen?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, that's for sure.  Nobody--I mean I don't, I wouldn't say nobody, but I got, I got tons, and tons of letters that didn't want me to break the record.  No, they--that's absolutely right.  Even though I was that close, they still--I still had to have police protection.  Somebody to walk me to my hotel.
Speaker 1: This was serious business.
Speaker 2: Aw, it was very serious, it was very serious.  It was--I was--I had, I had a tough time.  I mean I had a tough time not only thinking about baseball, but just thinking about playing the game and getting out of the ballpark alive, you know really, because you know out of all the letters I received, I think the police and a detective or whoever it was, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or whoever was interceding the letters saying that they wasn't afraid of all the letters, they was afraid that one letter, one of 'em may be for real, and that's what they had to be afraid of you know.
Speaker 1: So you got like tons of these threats?
Speaker 2: I got tons of letters, tons of threatening letters you know really.  So, I had to--I had to think about do, do I really want to continue to play you know and that was one of the reasons why you know I had to say well this is gonna be my last year, you know.
Story_ID: 665805
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the things we were discussing off camera is that a lot of people back in the day when Babe Ruth played, speculated about his, speculated about his race, and whether he was black and Ty Cobb wouldn't even room with him.
Speaker 2: Well, Ty (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And during the All-Star Games because he said he thought he was black.
Speaker 2: Well, Ty Cobb wouldn't room with anybody I mean (laughter) you know but, you know, but I had heard the same thing, heard the same thing.  That people thought that Babe Ruth was, was somewhat you know, you know he looked like he was--if you look at his facial structure you know, kind of looked a little bit like he was black.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so and it never was decided that he wasn't white but a lot of people thought he might not of been.
Speaker 2: That's absolutely right.
Speaker 1: But in 1973 and '4 [1974] people are, now the people that are threatening you are sure he's--they're taking for granted that he is you know.  They're threatening you because you're going to break a white man's record?
Speaker 2: But they knew who I was (laughter), there were no second guessing that (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, so now this is an interesting period 'cause I never put these two things together, but you were married in '73 [1973] and that's when you married Billye [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron] right, '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: You met her a couple of years before and this--I mean I suppose--I mean how did being married like help you get through this?  Did it help?
Speaker 2: Oh, it helped me quite a bit.  I had somebody to talk to.  You know before I stayed in a hotel for two or three years at the, at downtown.  I had nobody to talk to.  You know you hit a home run or you do what you had to do and you go home and you got a big lonesome apartment there, you know, so but--oh, it helped me so much.  You know I had somebody--if I went 0-4 at least I could have somebody to talk to, and she helped me quite a bit because it would--you know those last two years were really tough years really, especially the last year.  And it was, after I'd hit the home run then each time I went to the plate--if I got a base hit people would be disappointed.  The only thing that would satisfy 'em would be a home run, so that's the way they were you know.  So, I said well you know, I--I'll be dammed if you do, dammed if you don't situation, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, when you consider it, baseball, I mean the standard for success is getting three hits out of ten and then you're really a star (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You really, yes, right.
Speaker 1: --batting .300.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And to think so now you've got to hit home run every time you come to the plate.
Speaker 2: But that's what it--that's what happened and then, going to the American League and going back with Brewers [Milwaukee Brewers] it was the same way you know 'cause most people that I played against over there had never seen me play before because television was not very prevalent back in those days, you know.  So, I had to--each time I went to the plate, they would come to a game and--if I hit two or three hits like you were saying, they were disappointed, you know.
Speaker 1: Only a home run?
Speaker 2: Only a home run would do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was there anything that surprised you when you won, when you actually broke Babe Ruth's record, anything about the response from the public surprise you or the press?
Speaker 2: I don't know, no I, I--you know most of the press that I received and most of the press that, after I hit the home run.  I, I think the majority of 'em, I wouldn't say all of 'em, I'll say the majority of 'em felt like they had not been very fair with me.  They hadn't given me the credit I deserved as a ball player.  They felt that the only thing--and I don't know why, they think that the only thing that I wanted to do was to break Babe Ruth's record, and I didn't care about anything else, and that was not fair because hell, you can't walk up to the plate and say, "I want to hit a home run, I wanna do this today, I wanna do this." And I think that most of 'em, the ones that I'm thinking about were not being very fair to me or my ability because I couldn't do that.
Story_ID: 665806
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about--if you can put us in the moment.  You hit the home run against who?
Speaker 2: Al Downing.
Speaker 1: Al Downing, okay, so this is the day--it was a day game, right?
Speaker 2: It was an evening game, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Right, evening game, all right, so you're at the plate and what did he pitch you?
Speaker 2: Al had, you know I never had good luck against him really to be honest with you, although I hit the home run to, to beat the Babe's [Babe Ruth] record off him, but I never really had good luck with him.  He was--I remember when he was with the Yankees [New York Yankees], for a little fellow his size, he threw very good, had very good control and was a very good pitcher.  He hurt his arm and of course they traded him to the Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], and what he threw me that night, he had a very good screwball, you know and he couldn't--at the beginning I could understand it.  He couldn't get his screwball over you know and he tried to throw me a fast ball and that was not his pitch, that was his second pitch.  Well, I say  second pitch, that's the second pitch that he usually gets you out on, and I hit the ball out of the ballpark [Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium, Atlanta, Georgia], but in all fairness to him, it was a, it was a--as I mentioned before, the second pitch, but he was a very, a very good pitcher.  He was not one of these yo-yos that come along, he could pitch and he knew how to pitch.  I think right now I think he's teaching school in, in New York somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were there charges that he just lobbed you one up there or something?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard that part, never heard somebody say that, but I think I've heard people say well you know he was a secondary pitcher, and that was not true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're right.
Speaker 2: He, he wasn't, he was a starter for the Dodgers and the Dodgers thought a lot of him and I thought a lot of him 'cause I had faced him once before or maybe two or three times before with the Yankees and he was not easy pickings, you know he was somebody to be reckoned with, but he just happened to have an off day like anybody could you know.
Speaker 1: Right, Al Downing was a respected pitcher in the Minor League [Minor League Baseball], right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So, how did you feel when the ball was going out of the park, did you feel relieved it finally (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I felt good and I felt I had hit enough home runs to realize when I hit it that it was gonna go out the ballpark because I had hit enough of 'em, you know really, and I felt, I felt very good.  I felt like it was over with, done with and that was it.
Story_ID: 665807
Speaker 1: How does it feel when you hit it and you know it's going out, I mean how does that feel?
Speaker 2: Boy, I wished I coul- I wish I could tell you how it does feel.  It's, it's kind of hard.  You know you hit enough home runs that you know; you kind of have a feeling that you hit it well enough that it should go out the ballpark and you're playing in your own ballpark you know that the wind is not gonna bother it if you don't get it up in the air.  I mean not high enough that you can get it out of the ballpark.  So, it makes you feel good.
Speaker 1: What's the furthest one you ever hit?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, the furthest home run I hit, I hit off of--who was it.  I'm trying to think who it was. It was in the World Series, and I don't--I can't think of who it was.  I hit it dead, straight center field on somebody.  Who did--I can't think of, I can't think of the name of the pitcher, I can't think of his name, but the furthest, that's the furthest home run I ever hit.
Speaker 1: But it was in a--it was dead center?
Speaker 2: Dead center field, Yankee Stadium [New York, New York], yeah, this was in the, the World Series.
Speaker 1: I know it was over, I can't remember exactly four hundred and four something feet or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it went, they had monuments back there and I think it went over the monument.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And one thing people used to say too especially during the home run series, we used to talk about it in Boy Scout meetings, you know we just say like, "How does [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron manage to hit all those home runs," and you see a big guy like Rocky Colavito or something like that you'd think he'd be able to hit more, more than you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But here you are a normal size man.
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: You walk up (laughter) and the ball just flies out of the park.
Speaker 2: And that's what I always tell 'em, hitters sometimes.  You know they ask me the same question.  I say it doesn't make any difference about how you, about what size you are.  I mean if somebody's throwing a ball ninety miles an hour and you make good contact with it, it's gonna go out the ballpark, but if you're lazy with the bat, I mean that's my motto, if you're lazy with the bat just getting it through the strike zone, you're not gonna do anything with it you know.  So, it's--sometimes it's not the size you know.  I've played with players like Ted Kluszewski with Cincinnati [Cincinnati Reds] who was much bigger than I was, and I always thought that if I got in a home run deal with him, I could beat him any time I wanted to, you know.
Speaker 1: His technique wasn't (unclear).
Speaker 2: His bat speed was a little slower than mines, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when your record was--well, who had--well, let me say this--well I know they used to marvel at [HistoryMaker] Billy Williams' swing back in the day.  The sportswriters used to talk about his beautiful swing.
Speaker 2: That beautiful swing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, who did you think the best hitters were or had the best technique when you were playing?
Speaker 2: I think, I think McCovey [Willie McCovey] did.  I thought Billy Williams' swing was certainly beautiful to look at you know.  I thought it was.  I thought those two guys swung the bat about as pretty as you could swing it you know, really, but McCovey you know hardly ever would swing at a ball above his letters, everything he hit was down below and nobody dare not throw 'em down there 'cause he couldn't get it out the ballpark, and Billy Williams was the same way.  I thought, I thought they both were very good hitters and, and beautiful, had beautiful swings.
Speaker 1: Batting techniques, one thing the kids used to do when I was growing up, we'd copy everybody's batting technique you know.  We were--if I was Frank Robinson I'd lay the bat down like low, like this (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you know do his long warm up, wind ups and if I was Bobby Tolan I'd hold it straight out and shake it (laughter), or Joe Morgan you'd pump your arm out (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Has everybody got, is there a, (unclear) you know I tend to think, and correct me if I'm wrong, it doesn't matter that much I guess how you hold it 'cause some of these guys are really successful doing some things it seems like they shouldn't be but they--well, what do you think?
Speaker 2: No, no, no you're right.  I think what you're saying all these guys have different ways of starting the bat.  No matter how you start it the thing that you can't do, you just mentioned all these guys, the thing that you can't do in baseball is drop your hands.  You can start this way, you can start that way, right, left, right, left, right but you can't drop.  Once you drop your hand, then you're out of it, you can't hit like that.  That, that is a no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's just like you mentioned, you know Frank Robinson start his bat here or do this, you know do something with it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, droops down sort of when he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --when he winds up, he cocks it and droops it like--
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.  All those guys start from somewhere but when you start dropping your hand, they just tell you, that's--and then you see a lot of hitters do the same--do that today you know.  Drop their hands--I always felt like if, if a ball is good enough for me to swing at, then I ought to be able to hit it you know, really.
Story_ID: 665808
Speaker 1: Subsequent to you, you know you retired in what in '75 [sic. 1976]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, subsequent to you, I mean people have--you know your record stood for thirty-three years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then you had like, as I mentioned in the beginning--was it Mark McGwire or Barry Bonds that--it was Barry Bonds.
Speaker 2: Barry Bonds, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he beat the record, but the charges were that he, you know he did it with, he enhanced his performance through steroids, I guess.  Human growth hormones or something like that.  (Unclear) you know the average person watching him play, he's a normal sized guy, (unclear) next year like his head is bigger, his arms are bigger, everything looks bigger and the bat speed is just unbelievable.  You know he was an all star player before, but do you have any thoughts about Barry Bonds.
Speaker 2: I, I played with his father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bobby Bonds, yeah.
Speaker 2: --loved his father.  His father is dead but his father was a heck of a ball player, not quite good as his son, but his father was a very good ball player.  Good base stealer, could run the bases, play the outfield, did well.  What I think about Barry?  I think Barry is probably, if you start mentioning six or seven ball players in the league [Major League Baseball] that played, I think he would be right up there with all of 'em. I think he would be, I, I you know.  You know I always said that records are made to be broken.  You know I hit 755, and I always said that eventually regardless of whether they accuse him of drugs or whatever they wanna accuse him of, I think that he probably could've done it without being accused of anything, you know really.  I think he was a terrific ball player you know.  I know people have said that his head got bigger, his--I don't know, I have no idea.  I'm not, I'm not gonna sit here and be God you know really.  I'm not gonna accuse him of doing something that I never did in my life.  I know I didn't do it, so it didn't bother me.  I, I played--I played the game the way it was supposed to be played. I crawled before I walked, you know and that's the way I think that life need to be looked at, regardless to whether you try to play baseball, be a doctor, be a lawyer, whatever you're trying to do.  You're gonna have to crawl before you walk, you know and try to take one step at a time and do it right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you're right, he was a great ball player before the accusations.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I don't know how much that helped him or didn't help him but (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Neither, and I'm not gonna sit here and say the reason that he hit the home runs that he hit is because of drugs.  I didn't see him--I've never seen him take anything.  I don't know that he did and that's all I can say about it.
Story_ID: 665809
Speaker 1: Now how has the game changed since you were playing?  I mean I, I know we've--when you look through old issues of Life magazine, there's a scene in the locker room.  The ball players are smoking Chesterfields or something you know.  You don't see this now, is there a--I mean and of course they talk about it like it's different enhancements that people are taking, and people have like Nautilus machines now, they're, they're people are pumping iron in baseball.  I mean how has it changed that I mean--?
Speaker 2: Oh, the game itself has changed tremendously.  First of all, you have players today that don't have to--when I played baseball back in the day in the big leagues [Major League Baseball], when I played, after the season was over, I had to go get a job.  I wasn't making enough money and I had to support my family.  Today, these players today build recreation rooms in their houses, exercising rooms to keep themselves physically strong, and to, to prepare themselves for the next year.  And I said there is absolutely nothing wrong with that, you know I mean they got a right to, to whatever.  I don't know and I say this in all honesty and I would say this in front of any owner or anybody else.  I don't know of anybody that goes to a baseball game to watch an owner play baseball.  They go out there to watch the players play, and if the players, if the owners are making a hundred dollars, then the players justly deserve to make fifty dollars of that, whatever it is.  So, yes, the game has changed.  It's changed in some ways and in some ways, it's changed for the best, in some ways it's changed because I think that players today don't give enough credit to the fans.  The fans are the ones that makes the game what it is today.  The fans are the one that go to the games and make sure that they do. Now, but the game has changed and rightfully so it should change.  It, you know I mean, I played, we talked about it, you know I made two dollars a day meal money, and what two hundred dollars a month for, for playing baseball in the Negro League, and the most I ever made was the salary that you mentioned.  Today these players make four times, five times, much more than that, and rightfully so, or they ought to make as much as they can and do it and be able to--but I'd just like to see 'em get, get fans more involved with the baseball, you know, treat 'em a little bit better, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you think baseball's status as a sport has dropped since you played?
Speaker 2: In what way?
Speaker 1: I mean in just its popularity amongst the general population?
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean whether the popularity has changed somewhat?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I think that, I think--I would like to see baseball do one thing.  I would like to see it get involved more of trying to educate fans more in baseball.  Baseball is a game that if you talk to the average fan, the average fan, I wouldn't say all of 'em, the average fan, they don't understand it, but baseball is a very fine and very quick game.  Now, I know there's a lot of things in baseball that bothers me as, as an ex-player and someone who know the game a little bit better, is that it takes longer for you, or for you as a fan to go to a game and sit out there and watch a game from one inning to the sixth inning, and from the sixth inning to the ninth inning, you have to stay two and a half hours to watch a game finish, and the reason for that is because they got special this, somebody this, and that's, that's just prolonging the game and that's not right.  I remember somebody asked me said, "What about when you played?"  I said you know when you have Warren Spahn and Tom Seaver and all these guys that's out there and pitching a nine inning ball game, I said you get them to the eighth and ninth innings, sixth, and seventh and eighth and ninth innings and I said they got a one run lead, I said if you a spectator, someone who's watching the game, you can call your wife and say, "Honey, I'll be home in a half an hour, put dinner on," 'cause you're going home, you're not gonna sit there for another two and a half hours watching the game.
Speaker 1: But today, when they bring in a relief man.
Speaker 2: They're bringing a relief man, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three or four relief pitchers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they bring in three or four relief pitchers and, and one to get a specialized, to get a left hander out.  One specialized to get a right hander out, that's where the, that's where the game is played for a long time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the pace has slowed down.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.
Story_ID: 665810
Speaker 1: Well, when you were growing up and certainly when I was growing up, I'm sixty-seven now, the average kid played baseball and you know, understood the rules.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, and the rules of baseball are more complicated than some of the, say rules of basketball.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Or football.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, do you think that might be a factor too--I mean baseball's still popular but at one time it was the national sport.  Now, I don't know it can be said anymore that it's the national sport?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I think you're absolutely right in what you're saying.  I think the thing if I wanna add anything to what you're saying, is that a lot of times, players--when, when you got the Little League players out there playing little--I'm talking about the little, little fellows.  When you got them out there playing, and the coach is watching them play.  I think the coach is kind of energizing and putting too much emphasis on do this and do that instead of letting the kid grow into baseball.  When I say grow, I mean let them come up, don't teach them how to throw curve balls, fast balls, and screw balls and all that when he's eight and nine years old. Teach him how to make--what the game is all about.  Teach 'em what the game is all about.  What is the game about?  The game is about getting somebody out, making somebody pop up or you striking somebody out.  Don't go out there trying to throw a curve ball, you're eight years old 'cause you're just gonna damage your arm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you think kids are being pushed too far?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think they're being pushed, and I think that comes from, from somebody wanting to be a big time coach, you know really.  That's not right, you know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 665811
Speaker 1: What about the popularity of baseball in the black community, it seems to be you know--now, there's a lot of talk about it, and people have made efforts to try to re-energize the interest in baseball in the black community.  African American kids don't seem--it's not when you look at the Major League team [Major League Baseball], you don't see that many of them.  You know you see a lot of Dominicans, you see a lot of American white people, you know but.
Speaker 2: I think--they, they've certainly has taken the game away from the black community. They certainly have taken the game away from the black players and there's several reasons for that.  Number one, is that we don't have, for example, number one is that whenever you have an economic struggle in this country, I mean among anybody, black, white, green, whatever it is.  We, and I mean we, you know blacks are gonna suffer the most with that struggle, and when we struggle the most with that struggle, the first thing you know, you got the father going working in the morning, or, or and the wife is going out in the evening.  So, you never have a family at home.  You never have the father going out with the son, teaching him how to play the game or how to do certain things.  So, they, they've taken that away, that's number one.  The other thing is, is that the game itself has offered a lot of things.  Baseball is a very, very rich game.  I mean we talk about football, but baseball is much, much richer than football.
Speaker 1: Yeah you can make more money playing baseball (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can make more money with it, and your contracts are more sound.  Your contracts are more solid than any other sports in the game.  You see these kids today and when I say these kids, I mean these young men today, sign contracts for, for what, for the next five years, two and a half million dollars, five--not, not two and a half million, but $50 million, that contract, that's guaranteed money.  That's not anything.  On the other hand, in football, they give you--they sign you to a contact, a fifty thousand dollars, $2 million, and they give you a bonus of twenty thousand dollars and then right at cutting time, two years before you get there, they cut you.  Then you're gone, but they can't do that in baseball.  So, it's a game that I think, and, and the other thing is that the one thing that I think that, I think that bothers me more than anything I think is the fact that when I see baseball, if a player, a young player coming out of college, not out of college, I'm sorry, out of high school and wanna play baseball, he can't, he's, he's looking for some kind of--what I wanna say, trying, trying to get a scholarship of some kind to continue his education.  Baseball offers that, but once we get into playing in, in the black area we see kids try to play baseball and the very first thing you know, they get to a certain age playing base- playing baseball and then the first thing you know, the coach want 'em to play football.  The coach want to stop 'em from playing baseball and play football.  We've had so many great little young ball players.  Deion Sanders could have been a heck of a baseball player, Bo Jackson could've been a heck of a baseball, but they try to play two sports, and you are not going to play--you might play one year, two years, but you're not gonna play baseball and football the same year.  Something has gotta give and that's the way it goes.
Story_ID: 665812
Speaker 1: You have any thoughts about how to re-energize baseball in the black community in terms of options 'cause it--you don't have to be 6'5" to play it?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You know as you said the contracts are better if you make it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You may have a better chance of making it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Than you do play football and you don't have to worry about as many concussions and other broken bones and stuff as you do playing football (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, I think--do I have any--I think that Major League Baseball [MLB] need to take upon themselves and I've talked to the commissioner, not this commissioner [Rob Manfred], I am planning on talking to him but--the commissioner but see and to try energize and put some kind of area where they can, these kids can play baseball you know in the black community.  As I said before baseball is a very, very expensive game you know.  I'm not trying to frighten anybody, but it is.  I mean you take a--if you want to have a kid that's gonna play baseball.  For an example, I'll get off the subject, get off, tell you about something.  When--I'm trying to think, Sal Bando, Reggie Jackson, all went to Arizona [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona], and they--I drove, and I went out there and saw the ballpark.  Okay, it's just like a Major League park.  Now, they couldn't do that at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], 'cause we don't have the field to do it at Morehouse.  We don't have the field to do that at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  That's the same thing I'm talking about in order for these kids to do it.  For example, they can't do it just by doing it because to have the--to play the game right, I was lucky to come up and didn't have nothing but a broomstick and a bottle top to hit with, but that don't happen every day.  But you got to have the proper bat, you got to have the balls to play with, you go to have the uniforms to play with and the most important part that you gotta have, you gotta have a field, to field ground balls and to play the game the way it's supposed to be played.  How do you energize or how do you tell Major League Baseball that hey if you scout somebody over here at Morris Brown or Morehouse or one of these schools over here and you see 'em over there playing, and I've been in this situation before, you don't, you can't scout him the same way you scout somebody at Arizona State 'cause those boys got four years playing on a manicured diamond, no bumps, no nothing, bright lights.  They don't have anything over here at Morehouse, so you have to give that guy a little more of a chance and an opportunity to play on that same kind of diamond that you scouted that other player at.  How do you energize 'em?  By giving 'em the same opportunities that, that the other player had, the field to play on.  You know if you don't give 'em the field to play on you ain't gonna have him--he, he--it was just lucky as I said before.  I was lucky, I was extremely lucky to play with a bottle top and a broomstick, but that don't come along every--in fact, two or three of and I got away from it very soon 'cause then I started playing in the Negro League.  But you don't find that very often you know.  So, to energize, I think to energize the black community you got to feel like--and there's other things, that, that's really, there's other things that need to be looked at too, you know, things that I think, that are, I take very dear to me.  I think that Major League Baseball need to understand that they need to feel like they need to come into the black area and put some money in the banks, put money somewhere for these, for kids and make themselves say, hey we want you.  You know we want you to play Major League baseball and you know it hurts me and you I played right behind Jackie Robinson.  I know what Jackie went through and I know what I went through and now it's back to zero now, you know it's nothing.  You look at it now and you say, you don't have many black players.  You don't have many black players you know.  In fact, and the ones that you have they don't live in the black area.  Somebody asked me the other day, said, "Hank [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] where do you live at?"  I said, "I live in southwest Atlanta [Georgia]."  "You live in the hood?"  I said, If you want to call it the hood, that's the hood.  I been living there all my life."  I'm gone live there all my life and if I live--go out of the hood, I'm defeating the purpose.  I wanna make sure whoever I see, that I help get outta the hood, so you know I, it just--those are the kind of things that bothers you and if Major League Baseball (unclear).  You know it, it bothers me because I like to see, I like to see everybody have a fair chance, you know.  And, and right now, I don't think Major League Baseball is giving blacks an opportunity.  You know I started that civil rights thing where we were, honored certain things and now, that's been cut off you know so.  I'm gonna have a talk with the commissioner and see what we can do because it is getting to be a dreadful moment (laughter).
Story_ID: 665813
Speaker 1: You retired in, was it '76 [1976] was it, was?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and did you immediately start working for the Braves [Atlanta Braves] organization?
Speaker 2: What happened was that I was (laughter)--I started working--Ted Turner gave me a job.  I started working with, with CNN.  I was in St. Louis [Missouri] and Ted said, "You know, we owe you two hundred thousand dollars." And I said, "Yeah, you sure do."  And he said, "You wanna come work for the ball club?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well you could be the farm director," just like that.  I said, "Oh good."  That's Ted (laughter).  I, I was, I started working and it's a good thing that I did because I didn't know anything else to do.  You know really as a layman, I didn't know how to work computers.  I didn't know how to do nothing else, you know.  So, I kind of stayed in baseball two or three years after--well, I'm still in baseball, but right then I stayed in baseball, and only because of Ted Turner, you know really.  He gave me a chance to stay in the game.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you--when you were director of the farm system, did you discover any exciting talent?
Speaker 2: I did, there was, there was--what's the boy's name?  Oh, god--outfielder, that played with the Braves and hit the home run in one game.  We won the game one in the World Series [1995 World Series] here in Atlanta [Georgia]--Dave Justice.
Speaker 1: Dave Justice, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he, he kind of, he was a challenge to me in more ways than one.  You know he's, he was David Justice that only was interested in David Justice, but he, you know he was a challenge, then he got up and I kind of read him the riot act and got him straightened out and he went on and had a--not a great career, but he had a--not a hall of fame year, but he had a good year, good career.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a decent career, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Dave Justice was a good ball player, yeah.
Story_ID: 665814
Speaker 1: Now, speaking of the hall of fame, now you, you were elected in the hall of fame, Baseball Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York] in 1982.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which you knew you expected to be, as home run king, you were going to be elected in the hall of fame, but just tell me how you felt about the moment?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt very good, I felt very excited about it.  I was--the hall of fame and I had problems.  You know, we, we didn't--because you'll notice that I don't have any jewelry on me, and everything I own I give it to the hall of fame.  Everything that I have I give it to the hall of fame, and at that I thought that they were putting things where it's supposed to be seen?  And they were putting things at the bottom of the barrel, you know they were putting them in the basement.  But we got it straightened out, but--.
Speaker 1: 'Cause they weren't displaying the trophies and things and the rings you were giving them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They weren't, they were not displaying 'em, they were not displaying 'em and I was a little bit taken out with that you know, really.  So, we got them to take it and (Unclear), the guy that, that sponsored the Jackie Robinson movie, that made the Jackie Robinson movie.
Speaker 1: '42.'
Speaker 2: Yeah '42,' he and I got to be very good friends and he helped me put a thing up in the hall of fame, he paid for it himself.  So, I--they brought everything upstairs so, it's--and I got to be very good friends but, but I was happy.  I was happy, you know I felt that I was gonna make it and I was lucky enough--lucky enough to go in with a very good friend of mine, Frank Robinson.  Frank and I both went in the same time.  Then Frank said (laughter) he made, he got up before me and he said, "Well," he said, "I've been always for all of my career, I've been trying to catch up with you," and he said, "I finally caught you" (laughter).  But, we, we, but I, I enjoy it.  I haven't missed--we missed last year of course, and that was because of my leg, my wife [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron] and I missed it.  But we always--we been going back for the last few years you know, to the hall of fame.
Speaker 1: Now, we hear that you invited Dr. Benjamin Mays to attend the hall of fame induction (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Yes, Dr. Mays and I got to be friends.  My wife knew him very well and I got to meet him, course she taught at the school [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I got to meet him myself and you know he was, he was such an educator really, I mean god, this man could--I mean he can come in your house and he can talk for five hours and keep your mouth open up and he, the only thing he wanted, it's a funny thing.  The only thing he wanted, I used to always buy him, he used to come by on Thanksgiving and he always wanted a Harveys Bristol Cream.  I would go and buy a bottle of Harveys Bristol Cream and I would give him a little bit, about that much.  That's all he would drink, just a little bit of Harveys Bristol Cream that's all and he would sit down and I'm telling you he would tell you stories that he educated himself and I know he did under lamps and all that, and I told him and he was an avid baseball fan, loved baseball.  So, I told him I said well if I get a chance, thanks for the Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], they were able to put him on a plane, send him to Cooperstown [New York] and he sat there with my wife when I was inducted into the hall of fame.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I remember that time period but it seems like it was a golden age for Atlanta [Georgia] then.  With Maynard Jackson as the mayor.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you got like [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young here, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, the city itself with CNN hitting the cable network and.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I think just a golden time for Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're a big part of it.
Story_ID: 665815
Speaker 1: Now you went into the automobile businesses too, didn't you?
Speaker 2: I went into automobile, yes, yes, I went into the automobile business and stayed there for a long time and approached it the same way I approached my baseball career, you know, do unto others as you have them do unto you and treat people, no matter whether they came and bought a 7 Series [BMW 7 Series] or whether they came in to buy a little nut bolt that spent fifty dollars with you, and that's the way I approached my business, and I did well.  I did very well and I just, I stayed in too long and I was--I got to own not only--I had four or five dealerships.  I had four of 'em and one day I woke up at five in the morning and got to one of the dealerships and for some reason I just felt terrible, I felt heartache, I just felt terrible and I called my wife up, and I said, "Listen," I said, "we gonna sell all these dealerships.  I am tired."  I said, "I played baseball for twenty-three years, and these businesses are beating my you know what."  She said, "Well, if that's what you wanna do, that's what you want do," and so that's what we did.  We sold it so.  I was glad to get out of there, but I was very successful, I'm thankful, I was very successful at what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you published your autobiography in 1990 [sic. 1991], if--'I Had a Hammer' [sic. 'I Had a Hammer: The Hank Aaron Story,' Hank Aaron with Lonnie Wheeler] not 'If I Had A Hammer' (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, have, yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your nickname was Hammering Hank [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the Hammer to some people.  Now, how did--who gave you the nickname?
Speaker 2: A little fellow, a friend of mines, named Donald Davidson who's no longer with us, who stood about this tall and who saw it--almost every one of the home runs I hit, but his name was Donald Davidson and he was the one that gave me the Hammer.
Speaker 1: Okay, it stuck.  Now, you founded the Chasing the Dream Foundation [Hank Aaron Chasing the Dream Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia] you and your wife, Billye [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron] founded that in 1994, you were sixty.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us about the foundation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm gona let her tell you about the foundation (laughter), I, I'll let her, she can tell you a little bit more about it than I can.  Well, she'll explain it to you a little bit better than I can.
Speaker 1: All right, that's fine.  And Major League Baseball [MLB] in 1999 decided to start giving out the Hank Aaron Award you know.  What is the Hank Aaron Award for?
Speaker 2: It's for a complete ball player that year that not only had home runs but runs batted in and, and batting averages, all, putting all three of 'em together and I'm very thankful to the commissioner [Bud Selig] that he made that as one that would as long as I'm alive and well, as long as it's here, you know.  It's gonna be forever you know.  It's not gonna be just a one time thing, it's gonna be forever.
Speaker 1: Okay, your friend Frank Robinson became the first black manager in the Major Leagues?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Back in the late '70s [1970s]; had you ever considered becoming a manager?
Speaker 2: No, never did, never wanted to be a manager.  Never wanted to be a manager.  I felt like playing the game for as long as I did, I had enough trouble.
Story_ID: 665816
Speaker 1: We already talked about Barry Bonds.  When--today are you--what advice would you give like a young person who wants to be a baseball player today?
Speaker 2: I would tell him as I said before to give it all he got.  He'd have to remember that for every player that makes it, ten don't make it.  That's number one. The other thing is if he decide, if he decide he wants to play baseball, to make sure he go into it with the right attitude you know.  Do what--just make sure that he understands that you have to be able to say well, I need to do this today, tomorrow I need to do that but make sure that he understands that you can't, you can't do something that you're not capable of doing.  You know, he can't go into the game and think that the success is going to be like the day after tomorrow.  You know he gotta take one day at a time and be able to be prepared to do the things right.
Story_ID: 665817
Speaker 1: Okay as we sit here in 2016, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns--in sports you're speaking of?
Speaker 1: No, in life.
Speaker 2: In life (laughter), it's to--well, I think that most of us, and I say most of us and I guess the older I've gotten, the more I realize this is that we take things for granted you know.  We need to understand that, for an example, that we've had some people who have, who is in their grave today is simply because to make things better for us, and I'm talking about the likes of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Maynard Jackson, and you can go on and on, Thurgood Marshall, go on and on, you can name 'em all.  All these people have worked and survived and did some things to make things better for us, and the most important thing I think that they need to understand is that, take time out do one thing for yourself, vote. Vote and vote your conscience, you know make sure that you understand what you're doing and make sure that you understand that you are voting for others.
Story_ID: 665818
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now do you speak a lot these days? Do you--
Speaker 2: No, I don't speak at all.  My wife [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron], I let her do the speaking (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, I still see your picture, you know, it seems like every now and then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no I go--I make--but I, I'm mostly involved with my foundation [Hank Aaron Chasing the Dream Foundation, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about the family.  You have children from your first marriage [to Barbara Lucas], and you have like an adopted--?
Speaker 2: The kids are doing--my kids are doing fine most of them.  They're grown, they're doing fine, like the average kid, we have two little grand kids.  One [Emily Haydel] is at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], she's doing fine.  This is her last year, then we have one at Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona]--I think it's Arizona State.  Yeah, we have one, this is his first year.  So, they're both doing very well.  I am tickled to death that the one at Michigan is--she is blossoming into a young lady.  She just had her birthday yester- last week and she's twenty-one so, she is looking forward to coming out of college and I'm looking forward to her coming out of college and she's, she's a fine young lady.
Story_ID: 665819
Speaker 1: Okay, well considering everything that you've done as we sit here in 20- 2016 once again, what today would you consider to be your legacy and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered that you know regardless of what I tackled, what I went into, I did it with the intent of doing the very best that I could do.  It was not a matter of trying to go into something, to trying to make money, but as right now, you know my business with the stores, restaurants that I have, we hire, we got a lot of people hired and so that makes me feel good when people can, can work and make a little money and go and spend it.  You know, that's--so, I'd just like people to remember me as in, he wasn't greedy.  He didn't try to hog everything, he did things for others.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what's the name of your restaurant?
Speaker 2: We do Popeyes [Popeyes Louisiana Kitchen, Inc.].
Speaker 1: You have a Popeyes franchises?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we believe in Popeyes chicken (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right I'll have to check 'em out.
Speaker 2: Yes, please (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you. Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you, okay.
