Story_ID: 21546
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sondra Barber Akins, and that's S-O-N-D-R-A, B-A-R-B-E-R, Akins, A-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 16, 1944, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right, and, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a science education professor.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March--I'm sorry, May 15, 1940--(laughter), 2012 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home, 1530 Sunrise Terrace, Teaneck, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21547
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, "People Magazine-ish" type questions we always ask as sort of a warm up.  And they only require, they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  There're quite a few.  I think strawberry shortcake (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My hometown, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Keep an open mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21548
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first, and then we'll get 'em together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, Mabel, M-A-B-E-L, Savannah, S-A-V-A-N-N-A-H, Sharpe, S-H-A-R-P-E, Barber, B-A-R-B-E-R.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born May 31, 1919 in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family.  I mean how far back can you trace them, and what were they doing in history?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's father, George Sharpe, was a chef at High Point College [now High Point University, High Point, North Carolina].  I'm sure he had other jobs, but that was the, that's the one I'm most familiar with.  And my mother's mother, Lamar [Lithea Ingram] Sharpe, actually, around the time my mother was ten [years old], went to New York.  And she had a number of jobs babysitting and finally, a nurse's assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother's mother moved to New York, and did she and your grandfather split or--
Speaker 2: Yes, they eventually did have a divorce, sometime after she moved to New York.
Speaker 1: So was your mother raised in North Carolina or New York?
Speaker 2: My mother was raised in North Carolina by her father and his mother.  And, of course, she corresponded frequently with her mother, who sometimes came to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there any stories in the family about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or any of those kind of stories that are passed down?
Speaker 2: I don't know of any stories that come to mind, the end of slavery, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, or Reconstruction or any of the other things that happened, you know, in the nineteenth century?
Speaker 2: I can't think of any that they talked about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21549
Speaker 1: So what did your mother [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber] say about growing up in Greensboro [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, she had some happy memories and some sad memories.  She has memories of what it was like to live part of the time with her paternal grandmother.  And I think at the age of about twelve, she was sent, along with her brother, to boarding school at Mary Potter [School, Oxford, North Carolina].  It turned out that her aunts, her father's [George Sharpe] sister, was a teacher at that school.  So she was not entirely separated from her family.  And, of course, her brother went there as well.  She talks of her grandmother having a magnificent horse and buggy that everybody admired.  Her mother--, her grandmother had taken Madame Walker's course.  And she knew something about doing hair, but she had a number of other things that she was involved with to make money.  So she was a pretty remarkable woman.  And my mother always talks of being sad that her mother [Lamar Lithea Ingram Sharpe] was not there and having a broken family, as she would say.
Story_ID: 21550
Speaker 1: Do you know anything more about Mary Potter Boarding School [Oxford, North Carolina; where Akins' mother, Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber, went to school]?  Now, this is a black boarding school, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I know it was in Oxford, North Carolina, and it really existed as Mary Potter [School], I believe until after I was in high school, though I don't know if it was a private school by then.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a private school as--
Speaker 2: It was a private school.  It was a boarding when my mother went, but somehow I remember in the '60s [1960s] hearing the name, Mary Potter, and I didn't think of it as a private school at that time.  It may have, I really can't say if it remained private for as long as it existed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it might have been taken over by the state or something at one point.
Speaker 2: It might have been.  I, I can't be absolutely certain.
Speaker 1: So was Mary Potter like, was it similar to like Piney Woods [Country Life School, Pineywoods, Mississippi] or some of the other schools to--
Speaker 2: A school that I heard a lot about in North Carolina that I believe it would have been similar to was Palmer Sedalia Institute in [Sedalia] North Carolina.  It was not necessarily a school for disadvantaged--now, we're talking relatively here, relatively speaking.  I don't think it was necessarily a school for children who had been deserted or anything like that.  These parents wanted the children to have a good education, I believe.  I know when my mother talked about what she learned in school, it seemed to be quite a bit.  She took Latin, and she said she learned about Marie Curie [Polish physicist and chemist, working mainly in France, who is famous for her pioneering research on radioactivity] when she was in high school.  And she did, after she graduated, she went to Winston-Salem Teachers College [now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] at the time.  So it was a school to prepare students--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for further study, though I wouldn't--, I'm not sure how many of them went on to higher education.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, it sounds like, a lot like, what you said, Palmer Institute or Piney Woods Country Life School in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay.
Speaker 1: Students were sent to, you know, who--, to afford an opportunity for a better education actually--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in a boarding atmosphere, almost like Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] on a smaller scale.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, do you know who Mary Potter was?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think I once knew.  I think Mary Potter was not a black woman, but a woman who contributed to the education--, but I--to say for certain, I think I'd have to look it up.  But I'm thinking, I think she was definitely a benefactor. [In 1877, Venerable Mary Potter was the founder of the Roman-Catholic religious institute 'Little Company of Mary Sisters'.]
Speaker 1: Okay, that makes, okay.  Yeah, it's a shame it doesn't exist now 'cause the name would probably attract a lot of students (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Mary Potter and stuff (laughter), you know.
Story_ID: 21551
Speaker 1: So your mother [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber] went on to Winston-Salem Teachers College [now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she become a school teacher?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  My mother always said she just wanted to have her own family and teacher her own kids.  But she never really wanted to be a teacher.  Her father [George Sharpe] had that idea, and, of course, her mother [Lamar Lithea Ingram Sharpe] wanted her to be a teacher as well.  They did correspond a lot, she and her mother.  And my grandmother came to visit often.  So she definitely had a connection, strong connection with her mother, who also wanted her very much so to be a teacher (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, did your mother talk about what she really wanted to do?  Did she have an aspiration beyond that or--
Speaker 2: My mother wanted to get married and have a happy family that would stick together forever (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so she wanted to kind of repair the damage that was done when her parents split up?
Speaker 2: She--, I'm certain that the experience of feeling like she was from a broken home, even though she had relatives and, and they were quite close, I think that she just wanted to make certain that her life and her family would be different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21552
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna go to the your father's side, and I'm gonna try to get 'em together.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it?
Speaker 2: Alexander Eugene Barber.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born August 26, 1911 or '12 [1912].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born close to Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: My father's mother, Mary Ivy Barber, had, I think it was ten or eleven children.  Her husband, John Barber, died before my father was five years old, about the time my father was five years old.  I know quite a bit about his siblings.  They were a close family.  My father, of course, lived very--he lived at home till he was seventeen [years old].  And by that time, his mother was taking care of children, of her children.  So my father didn't feel like that there was that much space in the house for him.  He found a job, just a stone's throw from his home at Winston-Salem Teachers College [now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] that allowed him to live on campus.  So from the time he was seventeen, he was helping his mother, living on the campus of the college and--
Speaker 1: So his mother worked on the campus too--?
Speaker 2: No, his mother did not work on the campus.  She lived, not even a mile away from the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he had a job on the campus that--
Speaker 2: He had a job on campus.  He probably was doing odds and ends, but at some point became the chauffeur for the president of the college.
Speaker 1: Now, was he going to school there at that time?
Speaker 2: He was allowed to sit in classes, but he never actually matriculated.
Speaker 1: Okay, he became the, so he became the chauffeur of the president.
Speaker 2: He became the chauffeur of the president.
Speaker 1: Who was the president then?
Speaker 2: It was Jack Atkins.
Speaker 1: Jack Atkins.  Now, this is, was this a black president?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I have to say it was, you see the first president he knew was Frank Atkins, and then his son, Jack Atkins became president.  It was either one or the other I should say.  Jack Atkins would have, I mean I actually can remember Jack Atkins myself.  And so I'm not sure whether he actually started driving for Frank or Jack.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, so did your dad have any stories about growing up--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, lots of stories about what it was like to help to take care of those, actually, his, his siblings' children.  He was very responsible.  He was the one that his mother depended on.  The--, most of the others went North to New York or Pennsylvania.  There was one sister who remained in the home.  But he talked about picking up coal along the coal, the train track.  The train trestle was not very far away from my mother's house.  And he would run and see when the train passed, would do lots of the things for the, for those children who were in the home.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard that story a number of times, of people picking up coal along the train tracks.  I guess it would spill off the train.
Speaker 2: I think that's what would happen, yes.
Speaker 1: And poor people would often go along the track to try to find the coal.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 21553
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how he [Akins' father, Alexander Eugene Barber] met your mother [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, they're on the campus [Winston-Salem Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] at the same time.
Speaker 2: That is the story.  That is the story.  My mother had come to school, supposedly to study to be a teacher (laughter).  My father, by that time--my mother was eighteen [years old].  By that time, my father was twenty-six.  And at that time, he was driving for the president.  And my mother had, she happened to see him on campus, and she thought he was quite handsome (laughter).  He was eating peanuts, and she said, "I'd like to have some peanuts."  And he did not give her any, but the next week, apparently, he had this big bag of peanuts (laughter) that, that he gave her.  And they had a very short courtship.  She met him, I guess it was in January or February.  I remember, as a matter of fact, it's written that their first date was Valentine's Day, 1937 or '36 [1936].  I have to go back and look at that.  And they danced to "Pennies from Heaven" [popular song from 1936, by Johnny Burke and Arthur Johnston]. Well, by the time the school year ended, they had decided to get married, and the rest really is history.  They lived a very productive life, working together.  My father continued to work on the campus, but with other jobs as well.  My mother, after I started school, actually, went to help him.  She had a job in the laundry at that time because he was managing the campus laundry.  So she worked in that laundry with him for years.  Later on, she became a dormitory supervisor.  They worked at Winston-Salem Teachers College, which became Winston-Salem State University, all of their work lives.  My father probably had worked around thirty-five or forty, at least forty years.  He also had a dry cleaners at the edge of the campus because he recognized the need for black, African Americans to have dry cleaning.  And so he set up his own dry cleaning establishment right at the edge of campus.  And they worked in that establishment and did a number of things for many years.  They were married, when my father passed away, they were married, they had been married sixty-six years.  He passed away at ninety-one.
Story_ID: 21554
Speaker 1: Now, do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you name them in order and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --tell us where you fit in?
Speaker 2: Okay, the oldest one is Alexander.  We call him Gene.  It's Alexander Eugene Barber, and he is a junior (laughter).  Next to him, my brother, Freddie, is five years younger than he is.  And next to Freddie is where I come in.  I'm only about fifteen months younger than Freddie.  And our baby sister, Mary, is five and a half years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that everyone?
Speaker 2: That's the four, all four.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is there a story behind your name [Sondra] being spelled with an "o" instead of--
Speaker 2: The only thing I can think is that my mother [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber] wanted them to call me "Sondra," and not "Sandra" (laughter).  And she was pretty successful.
Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense.
Story_ID: 21555
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber] personalities and their dispositions and their habits and their talents and their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  Everybody says now I'm just like my mother, especially when it comes to appearance.  And I must agree to that.  From a child, I always wanted to be like my dad (laughter), because my father was the most gentle, smart.  Even though he didn't go to college, he was good with numbers.  As my mother would always say, they take after their father, not me; just a very kind person with a lot of wisdom.  And he was an entrepreneur too.  He did quite well for that time, for that day and time, he did quite well.  I mean we still today can appreciate, my siblings and I, can appreciate just what he did and what he accumulated.  And he was just an admirable person.  So was my mother (laughter).  She was caring, wouldn't let her kids out of her sight.  She just wanted us to stay together and be a family.  Even when she started working on the campus [Winston-Salem Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], we went to work with her.  Before we went to school, I started at school at six [years old], we would go to campus with her.  And the first couple of years, I was on the--I went to school in the afternoon because they had double sessions.  And my mom and father took me to work with them in the laundry until school started at twelve o'clock.  They'd take me home and give me lunch and then take me to school, my brother, both my brother and I went to work with them.  And in the summertime, I followed my dad to work.  I learned how to--, I learned the laundry system, how the clothes were taken in and how they stamped them, how he kept his ledgers for, especially for the dry cleaning, and his beautiful handwriting, I would try to imitate how he would have all his numbers lined up in columns.  And he had this Underwood adding machine.  And I liked to see if I could add the columns and get the same answers that the Underwood got (laughter).  So, it was, they were role models, my parents were.
Story_ID: 21556
Speaker 1: And so was your house that you, the house you grew up in, was it like right on the campus [Winston-Salem Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Akins' parents, Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber, worked there]?
Speaker 2: The house, it would have taken maybe ten minutes at most to get from my house to the campus.  It was, you know, just a very close-knit community.  On the way to the campus, I would pass my elementary school.  So things--, actually, it was walking distance from my house to the campus.  When we got to be old enough, we would say, "Oh, we're gonna walk over to the campus," and my mother would say--'cause mom didn't work in the summertime.  She would say, "Okay," you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you describe the house you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Oh, for sure, absolutely.  The house started out as a two-bedroom, you could call it, some people say "bungalow," but I'm not sure, I'm not quite sure that's the right architectural style.  But it was only two bedrooms when it, in the beginning.  My father decided--when they started building in the neighborhood, there were only two or three houses on the whole street.  But eventually, there were like twenty houses.  They started clearing out the woods and building these new houses.  And my father decided that he was gonna remodel our house.  So he planned exactly what it was gonna look like.  And they added two more bedrooms and modernized--had a pass-through from the kitchen to the breakfast nook.  That was another part that they added, made a garage that went under the house and really, it's a lovely home.  I have pictures of it now.  And the interesting thing is that when he told my brother, who was only about twelve or thirteen at the time, what he wanted the house to look like, my brother, who actually went into engineering, drew a picture of what it was going to look like.  And we looked at the picture, and when the contractor would come to talk to my father, we would eavesdrop to hear about the planning.  And we saw blueprints, and we felt like we were in on that house from beginning to end.  And it looked like the picture my brother drew (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, did you all have family meetings?
Speaker 2: We would, family, we had family meetings because the family was there all the time.  And we just talked about, my father talked about his dreams and we knew about that, whether it had to do with the house or what he wanted to do with some other things.  So that's how, pretty much how we were in on it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21557
Speaker 1: The section of town you lived in [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], did it have a special name?
Speaker 2: This was East Winston.  We called it East Winston.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well--
Speaker 2: Now, I should say that because some of the houses were built by R. J. Reynolds [Tobacco Company] for its workers. There's a little part of East Winston that was called Reynoldstown as well.  A matter of fact, my oldest sibling lives in one of those houses right now.
Speaker 1: Now, was this built by R. J. Reynolds for its black employees?
Speaker 2: No, it was built for the white employees, and you can see now where they'll be a big house and then a smaller house.  My understanding was the smaller house was for the people who worked for the people in the larger house.  Now, these were not huge houses, but you can definitely see a difference in the, in the houses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: White people lived in that neighborhood before black people moved in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our house was bought when I was, I was born in our house so it was bought a couple of years before I was born.
Story_ID: 21558
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights.  If I walked into my yard and looked across the street, all I could see would be the woods, my earliest memories, with only three houses on the street.  A lot of red clay, especially on the hill beside my house that one of our community members made bricks from that red clay.  And he became pretty famous too.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: George Black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lots of red clay. Around the house in the back where they said it was rich dirt because it was much darker than that red clay on the hill beside the house. Lots of fruit trees.  We had little flower gardens that we planted, and there were a lot of animals around.
Story_ID: 21559
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You were talking about the animals, I think in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, the animals.  I, I don't know where, all the places that they might have come from, but I certainly did see a lot of animals.  Now, in the woods, when we took our walks, we could see pigs, hogs that people kept in the woods.  They didn't wanna keep the hogs around their house, so they just moved them into the woods.  And we would--of course, that was not such a pretty smell, and it was kind of pitiful to look in there and see these pigs and, of course, what was gonna happen to them eventually, 'cause they were gonna be slaughtered.
Speaker 1: Now, were they in a pen or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, a pig pen.  Flowers, wildflowers, lots of nature.  That was really wonderful.  If my mother [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber] stood on the front porch, she could somehow call out to us, my brother and I, Freddie [Barber], the one next--I'm next to.  We'd take walks in the woods all the time.  And she would know where we were.  She somehow knew, even, it was not threatening to walk in the woods as little children.  There was a branch, we called it a branch, a stream, running water.  We would grab onto the vines and swing across the branch like Tarzan did in the movies.  Sometimes we would see certain plants.  We call them daff, junip--daffodils, and we wondered how did they get out here in the woods.  They looked like the ones in our yard.  We loved to look at the birds, the cardinal, which is the state bird [North Carolina].  And the few neighbors, only three on the street at the time, as I said, we could walk by their houses.  And I remember the lady at the end of the block had a doorbell.  When we were young, really young, we didn't have a doorbell.  And we would run to her house and just push the doorbell so that we could, so that we could hear it ring (laughter).  I can remember the people across the street, when they first got a washing machine.  It was, looked like a barrel standing on three legs, and I was just amazed to see how she washed the clothes and had the roller on the outside, and would roll them through.  And a home washer was a big thing, even though I really was used to high technology, commercial technology because the laundry had these huge commercial washing machines which were incredible to look at.  But to see one in a house (laughter).
Speaker 1: Were they like the ones that we had, I mean that, in those days, did they have dryers too or just the little washer?
Speaker 2: There were these big dry--the clothes went into these wringers first.  I think they called them something else, but we called them wringers where they spun, they were spun, and then they would be almost dry when you took them out.  And then they went into these big dryers that they called tumblers.  And then from the tumblers, they went to these mangle irons.  And those sheets would be rolled through those mangler irons, and they would come out just beautifully.  I think that's when I really began to see how matter changes.  I'd look at my father [Alexander Eugene Barber] put the soap in those big washing machines.  He'd sometimes lift me so that I could push the button.  And I felt so powerful.  I think that probably was my first exposure to, you know, changes in matter and how things can go from wet to dry, and I could see how, when the, under the ironers, the steam, they used to steam that went all through the laundry, through these pipes that had to be generated by something that happened in the boiler room that was some place, some distant place on the campus.  But I think it was the beginning of understanding something about technology and very interesting to look back on, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were really keenly observant as a child--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --in the process, some kind of change process with the machines, the big machines.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I--they would tell me, oh, look, the steam.  If they don't fire the burner, we won't have the steam.  And the dormitory rooms are cold today 'cause there was no steam.  Something was wrong in the boiler room.  My father, there was no phone in the laundry.  He would, he simply, he would say, "I'm going over to the boiler room.  They need to fire the boiler," you know.  And I could see that big smoke stack at another part of campus.  And I knew it was all related.  And my brothers [Alexander Eugene Barber, Jr. and Freddie Barber] got to go to the boiler room.  I didn't.  They said, do you know the train, the train goes up to the boiler room (laughter), and the train is bringing the coal.  So I, I would think about that, you know.
Story_ID: 21560
Speaker 1: The campus, so you were on the campus [Winston-Salem Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Akins' parents, Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber, worked there] a lot?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And you were saying that the campus provided you sort of a laboratory for learning new things?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, because the laundry [that Akins' parents ran] wasn't the only place that I went on the campus.  I ran around with my little friends whose parents worked (laughter) on the campus.  We might venture into the canteen, the dormitories, even a classroom.  I talked to everybody I saw on that campus, the students who were going to be teachers and at some point, they started teaching nurses as well.  The instructors, even the president.  I can remember the president walking with his big cane, and I'm looking up at Dr. Atkins, and, yeah; Coach Gaines, Clarence Gaines
Speaker 1: This is Clarence "Big House"--
Speaker 2: --"Big House" Gaines was, I remember, even as a young kid looking up at this big man.  So I knew who these people were.  I knew who the campus engineer was.  I knew what they did, and I got a chance to learn where they came, well, the students, where they came from.  Some came from farms, some came from bigger cities, some came as far away as, you know, I think Ohio and places like that.  When I would hear New York City (laughter).  So I had a sense of that world outside of the world that I was in by being on the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, so you mentioned some of the people on campus.  Are there any others that you wanna mention?  Did you know any science instructors on campus?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any science instructor.  I think the closest to scientists would have been that campus engineer who was always said to be a very brilliant man who would put the lights up and have, you know, some fantastic displays, displays.  That's the one I remember more.  And I knew he was an engineer.
Story_ID: 21561
Speaker 1: Now, did your family ever go into town much and to--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And kind of, now, I found out for the first time last, this spring, that Winston-Salem [North Carolina] is really a combination of two towns.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: I don't think most people know that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Kind of describe what it's like.
Speaker 2: Okay, what it was like to go into town when I was really very little, I can remember going to, they called it the 'Bing Line'.  And you could, I guess the farmers had brought in their vegetables and we could get something there.  I can remember the streets, some streets that they would hurt my feet if we crossed because they actually still had the cobblestones.  So that was quite a while back.
Speaker 1: Now, that would be, just explain the nature of Winston-Salem 'cause I alluded to it, but just explain it in your terms.
Speaker 2: Okay, Winston-Salem is part Salem and part Winston.  There used to be a big coffee pot that separated, and it still is there.  There's a coffee pot.  And it's right at the--
Speaker 1: Now, how big is this coffee pot?
Speaker 2: Well, it looks like it was about a hundred feet tall when I was young (laughter), but it really is not that huge.  But it certainly did seem to be so when I was quite small.
Speaker 1: It's like a sculpture of a coffee pot?
Speaker 2: It's, yeah, exactly.  You know, I'm sure it's hollow on the inside.  It's a big coffee pot.  Of course, R. J. Reynolds' [tobacco] factories, that's really, the tobacco was the, like the mainstay of that particular area.
Story_ID: 21562
Speaker 1: So when you went downtown [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] from our home, we would probably go down Fourth Street, and you would begin to smell the tobacco.  That's the first thing.  Then you'd get a little further.  If you went to some of the stores in town, of course, you first reached the part of town that was African American.  The factories were in that area.  And there, you would find the movie theaters.  It was the Lincoln, the Lafayette and there was a shoe shop and all the buses that brought you downtown.  And by the way, that was the Safe Bus Company that was black operated.  So we didn't have to worry about having, being forced to ride in the back of the bus to get downtown.  Now, once you got downtown--
Speaker 2: So--the black community had its own bus company?
Speaker 1: Oh, the black community had its own bus company.  It had taxicabs.
Speaker 2: The Safe Bus Company.
Speaker 1: The Safe Bus Company.
Speaker 2: And was there a significance to that name?  Was there, had there been incidents on the other buses that--
Speaker 1: I don't know that that is the case, but I do know that eventually when unions got stronger, the--I don't, I can't even remember what they called the other bus company.  If someone mentioned it, I would recognize it.  But those, when those bus workers went on strike, it turned out that the Safe Bus Company eventually took over all the buses in the city, but that was after, that was after, you know, way after--that might have been in the '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Now, did whites ride on the Safe buses?
Speaker 1: No.  I never saw one.  It, Winston-Salem was a relatively progressive town for the South because we did have the tobacco industry.  Also Hanes Mills, that was a prominent employer of people.
Speaker 2: Now, this is the Hanes company that makes underwear and socks?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That Michael Jordan [professional basketball player] is (unclear) promoter--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, yes, he wouldn't have been able to promote back then, but that's true, yes.  And I, because Winston-Salem had the college, Winston-Salem Teachers College [now Winston-Salem State University], it had the bus, the factories, many black people could make a pretty good life because of that.  And, of course, there was this school system that employed black teachers and principals, only black teachers and principals could be in a place where we were.
Speaker 2: So and all this was triggered by your question, what was it like going downtown?  I went from a completely black neighborhood, community in which I very, I rarely saw white people to downtown.  If I moved further downtown to go to some of the stores, like there was the 'Anchor', the first store I saw with escalators, and 'Mother and Daughter' and the 'Arcade'.  Now, that area of town, by the time you reached that area of town, most of the people around were white.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Lunch counters, Kresge's.
Speaker 1: Well, did you, was there like overt segregation in that part of town?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, especially, if you decided you were going to go to --Woolworth's, I almost said Walgreen's, but Woolworth's or Kresge's, the five and ten cents store which also had a lunch counter.  And generally, I would go when I got to be about eleven or twelve and could go to the movies.  I would go to Kresge's or the Woolworth's and have my lunch, standing up at the counter, while the other people were sitting, the white people were sitting down.  And I saw the signs, labeled "Colored" and "White" and all of that.  But we were allowed to shop in the stores, except for one or two that you couldn't even walk into unless you had a job in those stores.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you, what would be the protocol if you shopped in a white store?  Could you try on the clothes?
Speaker 2: Yes, you could try on the clothes, and buy the clothes.  But you always had that sense of space.  You just knew, even from the time I was very small.  I can remember going downtown with my parents [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber], and it seemed like a sea of white people.  But you didn't have much interaction with them.  There might have been people-watching, I mean you're watching, "Oh, they have really blonde, blonde hair or red hair," you know.  And they had a, the accent was, it was a drawl, more of a drawl.
Speaker 1: So did black people speak differently from the white people down there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, you just felt that difference.
Story_ID: 21563
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in terms of the school system [in Winston-Salem, North Carolina], this is a public school system, right, but it was segregated?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: I take it the black teachers didn't make as much as the whites or did they?
Speaker 2: Now, a few years ago, I asked, I was actually able to find one of my eighth grade teacher.  And my sense was, when he started working there was one system, and they made the same, there was the same kind of salary guide.  Now, when it comes to opportunity and all of that, I'm sure there was a difference.  We always had a sense that our books were older.  But I just wanna say, nevertheless, we, I had wonderful teachers.  Our teachers really encouraged us.  I could see that especially after sixth grade.  Sixth grade is when they started tracking students.
Speaker 1: Okay, let me go back.  What was the name of your, the first school you attended (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My school was Skyland Elementary School.
Speaker 1: And what, how do you--
Speaker 2: Skyland, S-K-Y-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so I take it you liked school.  You seem to really--
Speaker 2: Absolutely (whispering).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Absolutely, you know, some of the teachers came from the college, and I just had a school teacher connection.  My parents could say, "Oh, Ms. Smith, yes, Ms. Smith was a student" [at Winston-Salem Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Akins' parents, Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber, worked there].  They were excellent teachers.  Some of those, some of my teachers actually took graduate degrees from the North.  But you see they had, they could only teach black children.  So we were able to get the best of the black teachers at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked, when I was young, I liked, I liked language arts, for sure.  I liked math.  We didn't, science, we, we were exposed to nature.  But I don't really remember hearing the subject, 'Science', science as a subject till maybe I was in sixth or seventh grade.  It was then on my report card.  I look at my report cards which my father saved all our report cards.  And when I was in the seventh, sixth or seventh grade, when I was in the sixth and seventh grade, science was written in by the teacher.  It wasn't printed.  When I was in the eighth grade, science is typed or printed on the card.  So that may be a sense of when they really got serious about science.  I would, I would say when I was young, the language arts and math were my favorite subjects.  They were stressed the most.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter), I loved practically all of my teachers.  Ms. Smith, of course, was my first-grade teacher, Louise Smith.  She taught all the kids in our family, so I knew I was gonna have Ms. Smith before I went to school.  Matter of fact, the year before I went to school, I got to go to school with Freddie [Barber; Akins' older brother], and I was introduced to Ms. Smith, and because I came to her classroom.  So I was really ready for her, and, of course, we all loved Ms. Smith.  After first grade, there was a Mrs. Hall who was very much into history.  I still can remember some things I learned in history from Ms., Mrs. Hall, and she was very much into the theater, acting (laughter).  Now, seventh grade is when it really happened.  Myra Roseman.
Speaker 1: Now, is this still at Skyland?
Speaker 2: Skyland, yes, Skyland, went through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Went through eighth grade, okay.  So Mrs., what was her name?
Speaker 2: Myra Roseman.
Speaker 1: Roseman.
Speaker 2: Somehow you knew when you got in the seventh grade, 7-1, 'cause we were in the accelerated track, playtime was definitely over.  You had to be serious.  I can remember her saying, "Sondra Barber, one day you're gonna compete in an integrated world."  I had already heard about the Supreme--, Thurgood Marshall, I must have been ten [years old] when I started hearing all this.  So they were saying, "Integration is coming to Winston-Salem."  I mean they made it sound like it was gonna be the next day (laughter).  But, and we had a part in it.  We, we were not demonstrating in the streets, but we were part of that Civil Rights Movement because our, our job was to work hard in school and achieve.  That was, that was the way to equality.  And that was the way to disprove the myth of black inferiority.
Story_ID: 21564
Speaker 1: Okay, so your family kept up with civil rights?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And do you think it's because you're on the campus [Winston-Salem Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Akins' parents, Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber, worked there] too that you got a lot of information about it?
Speaker 2: I think the campus and church.  The other big institution in our life was church which was just a stone's throw from the (laughter) campus.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your church and what denomination?
Speaker 2: My church was, when I first--actually, I was born, my parents were charter members of that church.  And the church, they started the church when I was about ten months old.  So I was always in it.
Speaker 1: So what's the name of it?
Speaker 2: It was at first called Second Mount Zion Baptist Church.  It's on Dunleaf Avenue, and--
Speaker 1: Second Mount Zion.
Speaker 2: Second Mount Zion Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Was there a First Mount Zion somewhere?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And later it became Zion Memorial.  I think the name changed when I was about eleven [years old], by a minister who was very much into the Civil Rights Movement.  All the ministers, all the black ministers were.  So you heard news on Sunday, and you heard talk in the neighborhoods.  So we, we were aware, very much aware of Martin Luther King [Jr.].  I can remember talk about the bus boycott.  I can remember, I think I was in the seventh grade or so when Little Rock [Arkansas] was desegregated.  I remember hearing about how bad it was for those students, and I always wondered how can they do their best work.  I, I don't wanna do this 'cause I won't be able to do my best work, and I have to, you know, go to school like that.  But I knew I was gonna have to one day (laughter).
Story_ID: 21565
Speaker 1: Now did you all have a television early on or--
Speaker 2: Television, we got, I think I must have been in second grade.  I remember, I can remember hearing about television from my brother who went to work with my aunt.  My aunt worked for people, for white people in the other part of the town.  I can remember my brother came home and he said, "You know, when they're playing the Lucky Strike commercial, there are cigarettes that are jumping up and down." (laughter)  I mean I knew the commercial 'cause I heard it on the radio (laughter).  And it was always like, I wonder, I wonder when I'm gonna see, you know, I would imagine everything they would tell me.  And, yeah, we got a television.  I think I was about seven [years old].  I remember seeing very early on--maybe I was six, maybe I was seven, this little black girl on Ted Mack Amateur Hour [television series; 1948-1970].  And she was going to sing.  And he said, "What are you gonna sing?"  She said, I'm gonna sing something.  He said, I thought you were gonna sing, but you know what you're doing.  She said, "Yes, Mr. Mack.  I've been singing for years."  Her name was Gladys Knight [singer/song-writer].  And I remember when I was eleven or twelve seeing the '64,000 Question' [game show].  And Gloria Lockerman spelled, "antidisestablishmentarian," and she ended up winning, I think $28,000.
Speaker 1: Which was big money then.
Speaker 2: Huge money.
Speaker 1: It's good money now, but big--
Speaker 2: (Laughter), Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause you could get a house $6,000, I think, maybe then, $10,000.  So, okay, so, did you pay attention to science programming on television?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause those are the days of the--
Speaker 2: 'Watch Mr. Wizard'.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'Watch Mr. Wizard'.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And I can remember being jealous, well, I don't know if I was jealous in an evil way.  But these kids got to go to this man, and he was showing them all these things.  Well, it was like that about television anyway.  All the children I saw on television, you know, they were, they were not black children.  Whether they were on 'Howdy Doody' or 'Mickey Mouse Club' or 'Mr. Wizard'. But, yes, 'Watch Mr. Wizard' came on, on Sunday.  We would look at that after church.
Speaker 1: He would explain different science experiments.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, and they would say, "Wow," and I'm saying, "Hmm" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were kind of, sort of wishing for a black Mr. Wizard?
Speaker 2: I don't know what I was wishing for.  You know, I can't articulate just what I felt except that they were privileged because they could do that.
Story_ID: 21566
Speaker 1: We were talking about Don Herbert's 'Watch Mr. Wizard' and some of the other things on television in those days [1950s].  And, now, you were on campus at Winston-Salem [Teachers College, now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Akins' parents, Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber, worked there].  Did they have any science programs for kids that, in the summertime?
Speaker 2: I don't remember science programs for kids on campus, not on campus.  I just remember from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, you said they started mentioning science when you were in the sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Mentioning science, and it was actually printed on the list of courses in the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you conscious, you were consciously aware of science at this point--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you wanted to be a part of it.  Now,--oh, I was asking you about the space shots, you know, Alan Shepard [first American to travel into space, 1961] going up in the capsule.  Did you pay attention to all of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would have because that was, that was--oh, Alan Shepard.  We're talking about eighth grade--
Speaker 1: The astronaut.
Speaker 2: --you're talking about, yes, in the eighth grade.  Now, here's what I, in the eighth grade, I can remember my teacher, my first male teacher, having a little experiment where he had ice in a glass of water and the ice was protruding over the surface.  And he asked, "Okay, when the ice melts, what's gonna happen?"  And some kids said, "Well, it's gonna run, the water is gonna run over the brim," and one student said, "Oh, no, it's not."  And I was among the students who said, I have to admit, "It's gonna run over the brim."  And we waited a while.  We must have done something else.  And when that ice melted, it did not run over the brim.  And I was always the smart one, after all (laughter).  And I really felt, you know, a bit of chagrin because I was wrong, and it really bothered me.  I went home and I did it and I did it again.  And (laughter) I actually reminded my eighth grade teacher about three years ago, "Do you know you did that experiment, and I was so upset."  That is when I realized I didn't know science.  I didn't.  There was something I should be learning because the idea was, you have to learn, you have to just learn.  You have to take every opportunity to learn.  That was ingrained in us.  And I knew by the time I got in ninth grade that science was the subject that I didn't already know.  Well, there was plenty I didn't already know. But I kind of felt like I knew.  I was on top of all the subjects, but not science.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you learned from that that water expands when it freezes and changes--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --to a solid form.
Speaker 2: And I still didn't know the explanation, but I knew that I didn't know (laughter).
Speaker 1: So the teacher didn't explain why?
Speaker 2: Well, the teacher, I don't remember the explanation then as much as he got us to think about it and to wonder why.  And then from there, we put some, a Coca-Cola bottle with Coke [Coca Cola] in it in the refrigerator, and it cracked.  So I, yes, I was beginning to understand something, but it still was not as if I had put everything completely together.  But, but this science was something that you didn't just know.  You just didn't understand it completely.  It was deeper, you know, and it was more challenging.
Speaker 1: So you look back at it, were they really trying to teach you the scientific method, observation and--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure that was, that was the intention.  And certainly, it got my attention.  And I realized, you know, this is--unlike, you know, reading or some of the other courses.  You know, you learn how to do it.  You learn the rules for doing it, and then you get the next problem, and then you do it the same way.  Didn't seem like that to me with science (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Story_ID: 21567
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a chance to travel much when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Actually, we did.  In spite of the fact that we didn't have all the same opportunities, my father formed a traveler's club with a group of men so that they could take their families on trips.  They would charter buses and travel.  They would take us to Tennessee.  We would go see 'From these Hills', I think, passion plays, and we went to Wilmington [Delaware].  My parents [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber] also took me to New York when I was seven or eight [years old], in the car.  So for a kid, coming up at that time, yes, we--because we had relatives in the North.  My grandmother lived in New York City.  And my aunt lived in Syracuse, New York.  And there were a few uncles somewhere in between Pennsylvania and New York.  So, and even an uncle in Massachusetts, Springfield, Massachusetts.  So we had people that we could visit, and we did occasionally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21568
Speaker 1: So, now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Atkins High School.
Speaker 1: Okay, Atkins High School.
Speaker 2: Atkins, named for the same Atkins family that led Winston-Salem Teachers College [now Winston-Salem State University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, and the Atkins it's named for, was that the first, maybe Atkins that your father chauffeured for, the older Atkins?
Speaker 2: I'm, there was a Simon Atkins--I'm sorry.  I have to get back, remember what my father told me.  Simon Atkins must have been one that was way before his time.  I think it was probably named for Simon Atkins.  But it was, it's the same family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Affiliated, associated with Winston-Salem Teachers College.
Speaker 1: All right, so, Atkins High School.  Now, what was the demographics of Winston-Salem [North Carolina] in terms of black population?  I didn't ask you that.  I should have, in those days, just roughly?
Speaker 2: Oh, we were true, we were really a minority back then.  I mean there were fewer blacks than whites.  And, you know, I kind of wanna say 20 percent, but I really would need to go back and look at the demographics there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: However, we were 100 percent (laughter) where we lived.  Now, Winston-Salem had one high school that was in the city for blacks.  So the high--, the African American kids who came from other parts of town--there was a Columbia Heights area which really was where the college was.  The East Winston area, the Kimberly Park area, all those students went to Atkins High School.  Now, the high school on the outside of town, the rural high school, which interestingly, if you go back today, you'd see it's not very far at all from, from where Atkins was.  Those students went to Carver High School.  And so those were the two African American high schools in the city at the time that I started high school.  By the time I got in tenth or eleventh grade, they had built high schools back in the other areas, and the kids from those areas went back to a high school in their area of town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Atkins, itself, was like the flagship of black high schools in North Carolina in those days.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 21569
Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student-
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --a good high school student?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Were you an honor student?
Speaker 2: Yes, I graduated, I was--I graduated as Valedictorian of eighth grade [Skyland Elementary School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], and I graduated as Valedictorian, high school [Atkins High School, Winston-Salem] Valedictorian. All right.
Speaker 1: 1962.
Speaker 2: Okay, were you "the" top student?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: All right, now, so were you involved in other activities too?  Were you--
Speaker 1: Yes, high school-
Speaker 2: --did you run for government or-
Speaker 1: Well, high--I lost the student government (laughter) election.  That's something I did lose.  I was in the Latin Club, the, I was in every club, even in ninth grade, I was in the Dramatics Club.  And I really starred in a production in the ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Which one was it?  What was your play?
Speaker 1: It was, okay, it was called 'White Tablecloths' (laughter).  Now, I've tried to look up on the internet what--it was a drama.  It was about a farm girl (laughter), who wanted to do something in her life besides live on a farm.  And her father wanted her to marry--I can even remember the name of the man, Lim, who had a nice farm.  Now, I'm saying farm.  They really were rural area.  And the mother always wanted things nice, and she even insisted on white tablecloths in her home.  And she wanted her daughter to have something different from what the father wanted.  (Laughter) That's the play.  That's the drama that, that I--and I was the girl.  So it was, it was quite interesting, but, yes, the Drama Club.  And by then, ninth grade is when I joined the Junior Engineers Club.  I told my ninth grade teacher that I really needed to learn more science because that is something that I had not had exposure to.  Now, I have to tell you also in ninth grade, there was this little boy who came to our school who sat on the first row with me, very smart.  His father was an ex-radiologist.  He came from a home where there was science in the background.  He became a very dear friend.  And just, just being in the same class and hearing him talk, I realized, there is a lot more that I need to learn.  He, by the way, is a HistoryMaker.
Speaker 2: Oh, who is it?
Speaker 1: His name is Joseph Gordon [also a HistoryMaker]. Joseph had come from Tennessee. He's not listed as someone from Winston-Salem because that's not where he grew up. As a matter of fact, before we graduated from high school, Joe actually went to Exeter Prep School [Exeter High School, Exeter, New Hampshire]. He was so smart that they siphoned his off (laughter) and got him right after tenth grade. But we became good friends. We would, we would do things together. I, we did our science projects. I remember my first ninth grade science project.
Speaker 2: What was it?
Speaker 1: It was a demonstration of the crystalline structure of sodium chloride [NaCl, table salt], very simple, very simple, something I showed with gum drops and toothpicks.  I had the yellow gum drops represent sodium and the green ones represented chlorine or the chloride ion and the sodium ion.  And I built the structure, and I was so intrigued with it.  And that's when it all began.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's when it began.
Speaker 2: All right, so working with Joe on that--
Speaker 1: Well, Joe didn't work, Joe had a different project.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I can't remember what it was, but Joe's father was very active in the neighborhood, in the school.  He was the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] president, and he brought something to the school.  You know, they had just moved to the city.  And it was just that kind of exposure where I realized there's something besides this stuff that I already know (laughter).  But ninth grade was definitely the beginning, and I can trace the rest through high school very easily.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you said you ran for student government once.
Speaker 1: I once ran for student government, but that was one thing I did not win.  Of course, I was in the Honor Society.  I became president of Honor Society.  I became president of the Junior Engineers Club.  I was editor of the school newspaper and editor of the yearbook.
Story_ID: 21570
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher or was there someone there [Atkins High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] that took a special interest in you?
Speaker 2: Two, two teachers.  I feel like they all took a special interest because you have to understand, we still were in that tracked group of students.  I don't know, I don't know all the things that were happening with the other students, and when you're a student, you're not aware.  You just know that you're being nurtured, you know.  So most of my teachers, I really liked a lot.  Now, there were science--there was a math teacher and there was a science teacher, in particular, who definitely influenced me as far as science and math though.  The first one was my ninth grade Algebra teacher.  His name was Togo West, Sr.  Now, you may recognize the name (laughter).
Speaker 1: We interviewed Junior, and--
Speaker 2: Togo West, Jr. was two years ahead of me, one of my role models, very smart, very confident.  He, if you saw a picture of Togo West, Jr., you would know what my high school math, algebra teacher looked like.  He was a military man, had been a military man.  And he came into the classroom and looked around and we just shook in our boots (laughter).  Joe [HistoryMaker Joseph Gordon, who went to the same high school as Akins until the tenth grade] was on the first row.  I was on the first row, and another kid named Sanford who was a fantastic tennis player, we were all on the front, front row (laughter).  And we just, we just worked like crazy (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so Togo West, Sr., yeah, we--I remember in the interview with Togo West, he did mention the black bus company and he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he would.
Speaker 1: I think he made Eagle Scout.
Speaker 2: Yes, Togo was a big, big boy scout and all of that.  And he actually was a role model.  I tended to have role models in the higher grades.  Togo had actually taken AP [advanced placement] chemistry when they first started it in the city.  Well, it turned out, I took AP chemistry when it was my time.  And that had to be at the white high school.  That was the first taste of integration, racial integration that I had.
Story_ID: 21571
Speaker 1: Now, how did that work?  Did they segregate you after you got over there [white high school in Winston-Salem, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  All of a sudden, twelfth grade, I had to be ready to go and hold my own in a class with white students.  That was an experience.  There was one girl from the school who took biology, advanced biology, while I took chemistry.  So we practically went hand-in-hand because, you know, actually, our fathers [Akins' father, Alexander Eugene Barber] drove us there, kind of--it gave us moral support.  And then the bus would bring us back.  And we would stay, I guess maybe an hour and a half, then come back to our own high school [Atkins High School, Winston-Salem].
Speaker 1: So, but you weren't, you were allowed to participate?  There's no--
Speaker 2: In twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: --no problems at the school?
Speaker 2: Nothing like what I had, had been afraid of because, as I mentioned before, I had seen actually on television the little, Little Rock [Arkansas] Nine [a group of African American students enrolled in Little Rock Central High School in 1957].  And I knew it was coming, as I said, from the time I was in maybe sixth or seventh grade, that I was gonna have to go to school (laughter) with white kids, you know.  So I was anticipating, I didn't know what to anticipate, but it was very civil.  As it turned out, the class had only six or seven students in it, and they came from the other high--, the white high schools.  And it was held at Reynolds [High School].  So they must have had one or two kids who went to Reynolds, and a couple who went to Gray [High School].  And then there was Sondra Barber who came over from Atkins (laughter) High School and very cordial.  Nevertheless, it was not easy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is Reynolds High School, named after R.J. Reynolds [tobacco industrialist]--
Speaker 2: After R.J. Reynolds.
Speaker 1: --Tobacco thing.  Okay.  So, now, this is interesting because, you know, there are so many stories that are still to unfold in the South where there's like big conflict when a black student comes to the door, and then later on, even in the North, the bussing--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Well, I--
Speaker 1: --crisis in the '70s [1970s] where even--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the breaking of defacto segregation caused violence.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, now, it turns out there had been a black girl at Reynolds, and she was there.  We knew she was there.  That was like the token.  I'm sure it was, it couldn't have been easy for her, but we didn't hear horror stories.  We didn't hear horror stories.  I'm sure she went through something.  When I went, it was a, it was not so publicized.  After all, it was just an advanced placement [AP] class.  It wasn't all day, real desegregation.  So, but I can remember walking in there, and students staring just like a sea of white children or students, and they were staring, but nobody said anything out of, out of the way.  Nobody said anything.  I remember the teachers' names, Dr. Hounshell (ph.) and Mr. Gerald (ph.).  There were two teachers.  And we would have our class and our lab all together in the same place, and they would have coffee at the--you know, it was quite interesting, but nevertheless, it was not easy because I felt different.  I mean I was in a place different from what I was used to, and I felt self-conscious.  But, no, there was, I cannot speak of any negative comments or anything like that.  We worked with partners.  I remember the girl I worked with.  She was very nice, very quiet (laughter).  I remember we went on a field trip.  We must have gone to Raleigh [North Carolina].  I don't believe it was Chapel Hill [North Carolina], to the state university [North Carolina State University].  And then we kind of hung together because we were these little, we were these young kids with, in the midst of these college students.  And I felt like I belonged to them (laughter) at that time, you know, because we were on that field trip.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but you did all right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I did all right, and I did all--and the reason is because of, well, it's just the nurturing of the community that I came up in.  You know, everybody was concerned that I would do all right.  When I came back to my school, my physics teacher asked, "Well, how are things going?  How's Dr. Hounshell?" Somehow he knew of him.  He must have been talking to him.
Story_ID: 21572
Speaker 1: But just before twelfth grade [at Atkins High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] is when I had my, I had Inez Scales (ph.) for a chemistry teacher, female chemistry teacher whom I had seen in the hallways, even from ninth grade with her white jacket on.  And I thought she was--, in the days, language I would--she was cool.  I mean there was just something very interesting about that lady.  And once I got into her class, I knew chemistry was it.  That was the subject.  I knew it.  The following summer I took chemistry, I went for a four-week science institute on the campus of North Carolina College.  It was called North Carolina College, now, North Carolina Central [University] in Durham [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Okay, so that's--
Speaker 1: So I was well, I began to be well prepared from getting, becoming interested with that ninth grade project; tenth grade project was with rats, which I didn't really care for.  Eleventh grade chemistry was, it was just it, you know.  I knew.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was gonna major in chemistry, yep.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 21573
Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [Atkins High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina], were you being, what kind of counseling were you getting in terms of where you should go?
Speaker 2: Oh, now, that's very interesting.  At that time, they were beginning to talk more about breaking down the barriers and breaking down the barriers in North Carolina.  A few of us did apply to colleges in North Carolina, but I was already focused on Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] (laughter) where many of the people in the community, role models went.  Mr. West [Togo West, Sr.; Akins' teacher at Atkins High School] graduated from Howard University.  Togo [West, Jr.] was at Howard University.  Togo had been the Valedictorian a couple of years before I graduated, and even before Togo, there was this girl named Janice Jessup who eventually became a lawyer.  She went to Howard [University].  So, and Howard was the place of interest for top students back then.  It was like the most prestigious of the historically black colleges [and universities; HBCUs], and it turned out--and they gave these big scholarships.  Forty people--, the year I graduated, forty people across the country got scholarships, full tuition for four years.  And I was one.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a particular name for that scholarship you got?
Speaker 2: They called it--, it wasn't National Merit, as the national.  But it was a merit scholarship from Howard University.
Story_ID: 21574
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that happened during graduation [from Atkins High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] that, from high school, that's significant before we move on to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Significant.  I got a lot of awards, and Mr. [Togo] West [Senior; Akins' teacher in high school] was the one who handed them to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so that's, so at Howard University then, and this is 1962.
Speaker 2: I went September 1962.
Speaker 1: Oh, let me ask you this before we leave high school.  Did, do you remember hearing about the sit-in's starting in North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, of course, of course.  We heard about them at church.
Speaker 1: This would have been 1960.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You would have been a sophomore [in high school].
Speaker 2: And Greensboro was just, it was our sister.  That's our sister city.  I mean I would go to Greensboro often, and we knew about the beginning.  We knew about students in other schools.  Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I had a friend who was at Spelman who went to jail because of sit-ins.  I, for a long time, couldn't remember being involved, and then 19--a few years ago.  It must have been what anniversary, fiftieth anniversary, the 'Winston-Salem Centennial' or 'Journal' published a picture.  And to my surprise, I am in the picture (laughter).  I think I must have, with a friend of mine, decided to go downtown and observe.  And you can see the older students, the college students sitting down.  There's a white person with a flag, you know, the Confederate flag.  In the background, I am standing up and looking.  So, yes, (laughter) I remember, I definitely remember hearing about 'em, but I couldn't remember actually being at any demonstration.  If anybody asked me, "No, I wasn't in the demonstration.  I was doing my part in another way."  But I, I was there, and it might have been after they had actually made the decision to open up the [lunch] counters, and it was the first of the black people who were coming to sit down.  But I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so were those demonstrations successful while you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  They were successful while I was in high school.
Speaker 1: So Woolworth's had to, you know, was compelled to serve everybody at the counter before you got out of high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't remember ever sitting down at the counter.  Now, that is very interesting.  I don't remember sitting at the counter.  But they must have--
Speaker 1: And we know it all changed at some point, but I was thinking that might be the actual point.
Speaker 2: But it was, they were successful in 1960.  They had to open, they had to open it up.  I, I have a perspective of that looking back in history.  You know, I went and looked back.  And I said, "Ghee, I don't remember sitting.  I don't remember demonstrating."  I, but when I saw that picture, I saw that I was standing up in the background (laughter).  And it was from 1960, the picture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21575
Speaker 1: All right, Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], 1962.  So, here you are a freshman, and how did you like Howard?  Did it meet your expectations?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  I, I did.  It was, it was different because, you know, you're on your own.  And they always said it's a partying school.  And it's a school for serious as well.  And you can, you can blow it (laughter), and there were some people who tried to act like they were party goers.  And they would hide their books because (laughter), but they really were, they really studied.  It was different, and it was only one year, but it had a big impact on my life.  That's where I was in the honors program, and in the Honors Program, you, you know, you took courses with other students from across the country who were honor students.  I lived on the second floor Baldwin [Hall], that year was the honors floor for women students.  And the women were not just freshmen, but sophomores, juniors and seniors.  So you really had the role models, serious people.  I took chemistry and, 'cause I knew I was gonna major in chemistry, took chemistry with several other girls, also from the South, similar backgrounds.  So there we were in that chemistry class with those pharmacy students and, and some upper class students.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your chemistry teachers there?
Speaker 2: Well, that year, there was this teacher named Mr. Hakkala.
Speaker 1: Mr. who?
Speaker 2: Mr. Hakkala.  We called him Mr. Hakkala.
Speaker 1: H, as in--
Speaker 2: H-A-K-K-A-L-A.  I don't know where Mr. Hakkala was from.  He was a white teacher, and he was the roughest, roughest--when I say roughest, he was known as the teacher who really separated (laughter)--and I don't wanna say the men from the boys.  I don't wanna say that, but he was a real, very, very tough teacher.  And the girls and I, there were several who lived in the dormitory with me who had come from the South, who had taken advance placement and were either interested in majoring in chemistry or maybe medical school.  The nice thing is that we could go to class.  When we went, came back to the dormitory, we could talk, you know.  I don't remember studying so much with them, but at least we kept each other focused, you know, the test is coming and that kind of thing.  Well, having had AP chemistry, advanced [placement] chemistry in high school and having gone to that institute [four-week science institute at North Carolina College, now, North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] in the summer, I was well prepared for chemistry, for freshman chemistry.  I took--, the following year, I was only there for a month or two because my husband [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] and I, we got married after my freshman year.  I did have Lloyd Ferguson [also a HistoryMaker] for a little bit of time.  We knew he had come from [University of California] Berkeley.  He, and he ultimately went back to California.
Story_ID: 21576
Speaker 1: Now, in addition to that chemistry teacher [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia; Mr. Hakkala], as a result of being on the honors program, I met a physics teacher.  I hadn't even taken physics, but I--and this is interesting, I wanted to do a science project for my freshman honors project.  Most of the people in the program were gonna do something in literature or something like that.  I wanted to do a science project, and I was talking to someone, a medical--he was pre-med from North Carolina.  And I said, you know, I wanna do a science project, but I'm not sure what I will do.  And he said, well, you know, you should talk to my friend.  He's a chemistry and physics major.  I said, oh, really.  And I said, yeah, well, maybe I could talk to him.  I, and he said, well, his name is Dan Akins (laughter) [HistoryMaker, Daniel Akins; Sondra Akins' husband].  And, you know, I was just a freshman, probably running my mouth, and he said to me, and I think he was probably testing me.  He said, well, how would you like to do something in x-ray crystallography?  I think he thought I wouldn't know, not know what x-ray crystallography was.  But I knew because I had done that ninth grade project when I did the display on sodium chloride [naCl; table salt].  And I knew of, I heard of crystallography, and I wondered, how do they know that?  This is the structure, but how do they know this is the structure?  No way I could have understood it, you know.  And he said that, and I thought, oh, that would really be nice.  And, and he actually introduced me to the chair of the physics department, who then introduced me to this Indian professor.  He had been schooled in Germany, Dr. Sowen (ph.) Singh.  And he mentored me through this science project.  It was incredible, going to the physics building and all these graduate students would be working. And they were so passionate and so serious and knew exactly what they wanted, wanted to do.  It was, it was just right, just the right place.  It was so different from the literature courses and some of those other courses which were nice, but the humanities where people did a lot of talking.  And they had these crisp Northern accents which I did not have.  To me, the science, the chemistry was a safer place (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, that place on campus, I know, because my daughter was there, it's called Death Valley (laughter).  That's what they call the science, the little--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the biology building, and then there's the chemistry building, and there's the physics building.  And there might be something different in these years, but I can remember exactly what it was like.
Speaker 2: You have to go down some steps and kind of walk down through the middle of those buildings.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And they call it Death Valley, these are the liberal arts majors, but for you it was--
Speaker 1: It was, it was good for me.  You know, it--not that the answers are right or wrong, but they do converge on some theory (laughter) as opposed to, well, it could be this, it could be that and how I impressed people by the way I talk or debate or convince.  I felt more at ease with the science than with the humanities (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So were there any humanities courses that impressed you [at Howard University, Washington, District of Columbia]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in hum--I had to take honors Humanities, honors Communication and all of that.  Of course, I took it seriously because it counted on your GPA [grade point average].  But it was--, I was interested, but I didn't like being tested on it.  Put it that way.  You know, I liked reading the Iliad and the Odyssey [Homer] and some of the other things.  I remember the communications professor wanted me to do my little project on, was it eighteenth century England, I believe.  That probably was his dissertation.  And I ended up doing a project about Mother Needham [Elizabeth Needham] who was a prostitute (laughter).  And I'm saying, what am I doing?  But, you better believe, I tried to learn as much as I could, and I remember in that class, the students were very sophisticated.  They, they knew about Broadway.  They knew about all this stuff that I hadn't--I had had no exposure to.  And I remember, particularly, there was a man--I'm saying a man.  He was nineteen [years old].  I remember he was nineteen or twenty.  But he seemed like he was like maybe thirty-five (laughter) to me and so sophisticated.  And he had, he always had something to say about the music, the Caribbean, and some of the things that were suggestive, but, you know, now, as an adult, I mean a real adult, you know the music and the words and the implications.  But I was kind of embarrassed by some of the things (laughter).  It's just that I wasn't as so ready for that kind of exposure as I was for, you know, the chem-, learning chemistry, yeah.
Story_ID: 21577
Speaker 1: Now, did--, I know some of the activists were on campus there at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].
Speaker 2: Yep, Stokely Carmichael [Trinidadian-American activist in the 1960s American Civil Rights Movement] was there.  He was there.  I don't remember, I certainly did not know him personally, but I knew of him.  I certainly, yeah.  It was beginning of, just the beginning of 'black is beautiful' [cultural movement that was started in the United States of America in the 1960s by African Americans].  When the beauty queens became--, started to look different from how they looked all those years.
Speaker 1: Well, describe this because people a thousand years from now will not understand what we're talking about necessarily.  But what did they look like before?
Speaker 2: Okay, before, not just on college campuses, but even in my hometown [Winston-Salem, North Carolina], the African American people who had really light skin and straight hair were usually people who had achieved.  Now, I have to be careful about that.  I don't mean to say no other, the browner people or blacker people had not achieved.  But generally, you know, light hair, light skin, straight hair.  There would be some who might have been doctors or would have married lighter people and had lighter children.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a sense at that time--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of why that might be true or what the--?
Speaker 2: I can remember as a child walking to school, to my public elementary school and passing another group of children who would be going to the Catholic school.  Now, I can't say they all looked the same, but you, generally, the people who had college education, doctors and lawyers, would send their children to St. Benedicts [school].  That was the Catholic school.  There were a few people, a few children in my school whose parents were doctors, two I think.  And you knew that they came from more privileged homes.  Like the lighter-skinned girls were considered prettier, though, of course, there were brown girls who were pretty and who were popular.  But, in general, you see this person who looks this way, and they look more like the white race.  That's what I mean.  I began to hear the phrase "black is beautiful" when I went to Howard.  I think even that year.  I'm just trying to remember.  Yeah, I think the queen, the homecoming queen was quite light, you know.  But then there were other women too, who were darker skinned who were popular.  And we heard "black is beautiful."  Afros, nobody wore an Afro before then.  I would--
Speaker 1: So were they wearing them when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Not when I was in high school [Atkins High School, Winston-Salem].  But when I--
Speaker 1: I mean at Howard [University].
Speaker 2: --went to college, not much, but by the time I went to Berkeley, even I had an Afro.  So (laughter), and Stokely Carmichael's name was heard at Berkeley as well.  So it happened just about that time I would say, Afros, "black is beautiful."
Speaker 1: Around what, the time that you--
Speaker 2: Sixty, I would say 1962, '63 [1963].
Story_ID: 21578
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what one, I know another thing that was going on in those days is that, now, the Kennedy Administration, John [F.] Kennedy was the president.  They were talking about the New Frontier and science was being pushed in the mass media--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and space program and the future was discussed, you know, in terms of the future of peace in the world.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And the future of scientific discovery.
Speaker 2: We were gonna have a man on the moon by the end of the decade.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were you excited about those things?
Speaker 2: I was excited, I was excited about Jack [John F.] Kennedy (laughter).  We all were, and we all heard, you know, we all heard that, the discussion.  I was, I really was, as I look back in science education history from the perspective of a science educator, I know how things happened and why they happened.  We had those, we had the science fairs, and it all was a part of that initiative, beginning, I'd say back even 1958, to get more students into science and mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I think about the time that you were in school, John Glenn [American astronaut] had gone into space and orbited the earth [first American to orbit the earth], and--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember the year.  I know that Sputnik [first artificial Earth satellite, launched by the Soviet Union in 1957] occurred around '58 [1958], when I was in the eighth grade.  And then very shortly after, yeah, John Glenn would have, would have definitely gone into space at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 21579
Speaker 1: Now, were there any women in chemistry at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] when you were there?
Speaker 2: In chemistry, no.  There was a woman in biology though.  And I don't know quite how I knew her, but I knew of her, and I can remember being in her room and having her speak.  There were women definitely in chemistry who wanted to be, who were going to medical school, definitely.  So Howard really had its impact on me.  Just, just the culture, going to school in those buildings named for Frederick Douglass [social reformer, orator, writer and statesman; after escaping from slavery, he became a leader of the abolitionist movement] and living in the Tubman Quadrangle.  The black, we had a lot of black history as children, but there were so many I'd never heard of, passing our Aldridge Theater, passing the Friedman's Hospital.  You know, it was all there and just such a, such a sense of the culture.
Story_ID: 21580
Speaker 1: So, now, did you ever consider going to medical school?
Speaker 2: When I was young, I used to pretend, and when I--you know, I became fascinated--well, I could be a this and I could be a that.  I could--I always had this sense.  I would think about what it would be like.  And when I was in eighth grade, I can remember thinking about medical school and brain surgery 'cause I had a friend who died from a tumor.  I remember talking to our eighth grade teacher, but I also remember thinking, and this is quite truthful, I don't think I--, I don't really have what it takes to be a medical doctor.  I mean you're working on people, and they might die (laughter). And, and I kind of knew, by the time I finished high school, I thought I might like to do something in medical research, but not be a doctor, not a medical doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21581
Speaker 1: Now, 1963 is a pivotal year for you and a lot of other people, and then your personal life, you get married in 1963, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is a whirlwind courtship.  It happens pretty fast, right?
Speaker 2: And, yeah, it was, it was chemistry for sure (laughter).  I can't imagine--well, the simple truth is, I guess, I, it was, I certainly admired this person [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins].  And, you know, he was very intellectual, and, and there were other things too, of course, but, yeah, we got married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you stop going to school, I mean did he stop going to school too or--
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he continued--
Speaker 2: No, no, he was a senior at--we didn't marry until the summer after my freshman year.  He had already graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so he had already graduated, okay.
Speaker 2: He had already graduated.
Speaker 1: All right, now, was he getting ready to go to graduate school?
Speaker 2: And we knew, he had talked about going to [University of California] Berkeley.  I had the four-year scholarship at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] (laughter).  And we, we talked about, and we did try my going back to Howard the following year.  But after I was in school for, I think it was about October, and, you know, we were writing back and forth.  We were already married.  We got married in August, right, a week before the March on Washington [1963].  Then I could go to California because we were married.  There was no way I was gonna go to California in those days if we were not married (laughter).  And it was okay with my parents [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber], so I actually dropped out of Howard in October and went home to North Carolina for a couple of weeks to spend time with my parents.  And then I went out to California, and I took the bus.  Enroute, President [John F.] Kennedy was killed, just before--
Speaker 1: That's November 23rd, '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and so I got to California about the 24th [of November].  And, you know, I just assumed, I'm going to apply to [University of California] Berkeley.  I'm gonna get accepted, and I'm gonna finish college at Berkeley.  Now, you know, if I were looking back at that now, I mean what are the chances.  As a matter of fact, when I went to see the dean at Howard to tell her I was gonna drop out of college, she said what?  You have your--, he has his education.  You have yours to get.  She had her secretary to come in and talk to me, and her secretary said, you know, I got married in college, and my husband's a lawyer now.  And I still haven't finished college.  And through all of that, I decided I'm still gonna go to California.  And my parents, they didn't jump out of their skins.  They just said, well--, they thought I was very mature (laughter).  And they said, well, you know, this is your decision so how can we stop you.  You're married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 21582
Speaker 1: So you go out to [University of California] Berkeley in the winter of '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Sixty--I got there November, 1963, and I started, started January, 1964, in the College of Chemistry, and I was making my way through the Free Speech Campaign [Movement].
Speaker 1: That's right, Mario Savio [American political activist and a key member in the Berkeley Free Speech Movement].
Speaker 2: And Bettina Aptheker [American political activist, feminist, professor and author].
Speaker 1: Okay, Free Speech Campaign and Berkeley students were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --demonstrating and--
Speaker 2: And demonstration against the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].
Speaker 1: And, now, you and your husband [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] were not involved with ROTC, were you?
Speaker 2: No, we were just involved in the College of Chemistry (laughter).
Speaker 1: So all this social change is going on.
Speaker 2: All this social change.  And then we're hearing about unrest, you know, in the neighborhoods, but we're not touched by that because we're in college.  We're in, he was in graduate school, and I was in undergraduate school.  And, and we were really just very focused, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said by the time that you got out there, you had an Afro--did you have an Afro by then (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I didn't have an Afro when I went, but I certainly had, interestingly, in 1964, after I'd been there less than a year, I decided to come back and visit my parents for, and it was the only time when we were at Berkeley that I actually took a trip back to the East Coast; came back to visit them.  And I had an Afro when I got home, and my mother just couldn't believe it.  Of course, she didn't like it (laughter).  But I think I had an Afro by then.  Either it was the time that I came back in 1964 or when we were completely finished in 1968.
Speaker 1: It was probably '68 [1968], I'm thinking, but--
Speaker 2: I'm thinking it might--
Speaker 1: --just thinking about--
Speaker 2: I think it was 1968 too.  I didn't, I don't, I didn't have the Afro until 1968.
Speaker 1: It seemed like it really started to become, it started becoming popular in '65 [1965], '66 [1966], and then--
Speaker 2: Okay, I had the Afro--
Speaker 1: --about '68 [1968], people had started, it was like a breakthrough, and a lot of people got them.
Speaker 2: Right, 1968 is when I had the Afro, and that was when we came back home for good.  While we were there, and we were there from--I was there from '63 [1963]--, I finished bachelor's degree in '67 [1967].  My husband had one more year to get his doctorate, to finish his doctorate.  So, so much happened then, including our beginning a family while I was still an undergraduate student.
Story_ID: 21583
Speaker 1: So your first child was born in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: In '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is Dana [Lamar Akins-Adeyemi], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you have to, did you miss any school?
Speaker 2: I, okay, I missed the semester I came out.  I dropped out of Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  So I missed the first semester of '63 [1963].  '64 [1964], I was right in school [University of California, Berkeley].  Then I continued on--Dana was born in '65 [1965].  She was born about, I think back then the semester ended the end of January.  The first semester ended at the end of January.  Dana was born March 3.  So I had to miss that semester; got back into summer school, bringing the baby with me to summer school (laughter).  And Dan [Akins' husband, HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] kept the baby in the lab so that I could take physical chemistry.  And then in--, just went straight through and finished.
Speaker 1: So he kept the baby in the lab?  I'm trying to picture this.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you.  I don't know if we still have that picture or not, but there is a picture of this baby in an infant seat.  And we were kids, you know.  We actually did this.  My husband had the bottle hanging from the ceiling on a rope.  The baby was in the infant seat.  Just in case she wanted the bottle, she just turned her head and took the bottle (laughter).  I mean, you know, and she just, she went where we went.  She went where we went.  Of course, we could never do that today with all the rules and regulations.  But the summer that I got back into school, we took her every day, and then by the beginning of the next semester, I had a job in the storeroom, maybe twelve hours a week.  And I paid all of, I should--, "we," we paid all of the money that I made to the babysitter who was in--, she was a married student.  They had housing for married students at Berkeley.  It was called University Village.  So this woman from Iran kept Dana, and I continued to go to school until, until I finished.
Story_ID: 21584
Speaker 1: Yeah, let me ask you about C. Bradley Moore?
Speaker 2: Okay, C. Bradley Moore was actually my husband's [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] research professor [at the University of California, Berkeley].  He was a very young assistant professor when my husband went there.  And my husband was his first and only graduate student that year.  Now, the idea of a professor is probably, would be quite different these days, but C. Bradley Moore was only a few years older than my husband.  He was also married, a young married person.  And if I'm not mistaken, I think that he married, he and his wife married even before she finished.  She finished at Berkeley as well.  So they really were not so far removed from us in terms of being very young, but very serious people.  It was, I think when I look back, it was our good fortune, I should say, from my perspective, our good fortune, for my husband to have worked with him because they had lived in University Village like we were living in University Village.  And they were like colleagues.  They were like colleagues from the beginning, you know, not a superior person, in spite of the fact that he, of course, was a very brilliant man.  And she was a very brilliant woman as well.  She was in physics.  So, you know, we talked a lot about, you know, you know, life in University Village.  We often went to their house.  They were getting new furniture as newly married people.  And so it was quite nice.  And we really have known them all of these years.  Not a Christmas has gone by that we have not corresponded.  We, for his sixtieth birthday, Dan went for the celebration.  For the seventieth birthday, his seventieth birthday, which was only a few years ago, we both went.  And then there were the students who had been in his lab from year to year, all those years who were there as well.  We've kept up with, you know, all family matters and things of that type.
Story_ID: 21585
Speaker 1: But actually, as I--C. Bradley Moore [Akins' husband's thesis advisor at University of California, Berkeley], when I was a senior [at UC Berkeley] and did my senior research, I did it in his lab, that I was very familiar with anyway.  But it turns out, I really was more interested in, in the physical sciences and was very much interested in the kind of research they were doing.  And that was the research that Dan [Akins' husband, HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] was doing.  And so I did my senior project, senior research project in that lab.  And then the year, after I graduated, I actually worked in the lab as a technician for a whole year.
Speaker 2: So this is in '68 [1968], I guess?
Speaker 1: I graduated in '67 [1967], so '67 [1967], '68 [1968], my very first job.  I guess I must have made $6,000 a year possibly, $5,800.  Yeah, I did research, I continued to do research in that lab.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's not bad for those days or anything.
Speaker 1: No, that wasn't bad.  We were able to buy a Volvo, a brand new Volvo (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, that's, yeah, that's not, that's good--you know, you have to mention these things 'cause you have to keep them in the perspective.  People watching it might say, oh, that's not a lot of money.  But for those days, it was--
Speaker 1: Well, that was a lot of money, especially given the fact that up until then we had managed on $199 a month.  Dan's, our entire household income was $199 a month from Dan's research assistantship.  And what I made, all of that went to the babysitter, which was not very much, maybe twelve dollars a week, if that much.
Story_ID: 21586
Speaker 1: So you were saying, we were saying during the break that the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] was becoming, there was a lot of discussion about the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party; black revolutionary socialist organization active in the United States from 1966 until 1982] when you, just as you were leaving town.
Speaker 2: They, yes.  I remember before we left, let me just think.  Kathleen [Neal Cleaver; American professor of law, known for her involvement with the Black Panther Party], [Leroy] Eldridge Cleaver [writer and political activist who became an early leader of the Black Panther Party]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kathleen Cleaver?
Speaker 2: Kathleen, I remember her speaking on campus.  And I remember the problems with them.  Huey Newton [co-founder of the Black Panther Party in 1966], I think, was in the news that last year as well, the last year that we were there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So is this when you move across the country in '68 [1968] and visit your--
Speaker 2: No, no.  Actually, I had done that several years earlier.  I got out there in November '63 [1963].  I had a whole semester in January '64 [1964], and the end of that year for two weeks, I came back to the East Coast to visit my parents [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber].  I know that because we sat in the living room and looked at [President] Lyndon Johnson sign the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after 1964, from 1964 till 1968, I did not see my parents.  I didn't see anybody in my family.  It was just Dan and Dana [Lamar Akins-Adeyemi; Akins' daughter] and myself.  That was the family (laughter).
Story_ID: 21587
Speaker 1: Okay, so in '68 [1968], you make the transition back to the East Coast.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did your husband [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] get a job at (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, now, this is when, Kasha, Michael Kasha [American physical chemist and molecular spectroscopist], who had been--and there's so much history--a student of G. N. Lewis [American physical chemist], one of the, you know, really great in chemistry, had gotten his doctorate from [University of California] Berkeley.  And he was visiting the campus.  And he and Dan [Daniel Akins] met.  And he offered Dan a post-doctoral fellowship at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida].  That would have been summer, not summer, the end of the 1968 school year.  So that meant that Tallahassee, Florida was the next, was the next stop for all of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, what was Tallahassee like?  Was it a big, was it much different from Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  It was kind of a safe haven on the campus of Florida State.  Now, I think maybe a year, up to a year earlier, I don't think black people were going, were on the campus.  But we were in chemistry, and it was quite nice.  The faculty, very collegial.  Back in those days, faculty wives even had nice little gatherings.  And they would have dinner at the homes and that was good.  Now, going out into the city or I should say the town of Tallahassee was a different thing.  We were kind of apprehensive of what we would encounter.  It was a typical, Southern town.  Now, I don't remember any particularly adverse things happening to me.  Dan might have a different perspective as an African American male, things that he perceived and things that happened.  But as far as I was concerned, it wasn't particularly negative, but I would have to say somewhat backwards.  Nothing like the hometown [Winston-Salem, North Carolina] that I had left, you know, years earlier.  They had their ways of, you know, the segregation.  Then also in the town was Florida A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University; FAMU, Tallahassee].  So there--
Speaker 1: This is a black college.
Speaker 2: So there we were at Florida State in a place where African Americans had not been, and then there was the other, that other campus, Florida A and M.  A few of the professors there, we became friendly with.  But then there was that kind, I don't wanna say distrust, but a kind of chasm, I think, between, you know, people at Florida State--I should say Florida A and M, not so trusting of the huge Florida State.  And we were over there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were the first ones, right?
Speaker 2: I, I had to be the first African American woman to take, to be in a chemistry program at Florida State.  That much, I'm pretty sure of.  To be honest, I might have been the first one at Berkeley.  I certainly didn't see anybody in the College of Chemistry when I was there, you know, and I didn't hear any talk of any African American undergraduates.  But before we left Berkeley, there had been a couple who came out, a male and a female.  And both of them were graduate students and both finished.  There were, so I don't wanna give the impression that I was, as far as an undergraduate, but I might have been.
Story_ID: 21588
Speaker 1: Now, what were you interested in, in terms of chemistry?  What aspect of chemistry?
Speaker 2: Well, I always was on the physical chemistry side from the beginning of interactions of matter and light.  If you talk about x-ray crystallography, you get these patterns as a result of light hitting atoms in a certain way and being scattered in a certain pattern.  And from the patterns and intensities, you can tell something about how the atoms are oriented.  When I was at [University of California] Berkeley, I was very much interested in spectroscopy.  Again, it's a result of molecules being excited by radiation, and moving up to higher energy levels and transitions occurring and light is given off.  And because, as a result of the spectrum of the light, you can tell something about how the molecules are, how atoms are moving with respect to each other.  So physical science, physical chemistry is my favorite, though as a science educator, I must be, I have to be versed in life science or science and physical science.  And the lines between those fields are kind of diminishing anyway.  They kind of fuse into each other, more so than before.  Years ago, you could take a, you can take, you could take a degree in chemistry and actually not learn a lot of biology.  But today, the fields of science are much more fused or, I guess we should say intra-disciplinary.
Story_ID: 21589
Speaker 1: Now, was there a difference in the academic standards at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida] as opposed to UC [University of California] Berkeley, that you could see?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, our, at Berkeley, I was an undergraduate, and undergraduate work at Berkeley, a big school, is, is quite challenging.  Here you are in a, I mean you, you're taking a lot of subjects in addition to your major though I took a, I was taking a lot of physics and a lot of chemistry and a lot of math.  There were other subjects I had to take as well.  I don't feel, in my particular case, I had the camaraderie, certainly not the kind I had at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia], you know, where you could talk together, chat together.  You have these friends you work with.  I think in graduate school, you might have more camaraderie because you're working with other people in the lab, and you might be talking about your work.  So it's kind of hard to say about academic standards.  Certainly, when I got to Florida State, I felt more at ease.  It was an easier, it was easier to navigate.  I was taking these courses in this field, and I also took some courses in higher education.  That was my minor.  Certainly, at Berkeley, you had all these Nobel laureates, and you had all these Asian students who were quite excellent (laughter) and worked together.  And you had all these other students who came from top schools like Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and all those schools.  Berkeley, I guess, you could say it was, it was extremely challenging.  I had the experience of being far, far from the top of my class, which was probably good for me (laughter) because, you know, it's unrealistic to think you're gonna be out-performing or out-achieving for one.  And then I had some other responsibilities too, you know, the family and all of that.  So I think I learned how to look at life as I have this, I have that.  I wouldn't change places.  I'm not the, I'm not the best student, but I'm learning, and I'm really getting a good experience without feeling so down, so terribly down on myself for not, you know, being top student.  Now, I have to say this, I've looked back at my transcript from Berkeley after many years, and it was, it was really a struggle in the beginning.  But the last semesters, you know, I, by then, I was taking almost all physical chemistry courses and didn't have as many distractions.  I think I must have had like a 3.65, which is incredible (laughter) the last, the last semester or two, but far from that the first semester, you know.
Story_ID: 21590
Speaker 1: Tell us about Dr. Lidia Vallerino.
Speaker 2: Lidia Vallerino was a woman I met at Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida].  I had seen her at some of the seminars.  There's this woman who was wearing this white coat.  She's obviously a scientist, but who is she, and what is her position?  Well, as it turns out, she was the wife of Quagliano, John [James] Quagliano.  Quagliano and Vallerino had written the very popular freshmen chemistry textbook ['Chemistry: A Humanistic Approach'] that was being used at Florida State.  She didn't really have a formal position.  But she was in the lab and doing all this research, a woman with a family and working with her husband, but not really a, a person with a position or appointment on the faculty.  I learned a lot from her.  To me, she was a role model.  She never talked about feeling, having negative feelings about, you know, not being a formal professor herself.  And, you know, we just, we talked about family, but we enjoyed what we were, we enjoyed chemistry.  And I actually did a project in their lab and something different, different from physical chemistry where I was working with inorganic molecules, and looking at all of these colors that you got when you put together certain mixtures.  But certainly, I was, I was, it was nice to have this woman in science who also had a family who was genuinely interested in her work.  And I didn't, when we left Florida State, I didn't really communicate with her so much.  But last year or perhaps year before last, I did write her (laughter).  And by the time I wrote her, she had, her husband had retired, and she had assumed a professorship herself.  It was like her time (laughter), and she was in Virginia at the time.  And to be quite honest, I knew a number of women who were scientists like their husbands, who worked with their husbands, but didn't have any kind of, you know, formal appointment.  And that was a time when, perhaps, it was accepted that it might be like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know there's a story about [Albert] Einstein's wife--
Speaker 2: Yes, the first wife, the first wife who was a mathematician.  And, you know, I often wonder about the Curies, incidentally--and I'm kind of backtracking now.  I certainly knew the story of Marie Curie [Polish physicist and chemist, working mainly in France, who is famous for her pioneering research on radioactivity], and I knew a woman could have a family and also be a scientist.  And I have to admit, I thought that their story was really romantic.  And I learned it, learned of them [Marie Curie and Pierre Curie; French physicist, a pioneer in crystallography, magnetism, piezoelectricity and radioactivity; they won the Nobel Prize in Physics together, in 1903], I read a book about the Curies when I was in high school.  So I always thought it was, you know, it was possible a woman can do good work.  She probably, I don't know if Pierre had lived, maybe she would have been in his shadow, you know, for all of her career, you know, just maybe an appendage.  But, again, I think those women learned a way to, well, they accepted things as they were.  Not Marie, but some of the other women.  And as I've said, I've known a number of women whose husbands had quite high positions as scientists, and they were themselves scientists and, but didn't have the position, but worked for or with their husbands (laughter).
Story_ID: 21591
Speaker 1: What year did you earn your master's degree in chemistry from Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Okay, let me think.  It must have been '70 [1970] 'cause I started in '68 [1968].  So it was 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your thesis about?
Speaker 2: I didn't have to write a thesis for that.  I did do some research on coordination compounds, and I gave a talk on it.  And I also--it was an interdepartmental program--so I did something in higher education as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you went on to teach, you started teaching at Greco Junior High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was like something to do while I was where I was.  I really saw myself teaching in a community college or a two-year college or a small college.  It happened that we moved to Tampa [Florida] where Dan [Akins' husband, HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] took his first job.  And at first I had applied for graduate school at South Florida.  But there was some ruling that I couldn't go to graduate school 'cause he was a professor in that department.  Well, some nepotism thing that happened in Florida at that point in time, and so I said, well, okay, I'm prepared to teach anyway.  I have, I had entertained teaching.  They needed a physical science teacher.  It was one of those alphabet science courses, courses like PSSC [Physical Science Study Committee], IPS [Introductory Physical Science, a high school level science education class offered as a preparatory course to physical science], these, these courses were part of a study committee in science where they were gonna, they were exposing students to science that's done more like scientists do science.  So this course would have been somewhat of a challenge for a typical teacher unless they had some special professional development.  Plus, it was in physical science, not biology, which ordinarily is thought of the more difficult areas.  So here we are at Greco Junior High School.  They need this teacher to start this course.  It's the end of August, and they don't have a teacher, so I am a person who does not have certification to teach K-12.  I have a master's degree in chemistry from Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida], and a bachelor's degree in chemistry from [University of California] Berkeley.  So, hey, we better hire somebody to do this course.  So I was hired, and it was, it was very interesting.
Story_ID: 21592
Speaker 1: It was interesting in the fact that I learned, I don't really belong here [at Greco Junior High School, Tampa, Florida, as a physical science teacher] at this time.  They offered me the contract.  You know so much science.  You know what?  I wanted to teach science.  I didn't necessarily wanna teach children or science to children.  I had not had the education courses and experience teaching children.  And they were children.  The junior high students I was familiar with, were the junior high students like me, very high achievers, I want, who want to learn.  Of course, we talked about that before.  We had this, learning was like a mission with us where I grew up and at that point in time.  And I went in there to teach the way I would have wanted to be taught (laughter).  They were children.  Junior high kids are the most challenging to teach.  There's just so much going on in their lives at that time.  Plus, it was the time when they were beginning to desegregate schools.  You know, the nation had dragged its feet, and by 1972, it had to be done.  So that was just at that time when it had to be done.  This was desegregation of a junior high school, just a stone's throw from the University of South Florida.  I say, we say Tampa, Hillsborough County.  It, the little place was really called Temple Terrace.  And they were integrating the school by busing black children from other areas, from areas in Tampa.  So there was a lot going on there.  One really needed to be tuned into children and tuned into the socio-economic backgrounds, the different ways that children learn, all of that, which was completely out of my realm at that time.
Speaker 2: Now, was the teaching two--, I mean the busing two way?  Were they busing the whites (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Just busing the blacks?
Speaker 1: They bused black children from urban Tampa, and they also brought children from--I think the name of that place was [Homosassa] Springs or something like that.  It was farm--rural area.  White children, and a few black children from a rural area, and black children from an urban area, I believe in Tampa.  So you had all that going on.  And I was trying to teach IPS, Integrated Physical Science, which is kind of like a baby chemistry-physics course.  And there was just so much going on.
Speaker 2: Okay, a lot of distractions.
Speaker 1: Well, distractions, but the children needed to be taught in a way different from what I was prepared to teach.  Also, you know, what else was going on was space launches.  And sometimes I would say, okay, well, let's talk about that.  That wasn't in the curriculum, but, you know, I had gone down to Cape Canaveral [Florida' Kennedy Space Center].  And so we talked about that some time.  And the children, also, it was inquiry-based.  They were supposed to have a lot of lab, and they weren't quite used to learning that way.  That was the attraction of the course.  It was gonna be like the baby chemistry-physics inquiry-based course from my perspective.  But people hadn't been teaching that way.  The kids hadn't been exposed to that.  Neither were they also ready to learn science with all the social and physical changes at that time in high school.  I had no--, my child was like three years old.  I hadn't reared any kids like, at that age.  And so I was somewhat impatient.  I was impatient with myself too, you know (laughter).  So I went, the following year, just where I belonged, which was St. Petersburg Junior College [Clearwater, Florida].
Story_ID: 21593
Speaker 1: You were saying off camera that we've learned a lot more these days--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we've learned a lot more about teaching and learning.  We've learned so much about learning styles of individuals.  We've learned or we've thought so much more about the diversity, diverse backgrounds and how cultures can influence how children interact with the subject matter and how they relate to it.  We've learned a lot more about motivation of students.  That's not to say everything we used to do is wrong.  You have some students who are ready to come into the room, sit down and learn and hear what it is they're supposed to learn (laughter).  But you have far less of that, especially in a ninth, tenth grade classroom where you have diverse, you know, students.  And even more so now, the, the children are going to be from, may even come from households where they don't even speak English, which was not the case back then at Greco Junior High School [Tampa, Florida, where Akins' taught physical sciences in the 1970s].  But still--
Story_ID: 21594
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1975, you start at Hillsborough Community College [Tampa, Florida], right?
Speaker 2: Okay, 1975, Hillsborough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so was that better?  Did you fit better?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely.  St. Pete [St. Petersburg Junior College, Clearwater, Florida], the, several years before, I think I, yeah, St. Peter, I was there for three years [as a chemistry instructor] and then went over to Hillsborough [Community College].  When our second child [Meredith Ivy Akins] was born, I wanted to be closer to Tampa--we lived in Tampa.  So that's why I went to Hillsborough.  And again, yes, the students were adults.  In many cases, they were older adults, some older than I was.  The community colleges or junior colleges have not only students who are interested in transferring to four-year colleges, but also people who are already in the vocation, like firemen and policemen and people in allied health, people who are going to be nurses or people who are going to be radiographic technicians.  And in a situation like that, it's much easier because you, they are there to learn the subject matter.  And the nice thing for me was that it made me more aware of how science is related, relevant to real life, whether it's careers, or whether it's using science for personal and social perspectives.  So it was, it was growth for me, you know, not just from the theoretical, chemistry, physical chemistry, but applications to different careers, forensic science, health and so forth.  That, those were my early years of teaching, but I sometimes call them my golden years because I was really learning (laughter), I was really learning a lot and my students were very interested and very mature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21595
Speaker 1: Now, your second child [Meredith Ivy Akins] is born in '74 [1974], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Just as you start, I guess, I mean (unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Interesting, interesting, yes.  As a matter of fact, I can remember going to interview for the job [at Hillsborough Community College, Tampa, Florida].  And I was three weeks from having the baby (laughter).  And they didn't really wanna ask me, but at the end of the interview, they did say, "Well, you know, (laughter), how are you gonna work this in?"  I said, it's gonna work, you know.  And I got the job.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it difficult to, you know, so now, you've got two children, right, now, so was it really--
Speaker 2: Oh, not difficult, not difficult.  I think I had built the stamina with the first one [Dana Lamar Akins-Adeyemi].  And I learned as a really young mother, you know, about doing, having more, having that extra responsibility.  By then, we had more money, and I could hire a full-time babysitter.  And I even had somebody to help me with my housework (laughter).  So, because we were economically better off, it made it somewhat easier for me to really work on, do all that I needed for the job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in, so you were there from '75 [1975], I guess, to '77 [1977]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, three whole years.
Story_ID: 21596
Speaker 1: And then you moved on to Northern Virginia Community College [Sterling, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the reason is that my husband [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] (laughter) moved on to the National Science Foundation [NSF].  And as in all the other situations, I moved as a result of the positions that he was getting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Northern Virginia Community College, now, this is a different environment, I guess.  But is it more like North Carolina than Florida was?
Speaker 2: Well, you see Northern Virginia Community College, where we were was a suburb of Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].  So, we had access to all that Washington, D.C. has to offer, although I was working and living in a small suburb.  The students at Northern Virginia Community College were sophisticated students, you know.  The school systems are year around.  Northern Virginia, those were areas where the school systems are quite good.  And it's close to a lot of cultural things, and they're doing, they were doing things--it kind of, it spilled over into the nearby college.  Northern Virginia [Community College] had campuses, had a campus in Alexandria [Virginia].  Matter of fact, that's where [Vice President Joe] Biden's wife works now, Northern Virginia.  That's a well known community college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now were you thinking about, during this period, were you thinking about going back to school to get your--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I figured it was time.  And by the time we moved again, we moved to Massachusetts.  I was in Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts].  I finished coursework and comprehensive exam for the Ph.D. in physical organic chemistry.
Speaker 1: So this is, now, when did you move to--
Speaker 2: Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: This is Lexington, Massachusetts, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  The first year, the first year--
Speaker 1: Oh, this is the high school--
Speaker 2: You're right.  We moved to Massachusetts.  We moved to Massachusetts because Dan accepted a position as a senior scientist at Polaroid [Corporation].  When we were in Virginia, he was at the National Science Foundation.  That was to be only, that was a rotator, only a two-year job or so.  So we moved to Massachusetts, and the first year I was not in graduate school.  I taught physics at Lexington High School [Lexington, Massachusetts].  And that's one of those alphabet courses, PSSC physics, Physical Science Study Committee.  So these courses are conceptualized as very, they're elitists courses for students who, if they're not going to major in science, they would be people who would--I think it was envisioned--people in positions where they should have a good perspective of science in the inquiry, experimental approach of science.  So you can see, for both these positions in public schools, I was attracted by the particular kind of course it was.  PSSC physics was what I taught at Lexington High School, and, of course, the population, again, kids were graduate, were--that's a very-well the, the reputation of the school in terms of the background, academic backgrounds of the students is about as high as you can get, you know.  There were a couple of kids whose parents were professors at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who lived in Lexington, Massachusetts.  But that was just a one-year thing, and I should add, at that particular time, they had begun to bus students from Boston [Massachusetts] to schools in the suburbs.  They called, there was a special name for it, but I can't quite remember.  So there were a very few African American kids in the school at Lexington who had been bused from Boston.  But it was primarily high socio-economic, all-white district.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21597
Speaker 1: Now, you start working for, it says that (unclear) started working for Hewlett-Packard [Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Yes, but you, we didn't bring up that I had gone to Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts], started just before Hewlett, I started at Brandeis.
Speaker 1: So you started--
Speaker 2: And I did complete coursework and comprehensive exam for the doctorate in physical organic chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you started the Ph.D. [degree] process.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And I--
Speaker 1: All right, and then you started working at Hewlett (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, because some--
Speaker 1: You're at the same--
Speaker 2: Some--I--
Speaker 1: Well, wait a minute now.  Let me just add these up.  You're a mother, okay.  You're working on a Ph.D., and you're working at Hewlett-Packard.  I assume it's a full-time job, right?
Speaker 2: Okay, now, I was working at, on the Ph.D. before I went to Hewlett-Packard.
Speaker 1: So, but did you finish the work?
Speaker 2: I did not finish the work because I began to realize by that time, you know, finally, I have a chance to be in this program.  We're settled down, but this is not exactly what I'm thinking that I'm good for, you know.  I, and at the same time, Hewlett-Packard, you see, the OSHA [Occupational Safety and Health Administration] and EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] in the '70s [1970s] had come into existence.  And there was this need to confront practices in industry that were not good for the environment and not necessarily good for the workers.  Now, Hewlett-Packard was one of the best companies.  And certainly, they wanted to be on top of their responsibilities to the workers and the environment.  At that time, there were very few people in the field of industrial hygiene.  That's a person who, who examines the work environment for potential health risks.  Now, in my case, I was looking for concentrations of chemicals in the air, in the shops in which people were working.  So I needed to have an understanding about chemicals and about different kinds of technologies used to determine the concentrations of chemicals in the air.  That was something very new, relatively new.  And because people, there hadn't been many people majoring in anything to do that, they were open to people who had a background, people who could understand the, the science associated with making the measurements and also be able to teach the workers how to be safe.  It was new, it was exciting, it was meaningful.  It made a lot of sense to me, and I went for it, even though they'd never seen anybody who looked like me in a company (laughter) like that, especially, in the shops.  I needed to go into the shops, into the plating, where they did metal plating where there're these macho people, you know, and actually take my--they used to call me the widget lady because I had all these little machines and air pumps.  And I would take the air in and sample it and get it ready to go to the lab to find out if the concentrations were higher than they should be.  So I wanted to find out about that, and I wanted to do that.  And I applied for the job, and I got it.  I was the first industrial hygienist at that plant.  The person who had been functioning as the industrial hygienist was a man who had worked in the shops, and he was a part of the facilities.  But he--and he was quite good because he knew all the jobs.  But he didn't have the science background.  So I took that job.  That's what I did.
Story_ID: 21598
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, well, what were your findings in the [regarding chemical concentrations at Hewlett-Packard's plant in Waltham, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: Oh, in most cases, the concentrations were not above the levels allowable by NIOSH, the Institute for Safety, NIOSH--
Speaker 1: National Institute for--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: In a minute, I'll think.  Probably safety, safety and health, National Institute for Safety and Health--National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, they had fixed all these levels based on a lot of things, and in some cases, they hadn't had complete studies, but as far as they could tell, this concentration ought to be safe.  But it was a constant, ongoing monitoring to see what is the latest about this particular chemical or that particular chemical.  In order to do that job, I took courses at Harvard School of Public Health [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Liberty Mutual Insurance Company [Boston, Massachusetts].  So that's how I supplemented my background in science in order to do this job, which would require me to find out the concentrations of chemicals and require me to interact with occupational safety and health people, some occupational physicians and persons like that, engineers and also the people working on the floors to see how they did the particular jobs and what would be an even safer way to do the job or what kinds of technology should be implemented in order to make it a safer environment.  It was very exciting.  That's, that's when I wrote the Toluene Hygienic Guide.  That's, these guides are put out by the American Industrial Hygiene Association.  And there's a lot of technical stuff in it.  Now, I updated the guide.  They already had information, but I had to renew the information and discuss how, how certain chemicals were sampled for, what are the potential risks.  And I, I knew then that I was not gonna be there long.  There's, nobody made me write that guide.  I wanted to do it because I think I've always kind of had a feeling.  I'm moving through this process, and I'm here, and I'm learning this.  And this is my contribution for this, and I may not be doing it long, but it'll all add up (laughter), it'll all add up, you know.
Speaker 1: So this is 1984?
Speaker 2: 1984 is when the guide came out.
Story_ID: 21599
Speaker 1: But interestingly, I was already a teacher at Dwight Morrow High School in [Englewood] New Jersey when the guide came out [Akins wrote the Toluene Hygienic Guide that was published by the American Industrial Hygiene Association].  And there I was a teacher, and then they say, "Sondra Akins, teacher of--." Was I teaching AP [advanced placement] chemistry yet?  The first year at, in Englewood, I taught only math.  And then the second year, I started their advanced placement chemistry program and taught physics.  So about that time is when that guide came out, and here, I'm a high school teacher who's, you know, been all these places.  And I just, this guide just gets published (laughter).  So it was pretty exciting.
Speaker 2: Okay, so all right, now, you're still working on your Ph.D. [degree] during this period of time?
Speaker 1: No, by then I decided, okay, the Ph.D. in chemistry is not what I really want to pursue.  When I went to Englewood and started working there, it was a particular time in history when they were looking at restructuring.  That is looking at the way schools do their work, the curriculum and programs in general.  And how can we make these schools more effective for all students?  And that had to do with having the students to understand a lot of things in science, but other subject areas as well.  So once I got to Dwight Morrow, and I started teaching, and I started hearing about this restructuring and about the different ways people learn, how the brain works, how we can be more effective in education, and at the same time, I'm a mother.  And I've already gotten a child through adolescence [Dana Lamar Akins-Adeyemi] and I have a little, a younger child [Meredith Ivy Akins].  So I was more into children, and still into science.  But how can we use it and how we can--how can we really make education better?  I was just ready, you know.  And I decided the degree I was gonna get was a degree in science education.
Speaker 2: Okay, did you stay at Brandeis or did you go to a--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Brandeis was back in Massachusetts.  What I did was to go to Teachers College, Columbia University [New York City].
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're in New York.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Somehow I missed this transition to New York (laughter).  We,--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we came to New York.  When Dan decided he really wanted to go back to academia and leave Polaroid--as a matter of fact, he left Polaroid, but we couldn't sell the house in Massachusetts for two years.  So I stayed in Massachusetts until the house would sell.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is when you started at the Englewood School in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, I'm with you now.
Story_ID: 21600
Speaker 1: I started working on my doctorate [degree in science education at Teachers College, Columbia University, New York City] in 1988.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: By that time, I had become director of science and mathematics for the entire [Englewood, New Jersey] school district.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Englewood Public Schools.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: After having taught for about five years, mathematics and science.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay, Columbia Teachers College in 1988.
Speaker 1: That's when I started, and I got the degree in 1993.  Now, during that time, yes, I was working full time and working on the degree.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you're working on the Ed.D. [degree; Doctor of Education] this time?
Speaker 1: That is where it centered because that was a combination of the sciences and the education and--
Speaker 2: Okay, so, here we are in the, in the 1980s.  So, well, was there a special, who was your advisor at Columbia [University]?
Speaker 1: O. Roger Anderson.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A scientist and science education professor.
Speaker 2: Okay, what was your dissertation?
Speaker 1: My dissertation was, the title is 'Restructuring the Mathematics and Science Curriculum: Elementary Leadership Teachers' Perspectives'.
Speaker 2: Colon, now, let me get the last part again?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Elementary--
Speaker 2: Elementary, okay.
Speaker 1: --Leadership Teachers' Perspectives.
Speaker 2: --Teachers Leadership Perspectives.
Speaker 1: Elementary Leadership Teachers' Perspectives.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And can you boil it down for us in (laughter)?
Speaker 1: All right.  The, the work is based on theory that has to do with how the, how people learn, cognitive information processing, how people learn.  It cuts across science and mathematics concepts, and new ways of teaching.  So what I'm saying is, the background for this research is the science and math itself, the concepts in science and math.  And also, what research tells us about how people learn.  The other part, the teaching part has to do with how teachers do their work most effectively, in order to get all these things to happen.  So it turns out to be deep and broad.  Now, I facilitated a lot of professional development to help teachers to confront their ideas about how learning occurs and to move toward implementing some of the practices that are recommended, based on the theory.  And my study was to see how the teachers went about using that and how they actually worked in the classrooms with the children.  Now, my interest was elementary teachers because that's where it all begins.  All the time I've been involved with--I'd been involved with college, you know, all the--but if we can't get things going from elementary school, if we don't make science accessible to students at the elementary levels, and that's, that's been the weakness in education, then all that we're talking about, there's hardly any point.  You're just gonna have a few people that you can really educate well because they haven't had exposure from the elementary levels.  So that's why I was interested in how the elementary teachers did their work, resulting from the kinds of professional development.  They had been going through where they were exposed to how people learned.  They were exposed to math and science concepts.  I was studying how they were working in the classrooms.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you mentioned the early part of the interview how you were introduced to science in the sixth grade, I think, for the first time.
Speaker 1: Science was, they, I was hearing, this is science.  But all through elementary school, until really that eighth grade teacher, as I recall, there wasn't much.  And that's the case systematically throughout the states, country.  That's always been the case, that science has been traditionally neglected in elementary grades until we've had these restructuring movements, and these initiatives.  Now, it's getting better.  We now have National Science Education Standards.  That's been in my time.  So when I was working with the teachers and working on this study, my conceptual background had to do with these new standards and how we need to get science taught, not just in the higher grades, but in the elementary grades and how it needs to connect from the beginning all the way through the educational process.
Speaker 2: Now, it would seem to me that basic to learning, would be like a scientific approach.
Speaker 1: Inquiry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You'd have to observe and then measure things and then reach conclusions, you know, all, and through everything you had learned, if you were learning the problems, if you're not just learning in rote, if you're actually learning how to think.
Speaker 1: Well, in school, believe it or not, a lot of times when they, when people were teaching science, it wasn't so much having the children to do science.  It might be learning about quote, unquote, "the scientific method" and talking about the different steps, without even kids having the opportunity to learn the way scientists learn.
Story_ID: 21601
Speaker 1: All right, so we were talking about scientific--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --thinking as being a part of early childhood education.
Speaker 2: Yes, some people talk a lot about the "scientific method."  I can even remember being, was I in school or perhaps it was teaching when there was so much focus on the scientific method and the kids learning the different steps.  But that's not necessarily so effective.  The idea now is that the students have the opportunity to engage in inquiry and, and that's where they ask questions, and they decide on the process they're going to use--and it is a scientific process, to find the answers.  They form hypotheses.  They deal with the procedure, but it's different from cookbook.  There was a time when most of the, where the kids would get their manual.  And they would say, oh, we're gonna do this experiment.  Now, Step 1, Step 2, Step 3.  That's giving them the steps.  The idea here is to get children to, and young people to--and, of course, they need background in order to do this, to pose the question and form a hypothesis and work on the procedure for finding the answer, using the right technology and all of that, getting the, collecting the data, looking at the data, interpreting the data, coming to some kind of conclusion, reflecting on their work, what could I have done--what have other people found?  What can I do differently and moving on and on.  So it's working as scientists work.  Now, also included in that is working with other people because you hardly ever hear of a scientist working all by himself or herself in a laboratory.  So--
Speaker 1: Now, that's a popular culture notion though that, you know--
Speaker 2: Especially today, I mean there--(unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --that scientists--
Speaker 2: --in the beginnings people could--
Speaker 1: --work in isolated--
Speaker 2: It's not isolated.  So you've got to not only have some background knowledge and, and know-how about, you know, with the science process, but you need to learn how to work with other people as well.
Speaker 1: And I think traditionally schools have taught about scientists as being the inventors of this or that--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --[Albert] Einstein did this or [Thomas] Edison did that or Henry Ford did this--
Speaker 2: Yes, when--
Speaker 1: --but you see them, you don't see them in the context of anybody else.
Speaker 2: Right, and so these ideas have impacted--first of all, let me go back to why I can accept it.  That's the science background that I have.  Many times, not so much today, but people might get a degree, a teaching degree and may not have had as much in-depth work in science as I have.  I have from way back.  I can truly appreciate it.  I've had a continued communication with the scientific community.  So I can appreciate that this, the importance of children learning what science [phone ringing]--
Speaker 1: That's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --what science is, how scientists work, evidence in science.  What is this inquiry approach and how're you gonna get it unless you engage in it.  So that was the idea, to get children to do science so that they can learn about those processes.  They can develop those processes, so they can develop attitudes, positive attitudes for doing science.  That's what we call inquiry.  It's actually the first of the National Science Education Standards, but it does mean that children, little children engage in inquiry in their own, at their own level, which is, of course, important for living a productive life, making good decisions, whether they're gonna become scientists or not.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you propose this be done at the beginning level of school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, earliest levels.
Story_ID: 21602
Speaker 1: And so to get back to my dissertation [entitled, 'Restructuring the Mathematics and Science Curriculum: Elementary Leadership Teachers' Perspectives'; at Teachers College, Columbia University, New York City], it was to see the extent to which elementary teachers bought into the processes, recommended processes.  There were other things too, but that was the big piece.  What are--and restructuring mathematics and science curriculum, meaning the course, the courses, coursework that the children take, the work that the children do based on the recommended curriculum.  The only way you're going to do that is if teachers buy into it.  You can write a curriculum, but if the teachers don't teach it, then it's, it doesn't mean anything.  So my purpose was to get the perspectives of the teachers, not only getting their perspectives but learning their practices.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Restructuring mathematics and science curriculum, the perspectives and practices of the elementary teachers who would have to really do, do that kind of work, who would have to do their work differently from the way it has traditionally been done.  I wanted to get at that for my study.
Story_ID: 21603
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did your study [Akins' doctoral thesis at Teachers College, Columbia University, New York City; entitled, Restructuring the Mathematics and Science Curriculum: Elementary Leadership Teachers' Perspectives'] show?
Speaker 2: Well, I found that there were, the leadership teachers were the ones who had been identified by principals who were going to probably make a good contribution and benefit from, from the professional development.  They were the ones who were involved, who were open minded and for the most part, they bought into it.  Now, what kinds of things influenced them?  Peers, other teachers, you know, their attitudes in some cases because you can be a star teacher and other people in the schools may not buy into it.  So that affects a star teacher.  You can imagine how it would.  Another thing was, okay, we're doing this.  Our supervisor wants this.  The superintendent wants this.  They started this initiative.  How long is it going to last?  Okay, another.  We're doing these things.  How is it going to be tested, and will I be punished if I'm teaching these children all this rich stuff and they don't make as higher grades on the paper and pencil test.  So you can see in a science education project, it goes beyond all the concepts that's important, the science concepts and the theory, how children learn.  But there are a lot of other things that affect the real world of education.
Speaker 1: The last thing you said seems real important these days.  Children are being taught to the test a lot of times in school districts--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --to be able to pass this test and--
Speaker 2: So what happened--
Speaker 1: --be able to recite--
Speaker 2: Right, and what happens is, the teacher who made, you know, want to do a good job may throw up her hands and say, okay, the test is coming such and such and then fall back into--now, what I found, those teachers who really bought into it, it wasn't entirely new to them.  It wasn't like all of a sudden I came along or the administration came along and said, we should teach this way.  Most of them who really bought into it had had experiences themselves that convinced them that was the right way or they had been, they had studied in graduate school something about how children learn.  And they had an appreciation for rich, rich subject matter and rich experiences.  But even those teachers had pressures, experienced pressures.  It was good.  They needed to have administration and people who were quote, unquote "in charge," encouraging them and understanding what they were doing.  Heaven forbid that they're trying to do this work and somebody comes in, a boss, who doesn't know and says they should be doing this.  So the children are too, the children are not quiet.  The children are not (laughter), you know, your classroom looks different when you teach that way.  And as it turns out, you're gonna have more, it's more likely that parents in richer districts buy into this and the richer districts can support this kind of teaching, and they want it.  But in other districts there--not all urban districts because there are some urban districts where this kind of teaching is encouraged.  But it's like pockets of excellence.  So there're just, there's just, there're just so many factors that affect how well the teachers do their work.  And besides that, we can't go on, this teacher in this classroom is pretty good, but the overall picture, what does that look like?  That's our big problem in education.  An urban district is governed by the overall test scores.
Speaker 1: So, you finished your Ph.D. [degree; Doctor of Philosophy] in--
Speaker 2: Ed.D. [Doctor of Education]--
Speaker 1: Ed.D.
Speaker 2: --in science education.
Speaker 1: In, what was it?  19--
Speaker 2: 1993.
Speaker 1: '93 [1993].  Okay.
Story_ID: 21604
Speaker 1: How have you been able to implement some of these ideas or insights going forward into, you know, your career?
Speaker 2: Okay, going forward, before I leave Englewood [public school district, Englewood, New Jersey], I will say that, we did have the professional development.  We did get grants to work with, especially Ramapo College [Mahwah, New Jersey] to do things where we had the teachers come to the campus and we had the scientists to come to the classrooms.  So the children had that exposure.  And one thing that was exciting to me with the grant was having the children go to the college.  It reminded me of my college experience years ago and the kind of inspiration from just being in that kind of atmosphere.  So we were able to, through a grant to have that done in Englewood.  Now, the unhappy circumstances.  Grant's finished, and those teachers who are excited may carry on, but if you don't have the same superin--that's why they were worried about the changing of superintendents.  When that happens, then there is not the continuation or what was appreciated before may no longer be appreciated.  That's a big problem.  Another thing we did was to have family science and family math, where we brought the families in so that it can become like a cultural thing, family thing, you know, appreciation for science and math and the parents and the children together doing activities.
Story_ID: 21605
Speaker 1: I left that school system [Englewood School District, New Jersey], and then a, you know, the administration changes.  This is, this is a problem.  We work on things, but are they continued.  Is there focus?  Is there continued support?  And some of the things I mentioned interfere with the progress, like the testing and not having a continuation of the administration and things of that sort.  Now, the African American Educational Center of Northern New Jersey--that's what they called it in its final days, was a center that was founded by African American citizens, parents of children primarily in the Teaneck [New Jersey] school system who realized that the children were not being exposed to their history.  And that was, I'll have to go back to the date they were founded.  I have it some place.  So these were parents who wanted to have their children learn more about their history but they also supported their SATs [Scholastic Aptitude Test] and at some point, I became the consultant for the African American Educational Center for Science and Math.  So that's like a community thing, but the community is so, was so integrated with the school system.  I mean I'm a parent.  I work in the school system.  My younger daughter [Meredith Ivy Akins] goes to school in the school system.  I know these people.  They live in Teaneck.  This is Teaneck, if you go a few, few steps down the street, you're in Englewood.  So it was a nice case of where the school system could be supported by the community and vice versa.  I, as a school system person, a member of the committee, became the science and math consultant for that, for the African American Educational Center.  And I, I have to say that center existed before I moved to Engle--to this area.  And the people who founded it were parents who had the right idea (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, sounds like it's an outgrowth of an independent black school movement.  I don't know if it is, but it sounds like--
Speaker 1: I don't think it is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I think about the particular women who started that, there was something I wanted to say.  Now, their curriculum, not just math and science.  I had something in the package.  You could see how they would have, there was just a lot of African American culture in general.  But their whole curriculum, not just math and science, was adopted in the Schomburg archives [The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, a research unit of The New York Public Library].  I think that might have been around 2002 or 2003.  The system, the center no longer exists.  It had gone on for about twenty-five years.  But just such an excellent example of what we talk about when we talk about systemic change, we talk about these kinds of things, and this is something I've seen.  If only it could exist overall where you have this partnership.  That's the word, partnership, between school and community and parents and school so that it'll take all that, I think.
Speaker 2: I think we might be missing each other on this, but I saw the flyer in the folder, and I'd be really surprised if there wasn't part of an overall movement, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, they might have been, they might have been influenced by a movement, could be, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know about all the school movements, yeah.
Speaker 2: And there's something called the Council for Independent Black Institutions as far back as '69 [1969], '70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh.
Speaker 2: --and a lot of the independent black schools in the start of those days became charter schools or some of the activities were infused into the public schools.  And in the early '90s [1990s], they had the center for--Adelaide Sanford in New York and other people trying to infuse African-centered education into the public schools with the parents--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: --I'm sure from the movement.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm--
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, I'm sorry, yes, because it was about the 1970s, I guess, when--
Speaker 2: When they got started.
Speaker 1: --this whole idea of multicultural education, when they would say, oh, there are no black children in the school books.  And there are no--, and in black history, there's not very much, you know.  And for that center, as a matter of fact, one parent wanted her son to know a contemporary black scientist.  Everybody, unfortunately, everybody hasn't heard of George Washington Carver [scientist and inventor] now.  But that was the one, and every few others, and as far as contemporary black scientists which is what this project does so beautifully--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--
Speaker 1: --this is really the answer to, a big part of the answer.  That's why it means so much to me as an educator that this really gets going.
Story_ID: 21606
Speaker 1: You were talking about the Ramapo College [Mahwah, New Jersey]--
Speaker 2: Okay, now, Ramapo College--
Speaker 1: --Upward Bound, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, that, my affiliation with them was when I was working in the Englewood School District as director of math, science and technology.  They were the people who furnished professional development in science and math for the teachers.  And the teachers had a chance to have scientists or science professor and math professors come to their classrooms and work with the children.  So the children were seeing people from the colleges.  The teachers were learning more math and science concepts.  They were also learning more about how children learn, if not from Ramapo, from other grants that we also had in the district.  And we had an excellent relationship with them.  Now, some years later, after that grant finished, and I was no longer director of math and science because we had a change in administration, I went back to teaching in the high school.  And I did that for a couple of years, during which time I found students who could go to Ramapo College and participate in their Upward Bound program.  And I also became principal of the high school (laughter) [Englewood Public Schools].  After two years of having a great time in the classroom, it's like they came and pulled me out (laughter).  We need a principal for this high school, which was a tall, tall task.  I did that, but I also taught chemistry on, with the Upward Bound program at Ramapo College.  You might have had something said, seen something by a Carol Freishberg (ph.) who was vice president there, who we had worked together.  And I taught chemistry, and I had a great time during the summer.  And then I was awarded something from their science society for dedication to science teaching.  I was a teaching principal (laughter).
Story_ID: 21607
Speaker 1: What are your feelings about No Child Left Behind and how does that impact your theories?
Speaker 2: Well, I think at best, it was legislation to ensure no child would be left behind, meaning those children of lower socio-economic status, many, most of whom are black or they might be from households where there is no English spoken or whatever.  So it was something to say, we want these children to learn too and you shall not look over them.  But at the same time, it was not, it didn't result in tests that really emphasized all the kind of work that we were trying to nurture.  So you have the whole thing all over again, of these tests scores, and now these districts are punished and all the teachers are punished because the overall test scores of children who, many of whom come from households where they haven't been in the district that long.  But they get counted, and they all get counted, and they all get counted the same way on these tests.  So I don't think it's done much good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that needs to be rethought.
Speaker 1: Okay, it seems to be effect--I mean it seems to be the driving force behind a lot of national politics, and now, even though there's a different administration in office.  Do you think today, would you look, the policies of the Department of Education today, are they progressive or they--I don't know.  What do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't see it progressive, so progressive.  We have standards, and now it's at a point where I think people have a bad reaction to the word "standard."  Now, I talk about National Science Education Standards, and those standards really do address, you know, rich learning and all of that.  But then when people say standards, and they think tests, tests based on the standards.  And then people start thinking, oh, the standards are dumbing down everything.  So it's kind of a, an unfortunate situation, I think where all the recommendations that come from standards are not really taken the right way.  And then the tests or the assessments don't match the goals or the intended outcomes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21608
Speaker 1: Well, 2001 [after retiring from the Englewood School District], once again, you started working at William Patterson University [The William Patterson University of New Jersey, Wayne, New Jersey], and as a professor of science education.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you're basically teaching teachers how to teach--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --about science.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: And it works right into my, my purpose (laughter).  Only now I get to impact teachers as they're being, as they are learning to teach, be teachers and not confront them after they've been teaching (laughter) a certain way and need to change the way they teach.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, so do you have a sense that the teachers that you teach are going out with the different kind of mission and have the strength to stick to their--
Speaker 2: I think the, well, I teach teachers in different programs.  I teach elementary teachers, which I want to do.  It's important, although I'm in the department of secondary, middle education.  I think that an impact is being made for sure.  The only thing is, as far as science and math teachers, we have so few coming through the program.  There's so, there's so much competition.  Our teachers of science and math have to have a regular degree in science and math, no dummying down 'cause you're gonna be their teacher.  You must go through the regular curriculum for a major in science and mathematics.  And many of them see themselves going, first to graduate school in science.  They go to graduate school, do this, do that.  And they are not interested in teaching.  Now, those who are, are pretty good because they have gone through a very challenging program and they know they wanna teach.  Most of them know they wanna teach because they have been impacted so positively by a teacher.  Some of them come from teaching families, but they are teacher types.  And, yes, I think those will be good.  It's just that we don't have enough of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in--tell us about, in 2004, you were a science, school science liaison and science content coordinator for the Inquiry in Mathematics and Science--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --grant at William Patterson [University].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Okay, that was the same kind of thing that we were doing in Englewood [School District, Englewood, New Jersey].  The difference is, I was the driving force in the district [professional development program for teachers and students to interact with scientists at Ramapo College in Mahwah, New Jersey], and now, for this program, that was through the university.  I was a person from the university interacting with people in the schools.
Story_ID: 21609
Speaker 1: In 2005, you're included in a National Science Teachers Association essay collection and the article is 'Exemplary Science: Best Practices in Professional Development'.  And so, do you publish a lot?
Speaker 2: I don't publish a lot.  This one was very important to me because ten years after the National Science Education Standards came out, the National Science Education Leadership Association was interested in to what extent are people addressing those standards?  Now, that would apply to people in the schools, people who are in the universities.  I'm a science teacher-educator now, and it's been my purpose, as a science teacher-educator, to, especially help people who are going to be teachers get a head, head, head start in terms of learning ways that they can implement standards.  Now, as I said before, inquiry is one of the most important standards.  There are others.  Inquiry, having to do with doing science, understanding how to ask questions and find the answers through experimentation or investigation.  That's just one.  Another is the nature of science, understanding how scientists contribute to, to life in general, what scientists do, how scientists work, how scientists from different backgrounds have made contributions.  Those are just two of the standards.  What I've done in my classes is to emphasize National Science Education Standards in my courses.  This, this paper bringing school science to college, modeling inquiry in the elementary methods course was a piece that was recognized by the National Science Education, National Science Educational Leadership Association because it is an exemplary practice as addressing those standards.  This is a whole course curriculum that I put together, and I taught myself so that I could emphasize those standards, primarily the inquiry part.
Story_ID: 21610
Speaker 1: Now, one thing that you always hear discussed when people discuss the education in the black community is discipline, and it seems the approach to discipline sometimes may be in conflict with a culture of inquiry.  Do you have any thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, if, if the emphasis is on "be quiet, listen to me and do what I tell you to do; I'm lecturing, you take the notes and when I give the test, you tell me what I've said," that certainly is not consonant with inquiry.  Inquiry for--of course, there has to be a certain kind of discipline.  There has to be a certain kind of respect and a certain kind of supportive community.  But it's understood that children are going to be working, children are going to be questioning each other.  Children may even question something that the teacher says.  So it's, it's different from what many people may think of as, you know, traditional discipline, but certainly discipline is important in school.  I don't know if I'm answering your question or not.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--the answer, but, yeah.
Speaker 2: You still need a, you need sense of community.  You need respect.  The teacher, however, is not the sole, the authority, the sole authority.  The teacher facilitates learning.  Sometimes the teacher may do a little bit of lecturing, of course, but the teacher is a facilitator.  That's harder, that's really harder than just commanding, in some ways, it's harder than commanding the attention of the students.  But then again, the way the students are thinking and the way they sometimes have been programmed, maybe it's not.  The students need to know why is it important for them to do what they're doing.  These days, you have more students like that than, okay, I'm here.  You just tell me what I need to do.  I will do it.  You still have some children like that, but most of 'em are not.
Story_ID: 21611
Speaker 1: In 2009, you worked with Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on the African Burial Ground project.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: So tell us about--
Speaker 2: --what I did was, as a person not working on their research--I didn't work on the research.  And I didn't write the book [New York African Burial Ground Project General Audience Report], I made the recommendations for the content of the book and also to ensure that it would be appropriate, developmentally appropriate for readers, K [kindergarten] to 12 [twelfth grade], children, well, K to 12, they can't read--kindergarten children can't read this.  But there're certainly some middle school kids and high school kids who can appreciate the way it's written and certainly teachers who can not only appreciate the way it's written, but they can see the standards, you know, integration of science and history and, and some math and the integration of the subject areas, seeing how people, especially because of the Howard University researchers contributed to this very, very important project.  And there's even something in the book about who the, who the researchers are.  There's something on, there's a part about, there's a skeletal biology part.  There's the history part.  So it's really an integration of content.  The kids can see how scientists interact with the community.  There was a lot of conflict over that project when it first started because the general service administration, they were digging for office buildings.  And when they realized, you know, that these bones had been excavated, then they have to go do a study for cultural purposes.  So there was, there was a lot of conflict.  Who's gonna be in charge of this?  Who's gonna do this?  And the Howard University researchers, they talked to the community.  The community talked about what they wanted to know about the people buried in that ground.
Speaker 1: Now, this was, just to put it in some kind of perspective, in '91 [1991] is when they started like looking--
Speaker 2: Yes, as a--
Speaker 1: --at this project [African Burial Ground Project].
Speaker 2: --matter of fact, in '91 [1991], I was doing a project on the skeletal system in my integrated science class.  It was a little after '91 [1991] when I went back to the high school.  And I actually wrote a skeletal system, a unit.  The African burial ground had just been discovered, and part of my unit was for the students to go online to find out about the African Burial Project, and find out what scientists were involved.  This is the way they find out how people answer questions about, about a real big life project.  They get to appreciate the studies that went into the skeletal biology aspects and the history and the archeological aspects and how this whole project was so connected with society and the community.  And this is part of what the standards, National Science Education Standards talk about, not that the students can engage in inquiry, not just that they understand the history and nature of science, but they see how history, how--they see how science and society are connected.  This project, if someone does a unit on this project, they could easily integrate just about all the National Science Education Standards on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you helped to write the report--
Speaker 2: I did not write, I did not write them--
Speaker 1: --to inform, you helped inform the--
Speaker 2: I, I gave counsel.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I wrote a paper on the content and how it can be related to the Standards.  And then after each draft was written, I reviewed the drafts and made some comments.  But I certainly don't wanna claim credit for writing the report.
Speaker 1: No, I'm not suggesting that you wrote it.  I'm just saying that you informed (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had, I had, to me, it was such an opportunity to, you know, be asked to make the recommendations for that.  And when I look at the book that came out, it's, it's a little, it's about like that.  It does have the content, you know, it pretty much conforms to, to the recommendations.
Speaker 1: And the report basically deals with examining the skeletal remains of 400 women and children who were found at that site where they were--
Speaker 2: Right, but even--
Speaker 1: --excavating (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but even more than that, it gives the history.
Story_ID: 21612
Speaker 1: It [New York African Burial Ground Project General Audience Report] tells how when they were digging for the building, how the bones were discovered and what had to happen as a result of that and how the community got involved, how the community wanted to know certain things about the people who were buried and a researcher listened to them.  And then, of course, there are different parts.  Now, the original research covers the skeletal biology.  So they were looking at the diseases that they obviously had based on what they learned about the--
Speaker 2: I think the first thing they'd probably wanna know is how do we know they're Africans, right?
Speaker 1: Well, there is, there is history about that burial ground and when it, when it first--I can't, I don't wanna say when it first.  But the report tells, it puts it all in a historical perspective of the company, the, what do you wanna, is it the Manhattan?  No, they don't call it Manhattan.  I'm trying to think of the Dutch, the Dutch settled the--
Speaker 2: Right, the Dutch West India Company.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, they settled the area, and what was going on in history.  And there are some records they found of this burial ground.  So--
Speaker 2: And then what you were saying, you were just saying the, you know, conditions, I mean under which the people died--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --what their physical condition was.
Speaker 1: Right, and then there was some study, and I don't wanna try to quote everything because there's so much.  The people who came over after--how do I wanna put it?  For those who were born and brought over, that they have some of the same kinds of diseases that people who had been living under the conditions of slavery and were already here.  They somehow looked at that as well, but I--and I will do this.  I'm gonna go back and re-read everything because I plan to make that a unit (laughter).  We do a lot of unit, unit work in my methods class, one of my methods classes, where I get the students to develop a unit and develop lessons where they embed these standards that we want in those lessons.  And what I do with my middle school and secondary students, different from the elementary where they only do lessons, I get the students to develop their units collaboratively so that it is ensured that it is interdisciplinary and that it has different perspectives, and they're working together, like teachers, like the teachers that I worked with in the [Englewood] school district [New Jersey] in restructuring.  That's the way they worked.  They worked collaboratively.  So I brought that into my courses at William Patterson [University, The William Patterson University of New Jersey, Wayne, New Jersey], that the science methods students, some of them, would work collaboratively on curriculum and bounce ideas off each other and ensure that they're looking at, you know, chemistry and biology and earth science, all in the same unit.  And some are pathology majors, some are chemistry majors, some are earth science majors, it works nicely that way.  So those are some of the new ideas in professional development that I've been pushing since I've been at William Patterson.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, just on the African Burial Project, I think it was Dr. Rick Kittles [geneticist] was important in that.  He was a scientist at Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia].  Did you have a chance to meet him?
Speaker 1: No, no.  Now, the thing that's probably, I don't wanna say disappointing.  I didn't get a chance to work with, and I don't wanna say I didn't get a chance, they didn't give me a chance.  It's just the way when I got involved and how much time there was before this general report had to be done, I was, I talked with a writer, the Howard writer who really didn't write the book either, but she's a writer.  And Dean [James] Donaldson, who is also a HistoryMaker, and Oscar Cole (ph.) who was a special assistant to the president, and who was in charge of the project, those were the people that I interacted with and gave my recommendations to.  And as I said, when the drafts came back, I read and I made recommendations along with other people who were also reading the draft.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 21613
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my concerns go back to--and I don't wanna turn back the clock.  I just wish that children, African American children in the community could experience the kind of nurturing that I experienced.  We talk about an urban education today.  We should be doing this, we should be doing that, we should--when I think back to growing up, I think, but, of course.  I think that so often the leaders or people who would be leaders are separated from the people.  See, when I was growing up, African Americans had to all live together, the same place.  And, again, I don't wanna go back to that being the situation, but as a result, the children could see role models every day.  They could see their principals.  They could see their teachers, and there was this connection between the home and the school.  Kids would know if anything happens in school, their parents will hear about it and vice versa.  I think my, well, my father [Alexander Eugene Barber] had been, when I was in elementary school, president of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association].  My father was, did not graduate from college, but he was active, concerned.  He knew the teachers.  He had that connection.  You know, it kind of cut across class lines.  There was class.  I mean, you know, there were people, oh, we do this; we go to that church or whatever.  But we were very likely to see some teachers in our church as well.  There was just complete, you know, I--what is the word, just a connection between school and community and home.  Now, when you look at restructuring recommendations today in urban districts, they're talking about the school, the community and the home.  I've seen it.  That's what we don't have, and, and part of it is that at home the people, part of it, not all.  This is not the case with all parents or households.  People don't have as much time.  Sometimes even people who are making it up the economic ladder don't have the time.  Sometimes the people in the homes don't feel that they can go to school and be involved.  Sometimes the people in the schools are, "Oh, is it Mr. So and So or Ms. So and So again?"  But that home-school connection is very important.  I'd like to see partnering between home and school, not adversarials, not you did this to my child or why did you do this or--. If you come to school, you know, this is, first of all, I know my child.  This is important.  Sometimes parents don't know their children, but if you do and if you're into your children, then you can be their adversary, you know.  This is what I've learned.  Tell me what I can do.  I'd like to see the partnership.
Story_ID: 21614
Speaker 1: Now, when I was coming up, we had something special.  That was the Civil Rights Movement, and I think that put us all, that made us all focus.  We had a common goal, and the children were part of the dream, the children were.  I can imagine now that my teachers must have been thinking, these kids are gonna go out, they're gonna be the ones, you know, on the front line.  We gotta get 'em prepared, and we lift up our children and we lift up our race, and we lift up our country.  And I don't know, Myra Roseman was the teacher that I didn't, for some reason get a chance to say, my seventh grade teacher, who lived in our community, walked to school (laughter) in our community, and she would talk about Ralph Bunche [American political scientist, academic, and diplomat who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for his late 1940s mediation in Palestine].  She would say, you know, gave us the impression that one day we would be able to do whatever we wanted to do.  But we were a part of the dream.  We were part, we were part of their dream.  Now, if all educators, all educators thought of the children as part of our dream and their success is our success, and we're not fighting, you know.  We don't have union and administration pulling and tugging, that would be great.  You see where I, I live where I live.  I don't know if you noticed the neighborhood.  I love the idea that I can walk in different parts of Englewood [New Jersey], and these kids are gonna see me.  I mean I don't work in the schools anymore, but I lived across the street from the high school when I worked there.  And when I moved, I wanted, I needed a bigger house, but I didn't move far away.  And the church I go to is around the corner.  It's walking distance.  And my students, I see them.  I see students I've had years and--I had years ago, and I can hear about what they're doing.  It's almost like the old days (laughter).  And as I said, I don't wanna bring back the old days, but part of the old days, there are some things about the old days we do need to bring back.  And we can't do it as African Americans only.  And we do at William Patterson [University, The William Patterson University of New Jersey, Wayne, New Jersey], I think we've given more than lip service now, insists that the students--most of our students are white.  But we insist that they do their student teaching in an urban district and a suburb--if they do the student teaching in a suburban district, they must have done the practicum in a, in an urban district.  I mean they must have a suburban and urban experience, unless they've decided they wanna go urban all the way.  And we, our partnerships are with urban schools.
Story_ID: 21615
Speaker 1: What are your future plans?  Do you have a big project--
Speaker 2: I have a personal project.  The, I took a sabbatical in 2007, and at that time, I was interested, you know, in really going back in history and looking at my own journey in learning and teaching science.  Then from the vantage point of an educator and knowing from teaching what is important, I re-examined things in my own life, went back and got my school--my parents [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber and Alexander Eugene Barber] kept everything in the childhood home, just all kinds of records, found teachers that I could find, went back to [University of California] Berkeley, found some of my old friends and just looked at how it, how things worked for me, how I, as an African American woman did or got on this, on the path of science.  So the long and short of it is, I have been writing, you asked me do I publish?  I don't feel like I'm, I have to publish to keep my job.  Fortunately, I'm in that position now.  This is important.  I don't feel like I have to do a bunch of publications, but I want important publications and journeys in learning and teaching science is one that starts off when I was very young, and it moves through my childhood.  There are little episodes of my brothers and me noticing scientific things together.  It goes through elementary school and high school and, and some college as well.  And I'm going between what I do now, why I do it and how it relates to some things that I saw, experiences I had even as a child.  So it's that writing project that I must (laughter), that I must finish.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is intended to be a book, right--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) project?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 21616
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: You know something?  My answer is no (laughter).  My answer is no, and I don't know what that means.  I don't know if it means I'm complacent or what, but I am at a vantage point where I look at, I see some students I've had.  I see students I have now.  I look at my children [Dana Lamar Akins-Adeyemi and Meredith Ivy Akins], and to me, it's all part of my purpose, my children, my grandchildren.  I see how it's working out.  I wish maybe that, maybe I could make things, some dreams that I had fruition and that it stayed.  But I can't control places I've been and things I've started and the fact that they may not be going on except maybe in the hearts of a few people, but not the whole system.  If there was a way to make it all stick across the system.  But I can't think of what I might have done myself personally.  So I can't say I have any regrets or that I would have done it differently.  I'm glad that I got experiences in a lot of different places.  I don't mind that my husband [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins] was moving and I was moving after him because all it did was to make me, or, you know, adapt and learn something new in a new place, and I'm glad that we've lived all the different places.  And I had to work through certain things, and I'm glad that the job that I have now, practically everything pours into this job I have now, everything that I've done--
Speaker 1: Well, speaking of--
Speaker 2: --relates to this job that I'm doing right this minute at William Patterson [University, The William Patterson University of New Jersey, Wayne, New Jersey].
Story_ID: 21617
Speaker 1: All right, so, when you look at everything you've done to this point, and what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy is, I just gave it all of myself, and I hope that there are some students to whom, I wanna say role--I've been a role model, though I don't want them to just emulate me, but I want them to see that, you know, caring, caring about your purpose is important.  And in the words of someone I asked on a search committee, the answer they gave that was important to me, when you see your craft as a vocation and not just a career.  Now, those are his words (laughter).  He got the job too.  It's not about, am I moving up, up, up and gonna make this amount of money.  I wanna develop expertise and I want to put it into my job.  I don't wanna go like this to the top.  And if I, even if I get to a certain level, for me, and this is satisfaction, I can go back to this level and this level 'cause they're just as important to me.  As a matter of fact, I have had more fun working as a coach and working through doing what I try to get my students to do.  I've had more fun doing that than I have from the top, saying you should do this, and you should do that.  So I don't know if I answered your original question or not.
Speaker 1: You did (laughter).  You answered it.
Story_ID: 21618
Speaker 1: The next question is, tell us something about your family and you've got two daughters, right?
Speaker 2: I have two daughters, two wonderful daughters.  Dana [Lamar Akins-Adeyemi] is an engineer and I guess not surprising, she really embraced science.  She has been an engineer, I should say.  Now, she's a stay-at-home mom.  Her first child--, actually, her husband had a daughter in Nigeria when they married, and she came to the country.  And she's--at the age of ten.  So Dana has reared her.  Her first daughter is a chemical engineer.  Dana married an electrical engineer.  The grandson is going to be fifteen in September.  He loves everything, robotics.  He just loves everything.  He's doing track now.  He's not a basketball player, but he loves soccer.  The younger granddaughter is nine, and these children are Tenor Kay (unclear), Nathan, and Naomi is the younger granddaughter.  She loves everything.  She could be anything.  She loves science.  She loves Girl Scouts (laughter).  So that's the first daughter and her family.  The younger daughter [Meredith Ivy Akins] is the one from whom I have learned so much.  She decided after going to her science activities which we wanted to make sure she got, as well as everything else that was right for her--and that's the important thing, she decided to become a dancer which has been as challenging as science could be.  She's been a successful Broadway dancer, actress for sixteen years.  And so, and, of course, Dan [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins].  I've talked about him already.  I'm still, my, my brother, my brothers [Alexander Eugene Barber, Jr. and Freddie Barber] and my sister [Mary Christine Barber], we're very close.  That's just the way we were reared.  Many of the memories I have that help me with this book. I do have a good memory, but we've talked, we've communicated all through the years.  We continuously reflect on things that we do.  And that's one way I've been able to retain a lot of things that happened to me when I was--to me, I say it in a good way, when I was young, very close.  My mom [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber] is--, my father [Alexander Eugene Barber] passed away at ninety-one.  It's been almost 10 years now.  My mother is now ninety-four.  She is very much with it (laughter).  She says she remembers better than we do because she doesn't clutter her mind with all the stuff that we do.  So that's my immediate family and my nuclear family, and I'd better not have forgotten anybody (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21619
Speaker 1: I just wanna talk about how enjoyable teaching is.  Science is like a center for me, but it's really been important and satisfying to apply it to teaching.  And I'm hoping, one hope I have for this interview is that more people will see how satisfying teaching can be.  I don't want people who should not be teachers to try to be teachers.  But oftentimes people will say, okay, I don't wanna teach, I just don't wanna teach.  It doesn't--, maybe it doesn't have the appeal or it doesn't have the status or whatever, to them.  Teaching is, is not easy.  Teaching is very challenging and people shouldn't feel that people who can't do anything else teach.  They might try, but (laughter), but they won't be successful.  I just hope that there is inspiration for people who may see that science can be, can lead to teaching and that teaching can be very satisfying.  And I don't know, I think science, I love teaching.  I love (laughter), but I wouldn't wanna have one without the other.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 21620
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow [whisper].  Again, I think I would like to be remembered as a person of caring, a person, some people say walked the walk as well as talked the talk, that I am, I was dedicated--I was, I don't wanna say "was."  I am--I would like to be remembered as a person authentic, genuinely dedicated to, to the work that I do.  And, of course, a supportive mother, grandmother, community member, all those things are important to me, daughter and sister and aunt.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 21621
Speaker 1: Okay, who are we looking at?
Speaker 2: Okay, on the left is my grandfather, George Sharpe, and on, that's my mother's [Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber] father.  And on the right is my grandmother.  This picture--, the two pictures were taken, I think about the same time.  My grandmother might have been forty-five or fifty [years old] at the time.  They had, they were no longer together when those photographs were taken.  I just put them together.
Speaker 1: Oh, this is a picture of my mother, Mabel Savannah Sharpe Barber, and her brother, Walter Sharpe.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that's when they were babies.
Speaker 1: When they were babies.
Speaker 2: Around 1919 or somewhere.
Speaker 1: This is the family.  On the far left, my oldest sibling, Alexander [Eugene] Barber [Jr.].  We called him Gene.  And I'm next to him.  I'm about seven, six or seven.  And there's my father [Alexander Eugene Sharpe] holding the baby, Mary [Christine Barber].  She's less than two [years old], my mother and my brother, my first, I should say my first partner in learning, Freddie Barber.  We were together all the time when we were young, went through elementary school and high school, very, very close.
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother, my father's mother, Mary Ivy Barber.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother, Mabel Savannah Sharp Barber.  And she's about eight years old, and she's on her piano bench.  She had just got a piano.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandmother when she was about seventeen or eighteen [years old].  She had already married my grandfather.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me.  I was in the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Dan [HistoryMaker Daniel Akins; Sondra Akins' husband].  This is very shortly after we married, maybe a month.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me outside of my childhood home.
Speaker 1: This is in Winston-Salem [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: It was Winston-Salem, and I'm younger on this picture.  My big brother is looking after me, and I'm holding my baby doll (laughter).
Speaker 1: Here we have a picture of my husband, Dan, and he is with a young student who wanted to learn about a contemporary scientist.  His mother was one of the founders of the Educational-, African American Educational Center.  His name is Alexander Norman.
Speaker 2: And the next picture is the same affair, my husband and I are flanking Shirley [Ann] Jackson [also a HistoryMaker; physicist].  And she was being honored as a scientist.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture of my husband, Dan.  And there's a quote from him.  My husband would often come to Englewood schools when we were having different programs, and we were talking about the school system.  So he was very supportive of the school work, restructuring.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me as the interim high school principal of Dwight Morrow High School.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother's family.  You can see her mother.  Her mother's name was Allan, her last name was Allan.  And she's holding the baby of the family.  My grandmother is a little girl on the lower right, and my grandfather, Granell (ph.) Ingram.  My mother's mother's name was Ingram before she married.  Some of these people are siblings of my grandmother and some are neighbors.
Speaker 1: Is this in--where was this shot?  In--
Speaker 2: That would have been in some place close to Asheboro or Greensboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, your father's home.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  This again is, I think a better picture of my family.  My older brother, Gene, myself, my father holding my baby sister, my mother and Freddie.
Speaker 1: Can you name all of these people (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Okay, believe it or not, I can name many of them.  This is a picture of the eighth graders who graduated from eighth grade in 1958, Skyland [Elementary] School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me as editor of the 1962 Maroon and Gold Yearbook.
Speaker 2: Are you in this one?
Speaker 1: Yes, I am.  Where am I?  Let's see.  If you look at the front row, there (laughter).  Now, this is a picture of the Science Institute that was held at North Carolina College [now North Carolina Central University] in Durham [North Carolina].  It was, I think it was four whole weeks.  This would have been just before my senior year when I took chemistry and math, and these are the teachers on the far ends for that institute.  The attendees came mostly from North Carolina, but there are one or two people from Virginia as well.
Speaker 2: Oh, my mom and dad.  This is a picture of them.  It, on the program, my father's ninetieth birthday and my, and also, it was the sixty-fifth year of their marriage.  And it was taken August 25, 2001.
Speaker 1: Oh, that, yes.  It's the back what's important.  The one with the two students, no, the other side, yes.  Those are--these, this is about a fourth of a page.  I don't know what happened to the whole page.  These are the winners of the National Competitive Scholarship based on the exam.  The scholarships that Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] awarded.  There were forty of us, and I am on the top row on the right.  And we were awarded $1,100 per year, full expense paid to Howard University.
Speaker 2: I wish it cost that much now.
Speaker 1: Wouldn't it be nice.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that is a picture of me and my classmates at Howard in a math class.  I have the striped shirt on.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in either seventh or eighth grade.  That's my Easter dress (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, I--, this is a picture of me as a teacher at Dwight-Morrow High School.
Speaker 2: Now, this picture is, it actually would have been in '96 [1996], '97 [1997].  I had started, after I had been director of math and science and they put away all the administrative positions, I went back to teaching.  And that's a picture of me teaching.  And then that's my bulletin board where I showed different people who had contributed to science, especially African Americans and Latinos on the bulletin board.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of me as my marriage announcement in the newspaper.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me as president of the Honor Society and a professor from A and T College who was the speaker of our Honor Society ceremony of that year.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.  The picture on the left is of me with the children who belong to the Skyland School Health Club [Winston-Salem].  I'm in the first grade, and this article is about the, the curriculum that we were studying for our health project.
Speaker 2: I think that's it.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Okie dok.
