Story_ID: 651714
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure. My name is Patricia, P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, my middle name is Jean, I don't say that often, but it's J-E-A-N, Andrews-Keenan, A-N-D-R-E-W-S, hyphen, K-E-E-N-A-N; [HistoryMaker] Patricia Andrews-Keenan.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, July 19th, 1954, and I was born at Charity Hospital in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Occupation, I run my own small boutique PR [public relations] and media firm, it's called the Tallulah Group [Chicago, Illinois], which is the home town where I grew up in Louisiana [Tallulah, Louisiana]. Tallulah, T-A-L-L-U-L-A-H, Group, and we do media, PR, communications.
Speaker 1: All right. And you were very, very active and an executive in the cable industry for many years, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. Prior to starting my own firm in 2008, I spent about twenty years in the cable television business doing a little bit of everything. When I first came into the cable business I was a communications coordinator, I was a director, and I left the Comcast communications [Comcast Corporation] as the vice president of communications there.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January the 24th, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois, at the offices of The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 651715
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: We ask them of everybody. So the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Wow. Okay. I know I do, I have to think of what it is. Gosh, I'm a savory, so just about anything savory. I love olives, I love, I love pastas, I love things with tomatoes, so not one specific food, but kind of elements of food, I guess I would say savory and spicy, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, I love the fall. The fall is absolutely my favorite, when, when the colors start to change and it's, you know, it's still warm, but it's just starting to turn. I love that time of year.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red. I wore it today.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh. I'm a city vacation person, so I love cities with lots of history. So, obviously, New York [New York], I love being in Chicago [Illinois]. I had the pleasure to go to Paris [France] and London [England], but I really love cities, because I love to see the people and the things that make the cities unique.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do unto to others as you'd have them do unto you. Golden rule's always been my favorite.
Story_ID: 651716
Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, separate from your father's side; and then we'll get his side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure. My mother's name is Pearline, P-E-A-R-L-I-N-E. I think my mother added--she kind of tweaked her own name. She really liked the sound of Pearline as opposed to just Pearl. Chapman, C-H-A-P-M-A-N, but her maiden name was Henderson [Pearline Henderson Chapman].
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is 12/7/26 [December 7, 1926], and she was born in Madison Parish, Louisiana. You know Louisiana is one of those states that has parishes as opposed to counties, and both sides of my family are from Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay. So is Madison Parish near New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: It's--no, it's in the northern part of the state. Tallulah, Louisiana is the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. So Tallulah is in the northern part of the state (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, northeastern corner of the state. It was settled by the Arcadians [sic. Acadians]. It's a lot different than New Orleans, although a lot of our family has ties to New Orleans, but they, both my mother and my father [James Andrews], came from the northern part of the state originally.
Speaker 1: Well, the only time I heard Tallulah before is in reference to Tallulah Bankhead, the actress (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tallulah Bankhead, everyone knows, yes. Yes, the actress. But Tallulah was actually the railroad--you know, if you go back to the time when the railroads were being laid, I guess the, one of the people who was responsible for laying the railroad through that part of Louisiana, his daughter's name was Tallulah, and they named it for her, so that's--I think that's what's on the little plaque when you come into town (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. It sounds like an Indian name, but I don't know if it is.
Speaker 2: You know the Arcadians settled that part of Louisiana, but there was also, obviously, that whole state, there were a lot of Native Americans in there. Don't know specifically, but that's kind of what I've always heard, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother, Pearline Chapman, formerly Henderson, born in Madison Parish. Now what, what can you tell us about her side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what occupations did they have, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: You know, as far as I can get back, and I've been for the last--probably about three years ago, I started really looking at like the ancestry thing, to kind of figure out things, because my family's kind of spread everywhere so it's hard to get everybody together, and I don't have a good oral historian, so I guess sometimes I strive to kind of pull things together for myself. But I can go back to her grandfather, which would have been my great-grandfather, Will [Will Douglas] and Dinah Douglas. And I'm told that Dinah was--had a lot of Indian in her. And she and Mr. Douglas had--and my great-grandfather had eleven children. Don't ask me to name them all, because I can't remember everybody's name now, but they had a really large family, so they had eleven children, and my mother is--and my mother--that's my mother's mother's parents. And my grandmother, Katie Douglas [Katie Douglas Young], was one, that's her mother. And it's funny, in my family, mostly everybody is named for one of those children, so my mother is named for her Aunt Pearl [Pearlie Douglas], which is Mr. Will and Dinah Douglas' daughter. Katie is my grandmother, and let's see we have Emma, that's my aunt, and actually my aunt reared me for the most part, she brought me up. So my great aunt reared me.
Speaker 1: This is your great aunt Emma?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They used to call her Irey, and her name was Emma Douglas Rucker. She's a, she's a Douglas, but my uncle's name was Rucker [James Rucker], so.
Story_ID: 651717
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's see when you ask the things that I remember about my mom--and my mom's, and my mom's eighty-seven. She's here in Chicago [Illinois]. She's suffered from dementia for the last three years, but you know, she, she has good health, but you know, does have dementia. But the things that I always remember about my mom is she, she was always very proper to me. You know, like if you see pictures of her the way she always held herself, she had the tendency to kind of hold her hand out, she's very petite, very lady like. And I'm like, oh, I'm so different from my mother, but yeah, she always has been that way. She was raised by her grandmother, as well. And my great-grandmother on that side, this is my dad's mother [sic.], she was a very good seamstress. Her name was Doreatha Henderson [Doreatha Dempsey Henderson], and she was a fabulous seamstress. She could just about make anything. And my mother learned that from her. And my mom always tells the story about the thing about her grandma, she's very patient, very kind and she said the things she would tell you if you made something that--you know, she was young, so she'd want to go out and she'd want to make something and to wear out, and she said, if she didn't do it correctly, she would tell her, she's like, "That's very nice honey, but you--if you want to do this, you got to take it apart and do it again." So, so I can see that in her the way she does things that, you know, it was very much a focus on doing things and taking your time and doing it right. So she could sew, she could knit, she could crochet, she could cook like nobody's business. My mother was an excellent cook. And it's funny because I think when we, when we finally kind of figured out that she wasn't as well, you know, up in her eighties, we would eat something and it wouldn't taste like her cooking, so I mean that was kind of a telltale sign to us, that she wasn't as well and after that we found out about her having, you know, having dementia. She didn't have a formal education, so she only went through school, probably, you know, just before high school. So, but she always--she's a very hard worker and she--whatever she did, and she did a lot of different things in her life. She told me she worked as an X ray technician at one time. She worked in a laundry, she worked as a seamstress. When she retired, she was working for the Denver public school system [Denver Public Schools], and she was a school bus driver. But anything she did, she always had a lot of pride in it and she would tell you that if you're going to do something, you know, make sure that you do it well. And I remember her talking about like maybe getting certificates from different places she worked. And even when she was a school bus driver, she--she would have to be at work really early in the morning, I remember that and Denver [Colorado] can have kind of precarious weather at times too. But you know she was always the one that's going to be there by five or six o'clock in the morning, and she had little kids that she took. She took elementary school kids to school, and all the kids just really loved her, so she's always had a great disposition, and she was always the kind of person that you'd meet that was always really friendly. She didn't like to fly. She never liked to fly. So she would do it a couple of times, but she would catch the train. So she was--anytime she wanted to go somewhere, she would get the train, and she would get on a train and, say she went somewhere in September, by that December, there was somebody she met on the train that would send her a Christmas card or send her a note, because she was just that person. If she took something she always shared it, she really believed in hospitality. And I learned to cook from her, and I've always liked to entertain. But that was her, you know, for her it was always, you know, you have a big pot of something on the stove and anybody who was around could come and have it so it was all about hospitality, being friendly. And even today, even though she's, you know, she stays in rehab with the dementia, you know, when I go everybody's, "Well, Miss Pearl [Pearline Henderson Chapman] this, Miss Pearl that," she still maintains that friendliness and that kind of openness and that kind of warmth with people. And, and people still respond to that, even though she doesn't, you know, a lot of things aren't there for her anymore, but she's still--she still has that, I think, it was just kind of always how she was.
Speaker 2: Now, did your mother have any stories about growing up? She grew up in Madison County [sic.] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she grew up in--
Speaker 2: Parish, parish rather.
Speaker 1: Right. She grew up in Madison Parish, Louisiana. Yeah, well, gosh, one thing, that I mean, it's a little bit traumatic, but when she was lit- when she was a small child, I think maybe about seven or eight, she got hit by a car. She was on her bike and got hit by a car so, I guess we're very fortunate (laughter) to have her here today. So, you know, some people say you have nine lives in life, so, so that was one of her challenges. When I was born, she, she--she had to go to hospital, she had to have a C section [Cesarean section], and she got really sick. So she always tells me that she says we're lucky that, you know--you're lucky you're here and I'm lucky that I'm here as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was she hurt very badly in the au- car accident?
Speaker 1: Yeah. She got hurt really badly, but she, you know, she healed really well. And she hadn't had a whole lot of percussions to it--repercussions to it, but yeah, that's something that did happen to her when she was lun- young, so.
Story_ID: 651718
Speaker 1: Are there any family stories about what life was like in Madison Parish [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: In Madison Parish?
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of the black community and (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Now we, you know, again, small southern town. And when I grew up, you know, still a lot of the vestiges of things, you know, from the, from, from the integration. I can--and I can barely remember them, but it seems to me that there was still a few signs I can remember, you know, kind of black and white things. Definitely, we lived on one side of the proverbial railroad track, which was actually, literally, a railroad track. So we lived on one side of town and, you know, the white population, for the most part, lived on the opposite side of town. Through the middle of Tallulah, Louisiana, there runs the brushy bayou. We're a river town so, you know, you can go maybe twenty miles and hit the Mississippi River on the one side and then in our town, there's brushy bayou, which kind of separated the town. So you know we lived on one side, the white community lived on the other side. I remember growing up and we would go to the little grocery store, you know, you'd have your neighborhood grocery store and we had a good--we had an interesting black community because one of the first black police chiefs in the country, Zelma Wyche, was from Tallulah, Louisiana, one of the early elected black officials.
Speaker 1: This is a man?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Zelma Wyche. I didn't even know I remembered that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) W--W-Y-C-H?
Speaker 2: C-H, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. C-H-E, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so. I'm going to have to go back and look at that. But yeah, he was one of the first black elected police chiefs in Louisiana. And I want to say maybe, you know, pretty close to in the country, so I definitely remember that that was kind of--that was a really big deal for us, but you know, it's still cotton fields--still we're in--in our town. And when I was young, I used to go with my uncle [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great uncle, James Rucker]. In the summer when I got older (laughter), I made the mistake of saying, "Well, I want to make some money." He would take people to the field to chop cotton. And I remember I got to be a teenager. And it was like, "I want to make some money." He's like, "Well you can go with us." Oh, what a mistake. I'm like why did I choose to (laughter)--but yeah, still cotton field right across from my house. I could see it every day and people were still, you know, wasn't all mechanized then, it was still--there was still cotton being picked, people were going to manually chop cotton. When my c- my older cousin was coming along, and he was probably about ten or fifteen years older than I, there were still times when people, they let kids out of school to do that. Yeah, there was still that time when they might take a part time out of school when it was harvesting season. It didn't happen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a time sensitive crop.
Speaker 2: Right, right. It wasn't--when I came along we didn't do that; but I remember those kids, that were like ten years older than I was. Yeah, that was still that time when I was a little kid, so.
Story_ID: 651719
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: She didn't. She didn't. She just started working, and that's part of the reason--she ended up leaving Tallulah [Louisiana] to get--you know, for work. And my town was really interesting. Tallulah was really interesting. Mom left to get work, that's where she met my dad [James Andrews] in New Orleans [Louisiana]. After she left Tallulah she moved to New Orleans. She met my father, they had me, they ended up separating and then she wanted to stay down and worked, so I came back and that's why I ended up being reared by my aunt [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great aunt, Emma Douglas Rucker]. But I remember when I was growing up, probably in the '60s [1960s], when I was like less than ten, because I have a sister [Doris Banks Blanche] that's older than me, she's twelve years older than me. And in the '60s [1960s] when she got to be, gosh, maybe about seventeen or eighteen years old, a lot of people were going to Las Vegas [Nevada] to work, because the hotels were opening up back then. So they would go and get jobs in the hotels, you know, either housekeeping was kind of the standard, but if you so inclined and you could make your way to become dealers or work in the hotels. So there were so many people from my small town that went there. They have a street named Tallulah [Tallulah Falls Street] in--
Speaker 1: In Las Vegas?
Speaker 2: --in Las Vegas, yeah. And I have--I have--my sister has five kids and they all live there, and they have kids and grandkids and I have cousins, you know, there's just a real large contingent, because I guess that was kind of seen as a way to kind of escape the South and do something better. And mom's generation, you know, going to a bigger city like New Orleans--New Orleans was like the big city, so that's where she ended up, but you know, the generation that came past her that were a little older than me, a lot of them went to Las Vegas, so.
Speaker 1: The way you describe your mother; proper, meticulous, takes her time to make sure she does things right, versatile, the number of jobs, I mean the range of jobs that she--and the things that she could do, I mean, did she share with you an aspiration she had when she was young?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We talked--not so much that but when we talk about it, and we talked about it in terms of what I ended up doing. I ended up doing public relations, community outreach and the like. And I watched her. I'd watched her interact with people, like coming with me to events, because I've done, oh, gosh, I can't even tell you how many events I do. But I would watch her and I'd say, if she had come along with different opportunities, she could have done something like what I do now. I actually would say, "You like people better than I do sometimes." But she was always been very comfortable. She's always been--I always call her a mediator because I remember she had--she had a little group of friends, we used to call them the golden girls and if they would get, you know, they'd do work in church and they would get into little disputes about things. And she would always be kind of the person in the middle with the kind of like, "Okay, well let's figure this out, let's do this." So I can see a lot of my traits in her and she didn't say that there was something specific that she would have done; but when I look at her, I always thought that she could have done PR [public relations] or something like I've done that involves people.
Story_ID: 651720
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna go to your father's side, and then we'll put them together. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, my dad's name is James, J-A-M-E-S, middle name Clifton, C-L-I-F-T-O-N, last name Andrews [James Andrews]. My dad, it's literally--my mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman] comes from one corner of Louisiana and my dad comes from the other corner. Ones--he came from northeast Louisiana, we came--we came from northeast, he came from northwest. There is a small town called Marion, M-A-R-I-O-N; Marion, Louisiana, where his family originated from. And I think on that side, I've been able to get back to a great-great-grandfather as well. And his great-great-grandfather's name was Winzor, and his dad's name was Winzor [Winzor Andrews], as well. And Winzor is a different spelling, W-I-N-Z-O-R. Now my grandfather died the same year I was born, so I never knew him--but his mother's name is Gertie [Gertrude Warren Andrews]. She probably died, I think, Miss Gertie passed in like eighty- in the '80s [1980s]. I can't remember the specific date now.
Speaker 1: This is your grandmother?
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother, my dad's mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your, your--so, I may have gotten this wrong, but your great-great-grandfather was Winzor?
Speaker 2: Right. And my grandfather's name. He's named after his father [sic. grandfather]. So my dad grew up in--he grew up in Marion. The family--a lot of the family migrated down to New Orleans [Louisiana]. But my dad's always worked for himself, he didn't finish--he didn't finish school, either, not a lot of education, but he was in the [U.S.] military, he was in the [U.S.] Army and then moved to New Orleans. He had--he's the youngest of his brothers and sisters. He still has a sister and a brother who are alive, who are older than him. He's eighty-nine years old. And still, I called him the other day, and he told me he was driving himself from the doctor, which was a little unnerving. I have to call my sister and ask her about that. Like are you supposed to be driving, so. So he's always been, you know, an entrepreneur. And as long as I can remember, he's run--he had a--he owns property and he runs a salvage yard, car salvage, you know, he's had that as just as long as I can remember. I actually remember when I was younger, he had a horse there. He's always liked animals. He's always liked children, he has bad luck in marriages. He's been married three times, and you know, he's been married this time for a really long time, but you know, children and pets seemed to be the thing he gets along with the best. But after he came from the military, there's--I don't know if I'm supposed to tell this story on him, but I heard he ran a still at one time and he got busted (laughter) for running a still. I think that was before he went to the military. But you know, he's run that business as long as I can remember and just got to the point where he sold it, maybe, you know, just a few years ago, actually. So he's always been an entrepreneur.
Story_ID: 651721
Speaker 1: Another kind of outgoing guy. The story he tells about my mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman], he and my mother, you know, they met in New Orleans [Louisiana], you know. And New Orleans in that day just, you know, I can see it in my head almost, you know having fun. My mom told me they met Fats Domino and you know, just fun things that they used to do. And she said they liked to go out dancing and my mother and my father [James Andrews] are both shorter than I am. I find that really funny. I must take after my grandfather, but they're both shorter than I am. And he would say that if my mother wore heels that she would be taller than him (laughter), so. But yeah. But just you know just kind of a--he has the most, of the two of them, I think, he even has--he has a very outgoing personality, just you know kind of a lot of fun, but always a really hard worker. I remember him telling his nephews, because there're just girls. My dad just has girls--there're only girls. My mom, there're two of us and then I have two sisters [Peggy Andrews Square and Kerry Andrews DeLavallade] on my dad's side of the family, so just girls all the time, and I remember him, if you had a boyfriend or something that you know that didn't quite--wasn't quite up to his expectations, his favorite thing was, "Oh, he's not worth a quarter." So, you know. So yeah, but, yeah good folks, so.
Speaker 2: Okay. So they met in New Orleans. Is there a story about how they met or where they met?
Speaker 1: No, not that they ever told me, but you know just kind of being out in the community and you know, seems like there was a lot of hanging out going on (laughter) back in the time, but that was kind of the story they always told me. He's like--they used to like to go out dancing, and he didn't like it when she wore heels that were too high, because she would be taller than him. I have a great picture of my mom from a Mardi Gras ball back then, so they--you know, they would do all of that. The Zulu ball [Zulu Social Aid and Pleasure Club] was kind of the, you know, if you got to go to the Zulu ball and get a golden coconut [golden nugget], that was kind of the big thing, and I have this great picture of her from--from that time going to a ball in New Orleans, so.
Speaker 2: Now, did she get the golden coconut?
Speaker 1: She did. She had a golden coconut. And we all went. When I was in college [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], we went back again, and she got another golden coconut, so she always talks about that. My dad had a best friend named Amy [ph.]. He had been married previously, and he had been married to Miss Amy's cousin and they separated, and he actually--and then my mother knew her as well, so that's how they met, they met through a mutual friend, who actually just passed away last year, and she was ninety-two years old, and my mother wasn't well enough to travel to her funeral, but she was the link between the two. And she became my godmother, she was my godmother. So that's how they met, through, through this mutual friend, so.
Speaker 2: Okay. So they were married, how long?
Speaker 1: They weren't, they weren't married long, probably about five years, yeah.
Story_ID: 651722
Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their, their talents, how they look, walk, talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Wow. Interesting. A little--there, there is some of both. Again, when I think about what I do now, I could definitely see my mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman] having done that kind of thing if that had been an option for her to do, to be in PR [public relations] and the like, although she--I love to write, and she never--she always says I wasn't good at numbers and writing and things. So I can see that from her. I see a little bit more--I have a little bit of pragmatism I see that probably comes from my dad [James Andrews]. I think I still love New Orleans [Louisiana]. I think definitely that comes from his side of the family. Interesting story, being because I didn't grow up with my father, and actually we didn't connect 'til later on--'til later on in life. When I was young I was growing up and when I was thinking about going to school. And then I always said, well, I'd like to go--I think I'm gonna go to Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I want to go to Southern. I would tell my girlfriend that, my next door neighbor that, that I was going to go to Southern. And then later on, this is before my dad and I connected, later on I found out that a lot of my cousins had gone to Southern. I don't know, I just thought that myself, and we would say that to each other that when we go to school, this is where we're going to go. I ended up deciding to go to Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] for different reasons, but we had always planned to do that, and her brother taught at Southern and she went to Southern; but then I decided to go to Grambling. But then later on I found out that I had a lot of cousins that had gone there so, I don't know (laughter).
Story_ID: 651723
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have? Now, you've got--?
Speaker 2: I have one sister [Doris Banks Blanche], my mother's [Pearline Henderson Chapman] side that lives in Las Vegas [Nevada]. I told you she had been there since the '60s [1960s], my sister. She's my oldest sister and she's twelve years older than me. And then my dad [James Andrews] has two other daughters, one that's in Texas now [Peggy Andrews Square] and one that's in New Orleans [Louisiana], my youngest--she's older than me as well; and then my younger, so I'm the third, and then I have a younger sister [Kerry Andrews DeLavallade] that's in New Orleans.
Story_ID: 651724
Speaker 1: So, you grew up in Tallulah [Louisiana] itself, or?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Let me ask, I was reading a note on--in the outline that Tallulah had the same mayor [William Putnam Sevier] for an unbelievable amount of time, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, we--I remember my first year of voting. I remember being old enough to vote, registering to vote, and we had a black mayor [Adell Williams], that he was elected when I was, I guess eighteen, and I was able to vote. I worked at the, you know, at the polling place and we elected our first black mayor, and it was just--it was amazing, and his--one of my teachers became the secretary for the city. So, I mean you know you never think of it. You kind of go back and there were quite a lot of first that happened in such a small town, 'cause it was a parish seat [of Madison Parish, Louisiana], so I guess it was the biggest town in our area, you know, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. How far away was Grambling [Louisiana] from Tallulah?
Speaker 2: Grambling was ninety miles. So it's just on the other side of Shreveport [Louisiana]. Shreveport was sixty [sic.] and then Grambling was ninety miles, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you said you all lived across the tracks from white people, literally right across the tracks (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, literally, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so, if, if you were on the other side of the tracks, was there any repercus- I mean did you have to have a destination or something (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No. I don't remember anything like that. I don't remember any confrontations. When it got confrontational, I--so from elementary school to sixth grade, all-black school.  When it was time for me to go to seventh grade, we inter- that was when integration hit, and then we had to go across--we were on our side, and then we had to go across the tracks, and I went to Tallulah High School [Tallulah, Louisiana]. So I'd gone to Wright Elementary School [Tallulah, Louisiana] and my expectation was to go to McCall High School [Reuben McCall Senior High School, Tallulah, Louisiana], because that's where everybody went, and it was that summer, and I was looking forward to going there, and then they decided it was time to integrate the schools. So I knew at the end of my sixth grade year that in seventh grade, I was going to have to go across town, be bused, because we walked to school, be bused to Tallulah High School. And I remember thinking I was going die over the summer, "I'm not going to school there, 'cause something's going to happen, and I'll never go to school there," so. So that was kind of how I thought about it. And then, you know, everybody on my side of town--there was still a delineation even on our side of town, so.
Story_ID: 651725
Speaker 1: One question we always ask at this stage is what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? I mean, what was your neighborhood like, what was it like to be in the neighborhood [in Tallulah, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Wow. Okay. Wow. For me I found it to be very, you know, kind of a nurturing place, because everybody knew everybody. I know people say, you know, these days, you know, you may live next to someone and you don't see them, but we, you know, you just saw everybody all the time. My girlfriend next door came from a huge family, and it was just me at my house, 'cause it was my uncle [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great uncle, James Rucker], my aunt [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great aunt, Emma Douglas Rucker], me, I had a older cousin that lived with us, but he had gone to the [U.S.] military, and you know, he wasn't going to be bothered with me, he was older than me. But, you know, I would be in and out of their house all the time. She had like nine sisters and brothers, so we'd be at their house, you know, the people that--my girlfriend down the street, you know, we played softball next to Mrs. Young's [ph.] house, 'cause we would play softball every day, I think. So you know you didn't feel--you felt as safe as can be. I didn't know anything about feeling unsafe, I would say. It wasn't even kind of in my head, you know, 'cause you just go, and it was the proverbial thing that everybody says your parents tell you. You know my aunt and uncle would say just be home before dark. If you weren't in school, you know, just be home before the street lights go on. There were no street lights. What am I talking about, I grew up in the country. (Laughter) But, you know, it was just safe. You didn't think about anything and everywhere you went, you knew that somebody was going to look out for you. So if I was out and I got hungry, I knew if I went in this house, somebody's gonna, you know, "Here, have this," or if I went to this house, it just wasn't a problem. I remember, you know, your interactions, it was, you know, life was kind of stable and it had routines to it. So if it's during the week and you need something from the store, you know, there's a black owned store, I think Mr. Johnny [ph.], what was his name, oh my god, his wife was our music teacher, they had a store. So if you needed something kind of quick, you'd go there, but you knew that once a week, you would go to the main grocery store. I don't even know if we had the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] then. I remember the A and P, but seems like there was another store before it was A and P. But you had an account at the grocery store. So if I had to go get something, I didn't have to have money for it because, you know, you'd just go, and that's like this is for Mr. and Mrs. Rucker, this is for James and Emma and this is what you got, so. You know, it was just easy, and, and I don't know, it was just--it was really simple. And if we--so we'd get in the car and go to the big store to do the big grocery and they had an account there. And then you'd go get that and come back home. If--the other thing, if you needed clothes, we had like an inside mall, and it's so funny, because I went to France, and I saw like the original mall, and it was like--it was open on both ends, but it was a big arch over the top. We had a little place like that. And there's--where all the stores were. So when we got ready to get clothes, we'd go in this little mall area and I think they were Jewish, the Levy--Levy Brothers department store [Levy's]. So that's where we would get, you know, when it came time to buy clothes, we'd go to Levy Brothers and they had an account there, and you'd get what you want to get. And then, you know, we didn't travel or anything, but my aunt's brother lived in Lake Providence [Louisiana], which is probably about an hour away, so a couple of times a year, my uncle--I remember a station wagon we had. I want to say it was blue, I can't--it might have been blue, and then we would get in and go with him--go see him, and that was about an hour away. So everything, you know, it had a season, it had a rhythm, it had, you know, just kind of the way it was, and it was good. And a lot of our time, you know, before high school [Tallulah High School, Tallulah, Louisiana], you know, it was all about our community, the people that were in our neighborhood. And by the time I got ready to go to high school and we integrated, and then you started seeing the way everybody--you know, the other people lived, the white people lived. But it was very calm, you know, there weren't any confrontations that I can remember of or anybody talked about, so. But, you know, we very much lived where we lived and negotiated where we negotiated; and it was fine, so.
Story_ID: 651726
Speaker 1: Tell us about the schools now. You started at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Okay.
Speaker 1: --at Wright school?
Speaker 2: Wright Elementary School [Tallulah, Louisiana]. So I remember Wright Elementary School. And (laughter) one of my memories of that, I remember my uncle [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great uncle, James Rucker], he worked--they had a paper mill where we lived, and he worked at the paper mill. So early on he used to take--he would drop me off at school. And I would get there so early, it would be me and maybe one or two other people, 'cause it was just as school was opening, 'cause he would go so early. And one of the memories I have--I remember it rained, and it had rained really hard. And (laughter) it had rained so hard that there were--that it had washed up worms. And I remembered the worms being on the pavement, because it had rained so hard and they had gotten washed up. And that's being at school early before they all floated away. And I remember one time a garter snake got in the school and it caused a panic. It was like a little green garter snake when I think about, but when you're a little kid, you know, that those memories kind of, kind of sit out really big for you. And for me I went--when I was--I should--when you go to school you usually go--hit elementary school at six, but I had something. I would break out. I was allergic to something in grass, and I would break out so badly that my aunt [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great aunt, Emma Douglas Rucker] wouldn't let me go to school that first year. I was so upset too 'cause you wanted to go when everybody else was going, but you know, there was something, and I had to sit out for a year. So I went to school a year later. But I remember that I would get--and she would always tell me stay off of the--don't walk in the grass, walk in the middle of the street, 'cause something would happen, and I would just break out really badly. So, those are you know the kind of things I think about. I remember being in third grade when Kennedy was killed, and I remember you know the teachers telling us. And I remember one of the girls in school, she would get so nervous, she would like chew her hair. And anytime anybody would mention his name, she would get upset and cry. And sometimes kids would say it to her just to make her cry. So, you know, I just--I remember being in Mrs. Wyche's [Myrtle Washington Wyche] class at third grade and hearing about that, so.
Speaker 1: Was Mrs. Wyche re--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --mar- married to chief (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Zelma Wyche, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Then became the chief of police, so.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So, again, small community (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this was like, Ro- John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in '63 [1963], he gets assassinated--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and we were in the third grade.
Speaker 1: This was an all-black school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in third grade, yet the children are crying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the chil- I remember that, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what did he mean to people in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember--I remember watching the election. I remember being a little kid sitting with my aunt and watching him on TV and saying, "Oh, he's going to be the president." And what am I, I'm like ten years old. No I wasn't even ten. I had to--but I remember them, you know, remember my aunt being captivated by him and watching him on TV and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were like six in 1960 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And I remember that and I remembered, you know, when he passed away and them coming to class to tell us that. You know, like in the third grade class, so. So, yeah, so those kind of things.
Story_ID: 651727
Speaker 1: I remember eating pears and getting sick. And I know I didn't eat pears again until I was thirty years old. I don't know why, it just, you know, the thing stuck in my head. I remember, you talk about sights and sounds and smells, I remember we had a porch in front of our house and it would get hot and you could sleep on a porch if it was too hot 'cause you know, nobody had air condition, you live in a shotgun house, you can see out the front, you can see through to the back. And if it got really hot, you could sleep on the porch, you know, 'cause nobody locked the door. And at Christmastime, I don't remember who all these people were, but I remember we'd have family come and they would bake, and they would bake so many cakes and pies that they would sit them outside on the porch to keep them cool. And I ate so much chocolate cake one year, I didn't--I still don't care for chocolate cake 'cause they would just let, you know, they'd let you eat it, and I just remember, you know that, and not care much for chocolate even to this day. I eat it but it's never been one of my favorites, 'cause I ate too much when I was little, so. I remember peppermints and oranges, like if it was Christmas, you always got peppermint candy and you always got apples and oranges. And my uncle [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great uncle, James Rucker], when he lost his teeth, he would--he'd want peppermint and he would take it and put it in something and beat it (laughter) with a hammer and you know. And I remember from my little--from being a little kid, I remember he--we always had beans. Beans were kind of like a staple, and I still love beans. I will cook beans to this day. But I remember being little, and I remember him putting them in a ashtray for me and feeding me beans. I don't know when this was, but I--you know, that's still kind of something stuck in my head.
Speaker 2: These are uncooked beans?
Speaker 1: No, no. He cooked it, you know, he just put them in something small or something, but you know--you know, food was really, you know food was really, you know something, 'cause that's how people kind of showed you how they loved you. My aunt [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great aunt, Emma Douglas Rucker] made biscuits and I still can't make biscuits. But she could make biscuits and we could have them every day, but I never learned how to make them, but you know, those were kind of the things, you know. She was a really good cook too, so. My mom [Pearline Henderson Chapman] was a good cook, my aunt was a good cook, my [maternal] grandmother [Katie Douglas Young] was a good cook, so. So all those things.
Story_ID: 651728
Speaker 1: What about your teachers at Wright?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. I loved my teachers at Wright Elementary [Wright Elementary School, Tallulah, Louisiana], and I can't--I know I can't say them all now. But I remember Mrs. Cannon [ph.] in the second grade, I remember Mrs. Wyche [Myrtle Washington Wyche] in the third grade, I remember especially Mrs. Bowie in the fourth grade. Fourth grade for me was kind of just, I don't know, there was something really illuminating to me about fourth grade, 'cause Mrs. Bowie taught, you know, this one class, but she was really good at English, so I--that's where I really loved to learn to read. Reading was good, and I remember doing really well at it and being commended, 'cause they used to have you read out loud a lot and she would always have me read out loud. But when I think about fourth grade, I really think about learning to love to read, and I've always liked to read and still to this day. But I think she was the one--the reading, the writing, I remember her being the one that kind of cultivate those things. It might have been her specialty, you know, all you kids in one class, so you aren't changing classes, but I remember kind of hooking on to that--
Speaker 1: Now this is important (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) about that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, important because of what you're going to devote your life to doing, primarily is reading--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, is writing and forming ideas and so this teach- this is Mrs.--
Speaker 2: Bowie.
Speaker 1: Bowie.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: B-O-W-I-E?
Speaker 2: B-O-W-I-E. She had a daughter name Gail [ph.]. I remember that, yeah, Gail is a year ahead of me in school. Yeah, so. So I think that, yeah, I think that's kind of where that came from. And even, maybe even the year before that. I remember having--trying to keep a journal. I'm a bad journaler. I journal for a while then I stop then I do it again and then I stop, and I've done that my whole life. But I remember having a notebook, a wire bound notebook at the top, kind of like what we would call a reporter's notebook, a little wider and doing a diary back then. I remember that and doing that in class and doodling in it in class, so, yeah. But I think between third and fourth grade, the fourth grade was solidified, but I think it kind of started around third grade.
Story_ID: 651729
Speaker 1: Now, did you have access to enough reading material to satisfy you? I mean, you know, once you started reading a lot? Did--were there lots of things to read at home (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. And I worked in the library, so. That was more in high school [Tallulah High School, Tallulah, Louisiana] that I worked in the library, not as much at home. I remember (laughter), and I'm still mad about this. I remember my aunt [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great aunt, Emma Douglas Rucker], because I liked to read so much, I remember they bought us, remember the Johnson--the pictorial black American histories, the three brown books ['Ebony Pictorial History of Black America']?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She bought those. And I think they came from a salesman. Somebody must have come, you know, 'cause you, you know, you had the traveling insurance guy with the big book, and I remember him coming to the house. And I think somebody came to the house and I remember she bought those books, and I had those books and I let somebody use them and they never brought them back, and I'm still mad with those--about that. Actually, I saw them, I was down at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and you know they have an archive, I don't know if you know about the black music research [Center for Black Music Research]?
Speaker 1: Right, right. Dr. Samuel Floyd [HistoryMaker Samuel Floyd] (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had those three books, and I'm like, I want those three books back and I don't know where to get them. Maybe I should look on eBay. But I remember--
Speaker 1: I think they have them out front here.
Speaker 2: Really? But I remember her getting those books and the encyclopedias, so. But for, for me it was always--I've always been a library card girl, I've always had a library card. And when I was in high school, I worked in the library. And the librarian was the one, because I didn't have people who had gone to college so they couldn't direct me that way, but the librarian helped me with that and told me those kinds of things, so. But yeah, I remember reading. If it was anything to be read, I read it 'cause I read all Louisa May Alcott, I used to like Greek mythology, so you go in the library and just read anything, you know, especially, I'm not as much like you, maybe a history person, you know, I read that for school, but I was very much a fiction person and mythology and just, you know, women's--I liked women authors even back then, I think. I loved Louisa May Alcott, I loved 'Gone with the Wind' [Margaret Mitchell], so. Anything I could get, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, were you influenced by the media at all, did you listen to--?
Speaker 2: Back then?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know we were kind of probably like most households, I mean, I thought Walter Cronkite was--ruled the world. Huntley and Brinkley ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report'], I mean, that was on every night, Mike Wallace. I'm trying to remember--when did '60 Minutes' start? It seems like I still watch '60 Minutes' and I watched it then.
Speaker 1: I think it started around 1969 or '70s [sic. 1968].
Speaker 2: I remember watching it, then I couldn't--I can't remember when it started, but you know, we were kind of like the nightly news, the five o'clock every--cause you had one television, so everybody watched the same thing. But, yeah, I remember watching the newscasts. It did not jell in my mind at that time that it could be a career that you have, but I remember watching it, and it was just kind of part of your life, so.
Story_ID: 651730
Speaker 1: Did you have middle school at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, when you go from, from sixth grade [at Wright Elementary School, Tallulah, Louisiana] then you go from seven to twelve. So we had no middle school. So that was when the transition came, when I got ready to move from sixth grade to seventh grade is when the orders came down for integrating the schools. So instead of going to McCall High School [Reuben McCall Senior High School, Tallulah, Louisiana] where, you know, I expected to go where all my friends were going, I was going to be bused across the town the Tallulah High School [Tallulah, Louisiana], which was the majority high school. And there was--I remember this, oh my god. You could selective--you could select to go to the school first before there was forced integration, you could select, and I only knew one other girl, her mother was a teacher, Mrs. Douglas, Gwen Douglas [Gwendolyn Douglas], who went to Tallulah High School, because her parents had selected for her to go there. I don't know if there was anybody else, but I know she did. So when I went to seventh grade, we went to Tallulah High School. And the kids would fight. All the upperclassman would fight, they would fight every day. And here we're, we're seventh graders so we're just kind of plastered against the wall watching the kids, you know, especially the boys, the boys would go, not the girls, but the guys would. I remember the young--oh, god, I remember this young son, they would be in trouble anyway all the time and they would end up picking a fight or you know the kids, the white kids would pick a fight with them, and they would, they would fight at the drop of a hat, so. But, you know, so you get through the first kind of traumatic year, and then things changed, you know, it became kind of a routine, it became a normal thing. And I'm a unrepentant joiner, so you know, like I did everything. I did pep squad, I did yearbook, I did school newspaper, so you know you kind of get--it kind of gets better and you figure out what to do and you know we just--we got through it, we got through it, so. But the first year was--it was really tough, it was tough. And--
Speaker 1: So, did you have any--was there any attempts to dislodge the black students from the school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not like kind of what we remember from the time, you know, I'm sure--all that happened was a lot of kids, a lot of the white kids ended up going to private school. So, you know, they started defecting from the school, so. It was, it was still pretty mixed, you know, by the time I left, but I bet if you would go now it's probably, probably back to 60 percent black. 'Cause one of my girlfriends retired, she taught math, my best girlfriend, taught math at the same school where we went to school, but you know. So the people that didn't want to be bothered, they just took their kids out of school and they, you know they put them in private school.
Story_ID: 651731
Speaker 1: Tallulah High School [Tallulah, Louisiana], d- so your grades were good, I take it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were good, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I remem- (laughter) fourth grade, again, it must have been Mrs. Bowie, I think fourth grade, I had almost straight A's you know, that's back in the elementary school [Wright Elementary School, Tallulah, Louisiana]. But, yeah, A and B, A's and Bs, definitely. Math wasn't my best, I might have gotten a C somewhere down the line. And the only reason I didn't have perfect attendance is 'cause I got chicken pox when I was a senior. That hurt my feelings, 'cause I had perfect attendance (laughter) right up until I got chicken pox in my senior year, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. So in high school were there any particular teachers that were role models or mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Again, my librarian, I thought, Mrs. Pitts [ph.], was the best and she kind of--she stands out to me. She was African American. Mrs. Westmoreland [ph.] was our gym teacher and she was--she was white. And I always remember her as you know, she was kind of stand out to me. Mr. Cagnolatti [ph.], I think Mr. Cagnolatti taught history, he was white. Mr. Thomas [ph.] was African American. So we had a pretty diverse faculty. When I think about it now, I guess I never thought about it before. So, yeah, it was pretty mixed. We had Mr. Verhagen [Martin Verhagen] was our principal, and he was, you know, he was, he seemed pretty good, 'cause somebody suggested that I join yearbook staff or newspaper staff, I can't remember one of them did, but they were, you know, pretty good. (Laughter) I remember--things, you know, you look at things on face and then you kind of look behind them as you get older and I remember one day we were doing something, pom poms or powderpuff football or something but there was still kind of, you know people come so far and they don't go further, 'cause I remember we had a tornado, 'cause you're subject to get a lot of tornados in Louisiana, and I loved Mrs. Westmoreland, she was our PE [physical education] teacher, so we had been on the field and she said, "Well, you kids should really get home, 'cause it looks really bad outside." And you know that makes sense to me, we all went home, but we walked home. And I remember, I'm like, she wouldn't drive us home, you know, but that didn't occur to me until I was older and a grown up, you know that, now what was the difference if you would probably take some of these kids home, but you know, you told us to get home, but you didn't kind of take it the next step and say hey, maybe I ought to take you home. So just things you think about. You see people that go so far but maybe they don't go a little bit above and beyond, so.
Story_ID: 651732
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations, in--
Speaker 2: Back then?
Speaker 1: --high school?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, again, I--again I don't think they kind of formed. My aspiration was to go to college. That was my aspiration. I didn't necessarily know what I was going to do when I get there, but I wanted to go to college and that's--that was--I didn't know what else I would do, but I knew I would go to college. I knew I had to do that, it's just what I wanted to do, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hadn't quite figured out what I'd do when I got there, but I knew I wanted to--
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any counseling in terms of college?
Speaker 2: You know--no, I don't remember a ton of counseling, you know. Again, the person who kind of stepped into that void, it was my--it was the librarian. She's like, "You should do this." And you know I just don't see where we got a lot of, you know, a lot of you should do that, but it would always be--it would always be people in the community. When I was young the people in the community would say, "Oh, you should be a nurse 'cause you have a nice smile." I'm like okay that makes sense. But then I found out what nurses do, I'm like, oh, I can't do that. So it was always somebody African American and it was always somebody in the community. It wasn't the external folks or, or really--you know, I didn't see a lot of counseling out of the school [Tallulah High School, Tallulah, Louisiana] just generally, but it was always somebody in school, somebody I knew, or somebody that was close to our family that would say, "You know, you should do this, you know, you should go to school," so--
Speaker 1: Now, did you say you--
Speaker 2: --it just kind of stuck in my head.
Speaker 1: Did you say you worked on a yearbook in high school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. I did so. And I didn't tell this, my uncle, another uncle, not the uncle I grew up with [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great uncle, James Rucker], but my [maternal] grandfather's brother, my grandfather's youngest brother, he's still alive today. He was more in line with my mother's [Pearline Henderson Chapman] age, so they kind of came up together. He worked for the Madison Parish journal. And he had worked for the Madison Parish journal since he was a little boy doing, running around that newspaper. So that was our newspaper, and he was self taught, a photographer, that--and when he came up, you know, he used to run errands and then he became a photographer, self taught photographer. And until he got sick, he worked at The Madison Journal for fifty years. So after a while it kind of lined up for me, and I used to go their house and you know just kind of hang around, but later on, you'll see. You know when we talked about that I took photography, I took writing and then I had to kind of link that back to my uncle, because that's what he did, from a little boy, started running errands there and then started taking pictures and, you know, by the time he got in the '90s [1990s] and the 2000s, you know, you could put out a small paper like that, which all you needed was a computer, and he even did that, so. So that you know is kind of--I still hadn't really connected the dots and said this is what I want to do until I actually got on the campus. But when I go back now, I can see that.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you wind up choosing Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: How did--because I wanted to be closer to home. I was a single parent. I had my son [Richard Andrews] when I was nineteen--
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so just before--just before going to college, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had graduated at eighteen or?
Speaker 2: Yes. Well, yeah, so. (Laughter) It's funny as I--he was born like my senior year of high school, right between, he was born in May, and I graduated in May. And so when I went to school, you know, my aunt [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great aunt, Emma Douglas Rucker], still, she's like, "Well, you want to go to college so I'm going to help you." And so she agreed to take care of my son, and when I got on campus my freshman year, I don't know how--it was called Jewett Hall [Fidelia Jewett Hall], I went by the journalism building, and I looked at that building, and it's like that's where I want to be. I just, you know, as soon as I saw it, I knew that's what I wanted to do. But I didn't think about it until I actually was there, you know, had done some general studies my first semester and somehow ended up down there by the journalism building. I went in and I said that's where I want to be, so.
Story_ID: 651733
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about home life so much, now you were raised by your aunt?
Speaker 2: My aunt, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And, now where was your mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman] during this period of time? Was she still in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: She was still in New Orleans. She and my dad [James Andrews] divorced and so she wanted to continue to work. You know she's single and she had to work, so she brought me to my aunt in Tallulah [Louisiana], and my aunt was--boy, she was a force of nature. She had two kids herself, but she had raised a cousin and some other kids, she seemed to always have somebody else's kids at her house. And she, she was a large woman and she was always at home. I don't know, you know, I think she came up in a time when she probably, you know, did field work and all that, but at that time, you know, she just was at home. So she was always home and boy she was a scary woman, too. I don't think anybody ever messed with her (laughter). She always seemed to be very independent, and this is my perception on this side of it, not at that time, but you know, I think she kind of stayed in her world where she could kind of control things and she was always very outspoken about what she did and didn't like and you know, never seemed to be afraid, so to speak, of white people as people that, you know. She was born in 1901, so, you know just coming--just fifty--sixty years on the other side of slavery, but she always seemed to be very kind of outspoken, and you know, this is my world and I kind of control that, so. So that's--she was my, well, let me see, am I saying this. This is my [maternal] grandmother's [Katie Douglas Young] sister, so this is literally my great aunt [Emma Douglas Rucker], this is my grandmother's sister, one of Mr. Douglas', Will [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great-grandfather, Will Douglas] and Dinah Douglas'--her sister or so. And so it was her and my uncle [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great uncle, James Rucker] and they had both had kids, and they were grown and there was my cousin who was still there, and he had gone to the [U.S.] Army and came back. But you know, she was--she was kind of a force, but again, she was a great cook, you know people, you know, again had big families, so you know people would always kind of be in and out. And I remember my uncle, he was a deacon at the church, so that was kind of the thing, you know, the church was really a big part of that, so.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your family church?
Speaker 2: Zion Baptist Church [ph.]. It was like right down the--right around the corner. You could walk down (laughter)--you could walk right around the corner, outside of my house. You could see the church from my house, and he was a deacon at the church. And she didn't have the greatest health at that time, so she didn't--she'd come to church sometimes, but she was, you know, still very, very religious, but he was very active in church. And then, you know in that instance, I was always there. I remember I did a lot of Sunday school. Sunday school was like a big deal. And you know, and when I think back about it, I learned to speak in front of a group going to Sunday school, 'cause you know you always have the verses and the things that you have to repeat, and if you the deacon's daughter, you always got to read something, so. So I never had any fear of speaking in public, I never did. Because you know that was just kind of always, you were always in church and you were always speaking or doing something, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. Sorry I didn't ask earlier about home life as much, but you home--at home there was your great aunt, your uncle--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --you and then--
Speaker 2: I had a cousin.
Speaker 1: A cousin?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he had gone--I remember him when I was young, then he went to the [U.S.] military then he came back, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was older than you?
Speaker 2: Yeah. He was older than me and then he got married and they lived right--they didn't live far they just lived right down the street from us.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how much older was he?
Speaker 2: He is still living, so I'd say, he's probably about my sister's [Doris Banks Blanche] age, probably about seventy, seventy-two years old, so probably about ten or twelve years older than me.
Speaker 1: So, a lot of the time growing up, you were by yourself?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: You and your aunt and uncle?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So it's funny because when you have brothers and sisters, technically, I was not an only child, but I grew up as an only child, so. So I think for me like the reading and things, oh, that was just--that was just kind of; you know, I'd go visit other, you know, I had friends around, but still I grew up by myself, so.
Story_ID: 651734
Speaker 1: On the verge of high school graduation [from Tallulah High School, Tallulah, Louisiana], how, how did--how was Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] cho- chosen again? Did we--?
Speaker 2: Just, it kind of ca- I didn't want to be as far away from home, you know, because I had my son [Richard Andrews]--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) so it was closer to home, so that was kind of my choice there to make that change, so.
Speaker 1: And was there any- anything significant happened during graduation, did you get any special honors or recognition?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a National Honor Society student. I did get a couple of scholarships and I do not know where they came from. I always tell people again, because you know I didn't have family who had gone to school and could kind of navigate things like this. You know, I just--I think again, Mrs. Pitts [ph.] really comes to mind, saying, "You know, do this," do this kind of thing. So I had gotten a couple of smaller scholarships, nothing big. A lot of the--back then, you know, there were the--there were a lot of government grants to get to school. If I could--I could not tell you how I paid for school, but I know when I left school, I didn't owe anybody anything, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You are right. This is--you were in school during the age of the Pell Grant.
Speaker 2: Pell Grants, that's what they were, that's right, Pell Grants.
Speaker 1: That's right, students don't get them as we speak here today the way they did then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but there was a wave of grants to--specifically aimed at minority students after the assassination of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].
Speaker 2: See. Is that what the trigger was for that? I didn't know what the trigger was, but I remember, you know, people say, "Here, fill this out, fill this out," and I got--I got that, I got work study and then I'd have little odd jobs, so there was always something to be done and some way to kind of get it paid for, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, students coming into school during that time, I remember I started before that time and I didn't even know anything about anything available. But by 1972 or so everybody--
Speaker 2: And that's when I was coming out of school in '73 [1973]. I came out of school in '73 [1973]. So it was just fill out some paperwork and I'd left school and didn't owe anybody anything, so.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any sense--because we used to wonder if the students coming behind us had any sense of the struggle it took to get that money (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no (laughter). You know, you know some things, but I didn't know about that and today when I--even when I listen to my son, my son went to the Univer- he graduated from the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. He went to junior college, he went to College of DuPage [Glen Ellyn, Illinois] and then he went to the University of Illinois. And you know I gave as much as I had, but he got some loans and things too and then he still complains about that. He paid them all off, but he has friends he said who are still trying to pay loans off. You know, he kind of figured out how to get the remainder of what he couldn't get--what we couldn't do, he got it taken care of, but he still rails against the system. But, yeah, I just--I did not kn- you know, I didn't know that that was so set up for us that way.
Speaker 1: Right, and, you know thi- it wasn't just because of largesse. It was because of people raising hell and, on the campuses--yeah (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's time to do that again.
Story_ID: 651735
Speaker 1: So at Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], so you started Grambling in 1973?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, fall of '73 [1973] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fall, fall of '73 [1973]. What was, what was Grambling like in the fall of '73 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow. I just thought it was the best thing I'd ever seen in my life. I was a freshman and I felt like, you know, I really felt like a country girl. You know 'cause you go--and Grambling's [Grambling, Louisiana] a small town. It's a little bitty town, but just to see the people and all the places that they came from. I mean to see them, there were people in my, you know people--Grambling had such a reputation, I mean there were, you know, those people whose parents had gone to Grambling, so. Wherever they were from, there were people from Chicago [Illinois], there were people from New York [New York], there were people from Florida, there were people from New Orleans [Louisiana], you know, it was just--and one of my best girlfriends works for Apple [Apple Inc.] right now, she was from Colorado. I'd never even met anybody from Colorado, ended up living in Colorado later on, you know. But it was just--it was just something to see all these people from all these different places and they were all black. One thing about Grambling and the one reason I think, you know, back, I think in the '70s [1970s], a lot of people were going to a lot of mainstream majority schools, but I had just had--I was so tired, I was so tired from all the fighting that had happened with integration, I wanted to go to a black school [HBCU]. It was like, it's just, I don't want to have to worry about those things. If you remember our conversation, you know, you come from this kind of insular community where everybody loves everybody and everybody gets along, then you kind of interject the outside world and I think it was a little bit traumatizing. It was good in a way because where I went to high school, I saw things I had never seen, that I would not have had in a school. I mean, I remember jumping on--doing trampoline and square dance at Tallulah High School [Tallulah, Louisiana]. I wouldn't have done that at McCall [Reuben McCall Senior High School, Tallulah, Louisiana] and that was great that I got to--that experience, but in some ways it was just so draining, some of the other things that happened. So by the time I got ready to go to college, I had said I want to go to a black school, and this is where I'm going to go. But it was just--it was amazing. I met my first gay person. I'd never seen a gay person before. And I saw this six foot tall guy wearing a midriff top and shorts and you know this funky hair color and my mouth fell opened, but you know, I'd never been exposed to anybody like that. So for me it was like, wow this is a much bigger world than I'd been in; and I just thought it was the best thing ever, so.
Story_ID: 651736
Speaker 1: One thing that Grambling is known for is the football team--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the second, the band.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, but, but, of course, football team coach, Eddie Robinson, was, I think won more games than any coach alive when he was still coach.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, so were you involved in campus life?
Speaker 2: Oh, very much. Again, I'm a joiner, I'm always (laughter)--some things don't change. Yeah, so, you know you come to campus and you know the band and football team are practicing in the summer and the band's practice was just as rigorous as the football teams are. They'd make the kids run up and down the bleaches and do that. So I'm seeing all of this. So you know, I'm kind of looking around and it's like what do I want to do. So, gosh, over the course of my time, and I don't remember anything specifically, but you know sorority, did that, I'm an Alpha, Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]. I did, you know, I was involved a lot--once I got into journalism, I mean everything kind of opened up, so I do lyceum programs, I was in student government, I was secretary of Student Government Association. Actually the president of student government, when I was the secretary, is a judge right here in Chicago [Illinois]. We're still good friends, so.
Speaker 1: Who was he?
Speaker 2: His name's Rodney Brooks [Rodney Hughes Brooks], and he's a juvenile court judge here, and he was the president of the SGA and I was the secretary of the SGA. And I remember helping him run his campaign (laughter). When he was running for SGA president and then when he ran for judge, I helped him--came here and helped him knocked doors. So, you know, for us it was, it was a community. You just, you know, you just did things. I worked on the lyceum program, so when we had guests on campus you know you get to meet them, you sit down and have dinner with them, 'cause they come and the students, you know, go out with the guests on campus. I'll never forget the one that forever will stick in my mind is meeting Carl Rowan. Carl Rowan came and I was going to introduce him at the lyceum program and we went out to dinner to whatever the nicest restaurant, I think it was associated with a hotel in Grambling [Louisiana]. And he sat there and he ate his fried chicken with a knife and fork. And I was just amazed. I'm like, "Oh, I can do that." You know I was that kind of kid, 'cause you know I didn't have a lot of those big experiences. So for me it was really about soaking up things and watching people and seeing how people did things, and I'll never forget that. Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], Jesse Jackson must have spoken as a commencement speaker at least twice. For a little bit of time, I was editor of The Gramblinite. I had a teacher that drove me crazy though [Glen Jones (ph.)]. He didn't like the fact that I pledged, so he pulled me off of that job, but I was the editor of The Gramblinite for a part of my time in school, dean of pledgees for the sorority. So, you know, you just did things. For me it was--you just dove head first and you just did things, so.
Speaker 1: Were you a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] or?
Speaker 2: AKA.
Speaker 1: AKA, okay. And your favorite color is red (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I know, it's incongruous, but it's true (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: Just the color looks better on me, I guess.
Speaker 1: All right. Okay. That's what the Deltas would probably say.
Speaker 2: Yeah. That's okay. But I bleed pink and green, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, all right. So, okay. So, journalism department--now who's the president of Grambling, I think we interviewed him?
Speaker 2: You know he was at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois]. His name won't come to my mind right this second (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it Johnson [HistoryMaker Joseph Johnson] or--is the last name Johnson?
Speaker 2: No. He was there--when I came--obviously when I came in, it was Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones, Prez. And Prez was only the second president of Grambling State University [Grambling, Louisiana] behind the founder, Miss Johnson [sic.]. I am saying that wrong, Adams [Charles P. Adams]. I can't think of it right now. Oh, my goodness, I'm going to be excommunicated from school, if there's such a thing. But Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones was--he was just amazing. I think he came to Grambling as a baseball coach and then went on to become president of the university and literally, I mean, I don't know if he--he probably died right before, you know, Mr. Johnson came second and being--by then I was really ensconced in the journalism department, so when they decided to get a new president for Grambling and they were doing the interviews, I got on my first plane ride on a little prop plane to go to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] to cover it for the newspaper. Ears popping, I'd never--I'd never flown and it was the best thing ever, but that was, you know, he transitioned my last year in school. So, that was when he left, he retired, and we got a new president and I was privileged to go down to Baton Rouge when the state school board, you know, assigned him to the position, so. But Prez was the best, and that's what everybody called him, you know, no Mr. Jones, Ralph Waldo Emerson Jones; and he was--he was just the best, so.
Story_ID: 651737
Speaker 1: Who were your--you're in the journalism department [Grambling State University Department of Mass Communication, Grambling, Louisiana], were there any special mentors or teachers in there?
Speaker 2: In the journalism department? You know (laughter), funny, I go to a all-black school [HBCU]. I end up in the only department that has two white instructors (laughter). There was Glen Jones [ph.] and there was Mr. Dozier [ph.], but they were very great. Other than my little back and forth with Glen about pledging, cause he just, he just didn't believe in pledging, so he just--that was not his thing. But I found them to be very helpful during my--between my junior and senior year, they helped me get an internship with the Fort Myers News-Press [The News-Press] in Fort Myers, Florida. So that's where I spent, I spent that summer working in Fort Myers, Florida. And again, here you go--I haven't been too many places yet, and you know, here's me going to Fort Myers to work at a mainstream newspaper in Florida. So leaving home, first time I've ever stayed away other than being in college, that I'd ever stayed anywhere for a whole summer and then getting to do that and there were--it was a program, and I was the only black student. There were four other students I have a picture of us. I had on bell bottom pants, my god, and a big Afro and plaid bell bottom pants and there were three other white students and we all worked at the Fort Myers News-Press that summer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is about 1975?
Speaker 2: Yeah. This had to be, so, yeah, cause I graduated in '77 [1977], so it had to be '76 [1976], so over that--
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. So if I graduated May, it was the summer before, so. So that was a great experience. So we lived--Fort Myers, not too far from Sanibel, Sanibel Island [Florida], really great, you know, little community, lot of retirees, but it was beautiful. You drive down the Alligator Alley to get between there and Miami [Florida], and it was good. And mostly, I did feature stories, so. So I'd write feature stories. I think my girlfriend in the journalist department, she got an internship, I forgot where her internship was, so. So we all kind of, you know, we were all dispersed and, and doing internships that year. So it was good, it was really good.
Story_ID: 651738
Speaker 1: At Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] now, did you do all nice stories or did you ever get in trouble?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Pretty much no. I think we didn't have--you know, I don't know if you heard the recent little contra tips at Grambling, when the newspaper people reported about the bad condit- you know the team walked out. You know the team refused to play. Doug Williams left, they got rid of Doug. Doug went to school with me, so Doug was--
Speaker 1: Now Doug, yeah--
Speaker 2: Doug Williams was one of my classmates (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now Doug Williams that's wor- Doug Williams who has a--made a tremendous footprint on football.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, yes--
Speaker 1: He was one of the early black quarterbacks in the NFL [National Football League]--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --I think the first one designated the start.
Speaker 2: And Doug was the second string quarterback. When he was--when he got the call, the main quarterback, his last name was Como, Joe Como [sic. Jay Schroeder]. Joe Como got injured and Doug was the second string quarterback and came in and everything else became kind of history. So, yeah, and it's fun because when the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XXII]--the first Super Bowl he won with the Redskins, I was living in Denver [Colorado] and they were playing the Denver Broncos. So we got a Super Bowl party rooting for Doug living in Denver, so. But yeah, Doug was--Doug was good people. He was just really good people and so when you're on the--you know, a lot of that, you know, we had a sports guy that covered it, but a lot of that was part of what we did, covering the sports at the newspaper (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was nationally known.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was drafted number one by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Speaker 2: Right. He was amazing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And had a rocky start to his career but comes back and wins the Super Bowl in 1980 [sic. 1988] with Redskins.
Speaker 2: Wins Super Bowl with the Washington Redskins, so. Yeah, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: But he was there when you--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, we were classmates. And you know, seen him over the years, you know, so.
Speaker 1: So the recent controversy, he was--
Speaker 2: Oh, the newspaper. That's where we were going, so when they fired him, the team went on strike and they refused to play. But they were refusing to play because of some of the conditions at the sports center and the locker rooms and the like. And the student paper reported on it, and they tried to call the kids to task for that and then they had the--they tried to suspend them, and then they ended up bringing them, you know, suspending them, because they just reported what they saw. They went in kind of stealthily and took hidden cameras and shot pictures of that. But no, we didn't have anything--any dramatic thing like that. The biggest story that we had that I remember, there were some kids growing pot (laughter). They had the milk cartons back then that you get in the cafeteria were black and gold, the school colors, and they had the Grambling Tigers. So they were branded milk cartons for milk, and they busted them and they were growing weed in the Grambling milk cartons (laughter). And there was a big picture spread across the front page, it's so funny. And oh, another story, nice little Chicago [Illinois] tie. One of my--a person I met afterwards, he came into Grambling behind me. He's now the editor at the Chicago Defender, Ron Childs [Ronald E. Childs]. But Ron went to Grambling, too. But he was--I was coming out, Ron was coming in, so we didn't know each other in Grambling, but he was, he was a Gramblinite staff member too. The school paper was called The Gramblinite. So we have good--we have good history, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ron Childs, I know him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but Ron was a Gramblinite and he was--he worked on the school newspaper too, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the--the growing the weed in the milk cartons was the biggest story we ever broke in The Gramblinite, so.
Story_ID: 651739
Speaker 1: As you were approaching graduation di- you--you saw yourself becoming a journalist and a mainstream (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, that definitely was what, you know, what I wanted to do. So when I graduated, my mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman] had by then moved to Denver, Colorado. So when I left Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], we packed up and we moved to Denver. And my first job (laughter) in--I don't know if it was my first job, I think it was my first job. I worked for the Denver Weekly News, which was a black newspaper. Obviously, I was trying to get into a mainstream newspaper, I think The Denver Post. We had The Denver Post and the Rocky Mountain News, and I tried to get into both of those, but I landed with Cosmo Harris [Freeman "Cosmo" Harris] at the Denver Public--at the Denver Weekly News. And my girlfriend, who I went to school with, who was from Colorado Springs [Colorado], she worked there too. So we both worked for Cosmo Harris, and it was fun. It was a lot of fun covering the black community. And Denver doesn't have a huge black community, but it had a pretty active black community. And Cosmo would pay you in cash (laughter). So I worked there for a few years, but you know, the money wasn't great, so I ended up going to work for the phone company. You know, it's kind of--kind of things that people do. You find a good job, and so I did customer service for them (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, would this be a Denver Bell [sic.] or something?
Speaker 2: It was Mountain Bell [Qwest Corporation] at that time.
Speaker 1: Mountain Bell, okay.
Speaker 2: This was before, before the breakup of the phone company by the [U.S.] Department of Justice. So I worked there probably about eight years. And I wanted to do something different, and somehow I ended up at the Internal Revenue. This is a long way to go around to get to all of these places, but then I ended up at the Internal Revenue. Well, even at the phone company, when I worked at the phone company, I remember they decided they wanted to do a newsletter. And of course there were a couple of us that could do these kind of things. "Okay, can anybody write? Can anybody do--take pictures?" I was like, I can do both of those, 'cause I took photography in school too. So this kind of comes back to my uncle's [Andrews-Keenan's maternal great uncle] profession. So I took photography and journalism in school, and ended up starting to do a newsletter for the phone company. So, you know, you felt a little better, it's like oh, I'm using some skills that I have. And then I left them and I ended up going to the Internal Revenue Service. But because I was good at speaking in front of people, I end up running a tax fair education program. But I'm sitting here and I'm saying, "You know, this isn't really what I wanted to do."
Story_ID: 651740
Speaker 1: So I started looking around and I started talking to people in Denver [Colorado], you know, saying, "Okay, these are the things that I understand, these are the things that I know how to do, and I need a new career. If I can't get into The Denver Post--," you know, 'cause I would send them stuff and I'd go down there and they'd say, "Come write this," but they didn't hire me. And somebody said, "Well, you know, based on what you say you can do, you need to meet [HistoryMaker] Gayle Greer." And I think you guys have interviewed Gayle Greer. And Gayle Greer was with a company called ATC, American Telecommunications [sic. American Television and Communications Corporation], which is a precursor to TCI [Tele-Communications, Inc.]. And I, I called her up and she was so gracious. She was just the best. She's like, "Well, come on in, and I'll talk to you." And that's how I came to understand about the cable industry, that's how I came to understand the industry, what it was, what it was doing, 'cause I didn't really know.
Speaker 2: Now what is--what year is this?
Speaker 1: This is, oh, boy, so let's see, '78 [1978], '86 [1986]. This is probably about '87 [1987]. This is probably, yeah, probably about '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: Yes, it had to be '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Meanwhile, as you were in school [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], the cable industry was getting--taking off (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was just starting, kind of warm up.
Speaker 2: I know when we interviewed Gayle Greer, she told us that the reason why so many cable franchises were located in the Mountain States was because of community antenna television, you know, was already using coaxial cable.
Speaker 1: Right, because they didn't, they didn't get good reception.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And when you kind of look back at some of those pioneers back then a lot of them, they were stringing cable in some of these hard to reach areas like up mountains, like the company I worked for initially, Jones Intercable, Glenn Jones was stringing cable, you know, somewhere in the mountains somewhere. And Gayle obviously was in the mountains (laughter), well, in Denver. So, yeah, I went in, I called her. There were two people I talked to during that time, she was one. I didn't talk to her first. There was a legislator. Oh, and I'm not--I want to say his name was Hiawatha Davis [Hiawatha Davis, Jr.]. Denver had a kind of interesting history with black legislators as well. But I think I went to his office first, and I don't know why, but--I think my mom [Pearline Henderson Chapman] knew his mother or something. So I went to see him first, and he told me, he said, "You need to meet Gayle Greer." Just like that. "You need to meet Gayle Greer." And so I called Gayle Greer, and I went in to see her. And told her these are the things that I know how to do, still not really thinking about cable so much. At that time in the cities, remember cable kind of started in the outlying areas. In the cities, they got cable later on, because they were harder to wire, because you know you got rights of ways and you have all these legislative hoops you have to jump. But at that time, you could buy HBO [Home Box Office]. There were people coming door to door and they would just sell you HBO. So I remember at home, we had HBO. We didn't have anything else, but we had a movie channel that they sold independently. So, you know, still not understanding how it came about, but that's what we had. So when I went in and talked to Gayle, Gayle told me about the Walter Kaitz Foundation [Washington, D.C.]. The Walter Kaitz Foundation was founded by another one of the cable pioneers, Walter Kaitz, who had done extremely well. He was based out of California. And he had done extremely well in the industry. And I guess there had been a lot of conversation about, you know, this industry is growing, but we don't have any people of color in this industry. And it was a foundation that brought you into the industry, kind of taught you about the industry, and the way it was set up initially, this isn't exactly how it worked for me, but it used to be set up where you'd come in and you would get to do different jobs in a company. They would place you in a company, and it's kind of like a fast track program. So the company--so you start in this department then you move to this department, and you move to this one, so you'd learn all the different aspects of it, and it was designed to kind of--it wasn't entry level, 'cause they wanted you to have work experience. So it was designed to kind of fast track you and get you up to speed and get you into the business. So I applied to the Walter Kaitz Foundation, and I--and there were ads in the paper about it too. It just so happens the time we talked was about the time they were doing the selection processes.
Story_ID: 651741
Speaker 1: The Walter Kaitz Foundation [Washington, D.C.].  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Walter Kaitz Foundation.
Speaker 1: --you're, you're--would you be called a Kaitz fellow?
Speaker 2: A Kaitz fellow. Walter Kaitz fellow. Yeah, so I came into--I was accepted into the Kaitz program. And again, it was just a little bit different. So rather than--they had two parts to the program. So there was that kind of internship, if you want to call it that, but I got directly hired by a company in Chicago [Illinois] called Syntel [Syntel, Inc.]. So, you know, it's kind of rigorous, you have to, you know, you have to present all these essays, you have to go through these series of interviews, you talk to all these different companies and so at the end of the day, I got hired by Syntel corporation, which was based in Oak Brook, Illinois. And Syntel ran phone companies. They were a phone company that started into the--running cable companies. And that was kind of a trend back then too, 'cause they had phone--they didn't have phone service here in Illinois, but they had it in Las Vegas [Nevada] and some other states. They had cable service in Ohio, in Illinois, can't think of all the states now, but they were kind of the first aggregator. So, the cable companies they owned, they had bought them from these small mom and pops. So out in the western suburbs out here, they had bought the company that was run by a small mom and pop organization and they started aggregating them and then they bought some more in some other states. So they kind of started that consolidation process that has, you know, is now the norm in the business, so.
Speaker 1: What's interesting, and we were discussing it before your interview, it seems as though your career trajectory is about these acquisitions (laughter).
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: You change, every time you changed jobs is because of another company acquiring--
Speaker 2: It was because of another company--
Speaker 1: --acquiring another--
Speaker 2: Exactly. So I came in April of '88 [1988] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Serial acquisition.
Speaker 2: Serial acquisition. I came here in April of 1988, moved the family. I had gotten married, you know, have kids now [Richard Andrews], and I moved here in '88 [1988] in April. And almost as soon as we got here, you start hearing these things about sales and acquisitions and the like. And there was a thing--and it was Christmas that year, so that was--we came in April. Christmas that year, they had little toy pigs with wings on them, and they said, "Oh, we'll sell this company when pigs fly." By the next year they'd sold the company (laughter). And that started me down--down this road. "Oh, we'll sell the company when pigs fly." And they would toss them up in the--at the Christmas party. And I--you know, obviously, I'd never been through anything like this, so I am devastated, 'cause I you know moved here and you know uprooted my family. My mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman] was terribly upset with me that I had moved from Denver, 'cause you know, my mother is in Denver at this time. And she was just beside herself that I would move, you know, 'cause again, I don't have parents that were professional, so they weren't used to corporate relocations and things. So, we were bought by a company called Jones Intercable that was based out of Denver, Colorado, where I had just moved from, and who would have thought (laughter), you know. I go to work for a company that based for--out of where I live. But, again, it was just amazing. And what I particularly like about the business at that time, I think it fit my personality because it was like the wild west. There were no rules, it hadn't been in the industry yet, and it wasn't an industry then, it was still kind of a loose conglomeration of people who were doing things, entrepreneurs, people who just kind of, you know, who had great personalities that wanted to do something different and found ways to do it. So when you did things there weren't a lot of rules, there weren't manuals. I'd worked at the phone company [Mountain Bell; Qwest Corporation] where they had a manual for everything. If you did this, if you talked to somebody, you had to go through this stepping process and how you talked to them and how you deal with them. I'd worked with the government where there were rules and regulations. This had no rules and no regulations. So everything was good and anything we could do. So, it just made it--I thought that was the best thing ever because I never really saw myself as really a corporate person, but I saw myself as somebody, again, if you want to reference back to my parents, I thought I was the most flexible person, and if you just give me a direction and say I want to go there, I could do it. So, it, it really fit my personality to be in this industry I think.
Story_ID: 651742
Speaker 1: In '89 [1989] with Jones Intercable, you were--now did you start off with Jones--I me- when they acquired Syntel [Syntel, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --did you start off as the director of public affairs?
Speaker 2: I didn't. I started out as marketing manager.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably--yeah, if you look in a resume, things change so quickly there. So what they did is they divided because now, obviously they're acquiring what was Syntel, but they had acquired some other areas as well. So they divided it up into four distinct areas. There was the western suburbs, there was the southern suburbs, there was the northern suburbs, there was one other area I can't think of. So when I came here I was working--I was living in Naperville [Illinois], I was working at Oak Brook [Illinois], because that was Syntel's headquarters. I was working out of headquarters' office. So then we came and we kind of divide this area up into four distinct regions, and I went down to the south suburbs to Matteson, Illinois, to be the marketing manager in Matteson, Illinois--Matteson, if you--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and the one thing that you get, I did marketing, but the one thing that you have to remember is that cable is very much dictated by regulators. So your local municipality has a lot of say in what you do, because they have to grant you franchises to be able to do it. So, while you do marketing, you're also responsible for supporting your general manager and making sure your politics in your areas are good. So that involved doing events, that involves, you know, going out and schmoozing people, you know, so, it was all of that. It was all of that kind of going in there, so. But a lot of events--and then it had become about selling cable. You know when cable first came out, people were--they would say they would chase the trucks to get cable because everybody wanted it. But then as you start to grow then you got to sell, too. So the marketing role was really about selling cable subscriptions. How do you get more people, you know, coming on to buy cable. And marketing was not my core competency. My core competency, again, was the media, the PR [public relations], the communication side. But I learned a lot about that, one of my best stories about being a marketing manager (laughter), 'cause everything would change like every couple of years. My best stories about being the marketing manager is you would do direct mail. And so, there--there's a lot of things when you do direct mail, you have to code it appropriately, you have to make sure it gets to the post office, you have to make sure, you know, this happens, whatever. So, I had a young general manger who had come from Car- Indiana. I think he was from Indiana, and we had just done this big mailer, you know, this is the HBO [Home Box Office] special of the month. And so the guy from the post office called him. The postman was also the mayor in Crete, Illinois. So he called him, he said, "Rusty [ph.]," he's like, "your mail's sitting, here." So I had forgotten to code something on the mail and rather than going out to the public, it ended up stuck at the post office. So he calls me, he's like, "Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Andrews-Keenan], your mail's sitting at the post office, you got redo--," (laughter). So, obviously, for me, marketing not being a core competency, I'm kind of looking around and seeing what else. And so at this time, we had started--when I was transitioning from Syntel to Jones, one of the things we did is we had to go to every community where Syntel was operating and ask that municipality to grant us a franchise transfer to Jones Intercable. So I spent my nights sitting in city halls, sitting on stoops waiting for our little thing to come up on an agenda, and you know, a city council meeting can go on forever. So that's what allowed me to get this job, because the people I worked with at Jones who were acquiring us had sent us out to do this and they liked the way that I would go in. I would go in and talk to people and say this is why we we're doing this. This is what we expect to happen. So that's what landed me the job in marketing. But then eventually, I was able to transition over to government affairs. So, you know, reading, going--doing this more on a regular basis, dealing with these elected officials.
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in the negotiations in Chicago [Illinois], at all?
Speaker 2: No. Because we didn't have Chicago franchises at that time. That happened later on.
Story_ID: 651743
Speaker 1: So we've gone from Syntel [Syntel, Inc.] to Jones [Jones Intercable]. So the next thing that happened, Jones got acquired by TCI [Tele-Communications, Inc.]; and TCI was the operator in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. So now, you know, rather than having some sporadic clusters in the north suburbs, in the west suburbs, in the south suburbs, we didn't have--Jones didn't have franchises in the City of Chicago. But when TCI acquired us, now we have the City of Chicago. So this is when I started learning a little bit about some of that--there was some really historic stuff there. Mr. Johnson, [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson was one of the early investors and owners of cable in the city. Parker House fran- Parker House Sausage franchise [Parker House Sausage Company, Chicago, Illinois], they were part of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's another black--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend Clay Evans, so. So now I'm kind of learning that, 'cause I--we really hadn't dealt with the city. We were all suburban cable operators at that time. So when TCI acquired us then we became part of that. But by that time--
Speaker 2: So this is 1996 or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is probably around that time.
Speaker 2: In the meantime, I just wanted to point out that Chicago, the struggle over cable in Chicago was a protracted political--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --struggle that--I mean, I don't even know what it all entails, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when I left Ohio, we had cable TV in Columbus, Ohio, in '77 [1977], '78 [1978]. When I got to Chicago--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --there was no ca- no cable here until, what, the mid-'90s [1990s] or something, early '90s [1990s]? (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not in any big--probably the early '90s [1990s], yeah, 'cause they were doing it but there were a lot of things, you know, again, Chicago, you know the political climate in Chicago, so. So you can't do things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You had the ONTV box for a while and other things in the '80s [1980s], until they finally, finally--cable finally got--
Speaker 1: Right. Again, cities are just a challenge to wire, because you're going in rights of way, you're digging underground. So to get those kind of permissions--and to get those kind of permissions in a city like Chicago where everything is political, I can imagine. In the suburbs where we were doing it, we didn't really have those kind of issues, but, again, it was really political in the city.
Speaker 2: Yeah, also--yeah, part of Jones' success strategy was to focus on the affluent suburbs?
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. So that's, you know, we were in every--you know Naperville [Illinois], Wheaton [Illinois], Mundelein [Illinois], Lake Zurich [Illinois]. We had some very, very affluent, affluent things. Continental Cable [Continental Cablevision, Inc.; Comcast MO Group, Inc.] was the other one. They kind of butted up against us, but Continental got eaten up and bought over that time, so. So by the time we got to be TCI, we had--they had cannibalized all those other companies; TCI, Metrovision, Jones, oh boy, I can't even remember some of the names now, but there was Post-Newsweek Cable [Post-Newsweek Cable, Inc.; Cable One, Inc.], so all those things got cannibalized and became part of TCI. So, you know, as you go through each rung of this, you say, well, there can't be anything bigger, but along this time is when AT&T [AT&T Inc.] decided that they wanted to get in the cable business. And who was the big driver for that? Oh, I can see his face, white hair, oh my goodness. He [C. Michael Armstrong] had the grand vision that AT&T--he was running the phone company, but he had the grand vision that because they already were in rights of way, they were already on telephone pole- they already owned the telephone poles, and the cable companies were renting their space on the poles. So anytime you look at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, was this Leo Hindery?
Speaker 1: Leo Hindery. Leo Hindery was TCI.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So he had the grand plan from TCI and that was the precur- that's the company that [HistoryMaker] Gayle Greer's company [GS2.net] became. So Leo Hindery had the grand plan from the kind of pioneer cable guys, but then he got involved and they hashed up the deal with the guy from AT&T, whose name I can't think of right now. Maybe when we have a break, I'll look it up. But, so AT&T is saying, you know, if we already got the utilities, we need to be in this business as well. So they created AT&T Broadband [AT&T Broadband LLC], and then they bought TCI. And Hindery was the one, he and John Malone [John C. Malone], engineered the sale of TCI to AT&T to create AT&T Broadband.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this--
Speaker 2: This all happens really fast, too?
Speaker 1: It does. I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jones changes to TCI and then TCI is a product of Syntel.
Speaker 1: Syntel changes to Jones, Jones changes to TCI, TCI changes to AT&T Broadband; AT&T Broadband gets bought by Comcast [Comcast Corporation].
Story_ID: 651744
Speaker 1: I have a lot of information in here about a lawsuit. Jones [Jones Intercable] was in--part of Jones' problem was the suit against the City of Naperville [Illinois], I guess it was, it was emblematic of rules being changed or something for--I mean new people were allowed to do things that Jones was not allowed to do?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes.
Speaker 1: That's what it was about right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, gosh, yeah. That was a big deal because one of the things that cable companies do when they come into the city, they pay franchise fees, so for every subscriber that you have, you pay X amount of dollars. But now keep in mind too that the cable networks that are carried on a cable system, you know, they have to pay a fee to be carried as well. So, back in the day, if it were BET [Black Entertainment Television], BET probably paid five cent carriage fee, okay. But then in turn, the cable company had to pay a franchise fee based on their number of subscribers to the municipality where they operated. But also a big part of that was running cable access channels. And of course Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] comes from cable access, so, you know, that's where I first met Julieanna when she was running cable access in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. But these municipalities many times had cable access studios as well. Naperville has one of the more successful community access television stations and Liz Braham Stroker [sic. Elizabeth Braham Spencer] who runs that to this day, used to work for Continental Cablevision [Continental Cablevision, Inc.; Comcast MO Group, Inc.]. So, when the phone companies got into the mix, and AT&T [AT&T Inc.] said, "We want to do this," they said, "we don't want to run a cable access studio." But the company was run- we were running a cable access studio, so we're saying to be on a fairer playing field, you can't require one thing of us and not let them have the other. So that's where the lawsuit came from. And what AT&T decided to do, they decided to pay themselves out of the requirement to have an access studio. So they said, "We won't run an access studio, but we'll contribute to your access, we'll just give you money." And eventually all those studios moved over to the cities for the most part. I think if you look today, CAN TV [Chicago, Illinois], all of those things probably belong to the city. So the goal at some point in time, they all started transitioning. The companies still gave the money to support them, but they stopped running them, cause we used to be that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't realize that. So that's, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah. They end up transitioning out. But back then you used to run em. They were--at our facilities, we provide the people to train. If you wanted to be a community producer, we taught those classes. But after a while, it became so not aligned with the business that they kind of purchased--either purchased themselves out of them or if they came to some agreement to continue to contribute to them, and CAN TV is probably a big one. They probably get really good funding from Comcast [Comcast Corporation]. There's money that changes hands to do that, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now that makes sense. I always wondered what was going on with them.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It was a big suit, because the whole thing, when Com- before cable was--they would very much try to consider cable a monopoly, you know, you're--like power and all those things, but cable rebelled against that. They're like we're not a necessary, you know, utility, we're not a utility, but we have these franchise agreements that hold us to some things, but we didn't have competitors, so if we're going--if the market's going to be opened up to competitors to be able to compete on a level playing field, you have to relieve us of some of these responsibilities that we have, via these franchises. And back then franchise--you negotiated franchise, it would be a twenty year deal. Some of them were thirty years and that--I'm sure that's not the way it is now. I've been out of the business for a little while, but I'm sure the franchise negotiations aren't nearly as long. But initially, they would have thirty year deals with some of these municipalities to bring them these services because they were so new. But then the municipalities started learning, you know, what kind of power they had. So, you know, when these terms would come up, or they'd come up for certain renegotiations, they changed that. One of the people who was involved--there was a group called NATOA, the National Association of Telecommunications Officers and Administrators [National Association of Telecommunications Officers and Advisors]. And one of the past presidents of NATOA is Tom Weisner who's the mayor of Aurora [Illinois]. So, you know, back then, these guys who were at the cities, they would come together and you know kind of share expertise and delve into the cable act. The cable act was kind of the--the cable act at a federal level--oh, gosh, and I can't think of the year now, but you know, the cable act didn't change very often so the government was involved in this as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was '96 [1996] too, the Telecommunications Act of '96 [Telecommunications Act of 1996]?
Speaker 2: Right. So, yeah, so that was the big overarching--the overarching regulations of the industry. But still you had the local municipalities that had to negotiate as well. But, yeah, Tom Weisner, who's now the mayor of Aurora was one of the past presidents of NATOA, and those were the people from the cities that came together to kind of oversee these things, so, yeah. So lots of things. And if, if you notice now the big issue is net neutrality, what goes over the Internet. Because when we became AT&T Broadband [AT&T Broadband LLC], the big change became then, that was when we started offering Internet services. Heretofore it had been only been cable, then the Internet became a part of that, then telephone became a part of that. So we became more--the industry became more like a full service provider. But in the beginning it was just strictly cable then you add Internet then you add a telephone.
Story_ID: 651745
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999], from the note I have here is that when tele- when TCI [Tele-Communications, Inc.] was absorbed by AT&T [AT&T Inc.], it was the first major merger between phone and cable since dereg- deregulation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was, since the DOJ [U.S. Department of Justice]--and that's--it's so funny when I look at my career, because I was at the phone company [Mountain Bell; Qwest Corporation] when the decree came down, when the consent decree came down, and then I end up in a business, you know, that came very similar to that, so.
Speaker 1: Right. So--anyway so, '99 [1999] your--so your job has been to basically explain to municipalities and concerned people with the--
Speaker 2: Yes, and the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) political dynamics of cable is?
Speaker 2: And it also include a little bit of lobbying in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. So we spent time you know going back and forth to D.C. telling them about what we were doing here too. So about this time--so that's TCI then I kind of segue back to the communications, because we had started to get big, we had bigger government affairs and then we needed a communications arm of the business too. Heretofore, we didn't have communications 'cause media wasn't, you know, the media was there, but they weren't that focused on us so as we got bigger and we transitioned over to AT&T Broadband [AT&T Broadband LLC], I became the director of communications. We were housed in Deerfield, Illinois. So, I'm still living in Naperville [Illinois], but I worked down south in Matteson [Illinois] and now I drive--then I worked in the city and now I'm driving up to Deerfield, so. I told people you can't lose me in the City of Chicago [Illinois] 'cause I've been everywhere. I've been in every little town in this area, so. So I know little places that nobody knows (laughter). But, yeah, now we segue where we have a clear communication, and this happened at TCI actually. We had a corporate headquarters in Denver [Colorado], again, still because Jones [Jones Intercable] was headquartered in Denver and TCI was headquartered in Denver. So literally, we figured we had a need for communications because what you find, the bigger you get, the more people start paying attention to you and especially the media. The media would have tickler files, they say, or cable rates usually go up around January, let's call--let's call TCI and see how much they're going up on their rates, so that was kind of a standard thing. I knew every January I could expect a call from media 'cause generally we were increasing rates. We called them rate adjustments, we didn't say we increased rates, we did rate adjustments. And usually you had (laughter)--I know, it's semantics, but it was what we would say. And usually you had, you know, there were improvements that happened over the course of that past year. You added some new channels back then, you know, we still weren't at the five hundred channels that we talked about. That was always kind of the big goal, five hundred channels. But there was always some addition of some channel coming on. And when you think back to the Jones era, I remember when some of these communities, because again, they're kind of outliers, they're not Chicago, we didn't have BET [Black Entertainment Television] on some of the--some of the communities didn't have BET. "Oh, we don't want BET," but you know some people did and there was always people--there were people calling in, people loved EWTN, the Eternal Word Network [Eternal Word Television Network]. You would catch heck from a subscriber if you didn't have the Eternal Word Network. It was--it was a lot of the Catholic programs, and there're a lot of Catholics. So you would--these were the kind of questions I would get, "Well, why don't you carry this?" "Why don't you carry EWTN?" Or, "Why don't you carry BET?" Or, "Why don't call--why don't you carry HGTV [Home and Garden Television]," so. So these are the kind of things we would get from our customers or, you know if there is a complaint about service and people are very media savvy in a big city, so if they didn't like something, or if they didn't get the service they thought they should get or they got a run around, they might call a media person and say, you know, "Comcast [Comcast Corporation] did this," or, "they messed up my bill," and sometimes you get calls like that. But then there were great stories because we were very, very, very focused on community. So lot of altruism in the cable business, you know, supporting the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], the Red Cross [American Red Cross], we did a community care's day where we had all our employees out in the communities all across the market doing things. So these, you know, these were kind of part and parcel. So dealing with the media, internal communications so, 'cause we had to communicate to our employees, the employee base is growing. I think right now there are probably five thousand employees in the market, you know, don't quote me 'cause it's been a while, but you know at the time I left the company, I think we were five thousand employees in the market with Comcast, so. But, yeah, so all these things that are traditional corporations. So you can see we came kind of from being the wild west, where we kind of punted and kicked and did things, you know, as we thought they should be done to becoming more structured and becoming more of a corporate entity. And here in Chicago we were a regional office that had other offices reporting. So I worked at a regional office; and all the different offices around the area would report into ours, so.
Story_ID: 651746
Speaker 1: Comcast [Comcast Corporation] transition takes place in--
Speaker 2: Two thous- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ninety-nine [1999], yeah, '99 [1999] or two thou- yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was like 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. What year is this? I think it was 2002. So the Comcast transition--again, Comcast started in Mississippi, they started it in Elvis' [Elvis Presley] hometown in Mississippi [Tupelo, Mississippi] in 1968 [sic. 1963]. They loved that, you know, all companies have their histories and their stories and that's the Comcast story. Starting in a small town in Mississippi where Elvis was born, I think around 1968, don't--I don't know. I'm old now, I can't remember all the years, but Brian Rob- started by Brian Roberts [sic. Ralph J. Roberts] who previously sold belts. He had been in men's clothing, but you know, again, about this time, it was seen as kind of the, you know, we can do anything, and it was kind of out there. People were coming along, and they were saying we're going to get into this business. And then he was joined by his son, Brian [Brian L. Roberts], to start this company, to continue with the company and Brian had been the visionary, you know, just seeing all the opportunities. So they came in and they decided to buy AT&T Broadband [AT&T Broadband LLC], which we never, you know, who would have thought, cause you know, you think of AT&T [AT&T Inc.] is the household name with all the credibility. But I don't think it was working out the way they had first foreseen it, but we know too that they still are in this business. They ended up coming back into the business, even after they sold this, they decided they wanted back in, so now you have--you still have cable through AT&T. They ended up becoming a competitor to a company that they sold to, so.
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: Somebody should write a book, shouldn't they (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yes. This is like the big fish eating the little fish and another fish.
Speaker 2: And exactly is--and Comcast really was the little fish, they were the small company and they weren't that big, they were based out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but they ended up being, you know, the eight hundred pound gorilla. And the last I heard, I think they were even considering buying--there's a company they want to buy--I think they want to buy Time Warner, there was some mention of them wanting to buy Time Warner Cable, which was the other big--so in terms of size it was Comcast, Time Warner. And Comcast used to be the small one, they just kept getting bigger. They bought NBC, so now they own NBC as well. They made a play, they wanted to buy Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] and that didn't turn out well 'cause they always knew they wanted to own a broadcast network, but then a few years after the attempt to buy Disney, they were able to come back and acquire NBC in a part--in an ownership stake in NBC from GE [General Electric]. It was just a ownership stake. They finally bought out GE to become the sole owners and now they're looking at, you know, maybe increasing that to pick up Time Warner. And Time Warner is the main player in New York [New York], they own New York, so. That's the one thing they don't own, something that big. They have California, they have a strong post in Colorado, they have a outpost here, you know, they have it in the East Coast in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and Philadelphia, but they don't own New York, so if they ended up with Time Warner, they would own New York too.
Speaker 1: As an old person, I guess to me it just doesn't seem right (laughter), but this is business, right?
Speaker 2: It's business, it is.
Speaker 1: It doesn't seem right that Comcast could buy NBC (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Isn't it?
Speaker 1: --something iconic, you know.
Speaker 2: An iconic brand that's been around before they even existed.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 651747
Speaker 1: Yeah, you just wanted to clear up who the AT&T [AT&T Inc.] rep was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did. Michael Armstrong [C. Michael Armstrong] came up with the strategy of AT&T getting into the cable business and then worked--he, you know, he and Leo Hindery and John Malone [John C. Malone] ended up--John Malone and Armstrong worked together to do that sale of TCI [Tele-Communications, Inc.] to AT&T--to become AT&T Broadband [AT&T Broadband LLC].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, he came, you know, I remember going through our head ends and having him like it was a whirlwind, but that, that was a--that was a pivotal--I think that was a pivotal time in the business too when they made that big play, so.
Story_ID: 651748
Speaker 1: In 2000 you were elected--no, national president of NAMIC.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what, what is NAMIC and, and--?
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's (pronunciation) NAMIC and again, kind to my over involved nature, when I came into the industry in '88 [1988], there was an association that had been founded in 1980, the National Association for Minorities in Cable [sic. National Association of Minorities in Cable; National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications]. And it was a group that [HistoryMaker] Gayle Greer was involved in, a lot of the--you know the first people to come into the industry, they came together to form a group to support each other, to mentor, to learn, to, you know, help us navigate this business. And I must say I am just forever grateful that those--that group came together. So, I joined that group early on and it was--it's chapter driven. At that time we didn't even have a national office, we had an association that managed the group, but there were chapters all across the country, and we had a chapter here in Chicago [Illinois]. So we would actually put on programs, we would put on development programs. And just to tell you how different the atmosphere was then than now, Kay Koplovitz was the president of USA Networks [sic. USA Network], and we decided we wanted her to come. So I called her office, she took the call, we told her we wanted her to come do a program here in Chicago and she said certainly. But it was that kind of time. The presidents of HBO [Home Box Office], the presidents of Showtime, they were all very accessible because it was still a very small industry. So we would have some exceptional programs here, I think. So I kind of started--there were--there were a group of senior people here in Chicago, and I joined the organization then I became secretary--then I started doing programming, then I became secretary of the organization, I eventually became president of the Chicago chapter, all the while still getting kind of involved at the national level. And even before I got involved in NAMIC, there was a Women in Cable and Telecommunications [sic. Women in Cable Telecommunications] as well, and I served on that national board. So we would do programs here in Chicago, it was chapter driven as well. So, you know, I just--it was--for me it was a way to meet people who were doing things that I aspired to do. You know, that had risen to these really positions in this business, who knew this business and, you know, again, it was just, just kind of toward my personality. So I ascended to the national secretary for Women in Cable and Telecommunications, then when I cycled off that, I started getting involved in the national NAMIC programs and I was secretary for a while, did programming for a while, worked on different--I would go to some of these events out of town and they would do amazing things. Tracy Jenkins [Tracy Jenkins Winchester], who's in Denver [Colorado] and worked for Jones Intercable with me, she used to spearhead the national breakfast program. I'd see people like [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron, Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] came, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory came. So, you know, it was just an exciting time and to me it was the place you could do anything you want. All you had to do was have an idea. So it didn't matter who you were or what your job title was, if you want to do something, you just picked up the phone, you called somebody and you did it. And I think I've always--I've always--that's a good feeling for me, you know--rules are good, you know, they have their place. But sometimes when you can just do it because you think it's a good thing to do--that always appealed to me.
Story_ID: 651749
Speaker 1: So when I became president of NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable; National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications], we star- we had our own office. By then we had started to transition to have our own office and the organization just grew. I think we had probably about two thousand members during that time. And one of the wonderful things we did during that time, we launched an executive leadership program in partnership with UCLA's Anderson School [Anderson School of Management, Los Angeles, California]. So it had been kind of talked about for a while, but you know, we had some people, I can't say it was me being president, but we had a lot of people who really invested in this, and we were able to push that through and start that program. So that was one of the, you know, most unique things we did. The other thing that we did during that time that I'm very proud of, I had--we had a mentoring program in NAMIC, and we had had it for a number of years, but I--my mentoring person was Robert Sachs, who was the president of the National Cable Telecommunication Association [National Cable and Telecommunications Association]. He was assigned to me as a mentor, and he was just amazing. He was based out of D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I was based out of Chicago [Illinois]. So anytime we had meetings, you know, he would come together with me, we'd get coffee or we'd get a meal together. He was an amazing mentor and together we came up with the idea that once a year, the NCTA board, which were all the owners of the cable concern, so it was the president of Comcast [Comcast Corporation], it was the president of Time Warner Cable, it was the president of BET [Black Entertainment Television], was the president of HBO [Home Box Office], all these people on his board would meet with all the board executives from NAMIC, and we started that. And now I think--and that continues to this day. So they still, the two boards get together once a year. You know for me things about--its relationships and even back, going way back to being, you know, the little kid in school up against the wall, because we're integrating schools and people are fighting, to me it was always, if you could get people to talk, you find out you have more things in common than you have that are different. We have the same aspirations, we have the same goals, you know, having good lives and making things move forward. And in this instance, it was really great for the people that ran the business, you know, [HistoryMaker] Michael Powell is now the head of the NCTA today. But it was important to have that group know who we were and know what we were trying to achieve. So for me, my term, my two years as president, I think, that and kicking off this executive leadership program with UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] were just the highlights of that, so.
Speaker 2: Now when did you launch the executive leadership program?
Speaker 1: Probably I was in my second year as president. So I think I was president up until 2000. Boy, I can't remember these dates anymore. But yeah, it was in the first year that I was president, so it was a two year term.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this was 1999, 2000 or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. So I think it was in 2000 that we launched that program. And I actually went through that program myself, so it was great. David Porter [David M. Porter, Jr.], who was one of the instructors in that program now works for the Walter Kaitz Foundation [Washington, D.C.]. So, again, things kind of come full circle. So he's the executive director that runs the Walter Kaitz program. But he was one of the instructors in the ELDP, the executive development leadership program [Executive Leadership Development Program] that was created by UCLA. Ella Bell [Ella L.J. Bell Smith], who is at Tufts [sic. Tuck School of Business, Hanover, New Hampshire], who was at Tufts, was one of the instructors. So the wonderful thing about the program, it was about leadership, but it was also about having people of color understand the dynamics in which we operate in the world, in which people of color operate. And NAMIC isn't just about African Americans, it's Hispanic, Asian, it's about all colors in the industry. And a part of it was helping us understand the dynamics of which people of color operate in a business environment, understanding things like white privilege and the way you interact, and how you build teams of different people. So, I think we were really great that we always had, mentoring, was one of our core initiatives, always in that organization from its founding and then to be able to kind of graduate to working with managers, working with supervisors to working with executives. So we've had just some amazing leaders that have gone through that program at UCLA, so.
Speaker 2: Now you and other members of NAMIC have been called upon to speak, you know, around the country?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes. Actually, when 9/11 [September 11, 2001], I was president of NAMIC, and we were in New York City [New York, New York] when the plane--in 2001, hosting our annual conference when the planes hit the twin towers [World Trade Center, New York, New York]. Literally, on that morning, you know, we were on--I was on the podium and had someone come whisper in my ear that something had happened, and we ended up--a lot of us were in New York a whole week, you know. Usually, you have your conference a couple of days, three days, you're gone, Wednesday, we're gone. But we were--a lot of us were in New York 'til Friday trying to get out of New York. But that was part of my presidency, being president and being in New York on 9/11. It was a beautiful day, boy, it was the most beautiful day, ever, so. And--
Speaker 2: It's true, it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it really was. It was, it was something.
Story_ID: 651750
Speaker 1: Now you, in 2002, you were appointed vice president of Comcast [Comcast Corporation]?
Speaker 2: Vice president of communications, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Communications, right. In the greater Chicago [Illinois] region?
Speaker 2: Right, right. So very much a regional. So yeah, that was, that was wonderful. One of the big things I remember during that time when Comcast bought AT&T Broadband [AT&T Broadband LLC]. And so they wanted--and you know now you have a company that owns the greater Chicago region, they own big swaths of service in Denver [Colorado], they own big swaths in San Francisco [California], they own, you know, just all these companies. And what the company wanted to do to celebrate this purchase, they wanted us all to create events to welcome, you know, to celebrate Comcast coming (laughter), coming into the market and buying this company, you know. Ralph Roberts [Ralph J. Roberts] was very much about creating family. So how do you do that when you have a company that gotten as big as it is? So we created this huge event. We came down to the area and this was under me, I broke out in hives when we did this event. So I'm responsible for kind of orchestrating this transition thing to welcome our employees. So we went down to the Arie Crown Theater in Chicago. We had a concert with Chaka Khan, we had Gale Gand who's a well known pastry chef here, you know, created cakes. You know, when you have these networks, you have a lot of resources, so. So you know people that are associated with the Food Network or HGTV [Home and Garden Television], so you kind of bring all these partners in. We had Bill Kurtis sit down and do an interview with Ralph and Brian Roberts [Brian L. Roberts], so they came to the market. You know, we do this big concert and he interviews Ralph and Brian Roberts. So, it was amazing, we had five thousand employees. We bussed them in from all over the marketplace. We go to the Arie Crown Theater to welcome them into the Comcast family. So, it was pretty amazing. And they did these events all over the country at different times. They were on a battleship somewhere, you know, in California, and they went somewhere else in Colorado, so. So it was just pretty amazing time. It was very memorable; and I think, you know, no one can say they will forget, you know, that transition over to, to Comcast, so.
Story_ID: 651751
Speaker 1: Now did you stay in that, that position [vice president of communications] until 2007, or was it?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007], yeah. In 2007, I went to the Nielsen Company [Nielsen Media Research] to do something very similar. So that was corporate affairs again, and Nielsen had a very unique challenge because they had to go into communities. You're familiar with the Nielsen box [people meter], the ratings box. So, it used to be that when Nielsen did those things, you would get a book, and you kind of fill out what you watched on television. But Nielsen--
Speaker 1: Unless you forgot.
Speaker 2: Unless you forgot, and then you probably made it up. But then Nielsen, a couple of years before had transitioned to these electronic boxes that attached to your television set, so it can monitor your television set so you didn't have to remember and write down everything, you just had to let the box do its do. But people are suspicious of things coming in your home and especially people of color who didn't know the Nielsen Company. You know, they were like, well, what is this and why are you wanting this in my home, and we don't really know you. Because Nielsen is one of those company, they operate everywhere, but they're not as visible to you and I, you know.  TV stations live and die by Nielsen ratings, but the average person doesn't have any interaction with Nielsen, so we were working to just kind of pave that way and make the Nielsen name a little bit more known, especially in communities of color so they knew who they were and they felt a little more comfortable with the Nielsen. So, yeah, I worked for them for about a year--
Speaker 1: Well where was the, I mean, why did you leave Comcast [Comcast Corporation]?
Speaker 2: It was a good opportunity. It was a national role and, you know, you kind of looking for a little bit more adventure, a little bit something fun to do, so--
Speaker 1: So the bigger--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a bigger role, and the Nielsen Company, I learned a lot. They--the things they do are just amazing. Literally, nowadays they can--they even have the ability to kind of measure what people are thinking about, they can measure your Internet uses, they measure the television uses, they measure what you buy in the grocery store. Yeah, it's pretty amazing the things that you do there.
Story_ID: 651752
Speaker 1: And then in 2008 I decided to kind of strike out on my own and see what we could do with media (laughter) and PR [public relations] with all the things that I'd learned over the years, so.
Speaker 2: So you established the Tallulah Group [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: The Tallulah Group.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And named after your hometown?
Speaker 1: Named after my hometown. I'd always said if I decided to do something on my own, you know, I just wanted to pay homage to where I came from and have people remember Tallulah [Louisiana] for being something other than Tallulah Bankhead, but then by that time, I think Tallulah Willis, Bruce Willis had a daughter named Tallulah too, so I'm like, okay. And then there's a restaurant in Chicago [Illinois] named Tallulah, I found out about the same time, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now Tallulah Bankhead has a kind of a wild history--
Speaker 1: She did. She was kind of racy for her time, so. So I think that's kind of a nice thing to have all those, you know, those different thoughts about that name, so. And I don't know anybody--you know there aren't too many companies named that that I know of, so I thought it was a good one.
Speaker 2: Okay. It's a memorable name. So, your clients have included Quarles and Brady LLP, Merit Medical [Merit Medical Systems, Inc.], Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois], AtlantiCare, LINK Unlimited [LINK Unlimited Scholars], Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah. The nice thing about it is doing the work that I did for Comcast [Comcast Corporation], specifically, I had a lot of relationships in the marketplace, 'cause that's part of your job is to cultivate relationships. And one thing that Comcast was, was a big supporter of education and that kind of fits with who I am. So, specifically, a lot of those education concerns were companies that I'd worked with while I was part of Comcast and some of the other cable companies, so it kind of fits, it really fits. We're really about helping people tell their story, you know, helping them communicate with the media, helping them, you know, developing relationships with the media and helping them, you know, do the things that they do better. So it's been--it's been interesting, especially considering, you know, the kind of downturn we've been in, so everything, you know, same skills, same things, so it works really well. And then the other thing that I've tried to do is maintain the work with the not for profits as well, 'cause during the Comcast years, I was just involved with a ton of not for profits. And some of them, you know, are doing amazing work and I've been fortunate to stay involved with those as well.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay. I read--now I read here that social media plays a prominent role in your firm's outreach tactic?
Speaker 1: Yes. It's--I love social media. I think it is just so amazing. The one thing I think you always have to be willing to learn something new. So in 2008 as I was making this transition, you know, I just kind of immersed myself to see what was going on and what people were doing in social media. So I don't think there's a social media that I haven't done, I mean, you know, from Facebook to Twitter to LinkedIn to Quora to, you know, it's just been really fun, because it's just--to me it's all tactical. It's just another way to share a message to communicate to connect with people. So I found it immensely fun to kind of look at this and say how is this--some things I think never change, I mean, you always gonna have to know how to write a press release. And if there's anything bad about these things is the fact that people don't write like they used to. Everything's an abbreviation, everything's you know a little bit different than it used to be, but--but taken correctly and used correctly, I think it adds to all these things that you're doing. Chicago State University, I'll use them as an example. Last year they--they decided to hold a gala concert with [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, and we were able to use, you know, Facebook, specifically, and just really increase the visibility and really get people engaged. We were doing things like every day we were sending out old Smokey songs or putting out old pictures of Smokey, you know, with The Miracles, or telling his Motown [Motown Records] history. So it's just--I just think social media is a great way to kind of share with people and engage with people, so. It's been, it's been a lot of fun kind of learning those things, so.
Story_ID: 651753
Speaker 1: Well, also in 2008 you started teaching at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You taught through 2011, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. They--a friend of mine was doing this course. It was about--it's a course that's required of anybody that comes through some of the media programs at Columbia. The thinking is that if you're a media maker, you have to understand your background to be ab- because it influences what you make. Our history informs who we are and what we do. But if you're going to make media, you have to understand some of your biases, some of your--you know, the things that are there. So they have a really great course that teaches these young people who are planning to become media makers; film, television, whatever it is, writers about understanding the things that inform what they say. One of the things we do in the class, is we talk about, you know, how everything is impactful. So the music is impactful, the role that characters play is impactful. And one of the scenes we show, we use a lot of real time television. I think the show was 'ER' and we show how certain people are portrayed. So per instance if you're a black male, you're portrayed in a certain way. And that's okay that you portray that person in certain way, but you have to understand why you portray them that way. Are you thinking they can only be a certain thing, can they only be the robber, can they only be the shooter? So, so it was a really great course. Teaching is a lot of hard work, so I give a lot of kudos to people who do that. So obviously the business [Tallulah Group, Chicago, Illinois] kind of kicked off and I couldn't continue to do that. But it was really great for me to understand. It was understanding things like ageism or sexism, how these isms inform what media makers do. The thought being that if you are more aware of these things then you don't just immediately jump to the ster- stereotype, you think about what you're doing and maybe make a product that's better because you understand these things, so.
Story_ID: 651754
Speaker 1: I read that part of your message to young people who are going into the corporate environment is about how to handle the corporate environment.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I know you--I think you mentioned the one article I read that supervisors--you thought in the beginning that supervisors were there to help you and help you advance and you found yourself being thrown under the bus by a couple of people when--to advance themselves?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And again it's something you have to--you shouldn't be surprised by anything. I think that's--that was kind of the lesson that I learned. You don't get surprised by everything, because everybody wants to be seen as doing a great job. But I'm a big one, I'm like, when you asked me what kind of tenet or what my whole thing is, it's always do unto others as you would have them do unto you. And I think if people keep that--I think it's workable in business, I think it's workable in life, I think it's workable in business. So you just have to look at those things, but you have to look at the people who do things and say, you know, is that worth it, are you going to get to where you want to be on the terms that you want get there, so. I think that's important.
Speaker 1: So you're saying it's important to get there on the right terms?
Speaker 2: Right. I think for longevity. I think that's the thing that you're looking for, you know. Being cutthroat can take you so far, but you know, if you're there and you've done the things and you've taken the steps--one thing that I think is important, and someone said this to me that a sign of a good leader is that you create other good leaders. So the more people you can bring in, the more people you can cultivate and help them grow. It's better for you because now you've brought these people in and you've helped them grow and you created new leaders. Nothing exists in a vacuum. So to come in a door and close it behind you, I don't think that's ever the right thing to do. The goal is to open the door and bring more people in it. And when I think about people like [HistoryMaker] Gayle Greer, she brought people in behind her, so those are the examples I set--that I follow. Ruth Warren was another woman who was with--a corporate executive with Jones Intercable. She tried to bring more people in.  So that's the kind of rule I live by: I try to bring more people in rather than just to, to come in and not have anybody come behind you, so.
Story_ID: 651755
Speaker 1: Are you involved in any, I guess, ongoing mentoring projects now with young people?
Speaker 2: You know I work with the bl- the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] has a Black and Latino Achievers Program, that program will be around forty years this year. And I've been working with them for a number of years, so yeah, I still like to kind of get involved with things like that. I'm also doing work with the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois], that's been a big one for me as for the last five years. Previously, I'd been involved with the Chicago Children's Choir, so yeah, I'm still very much--I kind of like to get--meet people. Any time I get a message and somebody says, "Oh, Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Andrews-Keenan], you should meet this person, sit down--," a couple of young people--a young woman I worked with last year, I got her involved in a project that I was working on, so. You never know, you never know who that person's going to be that you take some time and talk to. So I'm one--I don't turn anybody away. If you say, you know, most of the time, I'm like I don't have anything great to tell you but, you know, if you say you want to take the time, I always do it, because somebody took the time with me. [HistoryMaker] Gayle Greer didn't have to take my phone call and she didn't have to say, "Come down and see me," but she did. So, again, I had great examples, you know. My librarian, she didn't have to take time with me, so, I'm just trying to kind of pay for the things that people did for me, because they took time and they said--they answered their phone or they took time out and came to talk to me; so, I think it's my obligation to do that same thing, so.
Story_ID: 651756
Speaker 1: Well looking back from the vantage point of 2014 here, where is, is the cable industry going?
Speaker 2: Wow. (Laughter) You know, interestingly enough there's another group that had started up called the Digital Diversity Network, same kind of--same thought process that the founders had for NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable; National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications] in 1980, but it's really focused on new media, technology, you know the growth of social media apps and I've done a little work with that group. They've just been around for a couple of years now. A friend of mine is actually heading up that organization, based out of New York [New York], and most of their work is done virtually, but once a year they do a conference in New York. So I've been privileged to be there and boy it is amazing. You know last year we had a speaker, this young man's twenty-eight years old [Amos Wimbush III], he came from Shreveport, Louisiana, he founded a company called CyberSynchs [CyberSynchs, LLC], and he's a millionaire today. So for me it's exciting to see that the young people don't see boundaries. They see this technology as a way to accomplish anything. And his thing was, the key is you see a problem and you have the problem so somebody else has that same problem and if you can find a way to address that, you can send it to millions of people. So another young man in New York, he founded a company called Dimension University [ph.]. That's all about bringing young people online to learn. You've heard of Khan Academy, it's kind of similar to that where you can go online and get lessons, but Dimension U. So, for me it's kind of about catching on, you know. What's the next thing that's going on? I always--I'm nosey, I always consider myself, even years ago, I've always thought of myself as nosey. I always want to know what's going on. I want to know what these are. So for me to see these young people, they're--it's not so much about the cable business like we knew it, but it's more about information technologies and how do you leverage those to make people's lives better. There was a young woman [Demetria L. Lucas] who's a blogger and that was at that conference last year. She does a blog called the Belle in Brooklyn [A Belle in Brooklyn], it's relationships and things but somehow she's captured, you know, the--she's just kind of captured people's attention and giving advice, so. There was another woman who runs an online travel magazine called Nomad [Digital Nomad Travel Magazine]. She's a young African American woman and she has this beautifully done online travel magazine for people that have been traveling all over the world. So the woman who produced 'Black in America' with [HistoryMaker] Soledad O'Brien, Al Jazeera, there was a woman that was in cable that was at CNN now she's at Al Jazeera America. So, it's interesting to see a lot of these folks were starting to transition, grasp what's going on in this world and taking it to a new level, so. So cable won't go away, but there's, ways to deliver that information are changing and I think that's the thing. How do you--how do you kind of latch onto that and see what's going on, so.
Story_ID: 651757
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Boy, I would have gotten into the cable business sooner. That's probably the only thing, 'cause I thought it was just the most fun ever, and I just wished I had known a little bit more about it and that I had maybe taken that route sooner, 'cause I probably could have gotten into it probably in the eighty- but that's--yeah, that's the only thing I would have done. I thought it was the most exciting thing, so yeah.
Story_ID: 651758
Speaker 1: Do you have an ultimate trajectory for, for Tallulah, now?
Speaker 2: For the Tallulah Group [Chicago, Illinois]? You know the one thing, the one thing that's been a constant and that I still want to develop is the writing. I love to write. So I started doing a blog--you know, doing PR [public relations], I love PR, I love media, but I think the ultimate thing would be to write. And, actually (laughter), next week I'm going to a writers workshop 'cause I start writing things all the time, so I'd like to know how to put them together in a cohesive way. I think the nice thing about being here with you guys today has been--I've never kind of gone through my life, like from beginning to the end. I've always thought it was probably pretty boring anyway. But you know there's stories in everything. So that's something I wanted to do, and something--I'm going to go to this writers workshop next week, so we'll see where it takes me. But that's always been a constant, and I've always liked to write and I'd like to see where that--you know what that takes me, if there's something there for me that tells--a story for me to tell, so.
Speaker 1: Do you have a certain genre you want to write?
Speaker 2: No, it would probably--it would probably be fiction, and you know it would probably be a story that would be appealing to women, I'm gonna, I'm gonna say. One thing that--a journey that I'm kind of going on now, you know, I think I told you my mother [Pearline Henderson Chapman] has dementia and that--that's been interesting to me to kind of go down that road, and I find that a lot of my friends are going down that road, so I think there's something to be told there, especially as black women, you know, dealing with that, and we all deal with it different ways. One of my friends has become a primary caretaker for her mother. My mother is close to me, but she--you know she can't have it--you know, she can't be by herself, so she's at a facility. One of my friends, her--but she's close to me. Another friend, she had to deal with this long distance, a couple of my friends are dealing with this long distance 'cause their, their parent doesn't live close to them, so. So something tells me there is a story there, and I don't--I've got to kind of figure it out. And I think it's also interesting, I went to--I had a checkup today and you know I was talking to my doctor about it, and you know I have one parent [Andrews-Keenan's father, James Andrews] that's eighty-nine who's trying to drive himself places and then I have one with dementia, so you know, just kind of understanding the dynamics that make you who you are and what am I looking forward to, so. So those things are kind of questions that I have. I have a grandson that's three, and I have a mother that's eighty-seven and sometimes my mother acts like my three year old grandson, so. You know it's just those things that you wonder about and think about and how you deal with those, so.
Story_ID: 651759
Speaker 1: I was just reminded by something you said, of a question I probably should have asked about the corporate days. Did, did you feel discrimination as a black woman or as a woman or did you feel that there's a glass ceiling that you talked about?
Speaker 2: You know it's interesting, I've had two, two thoughts about that in my life. When I was young I used to say it wasn't my problem what color I am. If you have a problem with that, that's your problem, it's not mine 'cause I can't change that. And then as I got, you know, as I started going down this road, and I saw differences, I began to think it's, it's part of my responsibility to make you aware when you do things that, that kind of fight against that, you know, because you might not know. I had a boss once and (laughter)--I had one boss and he was from here in Illinois, came from an old family, and he said colored, and he was younger than me. And I'm like, "Do you know that people don't say that anymore?" He's like, "They don't?" So, in some ways you have a responsibility to educate people about things as you go down this road. And then I had another boss and I, you know, it could have been a color thing--I don't know if it was a color thing or what it was, but I could see where he kind of treated people differently, depending on where they were in relation to him. So he had a, he had a--I had been in this market for a long time and later on he hired a woman that had worked for him in a previous market. And we would sit in meetings and you could always see where he kind of always leaned to her position about whatever it was, when I thought I had fairly good ideas about it as well. And so I told him one day, I'm like, "When you're the leader of an organization--you know, it's kind of like having kids. You have to give each of your kids some equal time here." And the way I explained it to him it made sense. I didn't say, "Oh, you're racist, you don't listen to me, you know, because I'm black," or whatever, but I said you know, "You have to give everybody kind of equal time." So, you know, I think there were times that it was a disadvantage, but a lot of times it was an advantage, because sometimes when you're the only person of color in the room, people can't ignore you (laughter). So it had its goods and it has its challenges, but for the most part, it kind of kept me moving. The one thing that I'm not as happy about, not being in cable anymore, especially where I was, there weren't enough people behind me. You know I talked about the door and how you have to open the door, but boy, it seems like the door is closing sometimes to me and that's, that's kind of frustrating and that's kind of, that's kind of challenging, 'cause you know in the department we were in, I don't know that there is any person of, you know, African or--African American or Hispanic. There's one Hispanic woman, there was one black woman, but there aren't a lot more people. And it's--and people nowadays, and I heard this, you know today is the anniversary of the founding of the Mac [Macintosh computer]. It was in 1984, the Mac turns thirty years old today. And I was listening to a commercial talking about it, and I don't--do you remember the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XVIII] commercial they did and they spoofed Orwell's '1984' [George Orwell].
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Remember that? And they come and they break, and this one person runs through all these animatronic looking people. And they were--Cook [Tim Cook] was talking about the diversity of thought. And I'm a believer in diversity of thought. I want to learn something from everybody, but I don't think we can ever forget the diversity of people in the midst of that. And, and because the world is so much more about technology and it's--and you don't always see people, it's easy to forget people if you don't see them, and I don't think we can forget that, because there are people who still need a hand up, you know. I was the first person to go to college in--like in my generation, in my family. There are kids that still haven't and I'm amazed--you know, like I work with the Y program [Young Men's Christian Association] and some of these kids, you know, they're saying--they're still--they're twenty something years old saying they're the first person to go to college. So there's still some help needed and we just can't forget people, we can't let them fall through the cracks because they don't look like us, or they don't have the things that we have. We just--we can't do that. That's wrong. In this day and age, I didn't expect any young people to be saying, I'm the first person--any teenager to be saying I'm the first person in my family to go to college, you know, so, yeah, so there's still issues (laughter). And the world's in a globally diverse place now, so. You know we have to expose our kids to everything, we have to let them see that you know it's not just about being in Chicago [Illinois], it's not just about being in the United States, it's about being in the world and being a citizen of the world. And if anything I hope that's one thing I can share with my grandson--that you're not just a citizen of this small place, you're a citizen of the world and you should see as much and do as much as you possibly can, so.
Story_ID: 651760
Speaker 1: I guess you addressed it on some level, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Again, that we don't get left behind. You know that we don't leave people (laughter) behind. You know, I've come a ways and I still see where our kids aren't--they don't get it, they don't get that they need to learn certain things, that they need to try to be involved, that they need to try to, you know, kind of move forward, that, that the most important thing in your life isn't, you know, what kind of shoes you wear or what kind of purse you carry, that there is, you know, other things. And coming out of a media company, the media has goods and it has bads, because they're looking at these things and they see things, they don't see--they don't see there's a big picture behind these things, you know. You didn't get to be Puffy [Sean Combs] because you know--so being Puffy isn't about just having this or drinking this kind of drink or having this kind of clothes, you know, what's the business behind that and how can you, how can you be that person, how can you be the businessperson, how can you help create that, 'cause I don't think they see that, they see the very front of that and, "Oh, I want that car," and, "I want this," and, "I want that." But boy, you know, where's the control. I used to think when you look at television and everybody wants to, you know, all the kids want to be the newscaster, but who wrote that piece that they're reading and who directed that piece and who did the photography. There's a whole lot of piece parts that they don't recognize and don't know that--of things they can do, even when they have a talent, they don't know. Just like I didn't know 'til I walked to the journalism department [at Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and opened the door and went in, it was like, oh, wow, this is the place I belong. I just people--kids to find the place they belong, because if you find the place you belong and embrace the thing that you know how to do, you're going to do fine. But if you don't have someone to help you figure that out, or help you get to that spot, that's what I'm worried about. And a lot of times our kids don't have somebody to show them, 'cause I'm gonna take my son to every--my grandson to every museum, anyplace, you know, I just want him to see it until he figures it out, and then one day that light bulb is going to go off, and he's going to say, "That's my thing." I just want 'em to find their thing, I want them to find it as soon as they can. And we just need to help some of our kids do that, so.
Story_ID: 651761
Speaker 1: Again, when you look back at everything you've done to this point today, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Boy, I think I'm still looking at that (laughter). I think about that sometimes because you know being involved in the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], I've read Dr. Burroughs' [HistoryMaker Margaret Burroughs] poem about that, and I still--I still think I'm kind of looking for that, maybe it'll be the book, you know, it could be my son [Richard Andrews], it could be my grandson, he could be somebody famous, I don't know yet. So in that way I used to say, I'm still growing up, I'm still trying to figure out what I want to do when I grow up. In some ways I think I'm still trying to figure that out. So I think it's, you know, it's going to be fun. I think I'm still--I'm still up for that challenge, so it might be that book, I don't know, but you know, hopefully, it'll be somebody can say--the one thing I hope is that somebody would say, "Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Andrews-Keenan] took my call and Pat talked to me, and something she said was of help to me," so. I hope that's you know the mentoring that I've done will be one of the things, but I still think I'm kind of trying to grow up and see what the other thing might be.
Story_ID: 651762
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your son and your grandson?
Speaker 2: Oh, wonderful. My son's name is Richard [Richard Andrews]. He's a, he's a IT [information technology] guy for Mount Sinai Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] and just wonder- he's always been a wonderful kid. I told you that I was a single parent, so. So when we were--when I was young and he was young, it was just the two of us, and he said the best thing to me a couple of months ago. He called me up, he's like, "Mom, you didn't mess me up." (Laughter) I was like, "What are you (unclear)--," he was talking to one of his friends, I guess, and they were going through this linear thing, he's like, "Mom, thank you for not messing me up." I'm like, "Well, you're very welcome" (laughter). And then my grandson is just a delight. He is, oh, he is three and he is just--he's just everywhere. And we have a great time, you know, I pack him up and we go to a museum or we go to this or we go there, we took him--we took him fishing for the first time this past year, so. So I'm just enjoying that, it's been a lot of fun, so.
Story_ID: 651763
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about or that we haven't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Makes sound) Gosh, I don't think there could possibly be (laughter).
Speaker 1: --discussed, before I ask my last question, that one last question?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Should I ask it?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, please.
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but just slightly different, so--but we have a habit of doing this, so. Wh- ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Wow. I would like--I'm a southerner, I'm a southerner to my bones and I would like to be remembered as someone--a woman once said something to me, she said, "Pat [HistoryMaker Patricia Andrews-Keenan], you are very gracious." And I thought that was one of the highest compliments I'd ever received. I want to be remembered as someone who is gracious, who's giving, who lived by the golden rule: who did to others the way that I wanted to be treated, who treated others the way I wanted to be treated, so.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
