Story_ID: 434855
Speaker 1: And my name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and we have observers from Great Cities Institute [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], there's six of them, and I'd like to start out by asking, you know, having you slate it.  So I want you to state your name and spell it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My middle name, okay, my name is [HistoryMaker] Joyce Owens Anderson, or Joyce Florence Owens Anderson.  It's spelled, J-O-Y-C-E, O-W-E-N-S, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can I have your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Seven--July 1st, 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date.
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 12th (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twelfth, I think it's twelfth.
Speaker 2: Thirteenth [November 13, 2006].
Speaker 1: Thirteenth, oh sorry, thanks.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) November 13th, 2006.
Speaker 1: And our location.
Speaker 2: We're at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago].
Speaker 1: Great Cities Institute, I think it's 412 South Peoria [Street], is it, 412 South Peoria (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South Peoria.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an artist, I'm curator for the galleries program at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] and a professor of art and drawing and painting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 434856
Speaker 1: We start out by asking five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers, nothing--I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like (laughter) every time of year.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite color to wear is black, but I love all colors.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: I don't like to vacation, I like to work (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite phrase or saying, if you have one.
Speaker 2: Oh, well on my website it says, creativity is easy, production is hard.
Story_ID: 434857
Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your family, and I'd like to sort of, by asking about your mother and I'd like you to give her name and what you know of her growing up and her family.
Speaker 2: I thought about her a lot today, this morning actually, preparing to come to the interview.  Her name is El-, her name is Eloise Owens [Eloise Owens Strothers], but she was married several times so she has a number of names.  Her name is, her maiden name was Eloise Franklin, my father's name is Owens [Elijah Owens (ph.)], her last husband was Strothers [Charles O. Strothers], her first husband was White [ph.], not white, his name was White, okay (laughter).  My mother grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], as I did, and her, her parents were very, socially established people in Philadelphia.  They were in, there's a blue book called the social register, the Negro register that my grandmother and grandfather were in, but my grandfather died when my mother was eight.  My grandfather had been a principal in the South before he migrated.  My grandmother had been a teacher, and when she came to Philadelphia, she became a nurse and she did some other jobs.  My grandfather, in the 1920s, was, worked for the, the post office, which was--for African Americans in, at that time--was a very good job.  My mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you give me your grand-, can you give me your grandfather and grandmother's names?
Speaker 2: Sure, my grandmother was Florence Collier Franklin, and my grandfather was Frank Franklin, and they migrated from Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know where in Georgia?
Speaker 2: No, I don't really know the name of the town.  My grandmother, along with her whole entire family, and my great-grandmother, who lived until I was ten, also migrated to the North, to Philadelphia, but my mother was the oldest of three children and I was thinking about her because of my own career.  She, she became an opera singer, which was a real odd thing to be, for me, to have a mother who was an opera singer was very odd thing for an African American woman to do at all, and the only other, I guess the only other opera singer that I was aware of at, you know, in my youth, was Marian Anderson, but my mother was an opera singer, but she also always had a fulltime job.  And she divorced her first husband because he didn't want, want to have a career.  She divorced her second husband, I think, maybe for the sort of the same reason because she traveled and she was very determined to have a career, raise her family and have a career.  And she ended up, you know, raising her children pretty much alone most of the time, but having a decent career, not the career she probably could have had if she had, didn't have children, or if she lived in a different time when racism wasn't such a dominant factor, but she sang with the Philadelphia Orchestra, she sang with Duke Ellington, who produced spirituals.  He--sacred music, he did sacred music and she sang.  I remember seeing her in Perth Amboy, New Jersey when I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and she sang with Duke Ellington.  So she was really my inspiration and she was the person who allowed me to have the nerve to think I could become an artist.
Story_ID: 434858
Speaker 1: Did she share with you any of her growing up?  She grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure, yeah, a lot of it.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us some, some stories that stick out?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] was very fair-skinned.  It's interesting, in African American families, you can have two parents that, you know, the same parents.  For example, with my [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin], they have the same two parents and there were seven children, five girls and two boys, and they were like a rainbow, a brown rainbow, from my grandmother looking Filipino, or something, some Asian, you know, from some Asian community--culture, and my Aunt Helen [ph.], her sister, being really dark-skinned.  My grand-, my mother and her two brothers [Vincent Franklin and HistoryMaker Jack T. Franklin] were the same way.  They had the same two parents and my mother was very fair-skinned.  What happened to her was that a lot of times she was mistaken for white because people would just look at her skin, they wouldn't look at her features so much and they, so they would say negative things to her about African Americans.  You know, when she worked for the City of Philadelphia in the department of water [Philadelphia Water Department], she was the supervisor, earning a living so that she could be a singer.  She would tell me that people would come in and, and say to her, this was probably in the '60s [1960s], when jobs were being integrated, nationally, and she said people would come in and say to her, "How can you, how can you stand working with all these--," should I, I don't know if I can say--
Speaker 1: You can say.
Speaker 2: --"niggers," but that's what they would say to her, "How can you stand working with all these niggers?" And she would say, "Well, what do you think I am?"  And they didn't know.  But she talked about, even as a little girl, she had a problem.  She had a dual problem.  Because she was light, she said, she said, black people didn't like her because she was too light and white people didn't like her because she was black, so she could never, she could really never win.  She said as a professional singer, because it was a public, you know, she was a public performer, she couldn't do certain things because she felt that they were tokens like there was one, if they were going to have a black singer, they wanted people to know she was a black singer.  I would see my mother sing at the Robin Hood Dell [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when she sang with the Philadelphia Orchestra choir and it was a big amphitheater.  It's like maybe like going to Ravinia [Ravinia Festival, Highland Park, Illinois] in Philadelphia and I couldn't find my own mother because the singers were all white and even though, you know, I knew she was there somewhere, it was very difficult to find her because her skin was so light.  So she had a lot of, she had, there were a lot of issues that she had to deal with growing up because of race in this country, in Philadelphia, the city of brotherly love.
Story_ID: 434859
Speaker 1: Did she talk about when she started singing or how people recognized that she had a gift as a singer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a natural singer.  She started singing when she was very young.  My [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin] really didn't want her to sing, you know, because, you know, for, for black people in America, in the, you know, in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] and even to today, we are, you know, we're so concerned about making a living that we feel that we need to have a trade or have some sort of profession where we can make money.  My grandmother didn't believe that my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] could make a living, you know, being a singer so she didn't encourage her but my mother's drive to be a singer was so strong that she did it anyways, she did it on her own.  She got married as soon as she could so she could leave my grandmother's house.  So she was married as soon as she graduated from high school [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  She didn't go to college.  She went to college later.  She took, she went to the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], and she always, she always won awards or grants to go to study music.  So she studied music all her life.  She always had teachers and training, but not because my grandmother encouraged her, but then, my grand-, my mother eventually became the Grand Songbird [Grand Songbird of Elkdom] of the IBPOE of W, which is the International Benevolent Order of the Elks of the World [sic. Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World], which is the black Elks, okay, and my grand-, all my, all my aunts, my great aunts and my grandmother were all past granddaughter rulers in the Elks.  My grandmother, my grandmother created something called the Fez Club [Elks Education Department Fez Club] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which was an educational club to support education.  They gave kids scholarships.  It, you know, they were, my--all my aunts, all my great aunts and my grandmother and my mother were involved in community service and, and, you know, civic endeavors.  So, ironically, because my mother pursued her singing career despite my grandmother, she ended up being the designated national represen-, singer for the organization that my grandmother was very much involved with.  My grandmother was also an Eastern Star [Order of the Eastern Star], which is another fraternal organization that's, you know, that does things in the community and my [maternal] grandfather [Frank Franklin] was a Mason.
Story_ID: 434860
Speaker 1: With her singing, was she a soprano?  Was she a--
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay, she was a soprano.
Speaker 2: She was a soprano.  She was actually, she was a coloratura.  She had a, but she was at, you know, 5' 7 1/2", full-bodied woman and, in the '50s [1950s], she, you know, she fit the prototype, you know, sexy woman, like, you know, like a Marilyn Monroe type woman.  She felt that she was too big to sing that high light tones of a coloratura, but she had an incredible vocal range.  She developed her voice into more of a lyric soprano and, and she sang in that range mostly.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember any of the roles that she played, you know, or any of the operas she was in?
Speaker 2: I know she sang s-, you know, I can't, to tell you the truth, I don't think I can remember the exact roles.  I know she sang like from 'La boheme' [Giacomo Puccini].  She sang from 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet].  She sang 'La traviata' [Giuseppe Verdi], you know, she sang numerous, as a matter of fact, when I was a little girl and I would go, she would have recitals.  In those days, in black churches in, there's, I have a photograph of her in front of a movie theatre in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where there's a Van Heflin movie, you know the actor, the old actor, Van Heflin, on the marquee, and then on the side there were posters for Eloise Owens' [Eloise Owens Strothers] recital in that movie theatre.  She sang in New York [New York], I think it was the Zion Baptist Church [First A.M.E. Zion Church, Brooklyn, New York] in New York.  She was the, their paid soloist for them.  She, she did a lot of, I kind of lost my train of thought there, but she's, she's done, she did quite a bit of singing.  She sang quite a few roles over, over the years.
Story_ID: 434861
Speaker 1: So music was in your house in many ways, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Mu-, music was in your house.
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandfather [Frank Franklin] was a musician, too.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't know my grandfather since, he died when my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] was eight, but I heard about him t-, so much that I actually I have a painting in my house right now that I did of him, a huge painting of him because he was just bigger than life to me.  I knew that he was an educator.  I knew that he was educated.  I knew he was my mother's first music teacher.  He taught, he played the piano, and he taught her about music and probably he, in some ways, inspired, I mean, she was only eight when he died, but he must have inspired her to pursue music.  My other uncle, Vincent [Vincent Franklin], who was my cousin, Dr. V.P. Franklin's father, was also a musician, played jazz and had a full-time job.  My other uncle, [HistoryMaker] Jack T. Franklin, who still lives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], was the only one who pursued his creative urges without having other jobs and he's a photographer.
Speaker 1: Okay, a well-known photographer, right?
Speaker 2: He's a, he's a, yes, he's a pretty well-known photographer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 434862
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] is, you know, she's performing.  You had mentioned also something about your family being part of the social register, was, did I--
Speaker 2: My grandmo-, my [maternal] grandparents [Florence Collier Franklin and Frank Franklin].
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: That's really fascinating.  I have the book that my grandmother kept that list important Negros, you know, like, you've probably heard of Sadie Alexander [Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander], who was a famous judge in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She was also a f-, you know, became a friend of my mother's and she was a person who was, when my mother was divorcing my father [Elijah Owens (ph.)], she helped my mother a lot.  She, you know, she advised her and she wanted me, actually, she was on the board of trustees of Moore College of Art [Moore College of Art and Design], which is an art school in Philadelphia for women and wanted me to go there but I, I really wanted to leave Philadelphia desperately so I didn't want to go to Moore or any, any of the five, there are five art schools in Philadelphia, I didn't want to go to any of those 'cause I just wanted to leave but her, she and her husband, Judge Raymond Pace Alexander, were in this book.  I can't, you know, I wish I could remember all the people in the book but I kind of looked through it.  I was interested in seeing what positions people held, and so I noticed that they were doctors, they were physicians, they were lawyers, they were, you know, they had these very important jobs.  So when I saw that my grandfather was a postal clerk for the government, I was curious about that and then I found out that, you know, blacks didn't get to do those kinds of jobs at all.  So, and because he had this education, and I think also because of their activities within their church, they were very active and they were very civic minded, as I said.  So, all of that combined, and the family, you know, one aunt was married to a minister and, you know, they were all very active in social and fraternal organizations.
Story_ID: 434863
Speaker 1: Do you think that you were influenced like any messaging or anything based on the pedigree that you're, you know, you came from on your mother's [Eloise Owens Strothers] side?
Speaker 2: I knew that I had to get an education.  Well actually, I didn't know that, my mother told me, I was either going to get a job when I graduated from high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] , I was going to go to college and college sounded like a better option, so I chose college for that reason sort of.  You know, when you're seventeen, eighteen, I was trying to pursue art, but I didn't know if I needed to go to college to do it or how to do it, I knew nothing about how to pursue art.  So, but I knew I had to do something.
Story_ID: 434864
Speaker 1: Now the other thing I want to just ask in terms of your [maternal] family background, you know, the, you mentioned the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World], the Masons--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and something about Fe-, something, I think it was the--
Speaker 2: Oh, the Fez Club [Elks Education Department Fez Club] was within the Elks.
Speaker 1: --within the Elks.  Do you, can you, is there any information that you grew up knowing about because these are, you know, fraternal organizations, secretive, you know, fra-, were, did you, did you have any understanding of the, you know, the inner workings of those organizations as a young person?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was just taken to, it's interesting because with my own two children [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson], I always took them to things, basic--in, you know, activities for them, for their age, you know, age appropriate for them.  Whereas, when I grew up, I always had the opportunity to go to whatever my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] happened to be doing at the time.  And so, if she was performing in a recital, then I was able to go.  If she were, we, there wasn't any separation of, for me anyway, in my family, for children's things and things just for children or things just for adults.  So I knew about what the Elks did because I was taken to a lot of the activities that they were involved with.  You know, they'd have those baby contests, you know, the prettiest baby or the nicest baby contest and people would get money.  They'd have talent shows.  They'd have fashion shows.  They'd have oratorical contests, where people would be required to speak.  You know, we see those still in the black community where some, some little kid is reciting Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you know, one of his famous speeches.  They were doing that when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see or participate, did they have induction ceremonies that you saw since you were--
Speaker 2: You know, I can vague--you know, I remember, I remember seeing, they wore these very extravagant collars that you, when you became a past grand dau-, you know, to tell you the truth, we always thought it was pretty funny.  We always thought it was sort of comical and we just, we were, we hoped that we wouldn't have to do it in, in our maturity.  We found, my brother [Reginald White (ph.)] and sister [Yvonne Shirley White (ph.)] and I, found other ways to contribute to the community without belonging to the Elks.  You know, my brother actually could have become a Mason because I think it's a, I think, we understood that the transition was through your family, that you didn't, you know, it's sort of like the electricians' unions today.  You know, you've got to, well, they're not supposed to be that way today but you come through, you come into the Masons through a family member.  So my [maternal] grandfather [Frank Franklin] was a 32nd Degree Mason, which I believe was the top of the line for masonry, but I, you know, those things were, they were, they were seriously secret so we really didn't get to, we knew, you know, they had these collar ceremonies and we knew that you had to do certain things to become a past grand daughter ruler.
Speaker 1: Well this is why I'm asking you this because they are secretive.  All I knew is that I would see a building sometimes, you know, and I knew something happened beyond that, but tell me, you know, what you remember of the induction ceremonies.
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't, I don't remember, I don't know if I was actually there.  I mean, I remember they acquired these collars that have all these symbolic markings.  I mean, it seemed like it was partially Egyptian, you know.  There were some, you know, various and sundry markings and medals that meant something in particular.  I have a pin, I think it's, that belonged to my mother that I think it's six-sided, perhaps, I think it's six-sided that has an elk, an actual elk animal and, you know, rhinestones surrounding it that they wore.  They wore these hats that were fez's so it was very, you know, very involved but I don't believe anybody could see what happened unless you were actually a member.
Story_ID: 434865
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  His name and his family and, you know, what you know about his growing up and his background.
Speaker 2: Sure.  His name is Elijah Owens [ph.], and my parents divorced probably when I was about five years old.  I was very young when they divorced.  So, but before then, we would visit my great, my grandparents, my father's parents who lived in the Carolinas, in, I think, you know, it's terrible that I don't, that these memories from so long ago, I'm not quite sure about because we actually, he sort of went his way and I went my way and I really didn't reconnect with him until much later and at that time I didn't really think to do an oral history with him, which I probably should have done but he did have, his family did own property and they had a farm.  His family were all very tall and the women, many of the women were very tall.  I have relatives in Syracuse, New York and in the Detroit [Michigan] area.  As far as I know, everybody was pretty well educated in his family, also.  He owned, which was unusual in the time that we were, you know, that I was born and he, and growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], he owned a gas station for a number of years and then for whatever reason I don't know, he sold it and he and my Uncle Vincent [Vincent Franklin], who was the jazz musician, both worked at the Frankford Arsenal in, in Philadelphia until they retired.
Story_ID: 434866
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: My mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] said that she was ill and she, somehow he was ar-, I don't know where he came from, but he was, he helped her out when she was ill.  And so she felt, she actually felt--
Speaker 1: Guilt.
Speaker 2: --guilty, yeah.  She felt, she felt she owed him something so she married him.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't a marriage of love, it was a marriage, is that what she implied?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  She implied that she felt she owed him the marriage, and so she married him.  And she felt that he was, one other thing, because of my mother's light skin, she was always looking to marry somebody that was darker than she was (laughter) so that her children wouldn't have to suffer the pain of being too light for black people and too black for white people, that you would just be whatever you were.  You know, that you would be bla-, that people would look at you and know that you were black.  So she really, this is what she told me, that she always wanted to marry a man who was darker so that her children would have a shot at being, not having to go through the pain of being too light.
Speaker 1: Do you think that this caused some issue with your grandmother, I mean, your maternal grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin]?  Do you think she shared your mother's views or, since there was already this whole thing about her, you know, singing and her, you know, your not having the support of your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean with my, my grandmother adored my father [Elijah Owens (ph.)].  She absolutely adored him.  He had great manners, you know, he was tall, he was, you know, from the South.  He knew how to behave and she liked him very much.  She thought he was very nice, so, she didn't have any problems with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long were your parents married then?
Speaker 2: I, I guess they were married, you know, like six years or--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I don't know when the, you know, I was so little, I don't know when the divorce became final.  I know that we moved from our house on York Street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] around the corner to my grandmother's house on Glenwood Avenue.
Story_ID: 434867
Speaker 1: Now let's, since we're talking about memories, can you tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: Earliest?  Well I think I remember my one year old birthday but I'm sure I don't.  I know I remembered because everybody talked to me about it over and over again and I have a picture.  We had a fire in my house so a lot of the pictures disappeared, you know, were burned so I don't have a lot of pictures of me when I was little.  I don't know, I remember, actually I remember being in the house on York Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] upstairs in my room and hearing voices, seeing, you know, like have--it's dark--it was dark, it would be dark up there and the glowing light of the adults downstairs talking about things and me trying to listen to them and wondering what they were talking about.
Story_ID: 434868
Speaker 1: And if you take yourself back on York [Street], can you describe the street and do you know who some of the neighbors were and things like that?
Speaker 2: I remember the flavor of the street.  The, the houses were, there were stairs that led up to the houses.  It was, the houses had porches and, and they were like a series of maybe six or eight stairs that led up to the porch and then to the front door.  They weren't very large houses.  I actually, I have a photograph of somebody, like my mo-, well, I know it's my [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin], but somebody's big like Model T Ford [Ford Model T] in front of that house.  So I've seen the house.  I have pictures of my Aunt Blossie [ph.] and my Aunt Jessie [ph.] on the corner across from where my grandmother lives.  So they, they all lived in proximity of each other and I would walk from my grandmother's house on Glenwood Avenue or on York Street, I mean, they literally were kitty-corner to my great aunt's house, which was a few blocks away.  But it was, you know, it was a, it was a nice neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Now, York and you said your grandmother's house was on Glen--
Speaker 2: Glenwood Avenue.
Speaker 1: --Glenwood Avenue.  Those, what part, what part of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] are those streets?
Speaker 2: North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: North, North Philly, okay.  Now, what also, what, what religion was your family?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: What, what--
Speaker 2: Methodist (laughter).
Speaker 1: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: A.M.E., Jones Tabernacle [Jones Tabernacle A.M.E. Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which they called Jones Tabernacle, yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the A.M.E., actually, church started in Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 434869
Speaker 1: If you could take yourself back to York Avenue [sic. York Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: I have no memory of smells.  Sights, you know, I was the youngest so everything was, the youngest of three, and my brother [Reginald White (ph.)] is four years older than I am and my sister [Yvonne Shirley White (ph.)] is eight years older than I am.  So I was, we basically grew up like only children because, that big a separation didn't, and with the boy in the middle, if there had been, if he had, if my four year older brother had been a girl, I guess I would have had more interaction with him when I was little but, you know, I just remember, I remember more visual things.  I remember the corner store that we used to stop in and, on our way to the elementary school [Pratt Arnold School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that was a few blocks away.  There wasn't, I don't remember there being a lot of commerce in the neighborhood but there was across from my, the house on Glenwood Avenue, there was a railroad, a train that went past, there was like an open field and there was a railroad train that passed through there regularly and I could hear, I could remember hearing that.  On, I have more memories on Glenwood Avenue because I was older.
Story_ID: 358400
Speaker 1: You were talking about sights and you said you had more memories on Glenwood [Avenue, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], so can you talk about that.  You know, you were saying, smells (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --were not your thing so much, but--
Speaker 2: No, although on, on, yeah, not so much, but on Glenwood Avenue, I, there were two houses which was really interesting because we had the backyards of, well there's a barbershop on the corner where, you know, the two corners, the two streets met, and then there were the, there was the backyard of a couple of houses from York Street and then, I think, there was a little space, then there were houses, side by side, and then, I think, there were the backyards of the houses from the other street, which I don't remember the name of that street right now, but next door was my best friend, of course, the only other girl in the neighborhood, in the only other house in the neighborhood, that was, you know, next, Phyllis Simmons, and, on Fridays, I would go to Phyllis' house and her mother [Katie Simmons] would fry fish and have what, succotash, I don't know if you've ever heard of succotash, but succotash is corn and lima beans and tomatoes in this little concoction, but every, every, you know, her, her, Phyllis' mother would invite me over to have dinner with them on Fridays and then I'd have to go every, you know, and ask if I could go and then I'd go over there.
Story_ID: 358401
Speaker 1: Let me just understand, you s-, lived on York [Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] until what age?
Speaker 2: So, I think I was about five years old and then we moved to my [maternal] grandmother's [Florence Collier Franklin] house [on Glenwood Avenue, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and we lived in my grandmother's house.  Now, I have a lot of memories about her house, a very tiny house.  My grandmother was very religious.  She, she played religious mu-, not gospel music, but religious music, spirituals.  She played them on her, one of those stand-up radios, starting early in the morning every day.
Speaker 1: Do you mean spirituals, or you mean hymns?
Speaker 2: Well, probably a combination of both, but I think spirituals were played on the radio.  I don't know what station she was listening to, but she would play, I don't think they were recordings, I think she was actually playing a radio station that played, you know, Christian music and she listened to it all the time.
Speaker 1: Did she have a favorite song?
Speaker 2: My grandmother?  Not that I know of, and, which probably, her listening to all this music, probably later on encouraged my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] to sing, 'cause she sang gospel, I mean she didn't sing gospel music, she hated gospel music, she sang, sorry but she did, she, she had, you don't even want to hear her opinions about gospel singers but--
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: You don't really want to hear those (laughter), but she, she did sing spirituals.  Actually, when I was at Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut], she came to, I had a music class that I, we were doing a survey of African influences on music on a global, you know, sphere and so I asked my professor, I told my profe-, I didn't even ask but I told my professor that my mother was going to come and maybe she could also, we heard Eubie Blake, right, perform and I said, "Oh, you know my mother's coming, so my mother could probably talk to you about spirituals and gospel music and the history of those things," and she did, but no, my grandmother listened to the music all the time.  She, she entertained Reverend Stevenson [William H.P. Stevenson], who was a minister of another church who she was fond of, and she never remarried after Frank Franklin [Anderson's maternal grandfather] died.  She just, she worked in the church, she raised her children, she worked in the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World], she was, she was one of those women who, I guess they were called the nurse, nurses or something.  She would wear a white uniform and gloves and so she'd go to funerals and other events that church would need somebody to take care of people and to look out for people and so that's, and she also raised over a million dollars.  I have a picture of her, she raised, during World War II [WWII], in, in bonds.  She raised a lot of money.
Speaker 1: So she was very civically involved then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 358402
Speaker 1: Give me your siblings' names--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and, and, and the birth order, you know.
Speaker 2: My sister is Yvonne Shirley White [ph.].
Speaker 1: So she was of the first young man (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She is married to, I mean she was the daughter of my mother's [Eloise Owens Strothers] first husband, and my brother is the son of my mother's first husband.  His name is Reginald White [ph.], and they both still live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were the third?
Speaker 2: I was the third by a second marriage [to Elijah Owens (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Okay, and then after you, is there, was there any that was--
Speaker 2: No, my mother, she eventually remarried but she didn't have any children with her third husband, whose name is Charles Strothers [Charles O. Strothers].
Speaker 1: Okay, and she had a, well didn't she have a fourth husband?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, just the three.  Okay, sorry (laughter), just like a--
Speaker 2: Three was plenty.  It was very, you know, very, it was hard enough telling people that your mother was an opera singer because that was so odd, when you're a little kid to say, oh my, "What does your mom do?" or, you know, or "Where is your mom?" when, you know, when you had a concert, when you had a, I'm sorry, a performance at school and my mother might not be able to come because she had a performance of her own, then people would say, "Well where's your mom?"  "Well, she's singing opera."  "She's singing opera?" you know, and so, it was interesting.
Story_ID: 358403
Speaker 1: Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], now, I do want to go back to what she said about gospel music.  I do want to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You do?
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.
Speaker 2: Well I may have to give you the, the PG version (laughter) of that answer.  No, she just really, you know, when Nina Simone, who sang for my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers], whose name was, I wish I could remember her real name [Eunice Kathleen Waymon], not, it's not Nina Simone, my mother told me that she said she didn't like opera singers, okay.  Well, my mother, so I'm just saying this to say that my mother's not the only one who said negative things about other singers.  My mother didn't have a lot of respect for, not all, some, gospel singers and I think it's because, as an adult woman who was out in the world, she understood what was happening behind the scenes. Not the music, she didn't have anything against the music, she didn't have anything against, you know, everybody, but, and she didn't make blanket statements, but she just didn't have a lot, I'm just going to say, she didn't have a whole lot of respect for some people who sang gospel music.  I think she felt that they were hypocritical in a sense, singing about God and behaving in another fashion.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was just wondering what was, what was going on.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right (laughter), all right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought there was some like, scandal, okay.
Speaker 2: No, there were scandals and she knew, you know, there were people who, there were people that she knew, I mean in, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is a small, was a small town.  It's still a small town but in certain communities, as we know in Chicago [Illinois], there are communities of people everybody knows everybody and if they don't know you directly, they know somebody who knows you, and in Philadelphia it was sort of the same way.  Everybody who was doing a certain level of thing, level of, you know, in terms of their professional lives or their whatever, tended to know other people and, you know, so people knew what everybody else was doing to a certain degree, you know, so she knew things that maybe weren't public for a public consummation but she knew some things that were behind the scenes kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you're saying, Nina Simone played for her, not necessarily sang?  She played for your mother?
Speaker 2: Nina Simone's a trained concert pianist and she was my mother's accompaniment--accompanist for her recitals.
Story_ID: 358404
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Pastorius, well, I went to two elementary schools.  The, I'm trying to think, what's the name of the one in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  I went to one in North Philly for a minute, and then I went to, moved to Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and went to Pastorius Elementary School [Francis D. Pastorius Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I, I, maybe I'll think of it later but I can't even think of it right now.  That's where I went in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Do you know why you went to the second one in Germantown?
Speaker 2: Well, the first one, I'm thinking of the high school in Phila-, I can't think of the name of the elementary school, oh, Arnold School [Pratt Arnold School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was the name of the elementary school I went to, and my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] said, and I remember this, I have a memory of sort of doing my work and then getting up and roaming around the classroom and I liked to play with hair and so I would braid hair or I would do something besides the, what, something else, I guess, I think what it was, that I finished my work and I didn't have anything to do, and so my mother said that she had had a conference with the teacher who said, not because I was getting into trouble, but because she, you know, she would just say, well, you know, can you sit down or something, I don't know, I think I was very quiet so I didn't, wasn't disturbing the class, but I have this memory of roaming around the classroom and she s-, and my mother said that the, she told the teacher that she was thinking of moving to another neighborhood and she wanted to get away from my [maternal] grandmother's [Florence Collier Franklin] house and move into her own house.  My grandmother was very lenient with my brother [Reginald White (ph.)] and my mother thought he needed more discipline.  My grandmother thought he didn't need to do the same kind of chores that my sister [Yvonne Shirley White (ph.)] and I had to do because he was a boy and my mother didn't like that at all.  So she wanted to move to her own house for a number of reasons and she told the teacher and the teacher said, she thought it would be good because she didn't think I was challenged in that school.  So, and that, you know, in a classroom--I teach, too, and I know sometimes in a classroom you really have to, you have to work with the average student in your classroom, you can't, you know, the student who is accelerating or the student who's left behind, both sometimes cause problems for the rest of the class, so you might be able to teach that student on the side but in general, sometimes, you know, it could be problematic if the student is finishing work too quickly and I think maybe that's what was happening.  So we moved and I went to another school which was more challenging and was fine, when I was in third grade.
Story_ID: 358405
Speaker 1: All of you moved, the, your, your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The family moved, yes.
Speaker 1: --the family moved, okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] and my siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was there any sibling rivalry, or did you feel like the lone person?  You know, you had two children that were fathered by another father.  Did you, was there any feeling that you were not, you know, part of the same, same unit?
Speaker 2: No, we really felt like siblings.  My brother was a little angry with me because, you know, he was closer in my age and so this, not only does this other man [Anderson's father, Elijah Owens (ph.)] come into his house, but then this baby shows up.  So he was a little disturbed and I think probably in those days, I don't know what they told him, but if you don't prepare a kid, and especially who's already four years old and understands quite a bit, that another baby's coming along and then all of a sudden the baby appears, he was, he was a little angry but he was one of my biggest protectors throughout my life.  You know, he was, he thought he was my father, you know (laughter), scaring away boyfriends and he was the one who always picked me up from college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to take me home or to, you know, pick me up when I was flying into town, he was the one who would show up at the airport to pick me up.  So he, you know, and my sister was actually like, I don't think I would have survived if my sister hadn't been there and been eight years older than I am, because my mother, as I told you, traveled with the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World].  They traveled all across the country and she would, they'd have conventions, she'd sing at the conventions.  She traveled to sing on her own, to New York [New York] and to Washington, D.C. and to Puerto Rico and to different locations around the country.  So, she stayed in the country, she didn't tra-, she didn't go to Europe which is something she, I think, I know she regretted, but she didn't feel that she could leave us to go to Europe, but she traveled nationally.  And my sister took care of me, you know, my sister, and when, my sister got married very young as well, moved into her own house, and so when my mother would travel, she would ask me, do you want to stay with your [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin]?  No, I didn't, or do you want to stay with your sister?  Yes, I did, because my sister was more fun, you know, so I would, and she had lived in a neighborhood where there were, she lived in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and there were other kids and, you know, so it was a, it was a very, it was fun for me to go stay with my sister.  She was very, she was very good.  My sister taught me little songs like the, when you go out in the woods today you're in for a big surprise.  Do you know that song?  'The Teddy Bears' Picnic,' I won't sing it but my sister--
Speaker 1: You can.
Speaker 2: --sang that, she taught me that song and--
Speaker 1: Sing it.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know if I remember all the words but it's, it's--
Speaker 1: Just a little bit.
Speaker 2: (Singing) "When you go out in the woods today, you better--you're in for a big surprise," something like that, you know.  When you go out in the woods, today, like that.  So it was really, it was really a sweet thing for her t-, she treated me like a sister but she treated me like a mother.  And when my brother would try to do things to me, you know, because he would be mad at me for whatever reason, my sister would protect me.  Actually, she said she'd kill him if he did.  She'd tell him, "I'll kill you, you leave her alone."  So, she was great.  They were both great.
Speaker 1: And so your sister's name, again, and your brother?
Speaker 2: My sister's, Yvonne [Yvonne Shirley White (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Yvonne, and--
Speaker 2: My brother's, Reginald [Reginald White (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Reginald, okay, that's right.  So now, so what year, what age did she get married when you said you got, she got married young.  Was she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My sister?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She was eighteen.
Speaker 1: She was eighteen, so you were ten?
Speaker 2: Same like my mother.  My mother and my sister felt like they grew up together, you know, because my mother was eighteen or so, eighteen, nineteen when my sister was born, and so, you know, they were very, you know, they weren't that f-, you know, I have friends who were eighteen years older than I am or, and eighteen years or more younger than I am (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 358406
Speaker 1: You're in school, I want to understand what kind of child you are, you know.  You said you were quiet, you said o-, you obviously were bright, you need to be challenged as a child but what was the young person in sight?  Your bab-, you're the baby of the family so what kind of child are you?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I was very quiet and I thank my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] for pushing me out of that shy and quiet nature.  That was my natural nature.  Over time I've kept, you know, playing, you know how you play this record over in your head of things your mother has told you and eventually I believed that I really needed to stop being too shy, but yeah, I was shy, I was introverted, I liked to read a lot, I drew all the time.  My mother said, you know, when I was five, you know some of these things are not your memories, there're of people tell you, well when you used to do this and you used to do that so they become your memories but my mother said that I would draw these dancing figures and she, she eventually showed them to somebody and they said, "Well if your daughter did these drawings and if your daughter is five years old, you need to put her in art school."  So I guess I could always draw.  The thing of it wasn't, when I was growing up, we didn't go to art galleries.  You know, we didn't go, fortunately in school in those days, in my schools, they took us to the art museum, the Philadelphia Museum of Art [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They took us to, you know, the, like the cultural institution, the major cultural institutions in the city, so I was exposed to art through school but I wasn't at home.  We had, we had lots of books and I'm not, I know we had lots of photographs but I'm not sure that we had any visual art like paintings or sculpture.  We didn't consider what my Uncle Jackie [HistoryMaker Jack T. Franklin] did, even though he was a photographer since he was ele-, starting taking pictures when he was eleven.  We didn't consider what he did as an art form, you know, it was his job, it was, you know, maybe a craft at the most, but it wasn't an art form at that time.  You know, it took a while before photographers were considered, you know, museum ready, except for in history museums.
Story_ID: 358407
Speaker 1: So you are, your, your drawing that is what attracts you in school.  Do you remember any teachers, and I--in elementary school that you were, you know, you remember or affected you in some way or--?
Speaker 2: There were teachers, I ha-, my teachers were nice.  I didn't have any, I don't have any really super, I don't have any bad memories at all of how I was treated in school.  I don't have any, I didn't have any real great mentors that I can remember in elementary school.  I think because I was quiet and I was pleasant, I had, you know, I didn't get into, well I got in trouble once but, basically I didn't get into very much trouble.  I was pretty much left to my own devices and, and at home I was pretty much left to my own devices.  So I was able to have a vivid fantasy life and, you know, I was able to read books and I was able, I had free time, I had free time.  I didn't, wasn't programmed all the time so I had time to do things but I, art wasn't my only interest.  I, I tap-danced, I did ballet, I took piano lessons.  I told my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] I wanted to take piano lessons so she found some lady down the street who, Mrs. Robinson [ph.], who gave piano lessons and I went to the playground and did arts and crafts.  That's actually, that's when I won a blue ribbon.  I forgot I had won it until I ran across it for some project that I'd done and I used to perform every year in the city-wide dance event that was through the park district in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So I couldn't, I didn't know, I just knew that I was attracted to the arts in general and when my mother would sing, I would sing along with her.  So, she had to explain to me, I remember she explained to me that when she has recitals, even though I know I could sing in German and French and Italian, I couldn't, I wasn't supposed to sing then.  I couldn't really sing with her, but as I, as she, as I got older, my mother would actually ask me how she sounded because she understood that I could really hear what she was singing, and that I could tell if her pitch was, was good and I could critique her singing from having heard her sing so much.  And I don't think, my brother [Reginald White (ph.)] and sister [Yvonne Shirley White (ph.)] weren't that interested.  You know, I grew up with my brother and sister saying, "Oh, you're just like mom," you know, which was sometimes not a compliment, you know, sometimes I guess it wasn't but sometimes it really was, you know, we were so, we were sensitive, you know, we were overly sensitive.  We, you know, we were strange, you know, we were unusual but having a mother like her did, made that not a problem because she supported creativity and she supported my creativity and she understood that, and didn't expect me to be like everybody.
Story_ID: 358408
Speaker 1: So you're not going to museums, you know, her taking you was probably a function of her time then, do you think (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was a single parent raising three children, trying to keep us out of trouble and in school and tried to make enough money as a city employee to support us.  She also was involved in all kinds of stuff.  She was a, she was named to the Mayor's Commission on Women at some point.  She was, she did a lot of things with, you know, both, my [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin], too, worked in the poll booths.  Growing up, my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] was, oh God, I cannot, I cannot in good conscience not vote, you know, because I was told over and over again, you have to vote.  My mother said, it doesn't matter who you vote for.  I disappointed them greatly one year when I voted for a Republican president, but that, they, they accepted that because I was always considered strange, always a little weird, but my mother said, I had to vote for somebody because she said, "It doesn't matter who you vote for, you don't have any power if you don't vote, but if you do vote, the politicians will think well if, since you do vote, you, they may get you to change your vote for them but if you don't vote at all, you don't count."  So, and my grandmother was the same way, you know, you had to vote.  So, there were just, you know, there were lots of things that my mother was involved with, you know.  She was, she was the executive, I think she was the executive secretary for her union [American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees], the white collar union, you know, whatever it is the, the municipal, I can't remember the name of the union right now but she was on the executive board, which was very unusual.  In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], there was, Charlie Santore [Charles Santore] was the president of the union.  I remember him because his son actually ended up as a classmate of mine at Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut], and his other son [Charles Santore] was a well-known illustrator.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any elections then that your, you know, that were sort of highly talked about or, you know, your mother or grandmother were, you know, there was a lot of discussion about or--
Speaker 2: Pr-, national elections, local elections (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It doesn't matter.
Speaker 2: Well, locally, they talked about a lot of things.  They talked about the mayoral elections.  You know, my mother worked for the city so it was kind of, you know, interesting for her to, she had to be careful.  You know, you had to walk a narrow line when you're a government employee but she would be interested in that.  She, they were more, they were interested in voting for, you know, those kinds of offices.  She actually was asked to sing for the inauguration of one governor of Pennsylvania and I can't, I don't know which one it was offhand.  She sang for lots of city events, you know, public events, she was asked to sing.  You know, basically they needed someone to sing 'The Star Spangled Banner,' which is, as you have seen over the years, is a very difficult song.  It has an incredible range and not everybody can sing it well, but in terms of the elections, I mean, I could, I remember her talking more about, you know, Cecil [Cecil B. Moore], this, what's his last name, who was a civil rights person.  She talked about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  She talked about, she took me to my first civil rights protest, which was the protest at Girard College [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was an all-white college and we marched around and around this bricked wall and it was the first time that I participated in an activity like that and I remember that I, I know I'm going away from the electoral process, but when I went to, when I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], we had a sit-in in the '60s [1960s] and my mot-, I called my, and we took over the administration building, and my mother, and everybody was worried about their parents, you know, getting into trouble, so I said, okay, well, I better call my mother and let her know where I am.  So I called her and so she said, she was happy.  She said, "Oh I knew you'd be there."  She said, "I knew, I told everybody, Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] is probably there," you know, because it was national news and she was proud of me because she felt that that's what I should do because that's the example she had set for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So in terms of elections, I wish I could remember the name and you know, I haven't, I haven't lived in Philadelphia since I was, full-time, since I was eighteen or so.
Story_ID: 358409
Speaker 1: So you went to, what was the name of your elementary again?  Pat- the second one.
Speaker 2: Pastorius [Francis D. Pastorius Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Pastorius, was that a public school?
Speaker 2: That was a public school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then what about junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Wagner Junior High School [General Louis Wagner Junior High School; General Louis Wagner Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, was there anything different about that?  Was that located in the same--?
Speaker 2: They were all schools that I could walk to.  They were both schools that I could, well, all three, the Arnold School [Pratt Arnold School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the difference probably for me compared to some people, when I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I met students from other parts of the country, that my schools were integrated, you know.
Speaker 1: All of them?
Speaker 2: Well not the one in North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Okay, not Arnold, but--
Speaker 2: --but Pastorius and--
Speaker 1: Wagner.
Speaker 2: --Wagner and my high school, were all--
Speaker 1: And what was, what was your high school?
Speaker 2: Germantown High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Oh, German--okay, okay.  Integrated, like wasn't it more white than black?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: Germantown High School was probably 50/50.  We had a lot of Jew-, and it was, we were on a, the--tracked, we were sort of, you know, so if you were in advance--they had advance classes and they had regular classes and they had, I don't know what the other, what that was called, but they had classes maybe for students who were moving along a little more slowly and so if you were in the advanced, if you were tracked into the advance classes then, I remember being in classes where I was the only African American student, which I did not, which is why I basically chose Howard because I was, I felt, I remember one class I felt that I was invisible because the students and the teacher were all, you know, like they really seemed to have a relationship and I ended up sitting on the last row of the class simply because I felt that they would, they would have sort of personal private conversations in the beginning, you know, the classroom, that had nothing to do with me.  So I just sat back there and just tried to, you know, learn what I needed to learn and pass the class and get out of there but, but the other, on the other side of it, from the time I was in elementary school, I had very good white friends who, you know, I went to their homes, they came to my house, except every once in a while I'd meet somebody who said, you know, I'd say, well, "Can I go to your house today," or "Can we, why don't we hang out at your house?"  And I remember this student, Beryl Handler, who shocked me by saying, "I can't take you to my house."  Beryl and I had been friends from junior, in junior high and high school and she was great, she was wonderful, but she said, "I can't take you to my house, my parents won't allow it."
Story_ID: 358410
Speaker 1: I had another friend that--I worked at a, as a camp counselor for four years--
Speaker 2: Is this in high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Starting in high school.  Well, I tried to go, or I found I was too young for the job, but I was dying to, to work as a camp counselor after I'd been a camper when I was ten, ten and eleven years old, and--
Speaker 2: It was at the, what was the name of the camp?
Speaker 1: Camp William Penn [Pennsylvania].  It was run by the city and it really, I think it cost my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] two dollars for me to go for two weeks because the city subsidized, subsidized it and I loved it, it was great.  And so, from the time I went, I wanted to go back and work at that camp.  So, you know, I kept asking my mother to find out when I could apply for the job, you know, and I thought I could do it when I was sixteen, but I was too young so I had to wait until I was seventeen and I went down and was interviewed and I, the job I acquired was a counselor in training and I made so little money that my mother had to pay me to go (laughter) to the, she had to give me money so I could go away 'cause I didn't, I couldn't, even though I had room and board, I couldn't like go to a movie when, you know, on a day off or something because I didn't have enough, I made thirty dollars.
Story_ID: 358477
Speaker 1: You know, Girard--
Speaker 2: College [Girard College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: --College, there was, Bill Coleman [HistoryMaker Mr. William T. Coleman, Jr.] talked about how he was, you know, fought th-, I think you know to help to desegregate that, the college filed a lawsuit.
Speaker 2: Cecil Moore [Cecil B. Moore], the attorney I believe, helped to instigate that situation and I'm pretty sure that in my uncle's [HistoryMaker Jack T. Franklin] huge, five hundred (laughter), five hundred thousand negative archive has photographs because he, he went to everything.  I mean, whether he was working for a newspaper or whether he was working independently, so yeah, we have, we should have, he should have photographs of the Girard College demonstration.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about what the issue was around Girard College?
Speaker 2: I was a little kid, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were, you see I'm trying to establish some of these ti-, Girard College happened when, how old were you when Girard--
Speaker 2: I know I, well, I don't know exactly how old I was.  I mean, I know that I went with my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] and so I was probably a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, but I'd have to look up the dates to actually recall.
Story_ID: 358478
Speaker 1: I want to know around, were there any special things you guys did around holidays, you know, that are sort of traditions or, you know, I'd like to ask that question, I want to ask (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, the most, the thing we all look forward to was my mother's [Eloise Owens Strothers], when she married my stepfather, Charles Strothers [Charles O. Strothers], who had been a cook during World War II [WWII] and was a caterer, worked with Molly [ph.] the caterer, and also was a teacher in public schools, taught restaurant practices, had a master's degree in restaurant practices, was an incredible cook and they would have these parties, you know, these parties at, for New Year's Eve, and we were little and they got, they were married when I was in sixth grade.  And so they would have these parties and people would start arriving some, you know, it was just, you know how when you're a kid and, you know these people come and they're decked out and they were these art parties.  You know, people would come and they would play the piano.  My uncle, my Uncle Vincent [Vincent Franklin] would put a mask over his face, he would cover his eyes and play the piano with his eye-, you know, to show how good he was.  I mean, most, I've learned since that most piano players don't, do not have to look at the keys but it was a, it was like a magic trick.  He would play the piano backwards.  People would sing.  They would have music.  It would be upstairs and downstairs.  They'd have all kinds, they'd have tons of food and they drank martinis and Manhattans, one, I know one, the one had the olives, and one had the maraschino cherries and they would serve like, and people would stay all night long and we would, I would sit on the stairs of the basement and watch them dance and act, you know, they were drinking so you know it was getting a little, they were getting, and so it was just like grownups act, behaving badly, you know, so it was a lot of fun.  We looked forward to that but we also looked forward to our Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays.  We had, we'd always have family dinners and people would arrive, we would never, you know, we'd never be a thing where everybody would sit down together like a number of people, whoever was there would sit down and then other people would come later and they would sit down and then other people would come later and they would sit down, probably because our house wasn't big enough to, to really sit everybody and if there were extra people who couldn't sit at the table, there would be, people would, they would have TV trays or whatever and they'd sit all over the house.  So those events were great.  Everybody, you know, the whole family would show up at some point or another.
Speaker 1: Now is this still on Glenwood [Avenue] or is this--
Speaker 2: No, this is in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  We lived on Wister Street (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, which --
Speaker 2: --6323 Wister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 358479
Speaker 1: Now did you, you know, Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] had a, there was the Germantown Boys' Club [Germantown Boys and Girls Club], was there a Germantown Boys' Club?  Does that sound, it doesn't sound, no?
Speaker 2: There probably was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a lot in Germantown (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, was there, did you remember having any influence with the Quakers?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of people that I knew were, went to, there were some people I knew who were involved with Quakers, the Friends Society [Religious Society of Friends], I think it was called, and there was an influence.  I mean, I think part of the reason some of the kids were, we were as integrated as we were.  We had, in high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I had a group of friends that ranged from, one person was half Asian, one person was, I think she was Jewish, you know, we had, and we were very close friends, we hung out altogether.  We're still in touch with each other.  So there was, I didn't ha-, you know, I wasn't going to the Quaker events but I think there was definitely an influence with people having some sense of how their behavior should model the Quaker, the Quaker format (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tradition.
Speaker 2: Tradition, yeah.
Story_ID: 358480
Speaker 1: You entered high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in what year?
Speaker 2: Well I graduated in '65 [1965] so I gue-, well I went in tenth grade so I guess that was '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay, and are you aware of sort of the political turmoil that's happening and does, is it affecting anything, you know, within Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well I'm just hearing what my mother's [Eloise Owens Strothers] saying and, you know, my mother has always been political.  My [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin] was always political, you know.  My uncle [HistoryMaker Jack T. Franklin] was, because he was this photographer, he worked for the newspapers.  He worked for The Philadelphia Tribune, which is like the Chicago Defender, but he also supplied photographs for the Bulletin [Pennsylvania Bulletin] and the Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer], which were the two major white newspapers.  So they would have a lot of discussions about events, things that were happening, you know.  So, but, you know, a lot of the things just sort of went by me.  I was, I was pretty much not encumbered with the, with the Civil Rights Movement.  I know Leon Sullivan started the Progress Pla-, built a place called Progress Plaza [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I remember go-, actually, I went there, I was in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], though.  I have photo--a photograph that my uncle took of my roommate and I when we went there for some sort of festival in college.  My, there was also the Heritage House in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] which was the place where my uncle had a studio for years, but they also had all kinds of cultural events there.  There was a lot of, we were steeped in, in black culture all, you know, growing--I mean, partly because that's all we were allowed to do for a number of years and then con-, subsequently, because that's what we were interested in as a family.  You know, my grandmother was interested in promoting black culture through the church [African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.) church], through the Elks [Improved Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks of the World] and other things and my mother was a, well although she wor-, she operated in a multicultural society, she, you know, because of her union affiliations, because of working for the city on, you know, this women's commission [Mayor's Commission on Women], I wish I could remember all the stuff that she did.  I know, at her funeral, there were so many people, a friend of mine who was a policeman, a lieutenant in the police force at the time decided, you know, he better have one side, she was a, her funeral was at a big church [Temple of Divine Love Church] on Girard Avenue in Philadelphia.  So he decided he'd better, you know, cut back the, you know, not allow any parking on one side of Girard Avenue, which is a major thoroughfare, and afterwards he said, if I had known there were going to be so many people, I would have blocked off the whole area.
Story_ID: 358481
Speaker 1: I didn't realize how much my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] was involved with over the years in terms of, she, and she eventually did theatre.  There was a company called the Playward Bus Company [Playward Bus Theater Company] that she performed in.  Actually, I went to, where was that?  I'm trying to think of all these different places but wherever, where-, I can't remember the name of the place right now, but I went there because they also had African dance classes.  And so I thought, while she was rehearsing, they did, they were doing, I remember she was rehearsing 'God's Trombones' at the time.
Speaker 2: Is this in high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: This was, I was in high school, and so she was, she was rehearsing James Weldon Johnson's 'God's Trombones' ['God's Trombones: Seven Negro Sermons in Verse'] with the Playward Bus Company.  It was amazing because my mother never considered herself a speaker, and when my [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin] wanted her to, to do oratorical contests, I told you they, they were engaged in that sort of thing, my mother felt very awkward and that she couldn't do it.  As a matter of fact, my mother told me at one time, she never knew what to do with her hands when she performed and she said, she was telling me, you know, "You can learn from everybody.  You can learn something from everybody.  It doesn't matter who they are, what their age is, you can learn from everybody," and she said, as a matter of fact, "I never knew what to do with my hands when I performed but you always seem to know what to do with your hands."  You know, it was some, you know, biologically, physically, I just always had something to do with my hands she said.  And so she said, so she would study me and my hands and so she would mimic my gestures when she sang, which is really something that kind of boosts your ego when you hear it from your mother saying, "Well I learned this from you, what to do with my hands."
Story_ID: 358482
Speaker 1: When did you start, like, do you remember your first art class?
Speaker 2: Well, in elementary school [Francis D. Pastorius Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] there, they, you know, everybody did art projects, I don't, nothing stuck with me really (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, was it in high school then that you sort of--?
Speaker 2: No, I was always looking for art classes.  I, in third grade, I decided I wanted to be an artist.  I remember distinctly being at a friend's house, whose name is Linda Chambers [ph.], and in her bedroom, saying to her, well we both decided we were going to be artists in third grade, and so after that, I, I was trying to figure out what did that mean.  So, I went to my playground, they had, you know, art classes and they were really crafts classes.  In high school, I was able to have a double major, so to speak, so I had an academic art major where I took, you know, language and math, science and all that but I was also able to take art every single day and when I first started out, when you asked me about influences, Walter Lubar, my high school teacher, was an incredible influence, but he was so good he got promoted, so I only had him for, you know, one, like one year and then he was promoted and, and the teacher I had after that was terrible.  I remember his name too, but I won't say it, but he was terrible and I didn't know he was terrible until later, I learned more and I realized that was, I wasted, I pretty much wasted my time in high school thinking I was learning about art because I didn't.  I went to the Tyler School of Art [Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art], which is part of Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I asked my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] if I could take an ar-, I found an art class there and I went to Saturday classes there and they basically gave me materials and said, "Work."  I still didn't really get any art training.  People generally said, "Oh, well you're a good artist, you know, so just make art."  I went to the, there was a school in Philadelphia called Girls' High School [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and it was the best school in the city.  Germantown High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was the second best, academically, school when I was there, and Girls' High was the best, and Central [Central High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was the one for boys, and actually V.P. Franklin went to Central, and my other cousin went to Girls' High.  I didn't want to go to an all-girls school, and my [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin] actually didn't encourage that.  She didn't think it was a good idea, so I went to Germantown, but I went to Girls' High for art classes and again, in retrospect, I don't feel like I learned very much.  Then I went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and I majored (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I want to ask you--
Speaker 2: Oh sorry.
Speaker 1: --you said that in high school, that's when, that you were, there was a tracking system.  What, where were you on the track?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was in the top of my class.  I wasn't like the t-, I was like probably in the top.  We had a huge, you know, as baby boomers, we had a huge class of students, and I was somewhere in the top, you know, like 20 percent or something like that.  I mean I was casual about school, although I generally got, you know, I had good grades but I wasn't, I was more interested in art than academics but, you know, the classes that I liked like French, you know, I'd get very good grades and most classes I did, I never failed anything and I don't, I never got a D or an F.  I think I did have, I know I had a few Cs here and there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But mostly A's and Bs.
Story_ID: 358483
Speaker 1: What is Joyce Owens [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] like at this point 'cause I remember you said, you know, earlier that you wanted to get out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know, any school but--any, but you wanted to get out of Philadelphia.  What are, who's this young person at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well there are a number of things that happened.  I was, I really enjoyed high school a lot.  I had very good friends.  We were, we were, you know, I was on the yearbook staff.  Actually, I was the art editor, but there was, there was an element of racism, and that was another situation where I ran into racism where I applied to--because we had such a huge population, all the teachers didn't know all the students, I applied when I heard they were taking applicants for the yearbook and we had a separate advisory.  If you were on the yearbook, you were, we were in alphabetic advisories, homerooms, and, but if you went into the yearbook, you would be taken out of your, the alphabetical advisory and you put, be put in that one advisory because you could work on the yearbook during the free time and after school.  So I applied and I had to submit some drawings and they posted the, the staff on a bulletin board, you know, we're all around it, you know, we're looking to see who's on it and to my joy I was not only on the yearbook staff but I was designated the art editor.  So I go to the yearbook advisory when it's time and, you know, were go- and, you know, we're given a preliminary information and then I'm pulled aside by my teacher who says, "You need to submit some drawings so we can make a decision about the editor."  I said, "I'm the editor."  I said, "That's what it said."  I, you know, I had told my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] and stepfather [Charles O. Strothers] and, you know, I said, "It said that I was the editor, what is--what are you talking about?"  He says, "Well, we need to see some more drawings, some more art work."  So I said, "Okay," you know, because you're taught to do what you're, what you're told by your teachers.  I didn't say anything to anybody, I just did, you know, produced some more work, took it in and thinking, there's no way I'm not the art editor.  You know, I don't know, I didn't process it past, you know, just do this and it'll be done and that's it.  So I come into school and he tells me, well, you're not the art editor, we decided on who the art editor is and I was crushed.  So I went and I told my mother and my stepfather and they had never been to school for me for any re-, except for, you know, like, I mean in those days, parents didn't have to pick up report cards like they do now.  I feel like, I felt like I was in school again with my kids [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson], but in those days parents, you know, they took you to kindergarten and, and, you know, pretty much didn't have to do that much more.  My paren-, both my mother and my stepfather went to school, they made an appointment with the principal and the expression, they turned it out, they turned the place out.  They were livid.  They understood exactly what had happened and what had happened was that Mr. Applebaum [ph.] wanted Meryl, I mean Carol Abramson to be the art editor and not me and that's, you know, and so, you know, we had a big discussion and I knew, I knew Carol Abramson since I was in junior high school [General Louis Wagner Junior High School; General Louis Wagner Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] also.  She had been a friend of, she was a friend of mine.  And so I really didn't want her to have the job taken from her also, and so in the process of this whole thing where nobody ever said that the hope, that this wasn't true, that it was not true that I, you know, nobody said, "Well she was never the art editor."  Nobody ever said that.  So, what, what it came down to was, well what are we going to tell Carol Abramson if we take the job from her?  And my mother and stepfather said, "Tell her the same thing you told my daughter," as simple as that.  "Tell her it's not her job anymore," that, you know, I mean, basically I guess she could tell her it wasn't her job to begin with but I said, "Well, can't we make a compromise.  Can we both, can we share the job?  Can we be co-art editors?"  And so, they agreed on that.  The principal agreed on that because he knew they were totally wrong and I really appreciated my mother and stepfather standing up for me.
Story_ID: 358484
Speaker 1: And by the way, this is the first time I ever--I was in twelfth grade, first time I ever had any counseling offered to me to prepare me to go to college, first time, happened then, nobody ever said anything to me about, you know, doing anything about applying for college until that incident, when I became sort of, I stood out--I worked in the office, I was the senate, we had senators, you know, where your classmates would vote you the senator from your class to represent your class at school-wide meetings.  I was the senator several times.  I was, you know, on the debate team.  I was on a lot of clubs and activities and I did a lot of artwork around the school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], but I never got into any trouble so I wasn't that noticed in a huge school.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, with, how large was the school 'cause you talk about it being--
Speaker 1: Oh, we had, you know, man, we, I, you know, I wish I'd, probably had over a thousand students in my class.  We had such a huge class that we couldn't graduate from our very large schoo-, we had a school with an annex building so it was two, you know, a typical pretty large high school that takes student--you know, high, junior highs from all over the area, and we couldn't, we couldn't all fit into the, we could fit into the auditorium, but we couldn't fit into the auditorium with parents and family.
Speaker 2: Now, so how does the decision come that you go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] then?
Speaker 1: I started looking at schools and I wanted to leave Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I wanted to study art and I wanted to get a liberal arts education and I wanted to be far enough away from home so I couldn't have my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] looking down my, you know, neck, you know, watching me and being the youngest, when you're the youngest, you have your, you know, I had my sister [Yvonne Shirley White (ph.)] watching what I was doing, I have my brother [Reginald White (ph.)] watching what I was doing, I have my mother watching what I was doing and my stepfather [Charles O. Strothers] while they were married so I really wanted to be my own person.  I felt that everybody was sort of telling me what to do, you know, my [maternal] grandmother [Florence Collier Franklin], everybody, you know, it seemed like everybody was telling me what to do.  I wanted to go someplace where I could be my own person so I wanted to leave.  I knew the only way I could really be my own person was to leave.  So, but I didn't want to be so far away in case I did need some-, something that I couldn't get home.  So Howard was perfect.  It wasn't too far away.  Howard was the black Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know.
Story_ID: 358485
Speaker 1: I mean, in the, in the '60s [1960s], all the, you know, the, the art teachers I had were the cream of the crop.  I couldn't have had better teachers.
Speaker 2: Can we talk about that?
Speaker 1: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was there?  Who was there at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: James Porter [James A. Porter], the father of African American art history.  [HistoryMaker] David Driskell, who's his successor, was my teacher.  [HistoryMaker] Paul Carter Harrison, who's the renowned filmmaker.  I did my first mask and I really only thought about this a couple of weeks ago.  I was told by Ed Love, who was my mentor and my teacher, my painting teacher that I should design costumes for Paul Carter Harrison's play and, what was the name, 'Tabernacle,' I think was the name of that play.  And so, I said, "Oh, I am?"  (Laughter) So he said, "Yes, you are."  So I created these masks and Lois Mailou Jones, who is, you know, and I, you know, I was trying to think, was there any other woman.  She was the only woman and she was phenomenal.  If you, if you wanted to work, she, she conducted the classroom like a Paris [France] salon, that's what she told us, she conducts it like a Paris salon.  I model my teaching pretty much after her.  She puts up all the work, she demonstrates in front of the students, and let me tell you, that's very difficult to talk to your students and actually paint but it's so important to students for them to see you work so I struggle with that but I do it.  She was really, it was easy for her, it seemed easy.  Maybe it seems easy to my students, too, I don't know but, and then she hung all the work and then she'd have the students say, well which one is, 'cause the students understood what was the best work and she would say, "What's the best piece?"  And I was thrilled to be selected.  I got, I had a, that was one of my A classes but she was, she was fabulous.  James L. Wells [James Lesesne Wells], who was a printmaking icon.  All of these people, if you read any books on African American art from, you know, like the WPA [Works Progress Administration] to, onward, you're going to see all these people represented.
Story_ID: 358486
Speaker 1: Now did you know that going to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that they were all there or was it that you wanted, I'm just trying to understand?
Speaker 2: I knew that they had a good, that Howard was a good school.  My mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] was fine with me going to Howard.  My mother wanted me to go to Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] or someplace like that.  I said, no, I don't want to go to a girls college, in the first place, but, you know, I wanted to go someplace where I could study art.  My mother was okay with Howard because of all the esteemed graduates, you know, and professors, you know, Thurgood Marshall graduated from Howard.  I mean, there was, there's a huge list of Howard graduates who are just amazing and there's still, and they continue to produce incredible students.  She just was, her main concern for, with me going to Howard was that she said, "Well, you know, there are people who send their daughters to Howard to become, instead of getting a degree, they go to get their M-R-S, and I don't want you going to college to do," I said, "You know, I'm not going, I don't want to get married, you know, so I want to go and get an education."  And so that was her reluctance that, and she wanted me to go to the best school for art and, of course, you know, we never exactly want to do what our mothers, our parents want us to do.  So she thought, you know, she thought I could go to Tyler [Stella Elkins Tyler School of Art, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I could go to, to Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts [Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I could go to Moore [Moore College of Art and Design, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], you know, I could go, there are any number of schools that I could have gone to in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], or other art schools, but I chose to go to a liberal arts school.  And so, you know, it worked out great and at the time, I didn't know that these people, because they weren't getting the recognition that they deserved at the time that I went there, you know, so I didn't know.
Story_ID: 358487
Speaker 1: Now was the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] you came into--what was it like?  Was it a culture shock for you in some respects?  You said that, you know, you had, you know, been to integrated schools and, you know, and there were students, I take it, that you found that had not been to integrated schools.  So was that a, what was, what was the campus that you came on to?
Speaker 2: It was a cultural shock in many ways.  It was very paternalistic in that when we came, when we first arrived, the women were taken aside to these meetings of, to explain to us what Howard, how Howard women behave and, I'm serious.  It was very fascinating.  Y-, Howard women do not smoke on the street, you know, Howard women behave themselves with a certain decorum.  You know, we had to represent the university, off campus and on campus but, of course, as a freshman in those days, I wasn't allowed to leave campus, I could only stay on campus and as an obedient child (laughter), I didn't leave campus but, and I lived in the dorm and the, I remember the first night I was there, I felt like I was at camp again because the girls were noisy, they were, you know, they were jittery, the, some were crying, they were homesick, and I thought, these girls are so immature I can't believe it.  This is like I'm with my little kids at camp, you know, and the dorm life was not, you know, dorm life is something I think everybody should experience but, you know, only for short periods of time if you can help it, but I loved Howard.
Story_ID: 358488
Speaker 1: I loved Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I couldn't have made it at Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut] if I hadn't had the Howard experience, I don't think.  I mean, I guess I could have made it, but Howard prepared me very, very, very well for my Yale experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't understand that statement.
Speaker 1: I had so much support at Howard.  The, the professors there were willing to, you know, teach you everything they knew.  They were willing to, when, actual-, when I was a junior, I had been an art education major at first because I, you know, I didn't know anything about having art as a profession, as your only profession, without a job to support you.  I told you, you know, the only person who had, who worked in his, only his profession, was my uncle, Jackie [HistoryMaker Jack T. Franklin].  So, I went to Howard thinking that I was going to be a teacher, an art teacher, and that I was going to create art as a sideline and that's sort of what I do, I've done, in a way, but not ex-, you know, not to the extent that I thought I would have to, but after taking some art education courses, I was just turned off to the methodology that I was being exposed to, and I thought it was false and, you know, when you're a col-, well, you know, when you're a sophomore you think you know everything.  So I thought I knew everything and I thought I definitely knew I didn't want to follow in the footsteps of some of the people who were teaching me these classes.  So, I told my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] I wanted to drop out.  She said, "Absolutely not."  So, so I went to Leo Robinson, who's one of my professors who's a California artist and said, you know, in tears, and I said, you know, "I really want to drop out and my mother said I can't and I don't know what to do."  And he said, "Well, why don't you change your major to painting?"  And I said, "What?" (Laughter) "You can get a degree in painting?"  And I never heard of such a thing.  He said, "Yes."  I said, "Then what do you do?" because, you know, I had to have a job, I couldn't just be a painter.  I had to have a job, I had to make a living.  He says, "Well then you get a master's degree, an M.F.A."  I said, and then what you--I'll never forget this conversation because I'm crying, the tears are drying up and I'm, you know, I'm looking at him and he was, he's gorgeous too, by the way, so it was very, it was, you know, it was like he was my mentor but he was just so cute, but anyway, so he's telling me that I can study painting and he says, "Well then you get an M.F.A. and then you teach in college and then you have time to paint."  So, I was always told that you had to have a job to be a painter but I, this is the first time I ever knew that you could actually get a degree in painting.  And so at Howard, fortunately, I did get a good liberal arts education and then I, you know, switched my major to painting as a junior and graduated with a B.F.A., but because I decided on painting, you know, as a junior, I thought, I need to get a, I do need to get another degree for sure, not, not only because I could teach.  I had a, I had a job teaching in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at a school called the Franklin House [ph.] and I taught, you know, I'd been a camp counselor [at Camp William Penn, Pennsylvania], I taught in arts programs for the city during the summer so I could, I knew I could get a job, you know, but what I didn't know was if I knew enough about how to actually paint.  So I felt that I better go to graduate school to learn how to paint.
Story_ID: 358423
Speaker 1: Let me ask you what you learned from the Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] experience from, from an art perspective because you had said earlier that you felt your training wasn't as good, you know, you really hadn't really been trained.  So what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's not what I meant.
Speaker 1: Oh, what did you mean then?
Speaker 2: What I meant, well, I had been trained extremely well at Howard.  As a matter--
Speaker 1: No, no, I'm, not at Howard, I'm talking about in high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Oh, in high school.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: Oh, I thought you meant Howard.
Speaker 1: No, I was trying to figure out what you learned at Howard, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I learned a lot at Howard.  In high school, I believe that this man who taught us was no artist.  You know, he didn't know, he himself, if you, it's very difficult for an artist to see what you need to do, improve or how, or to teach you technique, if they don't have the techniques themselves. Which is why Lois Jones [Lois Mailou Jones], and I had a white teacher at Howard, Lila Asher, who taught drawing.  They were phenomenal.  They were phenomenal.  They, they had such clear vision and such good ability to critique your work because of the level of accomplishment that they had. And when I went to Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut], after studying with Lila Asher and, and Lois Mailou, but we called her Pierre-Noel at Howard, but she's, her name was Lois Mailou Jones Pierre-Noel, she was married to a Haitian [Louis Vergniaud Pierre-Noel], and so we called her Pierre-Noel and, but, you know, that's like, I'm Professor Anderson at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] but I'm Joyce Owens [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] in the art world.  But I went to, I went to Yale and I could draw circles around people.  I could do stuff, you know, I was shocked that there were students at Yale who couldn't draw and I was actually, my work was used in class, in the drawing, for the undergraduate students to show them, you know, sample-, examples of good drawing and I learned that at Howard.  But in high school, it was almost, you know, it was, it was fun.  I mean, I never missed, you know, I don't think I ever missed classes or anything but, at school but, I didn't understand, you know, we were, you know we'd paint in tempera, we'd draw in charcoal, we'd draw in graphite or we'd do, you know, printmaking or, you know, linocuts or something but we didn't have any real instruction and we were just, you know, we were given superficial instruction by a person who wasn't talented or well-trained artist.  And what happens when you go to school to study art.  And I have lots of friends who are art teachers and also professional artists.  Those people tend to go someplace else to learn, beyond, they take, they take classes beyond their undergraduate education, but when you're in art education, a lot of your classes have to do with educational psychology and, you know, methodology and, you know, creating work, you know, you know, class, classwork for your students, you know, preparing how to organize lesson plans for your students and that sort of thing and not teaching you fine, fine art.  You learn the basic thing, you know, like color wheels and the basic rudimentary things but you don't learn anything beyond that, in most cases.  So, you know, so he was teaching us what he knew but his, what he knew was limited.
Story_ID: 358424
Speaker 1: So what did these people, what did Lois Mailou Jones, you know, Professor Pierre-Noel, what did she teach you and can you talk a little bit about her background?
Speaker 2: Lois Mailou Jones was able to study in Europe.  She took a leave actually, I understood, from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] before, fortunately not when I was there, and she studied in Paris [France].  And so she, she was a prolific artist.  She won prizes.  She won various prizes, I don't, you know, don't know all the names of them but she's, she was, her work was in, I think she was in the Corcoran museum [Corcoran Gallery of Art] in Washington, D.C., and other, the, the one with the P, the, I'll, maybe I'll think of it but she's been in major, you know, art collections in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and other places, but she had a facility for watercolor that was just phenomenal.  I mean, watercolor is probably the most difficult art medium because you don't get too many do overs.  You know, with acrylic painting and oil painting, you can make corrections without them being very visible.  With watercolor, it's a very direct medium and in order for it to look fresh and, and, you know, have the look of a professional watercolor, you have to know what you're doing and you have to practice quite a bit.  And so, she was a-, she could paint, you know, like little kids on the street, I mean, she would grab somebody in class and she'd just do a portrait that was in, you know, in the class period, you know, maybe an hour, maybe less than an hour.  And so what I learned from her is, you know, practice makes perfect, so to speak.  You know, art isn't expected to be perfect but you have to work and I learned that from her.  I learned that a woman can be an artist from her.  I learned that you can get pats on the back and, you know, and a gold star if you did your best because it was nothing like having your work up on a board with, you know, like twenty other art students and having yours selected as the best in the class.  So, that's what I learned from her, to work hard and to try to do your best and that you could be rewarded for doing your best.
Story_ID: 358425
Speaker 1: From other teachers--like Ed Love was, just pushed me in many directions.  You know, he came later on.  He was from California.  He was a, he was a younger artist who, you know, didn't, wasn't steeped in traditional art making like the other ones.  You know, like, you know, the art of the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] had a different look, you know.  They were influenced by Cubism, well everybody is influenced by Cubism, but they had a different approach to art making.  He was pretty unorthodox, you know, in his art and he was one of the early artists who used bumpers, old recycled materials to create art.  Now I wasn't interested in being a sculpture but what--sculptor, but what he taught me was that my painting was sculptural and which, what a good teacher does is helps you see what's good about your work, helps you understand what you need to change about your work or what you should think about changing.  Lloyd [Lloyd McNeill], what's his last name?  Well, another teacher I had, Lloyd, and I'm trying to think of his last name, was a teacher who told me some basic things like change the water when you're using acrylic paints because the dirty water, water that's contaminated with a mult-, you know, various colors, it's going to also contaminate your painting, simple things like that, but also people who gave you encouragement, who said, you know, your work is good, your work is worth looking at, you're, it's worth it for you to continue working and I won, you know, money, I won prizes and stuff at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], so--
Speaker 2: Now who else was in your class?  Do we know anyone else who was in, you know, the painting--
Speaker 1: Yeah, one guy who's become a member of AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists] was, is Ron Anderson, Ron Akili Anderson [Akili Ron Anderson], he's in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  I'm trying to think of, I think a lot, you know, I think a lot of the artists in, we had a, there was a show, an alumni show at Howard in 2005, I guess it was.  It was a juried show and I submitted some work to see if I can get into the show and I ended up being in the show with, you know, [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett, Alma Thomas, [HistoryMaker] David Driskell, you know, Ron Anderson who I just mentioned and all these notable artists who were, some living, some not living, who had graduated from Howard.  So, and there's a catalog with the, with the exhibition.  And so, you know, so there's plenty of artists from, who graduated from Howard who are still producing art.
Speaker 2: Now David Driskell, can you talk a little bit about him?
Speaker 1: He taught me an art history class and the thing about David Driskell is that, you know, I met him at Howard, I took his class, I did well in his class, I left Howard, really never spent a lot of time in D.C. after that but every time I see him, like if he was here at the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] a few years ago and did a lecture and I came to the lecture, and I've seen him at other events over the years and he always remembers me, and he's always very open and he's always very interested in what you're doing.  He's, he's, you know, he, he was phenomenal.  I mean, I was proud to have, to be able to say that he was my teacher.
Speaker 2: Now he, he taught but he was also head of the dean of the school of--
Speaker 1: No, no, he went, he left Howard and went to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  James Porter [James A. Porter] was the dean of--
Speaker 2: He was the dean when you were there?
Speaker 1: When I was there.
Speaker 2: Okay, but he died you said a year--
Speaker 1: He died after, and then I'm not sure if I know the sequence of deans after, but the, AfriCOBRA artist from Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Don- Sa- is it Samuel?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: AfriCOBRA.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jeffrey, Jeff--
Speaker 2: Jeffrey Donaldson (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jeff, [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson, right, was the dean later on and so they've had a, you know, a good, they've had great teachers there--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and still do.
Story_ID: 358426
Speaker 1: Was there any approach to art, you know, in terms of, was it more, I want to say portraiture, you know, was there not so much, or did it matter?  Was there modern, you know, modern art?  Was there any focus on any particular thing coming out of there?
Speaker 2: Well, in the various studio, it depends on who your teacher was and what you were supposed to be learning in the class [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  We learned a lot of basic tools, you know, like how to, we did portraits, we did landscapes, we did everything.  I took numerous drawing classes where, you know, we had, we did thirty second drawings, you know, gesture drawings.  We did, you know, sustained drawings that might last for a couple of classes.  I took printmaking, I learned to work in various printmaking mediums.  I learned ceramics.  I couldn't do the wheel, the potter's wheel, you know, like you saw in 'Ghost' because I, my hands were so sensitive that I developed these horrible calluses, so I hand-built rather than doing the potter's wheel because it just was killing my hands, but we did sculpture.  I learned how to do every-, I could teach anything pretty much, you know, except maybe photography.
Story_ID: 358427
Speaker 1: Okay, but were you finding your voice and where did you find your voice as an artist?  Did you find your voice at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] or was it Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut] or afterwards, that's--
Speaker 2: I think that I always was interested in faces, I think, and I've tried to analyze that over the years.  I've always been interested in knowing about people.  I've always been, I've always wondered, I had a wish as a young person that I could, you know, read minds, that I could know, because people would say things to me that, you know, they would verbalize but I never could know for sure if that's what they actually meant and I've always maintained that I'd really like to know what's behind, the interest in masks for me is partly due to that, I believe.  So I've always been interested in, in faces and I don't know if it relates to my family structure having, you know, like sort of lost my father's [Elijah Owens (ph.)] side of the family pretty much and wanting to know more about that and as you get older you, you realize all the stuff that you wished you knew that you don't know.  So I think for me, portraiture has always been, and I have one notebook from high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that I, for some reason I still have, and I had doodles of faces and so that's really been my interest is portraiture, although I do other things, you know, and in school, I did still lifes and I did, you know, you know, landscapes and I love landscapes, actually.  I usually incorporate some landscape behind the figurative paintings that I do but, yeah, I'm really interested in people and how they think.
Story_ID: 358428
Speaker 1: So you graduate [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with the degree in painting, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or fine, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) M.F.A.
Speaker 1: --B.F.A. but a concentration in painting (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Painting.
Speaker 1: Now, is there any thought about, I mean, was it automatically that you wanted to go on and get your M.F.A.?
Speaker 2: Well that's what I had been advised.  For, you know, I was one of these, you know, obedient children who, you know, when my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] told me I couldn't drop out, I didn't think, it didn't occur to me that I could do it, that I was old enough, and I had a job, I always worked when I was in school, and that I could have done it on my own.  It just never occurred to me because I wasn't that kind of person.  I was a person who basically did what I was told.  And so, I was told to, I mean, you know, most of the time, I mean I didn't do it all the time.  My mother would say that I would just nod and do what I wanted to do most of the time but in that situation, I didn't feel that I could drop out of school because my mother had made a financial commitment to me.  She also was counting, pretty much counting on me going.  The thing, that when I went to Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut], I felt, one of the things I felt was if I hate this, I, it's, you know, it's my money, I got scholarships and stuff, it's my money, I've already, I've already given her the degree, you know, I don't have to do this, this is my, except I was wrong about that because she didn't agree with that at all that I basically was expected to finish graduate school for her too, but (laughter), you know, whether I wanted to or not.  I wanted to but, you know, it was my, it was again my responsibility to her to do it but, you know, I just, you know, I needed, I needed to study.
Story_ID: 358429
Speaker 1: Now Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], you said that if you had not gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you would not have, I mean Howard prepared you for--
Speaker 2: Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: --Yale and what did you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Psychologically, it prepared me, emotionally, it prepared me and cra-, in terms of my craft, it prepared me because I didn't know what was happening in New York [New York].  I mean, when you talked about the contemporary aspect of it, it was very traditional at Howard.  You know, we learned traditional techniques but we looked at, we had a gallery and we looked at, you know, I saw [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.  You know, I saw, you know, probably Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner] and, you know, who, all the, you know, the various people that they had in the gallery and it was very traditional.  We went through traditional galleries in museums in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] to look at artwork.  I didn't, I wasn't enamored--I mean I knew about modern art.  You know, we knew about, you know, Jackson Pollock.  We knew about, well these are the modern artists, remember in the '60s [1960s] were the artists after the war [World War II, WWII], abstract expressionism, you know, so that didn't, that didn't interest me at all because I wanted to make concrete objects.  First of all, I enjoyed the capability of being able to recreate something that I saw in space, you know, on a two-dimensional surface but, but primarily, I was interested in people so I didn't want to abstract them.  They were abstract anyway.  You make 'em, you turn a person into graphite on paper so they become abstract anyway, but it was a traditional education.  When I went to Yale, there were twelve--the thing about Yale is, I was immediately, I selected, I looked at a bunch of catalogs and stuff and I said, okay, I like what Yale's offering, I like their program, you get, you get a studio for two years to do your work, which is what I needed to do because I hadn't been painting very much.  And so, that's the only school I applied to.  So I get in and then I look, and I look around and there are mostly males, this is 1971, there's mostly males and there are three women and there are only twelve students, painters.  And so I go to Lester Johnson, who is my advisor, and I, well Ed Love, I'm communicating with him and I'm like, what, you know, I don't know what I'm into here, this is really, and there were, the criticisms were real, you know, it was very intellectual and not so much about the work but what you were thinking about the work and, you know, it's a whole different thing there and we went to this place called the pit for critiques and it was, people were like cutthroat but because I had gone to Howard, and I had a certain amount of confidence, you know, I, I could handle that.  You know, one of the female students left, she couldn't handle it.  I mean, it was, it was brutal but it wasn't, it wasn't for me because, you know, because every abstract expressionism and I guess conceptual art and other modern art forms were in vogue at that time.  Lester Johnson was a figurative painter.  Bailey [William Bailey], Bailey was another artist who did, you know, who did still lifes but we had Al Held who was an abstract painter.  You know, we had, you know, so we had abstract painters and we had figurative, you know, representational painters but the, the mood in the department [Department of Design] was really towards abstraction and, and installation work.  This one artist, Judy Pfaff, was, was the other woman who remained and she did installation work, so, sculpture.  So I was sort of, you know, the antithesis of what was going on there, but because of my support, continued support--when I left Howard, Howard, my Howard people didn't give me up, you know.  So I could contact Ed Love and say, you know, "These people are driving me crazy, what should I do?"  And he said, "Don't waste your anger on them," you know, "spend your energy on your work, that's wasted being angry with what's going on there."
Story_ID: 358430
Speaker 1: And I went to Lester Johnson and I said, "Well, what's the deal?"  You know, "Am I the token black person," you know, "you don't have anybody else--?"  Barkley Hendricks [Barkley L. Hendricks] is an African American from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who's in a number of museums around the country and he was a second year student when I arrived.  And so it wasn't like they didn't have anybody else black, but I just thought well you just have like, you know, you know, why am I here?  You know, how did I get here out of, you know, you have an international pool of artists that many of them worked to Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut] and I get in?  I mean, because partly, you know, I made the, maybe it was my, I didn't have the confidence in my work, I didn't have the confidence in my work, that's why I was there and I didn't have confidence in my work for a really long time.  And so, I said to him well, you know, "Am I the token?" And he said, "You, when you're a second year student, you'll get to see how students make it through this process and you will understand that nobody cares that you're black or a woman."  I said, "Oh, okay."  So in the second year I went through the process and I saw what he meant.  It was just, you know, second year students in a big auditorium, all the students, you know, and all the discipline, sculpture, everything, you know, printmaking with a, in a darkroom with a slide projector, slides would come up, students would boo and hiss if they didn't like 'em and they'd say, "Yeah," if they liked 'em and they, they just went through.  They didn't, you know, they would tell you that it was a different person but they didn't really give you any background or, you know, other than that.  And so, when I came there and I started talking to the second year students, they asked me, "Oh, where, who are you?"  And I'd say, and they, they asked me about my work and they said, "Oh, yeah, I remember your pieces, they were really," you know, "we really liked your pieces," you know.  And so they selected, the second year students in this process out of hundreds of slides that, of applicants that come through, selected fifty students.  Those fifty students were then contacted by the department [Department of Design] to submit actual paintings.  I had to drive my work up to New Haven [Connecticut].  Well I didn't drive at the time, my brother [Reginald White (ph.)] took me up, and, no, actually I think, was it my brother, somebody took me up, I think it might have been my brother, anyway, you left your artwork there.  You could have an interview.  I decided that I might blow the interview because I was immensely shy, to te- you know.  And so I decided I wasn't going to interview because I, I didn't want to, it was optional and I thought well, if it's optional, I don't want to take a chance at saying the wrong thing.  I did have to write an essay and I submitted the essay and my grades and all that.  And so out of those fifty students, I was one of the ones selected.
Story_ID: 358431
Speaker 1: So the program was a two-year program [at the Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what are you thinking that you'll do afterwards?
Speaker 2: Get a job (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and where did you get a job?
Speaker 2: Well actually when I graduated, my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] had an accident in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I actually had a job in New Haven [Connecticut] working at a school, and they were going to keep me on for this job.  I'd gotten a job, I was sort of an arts consultant for a school and I really enjoyed it and I made a lot of money.  And so I decided I would stay in New Haven and I could work.  I had an apartment, I could paint and, but my mother had this accident so I had to go back to Philadelphia to help her out.  And so, I went to Philadelphia--graduated, went to Philadelphia and I couldn't work until she was on her feet.  She couldn't walk.  And so then I was trying to find a job.  So I applied for, and I just wanted to get enough money 'cause I wanted to move to Chicago [Illinois].  So, I was trying to find a job.  I had a f-, my friend, my college roommate from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], had gotten a job working for the TV station in Philadelphia, WCAU [WCAU-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was Channel 10, a CBS-owned and operated station, and she said, "Well they're looking for a producer at my station," and it was for a religious talk show and John Facenda, who was the voice of the NFL [National Football League] and TV anchor of really renown, I mean I grew up, it's like Bill Kurtis in Chicago.  You know, you live in Chicago, you know, during the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] and Bill Kurtis and Walter Jacobson were the top anchors.  Bill Kurtis was the first million dollar anchor in the country, but anyway, so to work for him.  So I, so I said, "Well, you know, I don't know anything about TV."  She said, "They've interviewed two hundred people."  I said, "You're kidding?"  She said, "No, they've interviewed all the--," I don't know, maybe she was exaggerating, but she said they had interviewed all these people, it's not going to hurt you to go interview for the job.  I said, "Oh yeah, it won't hurt me, I'll go."  So I go down there to interview for this job and as an artist I have, always had a lot of ideas.  So even though I didn't know how to do television, I had a lot of ideas for the show.  So I presented these various ideas to the general--I mean, to the executive producer and she sends me up to talk to somebody, she sends me up to meet the general manager and then he sends me over to HR [human resources], and I don't know what's going on, you know, because, you know, I'm in my, you know, twenties and I don't know what's going on and somebody along the way says, oh, I think I had to go see the nurse 'cause I think in those days they were asking you if you smoked--if you did drugs, and (laughter), and so I went to see the nurse and I said, "What's going on?"  You know, she says, "Well, you know, didn't anybody tell you, you were hired?"  I said, "Uh, no."  She says, "Well you got the job."  I said, "Oh, okay."  So, I got the job.  So I went down and I said again, I said, "You know, I don't know anything about TV."  She says, "Ah, you're smart enough to graduate from Yale, you're smart enough to figure out how to do this job."  So--
Speaker 1: So that was at WBBM [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] here?
Speaker 2: No that was in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: That was--so how did you get then, and you worked in Philadelphia how long then?
Speaker 2: About six months because what I wanted to do was make enough money, I didn't have any money because I hadn't, wasn't working, and I needed to make enough money, I had my, I had a student loan that I had to pay back and I had to make enough money so that I could go, so I could leave and move to Chicago.  So I just wanted a job and then when I was going to move to Chi-, made enough money, my mother got well and I was leaving to move to Chicago.  They loved me in Philadelphia.  They said, "Oh, when you go to Chicago, we'll set you up and they'll give you a job in Chicago."
Story_ID: 358432
Speaker 1: So I came to Chicago [Illinois] and thinking, I don't really want to work in TV, but also I was going to be able to work in the newsroom.  I was working in programming [at WCAU-TV] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but I was going to be able to work in the newsroom in Chicago, and I didn't know anything about a newsroom and I was always interes-, curious about things.  So I said, well I'll do it.  And so I worked in the newsroom and I ended up, you know, doing research for the program department and wri-, I was able to write some little bits for the, I didn't, never thought of myself as a writer.  I did all kinds of stuff.  I learned, you know, I was reading, you know, AP [Associated Press] and UPI [United Press International] ticker, ticker tapes, you know, I mean, you know, copy, news copy and the old City News [City News Bureau of Chicago; City Press] was still operational,  Walter Jacobson and Bill Kurtis were the anchors.  I, you know, got to know them.  It was terrific.  Worked with Donna La Pietra, who I'm still friends with and Marlene Iglitzen, who married Gene Siskel, worked with Gene Siskel.  Met any number of people who came in as guests on the show, Dudley Moore and Richard Pryor.  Richard Pryor did an incredible interview with Gene Siskel, he, where he refused to talk and Gene didn't understand what happened but I did, you know, interesting so--
Speaker 2: So you never would have thought that this would have been possible, the job that you fell in, but you're working as a graphic art--
Speaker 1: I didn't immediately--no, I was working as a producer--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then eventually I was working with a show called 'Two on Two,' and I was doing research.  So I was learning about broadcast and I was learning, and in those days, because TV news was still relatively new, people gave you opportunities.  If people liked you, you know, and I, and I got along with people all the way along, they would let you do things.  So I, you know, people would just let me do things and then [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers came to CBS Chicago [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois], as the assistant news director, and Bill Kurtis really liked me, [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield was there, you know, I got alon-, [HistoryMaker] Felicia Middlebrooks (laughter) was there, you know.
Story_ID: 358489
Speaker 1: What year is this that you're at WBBM [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974] to, until '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did Chi-, how was Chicago [Illinois], one, why did you want to come here?  I mean, this, you just said I wanted to come to Chicago (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The usual reason, I had a boyfriend here.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And I never wanted to live in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] again.  I just really, I just really felt that I had been obedient and done what I was supposed to do and I didn't feel like I could be my own person with, you know, my older sister [Yvonne Shirley White (ph.)] sort of saying, "Well, Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], you know," I remember in high-, in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with my brother [Reginald White (ph.)] and sister trying to tell me what to do and after I left college and after I came to Chicago, and I said, "But you know what guys, you have lived in Philadelphia three blocks from mom [Eloise Owens Strothers] your entire lives," well my brother was in the [U.S.] Army and he went to Europe and stuff but, you know, my sister has traveled extensively too, but, yeah, it's, basically you, you retained your, that home base, I said, but I've already lived, you know, from going away to camp in the Pocono Mountains every summer outside of Philadelphia and from, you know, going to college and going away to college and going away, you know, to Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut] and coming to Chicago and stuff.  You know, I mean but everybody wanted to treat me like the little sister, I felt, so I needed to go.
Speaker 1: So your, your boyfriend, was that the first person you married or not?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay, okay, okay.  So, sorry, I'm just checking.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you get here and you're working in the, not as an artist, are you still painting on the side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I'm painting, yeah.
Speaker 1: You're painting.
Speaker 2: I never stopped painting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't have, my goal was not, I didn't have the goal of becoming a famous--I just wanted to be able to paint.  I wanted, for me, was a mode of expression.  I wished that I could sing like my mother, but I didn't have that talent, and she said I could, you know, she, we even discussed, I did actually sing.  I actually got paid for singing one time with a group, a trio, but, and I sang all the time.  I mean, I, you know, at camp [Camp William Penn, Pennsylvania], we did performances for the campers and we sang and, you know, I'm always, you know, I was always singing but I knew I couldn't be a professional singer.  So, but, you know, I just wanted to produce art, not necessarily for any reason or any reward.
Story_ID: 358490
Speaker 1: Well, I want you to talk about the Chicago [Illinois] community you came in.  You had your TV community and that was, you know, a lot of, sort of household names--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, and really those jobs were not that easy to get, I don't think, were they?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it was very interesting.  As I spent time there [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois], I realized that, you know, like, was it Rehnquist [William Rehnquist], who was a, his daughter, a lot of people came (laughter), and I'm sure it still happens, a lot of people came into the TV business, knew somebody already, and actually I knew somebody.  My friend in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was working, doing a local show, a local talk show, and she was interviewing like, you know, [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr. and--I mean, not, I'm sorry, Jesse Jackson, Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and people, [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, and people like that.  And, so she had a rapport with the people at the station [WCAU-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so she could say to them, "Oh, my friend, Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], is going to come in to interview for this job," and that could get me in the door.  That didn't get me the job.  What got me the job was that I was able to come to--back to them with a list of ideas for shows.  And what kept me there was that I was able to produce a number of very interesting shows.  And what got, what encouraged them to keep me, you know, to help me out to find a job in Chicago, was that they felt that I was a, you know, great for TV, and great for the station.  So--
Speaker 1: So what shows did you produce, or produce?
Speaker 2: In Philadelphia?
Speaker 1: No, in Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago, I worked in the newsroom.  So I was working on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You worked in the--oh, so, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in TV news in Chicago.  I didn't work in programming anymore.  Although I did have some contact with Bruce DuMont, who was in programming here and this show, 'Two on Two,' I'm trying to think of the name, but I, you know, I worked with people in local, in local programming somewhat but I was mainly in the newsroom and so I was working with producers.  My, the job that I ended up, you know I was doing different things, at different times, and I worked as a graphic designer in the art department for a while.  I didn't really like that.  I wasn't trained as a graphic designer.  Graphic designers for news made maps, made sub-, you know, made titles in those days when, before they, you know everything was computerized and found, you know, you know, it was, it just wasn't very inter-, you know, mounted photographs of people that were at that time shot on camera, live on camera in the studio.  It was not very interesting to me.  I thought about doing court art and, but we had, you know we have, the court artist is still there, Marcia Danits.  And I--ended up that [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers, when he came to the station and became the, was the assistant news director on his way up to becoming, you know, way, way up in CBS and other stations, other companies, he, along with, I believe Donna La Pietra and Bill Kurtis probably helped to instigate this job for me to become the graphics coordinator.  And the graphics coordinator was the person who, because I, they knew I had a back-, an art background, actually the station covered a show, an early show that I did here at a gallery, Clarence White Gallery [Chicago, Illinois], but I knew then, I had worked in the art and design, in the art department, the gra-, graphic arts department and I knew the newsroom, I knew how it operated, I knew all the personnel in the newsroom as well as the technicians, and I knew what was required.  I knew how to diagnose, my job was to really diagnose a story and decide what visuals they needed to enhance it and then to let the art department know.
Story_ID: 358491
Speaker 1: So in the news department, you're learning a lot about Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean, it's a, probably a very good place to know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who, who's here, what the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the people--
Speaker 2: The politicians (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the politics--
Speaker 2: I called Jane Byrne one time trying to find--her brother was in trouble and I called her, we were trying to get a photograph of him from somebody, from some place.  So I called her and to my surprise, she got on the phone.  I thought I was going to talk to her people.  She got on the phone and explained to me why her brother, why she couldn't give me, you know, that she couldn't really give me a photograph of him.  It was a negative story, and she didn't really want to give us a photograph but people I, you know, it was, you know, it was a chance to be exposed to people that you would never be exposed to in any other place.  And what was amazing to me, is I could call anybody on the phone and say, "My name is Joyce Owens [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], I'm calling from Channel 2, from WBBM-TV [Chicago, Illinois]," and I could talk to anybody.  They would never, for some reason, they don't question and I would tell people, I said, you know, I could be calling from, you know, anywhere, you know, the corner of, you know, Cermak [Cermak Road] and 35th Street or, I don't know.  I mean I could be--I could be anybody, but for some reason the people would accept your phone call.
Story_ID: 358492
Speaker 1: What are you learning about the arts community here [Chicago, Illinois], though?  And how did that differ from, you know, what you had left out east?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah out east, I had participated in some shows in, a lot of shows in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  Generally speaking, I would get invited to be in shows.  People, somebody would say something, oh you know, you should--you should have her in the show, you know.  Sometimes my teachers, I remember there was a show to raise money for Biafra in D.C. and some guy was going around to different artists around the city looking for artists and I was, I would always be, you know, in the painting studio trying to paint.  You know, painting on this and painting, and I was working on some too--a couple of large pieces, but they weren't finished, you know, and he said, "Well, I'll come, you know, if you think you can finish them, I'll come back and take," he says, "you know, they look great but they're not finished so I can't really say."  So I worked like crazy and got those pieces finished and I ended up getting into that show.  And so, you know, when I found out, I didn't really learn how to find shows and, you know, I didn't learn how to, to figure out where art exhibitions were, but enough people would, you know, would come to me and say or tell somebody about me and say, well, you know, "She should be in this show," you know, so I'd get into shows that way.
Story_ID: 358493
Speaker 1: But what was the arts community that you found?  There was this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a South Side Comm--
Speaker 2: In Chicago, yeah.  I lived at 31st [Street] and--I lived in South Commons [Chicago, Illinois], 31st and Michigan [Avenue] when I first came here 'cause I had a friend who was living here and I stayed with her for a while, and then I acquired my own place in the same complex.  And, yeah, I started trying to figure out where can I exhibit and I found the South Si-, somebody said, you know, you should check out the South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois].  And so that was one of the places that I was able to exhibit and Clarence White, who ended up going to Atlanta [Georgia] and being involved with the, the national show, black show [National Black Arts Festival] that's in Atlanta, I can't remember how he, how he found me, but people would like see my work at the, I would do the art auctions at the art center, at the Chic-, the South Side Community Art Center, which is probably the oldest WPA [Works Progress Administration] art center still, that's still operating on a regular basis and actually it's getting better and better.  It's back, you know, like almost about where they were, I guess.  It was established, I think, in like 1939.  So I started exhibiting there and I found in Chicago and, you know, there is a community for, although I did show on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] at a gallery that's in my present neighborhood, it was on, it's no longer there, but it was on Sheffield [Avenue] and Max Robinson who came to that, Bill Kurtis came, Max Robinson came in a limo, and a number of people came to that show.  So I started, you know, slowly getting noticed by people.  Madeline Rabb [HistoryMaker Madeline Murphy Rabb] came to that show and subse-, subsequently, you know, supported my work.  But, yeah, I started, you know, trying to figure out where to show and it really seemed in the '70s [1970s] when I came here that it wasn't, I was, really wasn't going to get into the North Side galleries, and I didn't really ca-, I wasn't really concerned with that, I just wanted to show some place.  I also found out about Black Creativity ['Black Creativity Juried Art Exhibition'], which I think was originally called 'Black Aesthetics,' at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois], and I started submitting to that and I won several, you know, I was in it, I don't know how many times and eventually became a juror, a head juror for that and a juror for that.  But there were, you know, various--and then I found, South Shore Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois] had a fine arts gallery and I decided to submit some work for a show when I saw that [HistoryMaker] Samella Lewis had had a show there because I, you know, as an artist, you want to, you really want a venue that s-, people will take seriously. And so when I saw Samella Lewis, who's also a pioneer in writing about African American art history, she wrote, with a partner [Ruth Waddy], she wrote 'Black Artist,' 'Black Artist'--
Speaker 1: Quarterly, Black Arts Quarterly.
Speaker 2: No, well, yeah, the International Quarterly of the African American Arts [sic. Black Art: An International Quarterly; International Review of African American Art], but no, I'm talking about the early books that she wrote, 'Black Artists on Art' [Samella Lewis and Ruth Waddy], where [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs was included in that and Anna Tyler [Anna McCullough Tyler], who's a Chicago artist and a good friend of mine.  She and her husband [Al Tyler] were in that.  That was, those were, those were the kind of books that I saw when I was a student and that, you know, let me know that there were black artists but all these artists had jobs that I knew of, at least the ones that I know.  They had government jobs, they had city jobs, you know, they had teaching jobs, elementary, you know, teaching in public schools, some were teaching in universities.  I didn't know of any artist who were living off their art.
Story_ID: 358494
Speaker 1: Now who were, at that time, and we're talking about the, the mid-'70s [1970s] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventies [1970s], '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: --seventies [1970s], '80s [1980s], okay.  So what about this, was there a market for black art if there, I mean, did you find it or was it a market that was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was.  Who was purchasing?
Speaker 2: Well in my case, well with Clarence White's gallery [Clarence White Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], it was on North Aldine [Avenue], which is off the lake, it's like New Town area, his clients were white, black, everything, you know, so a lot of, so, my work has been purchased by people from all ethnic groups as far as I can te-, or many, I can't say all, but many, it's not, I don't, I don't have only a black audience and black collectors, but I would say that the black collectors really make a difference, a huge difference in terms of, you know, just supporting your work and getting it out there.  The South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois], Susan Woodson Gallery [Chicago, Illinois], who has a very small gallery in her house, but she gets all kinds of people coming in to see your work, you know, from curators at the museums to major collectors to people from other cities.  I had a guy who came to my house from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] who had seen my work at Susan Woodson's [HistoryMaker Susan Cayton Woodson] gallery and wanted to get a piece, you know.  'Black Creativity' ['Black Creativity Juried Art Exhibition'] has been very useful.  The DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] actually is more of a history museum so in terms of actually having art exhibitions there, although I was just recently talking to the newest curator there who wants to do something.  So I'll probably do something with him--
Story_ID: 358495
Speaker 1: So, but still this is sort of on the fringes, you know, I mean, at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], things were center, you know, in many ways.  At Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut], you were challenged in many w-, you know you said that your, what I would say, your self-esteem as an artist didn't have to be challenged.  I mean, you were able to hold onto it, right, which was, you talked about in high school [Germantown High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] being s-, feeling invisible, you know, in some of your classes, like you didn't exist.  Now, here in Chicago [Illinois], here you find a very active black community, right?  But the art is sort of on the fringes of that, in some respects is it or it's not (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On the fringes for me?
Speaker 1: Yeah, is it on the frin-, no fringes in terms of acceptance.  Whereas, who is buying, you're not in the major like museums.  There's not the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], it's not purchasing, right?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: The major gal-, you didn't know, you said that besides Clarence White [Clarence White Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], the major white galleries are not necessarily purchasing, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, the galleries don't necessarily purchase your art, they, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, they're not showing you, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think, you know the thing that struck me about Chicago was that it is more so than Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I mean, I lived in a, when I moved from my first house to my second house in Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I lived in a, in a--my block was integrated.  You know, my school was integrated.  You know, my working conditions were integrated.  When I worked at camp [Camp William Penn, Pennsylvania], there were mostly, probably fewer black counselors.  I don't remember too many black counselors.  You know, when I worked, I worked at one camp program where Simmie Knox (laughter) and I worked toget-, Simmie Knox who did the Clinton portraits.  He used to drive me to our job in his little sports car but we worked in, I was always in an integrated environments except for the, you know, the earl-, short period of time until third grade.  When I came to Chicago, I mean, I might as well live in the South.  I mean, I was hearing the same kind of stuff that I heard when I went to Howard which was, you know, people who were very anti-white, who had been, who had experienced all-white drinking fountains and were, were exposed to extreme racist behavior, I never had that in Philadelphia.  You know, there were subtle racism.  You know, I remember some, some guy in high school who signed my yearbook, "To a nice colored girl" and I thought, I thought I was his friend since junior high school [General Louis Wagner Junior High School; General Louis Wagner Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I didn't think he, I didn't think he categorized me that way.  I didn't think of him as a nice white boy but, you know, so there were subtle, there were subtle racism in Philadelphia but it wasn't overt.  I mean, people didn't, I could, you know I could go to school.  You know, I could hang--I could eat lunch with, you know, in a, in a integrated restaurant, you know, but when I came to Chicago, you know, all the black people lived on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and, and, but I found there's a pocket of black people on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], near where I live now in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois] who I, and I was trying to figure out, well how did they get there, you know, on, on Maud [Avenue] and Seminary [Avenue], these little, this little area and somebody told me who knows about the history of Chicago that the white families in that neighborhood had to have household help so they imported, you know, black people and they, you know, they lived in this pocket.  I don't know if that's absolutely true but it made sense to me because I couldn't understand why there was this little pocket in this whole area of, of whiteness.
Story_ID: 358496
Speaker 1: So, the gallery I showed at on Sheffield [Avenue] was a white gallery.  Clarence White [Clarence White Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] was not at a white gallery, but he was on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I contacted a few galleries and, you know, for whatever reason, they weren't interested in my work, my images were black.  You know, I did, I remember actually I would draw white faces, I would doodle white faces and I think it was Lloyd McNeill, I was trying to think of his name, Lloyd McNeill who was my, one of my teachers at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] who said, I think it was him, who said, "Why are you drawing these white faces?"  And I said, "I don't know, I just," well, you know, that's what you see in the media.  That's what you see on TV.  That's what you see in like Seventeen magazine that I would read.  You only saw white faces.  So I was drawing sort of what I saw in the mainstream, you know, but it made me, but it gave me something that I had to consider and so I considered it and started doing other stuff and at Howard, you know, I was t-, I always was interested in my family, I told you, probably because of the split nature of it.  So I did paint, I did prints and paintings of my, of my [maternal] grandfather [Frank Franklin], of my nephews, of my mother [Eloise Owen Strothers], of, you know, I did a lot of mothers and children, I did a lot of very personal work and, and I still do that kind of work, it's extended.  I think as you go through various periods of your life, you know, your interests change from being so introverted and so, you know, personal to being more extroverted and more involving of global issues.  So that's where I think I am now.
Story_ID: 358497
Speaker 1: Who was mentoring you and sort of encouraging you?  And who, like [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt had a certain predominance right here but--
Speaker 2: Richard Hunt was great, my--Ed Love told me when I came to Chicago [Illinois] to call Richard and to call Martin Puryear.  Well I did contact Richard Hunt.  I never quite got up the nerve to call Martin Puryear, although Martin Puryear did award me a prize at, one year when he was a juror for 'Black Creativity' ['Black Creativity Juried Art Exhibition'], but I went to Richard Hunt's house--studio, and Richard Hunt and I had been, you know, you know, we have, you know, like coffee or, you know, breakfast and I'd go over to his studio periodically and see him and he's very, he's just like Mr. Generosity.  I mean, he's an incredible artist and he's very generous and he's, what I find is artists who have a certain level of security, I mean he has an incredible level of security (laughter) because he's got over a hundred public commissions in the, in the country but even artists who, who may not be as established as he is, as, you know, established in, you know, we have to consider what's established, too, and I think to answer a question I'll go backward a little bit but in terms of, you know, white galleries or white museums or even museums of Chicago, I have to tell you that this is an issue not only for artist of color, including, you know, Asians, Latinos and African American artists, but it's also an issue of artists who are white, who are European artist.  Paul Klein is in the process of trying to establish a Chicago museum for, featuring and supporting Chicago artists.  I've been to meetings.  I have a very multicultural reach, you know, involving, involved with city--Department of Cultural Affairs [Department of Cultural Affairs and Special Events] programs and white galleries, Woman Made Gallery [Chicago, Illinois] and ARC Gallery [ARC Gallery and Educational Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] and, you know, Robert Henry Adams gallery [Robert Henry Adams Fine Art, Chicago, Illinois].  I, you know, I developed relationships with white galleries as well as black galleries.  Nicole Gallery [Chicago, Illinois] and Gallery Guichard [Chicago, Illinois] and South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois], and the problems are the same for all artists.  There are only a few name brand artists on in any race, you know.  In Chicago, every time you said artist, the answer was Ed Paschke, you know.  You said, oh Chicago artist, oh, Ed Paschke, you know, and then there's some other, you know, there are some other ones, but, you know, Tony Fitzpatrick, you know, or, you know, there's some other ones but--the, the white artists are having the same issues as the African American artists that they feel like they're not represented.  Well, you know, is there a right?  Is there some sort of rule that says, because you make art, you should be, you know, internationally famous or you should be, it's, art is a fickle thing.  It doesn't have to do with your skills necessarily.  It doesn't have to do with a lot of things, it has to do with opportunity and, and who you know, like most things, you know, if you happen to know somebody, like I won a prize at Woman Made Gallery.  Margaret Hawkins is the critic for the Chicago Sun-Times and for ARTnews.  It so happens I'm a figurative painter.  It so happens she loves figurative painting.  I won first prize in this international competition where they had like 1500 or something pieces of art submitted.  Now, if I wasn't a figurative artist and, you know, maybe I wouldn't have won.  Maybe I wouldn't have gotten into the show.  (Background noise) Actually she judged the show after the art was actually here.
Story_ID: 358498
Speaker 1: I really would like to spend some time talking about your work--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the different phases 'cause you've had, you know, within your, you know, and in your face-, you know you've, it's evolved over time.  So I would like to talk about the work that you were doing when you first came here 'cause we're talking about almost thirty years, right, right?
Speaker 2: I can't count that far.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess.  Yeah, 1974 I came to Chicago [Illinois] so I, you know, I have to say I've gone through phases of more representational, more, more what people might say realistic but always representational, always recognizable objects or, and people, to less so and my obsession with history and my family and the family of African A-, the history of African Americans has been persistent throughout.  So I started out creating, one of my, one of my paintings that people really responded to was a painting that I started actually when I was still at Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut], but it took me a couple of years to finish it, to my satisfaction, is a painting I call, 'Writers on the Roof,' and it's based on Harlem Renaissance writers.  I, I've done, you know, historic paintings but I've also done, you know, paintings of fictitious people like the piece that was selected by DanceAfrica Chicago last year for their poster and their promotional materials was just a group of people sort of dancing, moving and strictly out of my imagination.  So my work goes either strictly out of my imagination, the masks that I do which are sort of, represent sort of a continuation of the tradition of African mask making and I, and I had a, I had an idea that I know that in traditional African tribes the mask had special powers to, for fertility for, to increase the hunt, for whatever, you know, the mask maker and the priest and the community decided these masks were for.  So I thought, I thought well, I can decide that these masks mean certain things, that I can create masks that are for peace or for, you know, for strength or for wisdom or whatever I choose.  And so I've been creating masks sort of in that, in that genre for years.  I go, you know, I do, do them, you know, periodically or in spurts.
Story_ID: 358499
Speaker 1: I think of myself as an artist who works in sort of a circle, you know, that I'll do one kind of work for a period of time, then I'll do another kind of work for a period of time, then I'll do another aspect of my work.  I like doing sculptural pieces so some of my work is three dimensional, some of it is actually free standing, three dimensional pieces.  A lot of it is relief work so it's mounted on a wall but it has a third dimension.  Even my canvas has developed a third dimensional.  I started folding the canvas and really in that, in that case I was actually breaking from the traditional things that I've been taught in both Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and Yale [Yale School of Art and Architecture; Yale School of Art, New Haven, Connecticut], so I decided I had this, my children were--my son was a baby and I was still, you know, trying to paint and take care of a baby and my husband [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson] was traveling and stuff, so I, I had this epiphany that, you know, I didn't have to do, I didn't have to stretch the canvas the way I was taught, I didn't have to do what I had been taught, I could do whatever I wanted.  It was my canvas, it was my paint, these were my brushes, I could do whatever I want.  So I started distorting the canvases and creating these folds and these wrinkles and they eventually began to, you know, most of the time when artists, artists develop their complete ideas about their work after it's done.  You sort of work and think and evaluate what you've done and some of it, you know, maybe it's the Freudian influence that you sort of wonder, well what's this coming out of, you know, it's coming out of my subconscious for some reason and why is that?  And so, if I decide to do something, consciously or subconsciously, then I have to evaluate that thing and decide, one, if it works for what I'm, what I think I'm trying to achieve, two, you know, why did I decide to do it, you know.  So there's a lot of, in art making, you know, it depends on the artist.  I know for me, that's what's important.  It's important for me, the ideas about why the art has been produced.
Story_ID: 358500
Speaker 1: So I'm saying that if we were to sit back, if you can sit back and look at the stages of your work, would you divide it into four stages or would you divide it into five?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I, it's, well, you know, maybe if you understo-, -stand a little bit about how I work--
Speaker 1: Why don't we do that.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how I work, how I start, how I've been working since I was in college and I was trying to get into that show, the Biafra show [in Washington, D.C.], is that I set up work stations, several work stations, I'll work on a lot of different things at the same time.  I don't work on one painting from start to finish and then another painting.  I work on several paintings at a time.  Right now (laughter), I have so much work that I'm working, and they're all, and so you have to switch your, your thinking.  You know, I have a series that I call, 'Survivor Spirits' that I've been doing for several years now of former slaves.  I found that, you know, that archive on the, in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.], well first there was a book on slavery and I was reading this book and I see these photographs for the first time--that I've seen them--of these slaves that were interviewed in the, during the WPA [Works Progress Administration] when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] sent these New York [New York] writers, including Zora Neale Hurston and others to the South to record the, the stories of these, you know, last remaining slaves.  I'm reading these stories and I'm flabbergasted and it's just like, you know, just like, you know I'm lit up, you know, and I start painting them and I fin-, and I paint them, I found this barrel in, down the alley from me and it's this big oak barrel that had a big dead plant in it and I saw that barrel, I dumped out the dead tree, well let me tell you, it was very difficult to do that, and my neighbors saw me and they said, "Do you need any help?"  You know like, what are you doing?  I mean, I live in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois] so they don't expect you to be in an alley, you know, getting stuff, but I, you need, you know, I did and I dragged this thing home, it was very, very heavy, and I took it apart and I used the slats to do my first paintings of these former slaves.  I showed them at the Fourth Pres Church [Fourth Presbyterian Church, Chicago, Illinois] for the first time in 2004, and I got a call from one person who collects my artwork who said he stood in front of the, the paintings of the slaves, it was like the same, and he said he cried, and I've had other people tell me that they see these, these slaves and you just think about the history, you think about what they lived through and these people were freed slaves but they'd been slaves.  You think about what they lived, what they lived through and it just brings tears to your eyes and I just, and I just write, survivor.  Dr. Cross [HistoryMaker Dolores E. Cross], a former president of Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], purchased one and she had me come to her house so I could see where she placed it.  She placed it, and she told me this, that she placed it by her door so it would be the last thing that she saw when she left her house to remind her that she's a survivor.  And I think that's the th-, the key.  For me, the key was teaching my students at Chicago State who have, when we've done self-portraits and they have this, almost aversion to drawing their true features because they think that those aren't the features that they like, you know, like their noses are, they make their noses like two small and their mouths too small and they do, you know, they distort their own faces and I'm trying to understand why they do it and I'm, and so I, so for me, like showing them these former slaves and saying, you're the progeny of these people who survived horrific conditions.  You know, they, their parents and great-grandparents and great-great-grandparents were taken from their home, homes, they had to live on the, you know, the trip over to this, to the new world, they had to learn a new language, they had to learn a new culture, they had to live in conditions that weren't, that they weren't familiar with, they were separated from their families, you know, their religions were s-, you know, taken away from them or suppressed and despite all that, here we have these last living slaves standing up in their eighties and ninety year, years of age, standing up and having their photographs taken and being able to tell their stories.
Story_ID: 358501
Speaker 1: That's what I'm trying to understand 'cause you were talking about your, so that, in that instance, that's what affected your work, but you were talking about your method, like, you work on different things, you know--
Speaker 2: I work on different things--
Speaker 1: --at the same time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at the same time.  So, not, well, you know, obviously not at the same time.  I'll work on the 'Survivor Spirits,' I have a collection of those and I, what you have, what you do as you work is you have to look at the work and you have to think about it and you have to decide if you're solving the problems that you've set up for yourself.  You know, the design problems, the, if you're communicating, if you're trying to, if they're narrative paintings, if you're expressing the story, if they're, you know, you have to consider all the, you know, the elements, that includes the color, the texture, all that stuff.  So, it takes a long time for me, anyway, to make a painting.  So I'd work on a number of things so that I can think about what I've produced but also keep moving forward, producing work for other things.  You know, if you have, if you do a lot of shows, then you have to have a lot of work and if your work sells somewhat, then you, you know, you're going to, you need new work and also I have new ideas and things that I'm interested in.  So, I tend to, you know, work on a, you know, right now, I'm probably working on thirty pieces that some of which may be finished and, you know, it takes, when I decide it's finished is when I can't see another thing that I can do to it.  There's nothing else I can do to it.
Speaker 1: So you're working on thirty pieces simultaneously, is that, is that norm?
Speaker 2: It's not simultaneously, it's, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In different stages?
Speaker 2: --it's one at a time, yeah, it's one at a time but I, like if I'm constructing masks, it involves, you know, like cutting and sawing and drilling and gluing and, and, you know, putting eye screws on the backs and, you know, and, and deciding how I want to paint them and what other enhancements.  If I add metal, I had all kinds of objects found and purchased objects to the mask.  So that takes a while but, you know, I have to stand back and look at the work too.  So I work on, I started to mainly, I guess, well before that show but also because I started painting in oil paints and oil paints don't allow you to paint, you know, nonstop because you have to let the layers dry.  You know, you have to, you know, so, in order to paint another layer of color on top of the, of, you know, color that's already there, you have to let it dry.  With acrylic paints, I switched to acrylic paints when my children [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson] were little so that I wouldn't kill them with the fumes, the oil fumes since I paint at home.  You don't have to wait for the layers to dry so much but you still have to look at the work and see what you've done.  I'm very, very, I'm usually very, very, very hard on my work.  I'm very, very critical of my work.  I look at it very, very closely.  Every little, you know, every corner makes a difference.  Every, sometimes I put in tiny, you know, drops of color and I'm often surprised that people notice.  Somebody'll say, "Oh I saw that, you know, line that you put there."  I said--and for me, it's very significant but it may not be to other people and I'm not, that's not to say that everything I do I consider successful but everything I do I just try to do the best that I can do.
Story_ID: 358502
Speaker 1: Let's go back, 1974, you worked [at WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] for eight years.  You, you stopped working full-time, right, to concentrate on your art, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, well, we decided we were going to have a family and I thought, well I actually, was started, we started out where I was supposed to be painting for, you know, for a change, not having a full-time job because, you know, when you work in TV, you know how that is, you don't work eight hours, you work until it's done and so that could be, you know during election periods, you know, you work 'til, you know, two [o'clock] in the morning or something.  So, it was a, you know, it took up a lot of time although I always, I always painted but I wanted to spend more time on my painting but then we also thought, well, we'll start a--
Speaker 1: When you're saying, we, can you--
Speaker 2: My husband and I st- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) His name?
Speaker 2: Monroe Anderson III [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson] (laughter), and I started thinking about having a family and I thought it was going to take a while, you know, I thought it was going to take a while so I said, oh yeah, sure, you know, we'll start and I'll paint and it didn't take that long.  And so I painted a while and then I had a baby and so then I started, actually, I start--that's when I started making jewelry.  I would actually use a canvas and make little pins and earrings in, in the '80s [1980s] and I, and I actually sold them at holiday shows and jewelry, in shops in the neighborhood and, you know, but I never stopped making something.
Story_ID: 358503
Speaker 1: Can you describe your work place, the home you had, you know have, to work out of and how are you balancing being, you know, a young mother and painting and having the discipline to do both?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the discipline wasn't really a problem for me.  I don't know, the people who tell me that, you know, how do you--you know, they have problems painting.  I think, I mean I think it's probably, you know, like my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] said that if she couldn't sing, she might as well be dead.  She, she would get up, you know, at six o'clock in the morning and she'd vocalize, you know, practice her, her scales.  She would go to work, full-time.  She would take voice lessons because singers continuously, apparently, so I learned from her, constantly, you know, train their voice.  You know, they went to different voice teachers and, to keep her range or to, if she wanted to try to sing in another key, you know, you know, if she wanted to sing like a lower range, she'd have to do something, you know, exercise her vocal chords so that she could do that.  And so, I learned from her, I guess, that you find that, you just have to find the time to do something that's important to you.  So for me at, when I worked at CBS [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois], I would go to a makeup room.  You know they had these little makeup rooms in this back hall and I'd go in there and I'd, and I'd draw, I'd do self-portraits.  I did a number of self-portraits in there or I'd draw, I'd draw in the newsroom.  I have, I still have drawings of, you know, people sitting around the newsroom.  I'd draw, I took the, I took public transportation, I'd draw on the bus.  You know, the thing that, again, saving was my mentor, Ed Love because I would, I would feel that I wasn't producing enough, I wasn't being productive enough as an artist, and he told me that everything I do feeds my art, that I don't have to feel that just because I'm not physically, you know, with a brush in my hand or a pencil or a, you know, a drawing tool in my hand, doesn't mean I'm not creating because it's a mental process and I found out even more that it was a mental process when I broke my shoulder when my son was in eighth grade, so whenever that was, and I broke my right shoulder and I couldn't do anything.  I had to have surgery to, for them to even put it back together and I'm right-handed and I broke my right shoulder and I started working left-handed and I started doing, I thought I'd work in a medium that I wasn't accustomed to so I started doing, you know, that I didn't do frequently.  I told you I studied watercolor in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] but it wasn't, watercolor wasn't something I did, and I did it on and off.  I did some, you know, in the '80s [1980s] and, but I wasn't, it wasn't my medium of preference, but I started doing watercolors of the flowers that people were sending me and I would send them as thank you notes to people and my husband [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson], who was working for CBS at the time, he came there after I had been there, said at a, at a, you know, a directors meeting, you know, the general manager and the, all the directors were in a meeting together, and my card had arrived and they said, "Are you sure she did this with her left hand?" (Laughter) You know, because they turned out really well, and that's when I realized that my drawing ability is in my head.  It doesn't have anything to do with my hands, it's in my head.  So that's why, like a Chuck Close, with a, with physical impairment, can still produce viable artwork.
Story_ID: 358504
Speaker 1: So, you're saying essentially that art is just a part of you and you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's something you do daily?
Speaker 2: Right, I do it every day (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No ma-, every--
Speaker 2: I get up really early, I try to work the morning, I work when I come home, I feel like something's missing.  I fe-, you know like if you forgot your kid, (laughter) you know, like if you, you know, like people I don't know how people, people do it, but you know like you, you know, people leave their kid at, you know everybody goes to work and the kids in the house wondering why everybody's left him there, you know, or something.  I mean, to me, it would be like leaving your kid, not produce, not working, and it's not a matter of being, producing it so much, it's not a matter of having a finished product, although that is your goal, it's a matter of learning something else every day about visual representation and for me, always trying something different.  I'm in this show in Highland Park [Illinois] that just opened yesterday, and I'm doing something that's sort of different.  People say that even when I switch my basic style, like this, these works have more collage in them than I usually have, well usually have.  I started collage a little while ago, you know, maybe a year ago or something and, but people say that they can always tell my work even if I'm doing something that I consider not typical for me because they can tell the way I use colors or they can tell the way I paint eyes or some aspects of it somehow.  I'm always like totally not sure what I'm doing.  I mean, I'm always, for me, there's always a huge question mark, no matter what people, how people respond or, you know, I'm always, yeah, but I need to do better or I need to do more or I need to, I need to try harder or I need to figure out a better way to do this, it's always a chal-, it's always for me a challenge that I really love.
Story_ID: 358505
Speaker 1: But you did, during this period with your kids [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson], have a chance where you could work.  You didn't have to work.  You were working as an artist and raising your children, right?  No?
Speaker 2: You know, people who raise children are working (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, no I didn't mean, I didn't mean it, I didn't mean it that that way, but I'm saying you didn't have to have a job.  Remember your mother [Eloise Owens Strothers] always worked.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother always had a job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I touched a sensitive chord, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it's always a sensitive chord for a--you know, because people were telling my husband [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson], oh, your wife is so lucky because she doesn't have to work, she just gets to stay home with her children but my husband who was, at this particular moment, the press secretary for Mayor Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], was never home.  My, my, after I said , "I'm [HistoryMaker] Joyce Owens Anderson," I said, "I'm a single parent who happens to be married" because I had, you know, because I lived in a city [Chicago, Illinois] without family, you know, and his parent--his family didn't live here, doesn't live here either, so I basically was it.  I was the, the centerpiece for my children.  So my children got to do some of the same things my mother did with me.  They got to go to museums and galleries all the time but, yeah, I could, I could, I was able to produce work.  When I, when I did the, the 'Black Creativity' ['Black Creativity Juried Art Exhibition'] show that Martin Pur-, when I saw that Martin Puryear was the juror, I'm like, oh my God, I have to do a painting.  I, I think it was 1982, no I'm sorry, it couldn't have been nineteen--it must have been 1983 or 1984.  When was Sawyer, well whenever Sawyer was mayor.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-se- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was later than that, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1987, I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986], '87 [1987], yeah.
Speaker 2: All right, so my son would have been like three or so.  And so, yeah, that makes sense, so I wanted to enter something for this 'Black Creativity' and I didn't have that much time to paint but I was able, you could enter, I think, four, I think it's either three or four slides.  I was able to complete one painting and I got a slide of that painting, submitted one painting, submitted it and I went, oh God, I'm never going to get in.  The painting was accepted, but I wasn't happy with the painting 'cause I had, you know, it's just like, you know, I just was trying to, you know, get it done for this thing.  So I, so you're supposed to submit the painting as it appears on the slide, but I knew the surface of the painting didn't satisfy me so I kept working on the surface and tried not to change it too much from (laughter), so that it wouldn't be recognizable but enough so that it would look like the painting that I was hoping it to be, would be.  And I didn't go to the reception for the artists because I was, I was really embarrassed.  I thought I hadn't done the job that I should have done and I was, you know, even though it was in the show, it was only one piece.  I had been in 'Black Creativity' shows where all the pieces I submitted had been accepted.  And so, you know, yeah, it was four because I've had four pieces in this show.  So I, I didn't even want to go, you know, and Monroe and the mayor went and Monroe called me and said, "Guess what?  Not only did you get in but you won a prize," and I couldn't, you know, I just couldn't believe it.  I was flabbergasted but then you, that's the thing because you never really know, I at least, well some artists maybe they do, I never really know if I've, how people are going to react.  I just know how I feel about the work and sometimes I'm satisfied and most of the time I'm not and I think, actually, the dissatisfaction was probably good because that makes you produce more of it.  I'm not trying to make carbon copies of what I've done before.  I'm not, you know, there're artists who go, oh this sells so I'm going to make more of it.  I'm not interested in that.  As a matter of fact, having a job protects me from that because I, I have a job.  So, I can just make art for myself which is what I did for many years.  I really just made it for myself and my husband actually said, you know, "Are you an artist or is this your hobby?"  I said, "I'm an artist," you know, and he said, "Well, you know, you need to like get some of this art out of the house," you know, basically.  And so, but yeah, for me, it's, you know, I can probably be a hundred years old and still question my work.
Story_ID: 358506
Speaker 1: So let me ask this, now, you start teaching at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] when?
Speaker 2: I, they asked me to do a solo show in the President's Gallery.
Speaker 1: In what year?
Speaker 2: And that was '96 [1996], '95 [1995], '96 [1996] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so Dolores Cross [HistoryMaker Dolores E. Cross] was there?  Was she president of Chicago State?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess she was but she didn't have anything to do with it.  It was the, it was the curator, Bob Wiese, who was, who was the curator of the gallery and, you know, he knew I was an artist and so he asked me if I would do a show.  So I said, sure.  You know, I said, I don't know how I'm going to get the work there or anything, you know, but he said, oh, he'd come by and pick it up.  And so I had a show there and then when we're talking about the show, I said, yeah, you know, one of these days I'm going to teach in a college because I said, you know, I, you know, I, you know, I have this M.F.A. and my intention had been to follow Leo Robinson's advice and teach in a college but I just hadn't gotten around to it.  So I said, yeah, I guess I'll do that one of these days.  So I had the show.  A year later, he called me up and said, Bob Wiese called me up and said, "Do you still want to teach?"  I said, "Sure."  You know, my kids [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson] were in preschool, I guess, and I said, "Sure," I said, "I, but I can only teach when my kids were in school.  I have to be home when they come home."  And so he said, "Fine," and I wasn't driving at the time.  I had stopped driving and, because I was, you know, lived in the city, I, you know, I'm from Phila-, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] we took subways.  I mean, it wasn't like New York [New York] but I took subways everywhere.  I drove when I worked at CBS [WCAU-TV, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] there because there was no easy way to get there but when I came to Chicago [Illinois], I didn't really, you know, I drove somewhat but I didn't really need to drive so I just basically stopped driving plus I had a, still had a Pennsylvania driver's license and, you know, I had to run through some hoops to get it, to get it renewed and so I just let it go and so I didn't have a driver's license and while my, when my kids were little, we just walked it.  I walked everywhere.  I walked them to the zoo and stuff like that.  So I couldn't get to Chicago State very easily.  He said, because he lived on Fullerton [Avenue], not too far from me, he said, "I'll pick you up in the morning and you can just take the train home."  So that's what I would do, which I actually loved because I could grade my papers.  I was teaching art history to begin with and I could grade my papers and stuff on the way home.  And so that's how I started and after a while, you know, I taught, you know, mostly every semes-, you know, if somebody else's class didn't fill, then I would get kicked out so that, because if you're, you know, senior--have senior standing, you get, you get to fulfill your hours, your credits, that you need, but then after a while, you know, I kept going, whenever they had classes available, I kept going back and then they, at first I start, taught, an art history class, you know, introductory art history class, then I taught a class for non-art majors where I taught, I taught, you know, drawing, painting, printmaking, a variety of media and then they gave me painting and drawing studios to teach and I, you know, I got great, had great rapport with the students and the faculty liked me and then eventually they had an opening for this curator's position, and so I submitted a, you know, an application.  In the meanwhile, I had been curating shows in the city, and so, curating Sapphire and Crystal [Sapphire and Crystals Artist Collective] shows and other shows.  And so I had a history of curating which was an accidental thing that I got involved with.  And, and with my exhibition history and my, you know, affiliations with different committees and groups and stuff, I, you know, I was able to secure the position.
Story_ID: 358507
Speaker 1: So what are your plans then for, for, 'cause this is a new, a ne-, you're talking about the, what just opened up, right?
Speaker 2: The job that I just started at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.  So what are your plans?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I hope--I want to--
Speaker 1: Because Chicago State is not a Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: In what respect?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, in terms of having an art depart-, you know an art department there where people will gravitate there.  Do you see what I'm--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the thing about Chicago State that's very interesting is that one of the first exhibitions I put up when I was given this job, when I, they finally, well when I, I don't think I signed the contract yet, but they were working on it, but anyway, I did a faculty exhibition.  There hadn't been a faculty exhibition for about five years and I communicated with the faculty and talked to them about what choices of work they, I would show and, you know, they gave, they submitted some, some choices, I met with people and looked at their work and selected work and I was surprised that they actually would submit to that, to me, selecting work like that but they did and I had them, you know, we just did it like any other professional curator would do it and put up the show and the university people were flabbergasted because they didn't know that these people worked at the university because the art department has been in a cocoon.  There are people who have produced, have written books and published books.  One photographer has, is in tons of collections.  He's written, he's photographed the Frank Lloyd Wright homes.  He's photographed, I can never remember this other architect in Australia.  I mean, he's got an incredible body of work and a history as an artist in Chicago [Illinois].  There's another guy who also moonlights at the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] but, you know, his works have been widely collected and exhibited.  You know, we have, you know, [HistoryMaker] Ausbra Ford, just retired from the department, whose works are at the Center for Inner City Studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies, Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], but he's traveled extensively.  He's a scholar in funerary arts in Brazil and Africa, I think.  Marva Jolly--Pitchford-Jolly [HistoryMaker Marva Lee Pitchford-Jolly], who's a ceramicist, who's been in, you know, the Art Institute museum, the survey, I don't know, was it the MCA [Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], the survey of Chicago art from like 1945 to whenever or 1960--I can't remember the dates, but anyways, she's been in major exhibitions.  You know, there's a number, there are a number of artists there and when people came to the show, they, they said, well, oh, did you, first of all, you know, they were wondering if I had done all the work.  I said, "No, no, this is really a broad range of work."  They said, "Oh," they said, "well who are these artists?"  I said, "These are artists who are here, at the university."
Story_ID: 358508
Speaker 1: And then for the opening of the new library, we installed, I got help from some of the faculty, but I, I asked them if they would loan work to the library until we could, until they can, you know, purchase more work or maybe they'll purchase the work from the artist, the faculty artist, and they, people were floored.  They, they don't understand the reputations of our artists.  And our art hist-, you know, we have a small department.  Our art historian just did a show in New York [New York] on Rouault [Georges Rouault] the, an artist who was famous for his religious images.  You know, our art department is nothing to sneeze at, it's just that it's not, it hadn't been promoted by, either, because it started out as a school in education, a teachers college, you know, it was a normal school [Cook County Normal School; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], it was, it's been around since the eighteen-something.  It's moved locations, you know.  The community changed, where it's located now, at 95th [Street] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], but there's a lot, you know, the writers conference at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] is nationally known.  There has never been any similar arm for the art department and I, my goals for the university is to get it known.  I've been in meetings with people from other universities in the city who totally, you know, I talk about doing some collaborative things and don't mention Chicago State and I say, well, when you include Chicago State in those conversations, on that list, then, you know, I'll be happy to, because they're including me as an artist but they're not including my university because they're not aware of our art department and my goal as the curator is to make sure that people are aware that we have an incredible, we have a full, you know printmaking studio, we have photography, we teach, you know, digital and print photography, you know.  You know, we have, we have on a smaller scale, we have everything that other universities have except in our fiber arts department, we have a huge computer digital loom that nobody has but us.
Story_ID: 358509
Speaker 1: I'm not sure how the Howard University [Washington, D.C.] art depart-, art and design department became so well-known but it took time, it took people writing about it, you know, because Driskell [HistoryMaker David Driskell] was writing about the artists in that, in the art department because, you know, Porter [James A. Porter] had written about them because [HistoryMaker] Samella Lewis had written about them, because, you know, she established like you said, as you said earlier, the International Quarterly of African American Arts [sic. Black Art: An International Quarterly; International Review of African American Art], and they, you know, over time, it takes a long time to develop a career as an artist and to be known.  I mean, sometimes we see artists who are, are, you know, in their twenties and well-known but a lot of times artists, it takes them into their fifties and sixties.  And for women artists, it's a whole other issue.  I'm on a panel for the Department of Cultural Affairs [Department of Cultural Affairs and Special Events] coming up this Thursday, that actually I suggested, not the, I think they decided to call it, Not The--Not The Old Boys' Club [ph.], and talking about women's arts, arts collectives and arts galleries and why they were established and is, if there is still a need for them.  I'm on the advisory board at Woman Made Gallery [Chicago, Illinois], but I've also been advising ARC Gallery [ARC Gallery and Educational Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] who is having some issues with membership and, and what I did was I suggest that into it, ARC and Woman Made create a corridor of art galleries and they did.  I mean, I was surprised but I just, you know, I wrote this e-mail and said look, you should do, X, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, et cetera, and they did exactly what I suggested, you know, who know, who knows when you're just sending an e-mail to somebody that they're going to follow up on it but they, you know, they, they set up a series of meetings and they invited me to the meetings and they decided to follow, you know, my suggestions and it's been very useful for them because they have collaborative events and, and such.  And so, but I was trying to help ARC and submitted a proposal to Barbara Koenen at the Department of Cultural Affairs who's the woman who is in charge of the CAR's website, the Chicago Artists Resource website, which I'm represented on and also the Artists At Work forums and actually I named the Artists At Work forums when I was, when I was invited to join the, the Chicago Artists Month advisory committee along with, they have representatives from, you know, like the president of the Chicago Art Dealers Association and the, and Greg Cameron from the MCA [Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and Greg Knight [Gregory Knight] from the Department of Cultural Affairs and all these people and they included me and what I was able to do was to point out to them the narrow, the narrow focus of this Chicago Artists Month adventure and that it needed to be extended to, include the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  And I was able to go to these people on the South Side and say, there's this thing in Chicago [Illinois] every year called, Chicago Artists Month, it's an opportunity for you to present a program during October that the city will print in this book that gets distributed everywhere and that they select twelve featured programs out of the hundreds that they receive and put a spotlight on those and this year was the trolley tour in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] that was featured and, but they, they weren't even aware of what was going on in the South Side.  We even, they had an opening event--the first one was at the MCA and then--when [HistoryMaker] Kerry James Marshall had his opening there.
Story_ID: 358510
Speaker 1: You know, when we were just sort of looking at your life, you know, you say that art became, is, was a natural part of who you were from the very beginning, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Apparently, yes.
Speaker 1: And in terms of, do you think that that's instinctively the way things worked with people who, you know, have a creative spirit?  Do you think that they're developed early and, and, you know, that mark is put on early and it's--
Speaker 2: I think that, my feeling about, it is that everybody has the ability to be creative and that's, that's how I approach my teaching and when I've taught, I've taught kids from preschool through--the oldest student I've ever taught was seventy-one at Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and I have, I teach, I love teaching students who are non-art majors who, you know, they just want to take, they need to take a humanities class and they don't, they don't want to take something that's not going to be too taxing, you know, and, because they're taking biology and chemistry and other stuff, you know.  I get a lot of nursing students and they don't really think they have any talent but they think, well, it's a non-art major class so, I should, if I do my homework and show up for class, I should be able to get a good grade and I teach it like an art class.  I mean, I teach it like I'm teaching artists and what happens is that students produce work that they can't believe that they've produced and that their self-esteem is boosted so much, it's, it's amazing and students come back and say, "Oh, Professor Anderson [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], I still have that piece."  I've had students that actually sell their work.  I tell them, you can only give your art to your mother, anybody else who asks you for your art, they have to pay you something for it, you know.  That was one of those lessons that I never learned in, in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] because nobody ever talked about making a living as an artist.  They really just talked about, you know, creating art but not that it could, that it was a business.  So we never got the business part of it so my other goal for my students is to really tell them all the stuff that nobody told me because even though, you know, I'm still learning, my job as a teacher is to try to benefit them.
Story_ID: 358511
Speaker 1: What would be your assessment of, of the value of creativity, though?
Speaker 2: It's essential, that you, you know, you may not be an artist, you may not be an artist for life but if you have the, if you have, if you're exposed to it and you have a good teacher, you can produce something that looks like art and that you can be proud of and that you can say, well I did this one painting or I did this one drawing.  I don't necessarily know that everybody is marked as a, as a child and understands that they're an artist.  I think there are plenty of people, there are people that I went to school with who were in art school who no longer produce art and they're, and, 'cause people are always saying to me, oh, you're, I, I ran into a classmate at an art event recently, in October, who said, in September I think, and he said, you know, I can't believe you're still making art, you know.  And I said, well, you know, I can't believe people who thought they were artists who don't, who no longer make art.  So to me it's un- more surprising that it goes the other way but sometimes life gets in the way.  It's very hard for, it's very hard to make money as an artist.  It's very hard to find out, you know, a lot of things, a lot of opportunities you don't know about.  For example, even as the, the MacArthur Fellowship, that's a secret ballot.  You can't submit anything.  Somebody has to, you have to be in a position where somebody sees you and where do, where do people go?  They go to, they don't, they're not really going, necessarily going to the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] but, you know, my focus isn't on that.  My focus is on, you know, producing the best work I can produce.  My focus is not necessarily on, people, people talk about what is, you know, well this artist is contemporary and this artist is not.  And my idea about a contemporary artist is a contemporary artist is anybody who's alive and producing art now, is a contemporary artist.  Now if you're talking about an artist, you know, there're trends and there, you know, video art or, you know, the new technology always could, you know, has an effect on art forms, be it, you know, architecture, you know, on everything, you know.  We were talking about the archival situation with film versus digital, you know, but the, but artists are always, the, you know, the Internet looks the way it does because artists started getting involved and putting images on that, not just typed words but I, for me, the art is not only responding to your, to the technology and it's, you know, it's directly in your work, art is responding to who you are in your, in the, in the culture at this time.  You know, art, artists in my opinion need to express their reaction to their environment and to what's going on around them and it could be that you, what's interesting to you was, you know, you know, colonies of ants.  It may not have anything to do with high technology but it might be that you just paint ants because you think ants are fascinating and people, somebody may respond to that and lots of people could respond to that because they sort of get what you're talking about but also because as a viewer of art, you have the opportunity to bring your own experiences and your own knowledge and your own taste to, to the work when you view it and you can interpret a colony of ants as, you know, maybe a global, a global epidemic or, you know, a mass, mass migrations or people who were displaced or, you know, you can interpret it as anything you want.  So, but the problem is now, is that without art education in schools, people don't know how to think about art.  So if it's not visual, if it's not, you know, literal or if it's not abstract and it looks to them like, you know, Jackson Pollock or what they think, not what they know art is supposed to look like, but if it looks like what they think art's supposed to look like a lot of times, people will respond to it.
Story_ID: 358512
Speaker 1: I have two, two last questions.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: One is, do you consider yourself a black artist, female artist or--?
Speaker 2: All of the above.
Speaker 1: All of the above.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I can't separate, that's why, you know, my work has changed over time because of my, my interests have changed, my knowledge base has changed.  You know, I responded to my having children.  I responded to the desire for having children which I think is why I was doing lots of mothers and children early on in my career.  I have only one of those, I think, left that I kept 'cause I did it on Mother's Day, actually, for my mother [Eloise Owens Strothers].  The, you know, so I can't really separate what, you know.  I do children, I did children, you know, yearning for children but I don't do children now that I have children.  You know, but often people will say when I do imaginary portraits or, you know, figurative paintings, people will say, oh, there's Scott [Scott Anderson] or there's, there's Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson] or there's Kyle [Kyle Anderson] or sometimes I'll see them in the paintings, not that I intend to put them there but because they're in my life, they're also in my work.  So, the pieces that I have in Highland Park [Illinois] have to do with, you know, the, it's what I call a 'Crying Man' series, a brand new series for me.  I continue series but, and I have a number of series that I work on but then I sometimes create new ones and this 'Crying Man' series is something that, since 9/11 [September 11, 2001], I've been seeing all these men crying, in public, and that's, you know, we had the men eat quiche period, a little bit, you know, when men were trying to be more sensitive but they weren't crying, necessarily, they were knitting and they were cooking and stuff, but they weren't crying, and, you know, in large numbers and now I've seen so many that I've started taking digital photographs of, on the TV news of, when I can catch a man crying and creating paintings that I incorporate collage and text with, talking about, you know, Darfur [Sudan] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] and all those issues.
Story_ID: 358513
Speaker 1: Okay, now just--you have two sons, Scott [Scott Anderson] and Kyle [Kyle Anderson]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson] is your husband?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then just in terms, I said two more, one, what would you want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: I'd like to, I'd like to, if I could have my biggest wish, I'd have a huge studio and no job for once.  I mean, I, you know, my only job would be, 'cause my children are grown, although they still live with us and I, you know, we cook, we eat dinner every night and stuff, but I would have a huge loft, well lit, studio space and 24/7 to work.  If I would work twenty-four hours a day, every day, that would be th-, my dream job.
Story_ID: 358514
Speaker 1: Now what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Wow, I never thought of that.  Well, of course, the work that I've produced and, you know, and, you know, I hope my children [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson], you know, continue, you know, growing and prospering.  I, you know, I really sort of think that not just my art work but my willingness to curate for artists and to place artists in settings where they haven't been before with artists that they haven't been with before.  You know, the show in Highland Park [Illinois] puts [HistoryMaker] Preston Jackson and John Rozelle with a younger artist named Rhonda Wheatley and a white artist named Juliette Zielke and an artist, a woman who actually was a gallerist who gave up her gallery 'cause she wanted to really be an artist herself, Mary O'Shaughnessy, you know, and so I put these artists together, there are eleven artists in this show, two artists, Anna Tyler [Anna McCullough Tyler] and Al Tyler, who have, you know, contemporaries of [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt, went to, Al Tyler went to school with Richard Hunt and they went, they studied in Mexico with [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs and [HistoryMaker] Elizabeth Catlett.  They're not that, they're not that, as old as they are but Margaret Burroughs helped to teach that because they grew up in Evanston [Illinois] and went to the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], they didn't learn, they learned about black art from Margaret Burroughs and Samella Lewis and Richard Mayhew and people like that over time but, you know, I think that really, besides my art, my own artwork, that I'm going to continue putting artists together and exposing them to people who haven't been exposed, like at the Fourth Pres Church [Fourth Presbyterian Church, Chicago, Illinois], which is a white church.  You know, I did three shows down there and they were very well--and [HistoryMaker] Kerry James Marshall participated in one of the exhibitions.  So, you know, so other artists have the opportunity to say I, you know, I've been, I've shown with Kerry James Marshall.  That's a significant thing for artists and to be able to be treated, I try to treat the art, I mean as an artist, I know how I would like people to treat me and to really work with the artist and try to make their work look great and, you know, so, you know, I, I can't imagine, you know, all I imagine for me is that I'm going to keep working and I don't know what's going to happen, you know.  I mean, you know, if I can just keep working, that'll make me happy and my legacy, well I guess, will, will build itself, will make itself.
