Story_ID: 393404
Speaker 1: My name is Ed Anderson.  I'm an interviewer for The HistoryMakers organization.  This is Adrian Jackson, our videographer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Bishop John Hurst Adams, we welcome you to The HistoryMakers, and we thank you for making yourself available to tell your story.
Speaker 2: I'm pleased to do so.
Speaker 1: Let me just say this about The HistoryMakers before we get started.  The HistoryMakers is a national 501(c)(3) organization, non-profit organization committed to preserving, developing, and providing easy access to an internationally recognized archival collection of thousands of African American video oral histories.  The HistoryMakers represent the single largest archival project of its kind in the world.  Not since the recording of former slaves during the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] movement of the 1930s, has there been a methodic and wide-scale attempt to capture the testimonies of African Americans.  Even though African Americans have made significant contributions to American life, society, and culture, the world is still largely unaware of these contributions, as well as the many personal stories of African American contributors. Furthermore, the existing oral history collections still consist largely of transcribed audio-cassette interviews.  And access to them is extremely limited, and most are ill-suited for easy transfer to today's media.  And with your interview we will be adding to those oral histories that will be accessible, even via the latest forms of technology.  As we start, sir, may I ask you to state your full name and spell it, and give us your date of birth?
Speaker 2: My name is John Hurst Adams, J-O-H-N, H-U-R-S-T, A-D-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: And today's date is?
Speaker 2: Eleven, twenty-nine, o'five [November 29, 2005].
Speaker 1: And where are we located, the city?
Speaker 2: We are located on Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Very well, sir.
Story_ID: 393405
Speaker 1: A few People magazine type questions, I'd like to ask.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sweet potatoes.
Speaker 1: Sweet potatoes.  Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Spring.  Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or expression or saying?
Speaker 2: An expression which is native to the low country of South Carolina, which is a phrase which says, "We pray much your strength," a phrase used to communicate compassion and support for people who are going through difficulty or confusing times.  And that low country phrase just captured my imagination, and I borrowed it to make it one of my own.
Story_ID: 393406
Speaker 1: Your home of record, or your place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Columbia, South Carolina.  My father was a minister and a presiding elder in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church in South Carolina.  And he had a home on Lady Street in Columbia, South Carolina, which is my home site.
Speaker 1: Let's continue to talk for a few minutes about your dad, sir.  What is his name, and would you spell it, please?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Eugene Avery Adams, Sr., E-U-G-E-N-E, A-V-E-R-Y, A-D-A-M-S.  He was a native of a little place in the Piedmont section of South Carolina called Cokesbury, which was named after Bishop Asbury [Francis Asbury] and Bishop Coke [Thomas Coke], because that's where the Methodist circuit riders used to meet.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: It's also the home of Allen University which is now in Columbia, and he came from there.  And his career, he was the first person in his family to go to college.  He went to Johnson C. Smith [Biddle University; Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] when it was named Biddle and taught school and served as pastor, and ended up in Columbia, and that's where I was born.  He came to Columbia to be pastor of Bethel A.M.E. Church in downtown Columbia.
Speaker 1: Interesting.  Would you, can you tell us a little bit more about his background and his growing up there in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Well, he was one of fourteen children, so I had a lot of aunts and uncles.  And I still have a large number of first, second, and third cousins scattered across the country.  And we have periodically what is called the Cokesbury reunion, because all the families in this very tiny community were interrelated so closely that they all gather at the same time and call it the Cokesbury reunion.  So, we get to see each other about once every four years.  He grew up there and went to school there.  I have in my possession some minutes he took of a church meeting in 1910.  And he took the minutes because he was still very young, but he was probably the only person in the congregation at that time who could read and write.  And he left there and went to Johnson C. Smith.  And he was the patriarch of our family, and an exceptional--one of my heroes.  And I guess a lot of people have fathers who are their heroes.  He's especially, because he was a man who had a love for learning.  He was a civil rights activist before it was popular or safe.  And so, I have a lot of admiration for my father.
Story_ID: 393407
Speaker 1: Are there other things you would say to describe your dad [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Well, he had an incredible sense of humor.  And during those moments of tension and difficulty and anguish in the life of our family, he had a way of phrasing it so that we made us laugh.  That was one great quality which I tried to inherit.  Secondly, he allowed us to debate and argue with him frequently at the end of our dinner.  We would sit around the table, and he would intentionally provoke these very warm discussions, because he was trying, I think, to teach us how to think.  And so he was an exceptional person.  And the older I got, the more profound my appreciation for him became.
Speaker 1: I understand.  Did he ever share any stories with you about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, not a lot of stories, because I don't think it was really too exciting.  He grew up with a large family on a farm.  He told stories about how they worked the farm in those days.  And this was before mechanization, so you used a hoe and a plow and a mule.  And so they were interesting, you know, stories, to see him live through the transition from the manual farming to the automated farming of tractors and fancy cotton-pickers that leave most of the cotton on the bough (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 393408
Speaker 1: Let's talk for a moment about your mother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was her name, and would you spell it, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Her name was Charity Anzello Nash; C-H-A-R-I-T-Y, and A-N-Z-E-L-L-O [Charity Nash Adams] and I do not know where my grandparents [Rose Nash and Columbus Nash] got that name from, and Nash, N-A-S-H.  She too was born in Cokesbury [South Carolina].  There were four or five main families in Cokesbury.  The Adams was one of them, the Nashes another, and the Holmes, another.  And so we all knew each other, and all participate in this Cokesbury reunion.  She was also the first person in her family to go to college.  She came to Columbia [South Carolina] to go to a little school called Harbison College [Harbison Agricultural College], just outside of Columbia in a town called Irmo [South Carolina].  And she and my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] met because they had grown up together in Cokesbury, and married and lived together for about sixty years.
Speaker 1: Sixty years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, it was a strong family.
Speaker 1: Amen, amen.  Can you share other things you know about her background and her growing up there in Cokesbury?
Speaker 2: Well, she too had a similar lifestyle because the rural farm country lifestyle was pretty much set by that.  The little church in which they socialized was called St. Paul African Methodist Episcopal Church [Cokesbury, South Carolina].  It's still there, it's still a strong church in a small town.  On my last trip there, I found it amusing that I was sitting in the pulpit and I knew everybody in the congregation.  And everybody in the congregation had a college degree in this little country town in South Carolina, because the people wanted to live in South Carolina, in Cokesbury, even though they may work in Greenwood [South Carolina] or Greenville [South Carolina] or somewhere else.  So it's a fascinating place, and people become deeply attached to it, you know.
Story_ID: 393409
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Charity Nash Adams]?
Speaker 2: She was a woman who was a strong disciplinarian, and at the same time a woman who was generous to a fault.  What I remember most about her making me do was whenever we had a great meal--and by that, I mean she was a good cook, and she would fix these wonderful meals.  And I always had visions of going back into the kitchen late at night, but she would give it away. And I would take food, a plate of food to all the people in our neighborhood [in Columbia, South Carolina] who were sick.  And by the time she made that distribution, there was nothing left for my late night snack (laughter), so.  But she would, that was just her way.  She would, she cared about people I think more than her resources allowed her to.  And she was generous with everybody, and had this profound sense that she was going to try to take care of everybody she could.  And that was really the characteristic about her which stood out the most.
Story_ID: 393410
Speaker 1: Do you recall any stories about her [Adams' mother, Charity Nash Adams] growing up that she shared with you and your siblings?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a lot of stories.  Because one of the things my parents did with their children was made us go live on the farm [in Cokesbury, South Carolina] for a month every summer.  So, we got a taste of farm life and a taste of the lifestyle under which they grew.  And so we were able to have a little bit more appreciation for how well they had done and how far they had come.  Because we were, you know, I did not enjoy working in the hot sun from sun-up to sunset, and all the kinds of chores that you have to do on a farm.  But we did them for a month every summer.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, we were always glad to get back to school.
Speaker 1: Was tenant farming or sharecropping the way of life there among most blacks, or was land ownership (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was some of it, there was some of it.  But in this particular community, with rare exception, the black farmers were landowners as well.  This was not the general case in South Carolina.  But in this little community--this was sort of a niche place.  And my grandfather [Columbus Nash], my mother's father, was buying his farm and had a bad year and was about to lose the farm.  And my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] and some of the other people got together and pooled their resources to buy it, so that it could stay in the hands of black people.
Speaker 1: It's not on my script, but may I ask if this land, family land, continues to be owned today by the families of--
Speaker 2: That farm which my father engineered the purchase of from my grandfather is still owned by us.  And the farmland of most of those landowners, the land is still owned by their children.
Speaker 1: Praise God.
Speaker 2: They have not gone away and sold it yet.
Speaker 1: They don't make any more land, do they?
Speaker 2: No, and my position is the longer we hold it, the more--whoever sells it--we can get for it.
Story_ID: 393411
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], how far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Formally, only to my grandparents, because they settled in Cokesbury [South Carolina] during the ferment of the Civil War.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your grandparents then, just for a second.  Your father's parents, who were they, and would you spell their names?
Speaker 2: His name was Wesley [Wesley Adams]. That's part of that Cokesbury Wesleyan Methodist headquarters tradition; his name was Wesley Adams.  His wife's name was Lucy Dixon Adams.
Speaker 1: Dixon.
Speaker 2: And they married and had fourteen children.
Speaker 1: Any idea of their dates of birth, or dates of death--and, or dates of death?
Speaker 2: In reality I don't know for sure, because I never knew them.
Speaker 1: You never knew them?
Speaker 2: Not on my father's side.  I knew my grandparents [Rose Nash and Columbus Nash] on my mother's [Charity Nash Adams] side, but they died.  And my, I know that my grandmother on my father's side died first.  And he in his later years re-married, and of all things, went to New York [New York] and lived across the street from Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York]; I remember that about it.  We are working on what we call a family biography.  I don't think that I am who I am in isolation from all this other stuff we've been talking about.  And so, we're, I'm doing, I'm sort of working on a five-generation story, starting with my grandparents and going through my grandchildren, and tracing certain issues--economics, careers, education, racism, et cetera, et cetera, to see whether my grandchildren and my grandfather faced the same issues.
Speaker 1: Awesome, interesting.
Speaker 2: And it's becoming more interesting, the deeper I get into it.  And hopefully we will be able to shape this into a document.
Speaker 1: And the mother of your father, first name Lucy. Would you pronounce her whole name and spell it, and give her place of birth and dates of birth and death if you know them, sir?
Speaker 2: I could not do those.  But they are from Cokesbury.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Lucy, L-U-C-Y, Adams, A-D-A-M-S, was her name.  And--
Speaker 1: Dixon was her maiden name, you say (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Dixon was her maiden name, D-I-X-O-N.
Speaker 1: D-I-X-O-N, all right.  Sir, and by the way, what is the date of birth and the year of date and birth of your dad, Reverend Eugene Adams [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: My father was alleged to be born in 1886.  And he died in 1969.
Story_ID: 393412
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother's [Charity Nash Adams] parents.  And before talking about them, the year of her birth and the year of her death?
Speaker 2: My mother's?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: My mother's year of birth was 1890, I believe, and she died in 1968.
Speaker 1: A year before your dad [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it's a very interesting story.  When she died, I was pastoring in Seattle, Washington.  And I took my father to Seattle and had my officers make him my assistant pastor.  But he was a stranger to that community; he knew nobody there but us.  And after about two or three months he said one day, "John [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], I'm going home."  And he was a very strong-willed man, and eventually we got my sister to come and escort him back to his home and farmhouse in Columbia [South Carolina].  And he, you know, if you--he was alone and lonely.  Because he and my mother had lived together for long, it was just difficult for him.  And he died a year after she did.
Speaker 1: And your mom's mother and father, what are their names and places of birth?
Speaker 2: Cokesbury [South Carolina] is the place of all of these people
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Columbus Nash, just like Christopher Columbus Nash.  And my grandmother's name was Rose [Rose Nash].  I have a sister whose name is Lucy Rose [Lucy Rose Adams], because she was named after her two grandmothers.  So it's, you know, it's part of that same family thing.  And they were from Cokesbury as well, and I did know them as a child, because it was there that we went and lived for that month every summer when we were very young, so that we could get a taste of farm life.
Speaker 1: All right, sir.  And did you know their parents, the parents of Columbus, the grandparents of Columbus Nash?
Speaker 2: No, I did not know them.
Speaker 1: And Rose--by the way, what was your Grandmother Rose's last name, her maiden name?  Do you recall that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: You knew them, so they died in your lifetime?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember about when they passed away?
Speaker 2: It would have been about sixty-five years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was still a child.  And the farm that he worked is still owned by us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And for the record, I'm not sure if I asked your birthdate.
Speaker 2: I was born November the 27th, 1927.
Speaker 1: Happy belated birthday on this 29th day of November, sir.
Speaker 2: Today?
Speaker 1: Today is the 29th?
Speaker 2: Yeah, today is the 29th.
Speaker 1: So, two days ago you celebrated.
Speaker 2: Two days ago I had a birthday.
Speaker 1: Praise God. Happy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I did not celebrate (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh well, we'll try not to keep you too long, because we want you to celebrate this one, it's a big one.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It is a big one.
Speaker 1: Just a couple more questions during this segment.  The parents of Columbus Nash and Rose Nash, did you know either of them?
Speaker 2: No, I did not know either of them.  But we are tracing our family, you know, the genealogy thing now is very prevalent.  And we have engaged someone to see if they can track down my family.  My wife [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams] has paid somebody to track down her family.  She's from New Orleans [Louisiana], so she's got a lot of family problems right now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I understand.  I enjoy doing genealogy myself.
Speaker 2: Do you?
Speaker 1: I've gone back many generations.
Speaker 2: Well, we're working on it.
Story_ID: 393413
Speaker 1: Let's talk briefly about your wife [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your siblings first.  You mentioned one of them, Lucy Rose [Lucy Rose Adams]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --named after each of your grandparents [sic. grandmothers, Lucy Dixon Adams and Rose Nash].  Who are your other siblings, and where did--
Speaker 2: Well, I have, there were four of us.  My oldest sister was named Charity Adams Earley.  And she was really the highest ranking black woman in the WACs [Women's Army Corps] during the war [World War II, WWII], and took a battalion of women to France.  And I really think they sort of ran the mail service for the European Theater.  And she did very well, and she was a well-known prominent lady.  I have an older brother named Eugene Avery Adams, Jr.  And he worked for years for the state department [U.S. Department of State] and the [U.S.] Agency for International Development [USAID], and he still lives in Washington [D.C.].  He also had a, you know, very successful career.   The sister to whom I refer as having been named for her two grandmothers, Lucy Rose, was a college professor.  She taught business at both Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] and Saint Augustine University [Saint Augustine's University] in Raleigh [North Carolina].  She's retired, and I have brought her here to live in Atlanta [Georgia] where we live so that we can see about her.  So I had three very successful siblings, and they spent a lot of time trying to make me do right (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where do you fit age-wise among them?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest of the four.
Story_ID: 434870
Speaker 1: All right, Dr.--Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams].  As we continue, let me just return and ask you if, in your studies of the family, you have determined the history of the family name, the history of the name Adams?
Speaker 2: It is our best information that the name is of Scottish origin--that somewhere back in time, somebody named MacAdams settled in the area [in South Carolina], and the descendants dropped the Mac and simply became Adams.  And we think that is the origin of the name.  And we are--in this whole thing we've been authorized to be done, we want to document that part of our name history, so that we can say that with more certainty than I can now.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me if you've established whether your family grows from those who were enslaved, or were there branches of the family that were always free?
Speaker 2: It is our best information that we are from both traditions.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: You have to find some rational explanation of my complexion.  (Laughter) And we believe that some of our descendant ancestors were white, who married or had relations with blacks.  Other people say it was a white man and a black woman.  I put it the other way, that it was a white woman who found a black man irresistible (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, yes, sir (laughter).
Story_ID: 434871
Speaker 1: As we continue, let me, let's talk about your wife and your children briefly.  You mentioned earlier that--
Speaker 2: Well, I'm married to a lovely young lady named Dolly Desselle Adams [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams].  Her maiden name is Desselle, she's from New Orleans [Louisiana].  Well, she's really from a little town called Marksville [Louisiana] up near Alexandria [Virginia], but grew up in New Orleans.  And she's a very smart, strong sister.  And we have three daughters, and we have eight grandchildren.  My wife is a well-educated woman; she has a doctorate degree.  I was a bishop in Texas, living in a little city called Waco, Texas.
Speaker 1: Waco, Texas.
Speaker 2: And she didn't have a whole lot of things to do, so she decided to go across town to Baylor University [Waco, Texas] and got a doctorate degree.  She had already finished Southern University in Baton Rouge [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  And so, she capped it off with a doctorate when we were in Texas.  And she has worked at various schools--Paul Quinn College [Waco, Texas], Albany State [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia], and Howard University [Washington, D.C.]  She even taught at ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia].  But you know, she taught communication skills to enhance the writing skills of the pastors who were studying at ITC. So she, she's been a very active person in the community and in women's work.  She's been president of The Links, Incorporated, and she's been president of The Black Women's Agenda [The Black Women's Agenda, Inc.].  So, she's a strong sister.  And we have three daughters.  The oldest daughter [Gaye Adams Massey] is an attorney, a graduate of Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts], and Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Harvard Law School.
Speaker 2: And she is now a counsel with UnitedHealth [UnitedHealth Group] in Minneapolis, Minnesota.  My second daughter [Jann Hurst Adams] has a Ph.D. from the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and a graduate of Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio], and chair of the psychology department at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  The baby daughter [Madelyn Rose Adams Cobb] is a graduate of Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and the Wharton School of Business [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and is vice president at the Atlanta Journal-Constitution.  So, you can see I am in Atlanta [Georgia] because two of my daughters and five of my grandchildren are here in Atlanta.  And we were retired, we decided that we should be here to help them while we could, and teach them how to take care of us when we got to that point.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Amen, God is good. Indeed, he has blessed you with a beautiful and well-educated family.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And I have eight grandchildren, six boys and two girls.
Speaker 1: Great, great.
Speaker 2: And they're all doing well.  And they range in age from twenty to one year.
Speaker 1: Praise God, that's beautiful.  I, I know you're so proud of your family, I can see the joy.  My youngest just got married, so I'm waiting on my first grandchild.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right.
Speaker 1: Hopefully, hopefully, sometime soon (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's a whole new world, grandchildren (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what I hear.
Speaker 2: When your grandchild comes, you call me and let me know.  I'm going to send you a certificate which authorizes you to be an absolute fool (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'll be looking forward to that, I'll let you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 434872
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], let's talk about your early years.  What are your earliest memory of growing up?  What are your earliest memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we grew up in Columbia, South Carolina, and there are a lot of memories from that time.  And let me tell you some of the interesting stories which occurred.  Because I had three older siblings, and because my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] allowed these heated conversations to go on, when I was four years old my father decided that I was ready to go to school.  And he sent me to the elementary school [Waverly Elementary School, Columbia, South Carolina] and said to me, "Now John, when you get to the school, you tell your teacher that you are six at school, and four at home."  And I did that, and they let me in.  So, I started school in first grade at four, by telling that little twist, "I'm four at home, and six at school."  And a big incident occurred, because when I got in school, the parents of my playmates decided they should be in school.  But they were too late, so I got a year's head start on them.  And it became a big controversy in the neighborhood, how E.A. Adams' boy got in school and these other people didn't.  That's one of the stories which I thought was hilarious, simply because it happened the way it did.  And it wasn't planned, it just happened.
Speaker 1: Just happened.
Story_ID: 434873
Speaker 1: Another memory which is, which is important in terms of who I am and how I think, was the fact of the activism of my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] in the life of the community [in Columbia, South Carolina].  He was president of a bank, and he was chairman of the board of a black hospital, and he was much into civil rights then.  And on one occasion we were attending a program sponsored by the Delta Sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], to which my older sister [Charity Adams Earley] belonged, called the Jabberwock.  You may have heard of it.
Speaker 2: I have.
Speaker 1: And we were at this event when they came to interrupt my father's Watch Meeting to tell him that the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] were burning a cross on our front lawn.  So we left and went home to protect our property.  We came in through a neighbor's backyard into the back of our house, and my father got his--he had a shotgun.  He didn't have a rifle or a pistol; he had a shotgun (laughter) which he used to hunt, I believe up in Cokesbury [South Carolina] when he went up there.  And he took it and went to his front door and said to the folks burning the cross, "If you cross, if you come up my steps, I'm going to shoot you."  And they didn't, fortunately.  But that etched the issue of race in my mind and head and heart in such a way that whenever I encounter racism, that memory flashes through my mind.  And so as I was telling you earlier, my father helped organize the clergy, to patrol the military policemen in their abuse of black soldiers from Fort Jackson [Columbia, South Carolina], which you know about.  And so, he was into a lot of things.
Story_ID: 434874
Speaker 1: And of course, one of my other sparkling memories was that when he [Adams' father, Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] and others--and I give Columbia [South Carolina] credit.  They had some clergy who were real serious about justice issues.  My father, there was a Reverend Carl Klug [ph.] who was a C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal], and Reverend Rita [ph.] who was a Baptist.  There was a Reverend Jenkins [ph.] who was a Baptist, and a Reverend Hinton [James M. Hinton] who was in addition to being a preacher was the president of Pilgrim Insurance Company [Pilgrim Health and Life Insurance Company].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they had stuff going on. And they brought Thurgood Marshall to Columbia to file two suits.  One was for equal teachers pay in the State of South Carolina.  And the second one was for the right of blacks to vote in the Democratic primary.  When Thurgood Marshall came to argue those cases, there was a Yankee judge who moved to Charleston [South Carolina] who heard the cases.  His name was Judge Waring [Julius Waties Waring]. I remember all this like it happened yesterday, because it was, it was a pivotal part of my growing up experience.  And my father took me out of school and took me to the court, because he wanted me to hear and see Thurgood Marshall argue the cases for equal teachers pay and the right to vote in the Democratic primary in South Carolina.  Both cases he won, because Judge Waring ruled in his favor.  And of course, the appeals court held it up.
Speaker 2: Praise God.
Speaker 1: Now, those are the kind of memories which I was privileged to have, not because of me, but because of my parents, my father in particular, and the kind of community in which I lived.  Because he was one of many clergy and activists in that community at that time who sort of created this ferment, which influenced me greatly.  So, if you want to explain why I'm branded as a militant, it's because of these childhood events (laughter).
Speaker 2: We thank God for your childhood events.
Story_ID: 434875
Speaker 1: What was family like--life like, during holidays and special occasions, and even daily life?  What was life in the Adams family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we had a very traditional black family life.  My father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] was a clergyman, and my mother [Charity Nash Adams] was a very active churchwoman.  And so, the first boundaries and points of view imposed on us was one of the faith and the church.  And so we had an almost puritanical kind of home life and upbringing--courteous and respectful, "You don't do this, and you don't do that," et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  I had a little of a maverick in me, because I was much taken with athletics.  And when my mother would tell me to stay home and study, I would slip off to play ball.  I frequently got into a lot of trouble by doing that (laughter).  But they were patient with me.  And we always ate breakfast and dinner together.  We had--my mother fixed breakfast every morning, and my father got up early enough to eat breakfast with his children before they went to school.  And every--when we got home and dinner was prepared, and we all sat down and ate together and talked.  And this is when these--my father would engineer these provocative discussions about what the issues of the day were, and whether you should be a Democrat or Republican.  And in his lifetime he was both, originally a Republican, but became a Democrat because of the changing philosophies.  And so that's the kind of life. We occasionally traveled.  We went to Cokesbury [South Carolina] frequently, because that's where the family, the rest of the family was.
Speaker 1: How far was Cokesbury from Columbia [South Carolina] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cokesbury was seventy-five miles from Columbia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a major trip in those days.  And our father would pile us in the car and we would drive to Cokesbury early in the morning and stay all day, and drive home at night.  And sometimes we would spend--if we went on Friday, we would spend the night.
Story_ID: 434876
Speaker 1: My father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] tried very hard, with limited resources, to expose us.  And so, he took us to things like the World's Fair [1939 New York World's Fair].  You know, he'd pile us all in the car and we would drive twenty hours to wherever we were going, and spend a couple days to visit those kind of special events.  Fortunately for us, in Columbia [South Carolina] were two black colleges [HBCUs], Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] and Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina.]  And those institutions in those days when I was growing up were, they had what they called the lyceum events, and they would bring talents.  And I always remember my father made me go hear the great speakers.  I heard Mordecai Johnson and Rayford Logan.  And all that crowd of people would come to one of those schools as a lyceum event, and I had to go.
Speaker 2: Had to go (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) There was no discussion about that.  "This, this is one of the leaders of the race.  And I want you to go see him and hear him."  And they bring an occasional celebrity of one kind or another to one of the other campuses.  There was a great interest in the children of our community.  I remember that they thought I was a little bit athletic, and they took an interest in me, a couple of the men.  And I remember their names.  One was named T.J. Miles [ph.], and the other one was the coach at Benedict, and his name was Dan Crawford [ph.].  And they took the kids in the neighborhood around the schools to the gym and taught us how to play basketball.  T.J. Miles took us to the tennis court and taught us how to play tennis.  And so when I went to college [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], I was one of two athletes who got letters in four sports.  I was not that good, but I was good enough to make the team.  Because growing up, I had gotten the fundamentals from these guys, and these people were athletes themselves.  For example, when I was growing up in Columbia, one of the people who was a football star at Benedict was LeRoy Walker [LeRoy T. Walker].
Speaker 2: LeRoy Walker.
Speaker 1: And I saw him when I moved to Atlanta [Georgia], and he was here with the [U.S.] Olympic Committee.  And I called him by his Columbia nickname, which was Po Belly.  And he was called Po Belly because he had this huge upper body, and his stomach didn't exist.  And since he--it was this great drop from his big upper body to his stomach, and they nicknamed him Po Belly (laughter).  And he howled, because I suspect it had been a long time since anybody had the nerve to call him, (laughter) because he was quite a distinguished administrator and athlete, you know.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But he, you know, those kind of people were around, and you saw them later on with remarkable success.  It was really an inspiration to, to you, that maybe you can do something worth doing if you work at it.
Story_ID: 434877
Speaker 1: The gentleman who the stadium [Charles F. Bolden Stadium, Columbia, South Carolina] is named after over at the middle school?
Speaker 2: C.A. Johnson.
Speaker 1: Not C.A. Johnson [sic. Charles Bolden, Sr.].  His son is an astronaut.
Speaker 2: Oh, Jake Bolden.
Speaker 1: Jake Bolden.
Speaker 2: Charles Bolden [HistoryMaker General Charles Bolden, Jr.], excuse me, Jake.
Speaker 1: Charles Bolden, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you know his father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew the whole family.  And Charles Bolden and my brother Avery [Eugene Avery Adams, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --went to school together.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The father of Jake, of the one who's the astronaut, and my brother played football together at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina.]
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And the son became the astronaut.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And they named--yeah, Charles E. Bolden (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Charles E. Bolden [sic.], yes.  They named the stadium after him and they named a piece of the highway after the son, I believe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Charles Bolden yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I know those names.  And the other big name is Modjeska Simkins [Modjeska Monteith Simkins].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And then there was, I think, a United Methodist preacher who had a couple of things named for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm trying to think of the minister of Second Calvary Baptist Church [Columbia, South Carolina], who was a professor over at Benedict College for many years.  What's his name?
Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about.  It'll come to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was our minister when we were there.  I'll come back, we'll, we'll come back to that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right down on Pine Street.
Speaker 1: On Bull Street.
Speaker 2: Bull Street?
Speaker 1: Bull Street, that's right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was Calvary, yeah, Second Calvary.
Story_ID: 434878
Speaker 1: Okay, what street did you live on?  And what was your community, what was your community called, and what street, what block?  And who were your neighbors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived at 21-- I lived at 2113 Lady Street. Lady Street was in the Waverly neighborhood [Columbia, South Carolina], one block down street. And in the next block was Waverly Elementary School [Columbia, South Carolina].  To the right was Harden Street, which is a major throughway in the city. It was a, it was a wonderful neighborhood, really.  Everybody knew everybody. I had fifteen or twenty mamas, and I needed every one of them (laughter). But in that time, parents authorized their friends to participate in the discipline of their children.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Speaker 2: And so wherever I went, there was some adult to correct me if I got out of line, and to report me so that I would be dealt with when I got home (laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand (laughter).
Speaker 2: And so, I wish we could recover that mutual responsibility for each other and each other's children in our communities nowadays, because we need it.
Speaker 1: We need it.
Speaker 2: Well, children need it.
Speaker 1: Children, absolutely.
Speaker 2: What is the phrase?  It takes a village to raise a child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It takes a village.
Speaker 2: You need, you need everybody's help to make it right.  So we had, we had--the Waverly neighborhood was a real village.  And everybody helped everybody if they saw their children acting up, or out of line.  The adults were authorized by the parents to take whatever was the appropriate action.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 434879
Speaker 1: Tell me what other sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Charity Nash Adams] was a great cook.  So let me start with--basically the smells of good food remind me of my childhood.  She could do things with ordinary food and make it gourmet, and she never had a recipe.  It was, I guess her mother [Rose Nash], what she learned from her mother, and her own innovations in the process of cooking.  But I remember always--and we never had much, but we always had good food.  So, one of the memories of my childhood of course is that we always ate well.  And it wasn't fancy food, but it was so well-prepared.  And I say that based on what I know now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because I can go to some fancy restaurants where they got all the ambiance, and the food is not good (laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: So, one of those--the second is, of course, the sounds of play.  And I guess as I remember my childhood, those were important things--the food and the play, play.  We did not have strong community parks and recreational facilities, so we played ball in the street. The street on which I lived for a long time was not paved, so it was dirt. And so the ballgame was right in front my house, and I remember these sounds. And I remember, you know, going to play two-hand touch football out in the street, and the noise and the friends.  And so, you remember your childhood friends. You know, across the street was Chris Garrett [ph.], and around the corner was Pap Washington--Watson [Pap Watson (ph.)].  And these guys were like my brothers. So those are the things that I remember so clearly--the quality of the food my mother prepared, and the quality of the games and play and athletes that we shared with the other people in the neighborhood. And I guess the--I had a good experience in going to school.  I went to school at Waverly Elementary [Waverly Elementary School, Columbia, South Carolina].  The principal's name was Perry.  His son eventually became a very distinguished judge in Columbia, South Carolina (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that the W.A. Perry for whom the school [W.A. Perry Middle School, Columbia, South Carolina] is named?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We'll talk about your education in the next segment.
Story_ID: 434880
Speaker 1: But in the final minute remaining in this segment, tell me how your neighborhood, the neighborhood of Waverly [Columbia, South Carolina] has transitioned?  We only have about thirty seconds, or forty-five seconds.
Speaker 2: It has changed some. It's not quite--it was sort of a middle-class residential community.  The children and grandchildren are no longer there, of the original families, and so the property is not quite what it used to be. But it's still not a bad neighborhood. Now, you have to remember that Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] and Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina] are just two or three blocks away from where I grew up. And as a matter of fact, both of those schools are buying up the properties for their future development. So, I have optimism about that neighborhood for the future because the schools are--for example, my second home as a child was the home of a dentist named Dr. B. Everett [ph.]. I loved Mrs. Everett like I loved my own mother [Charity Nash Adams], and she was as nice to me as my own mother.  And I spent as much time at her house as I did at home.  When I was the bishop in South Carolina and chairman of the board of Howard University [Washington, D.C.], their property went on the market for sale, I bought it for Allen.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Speaker 2: And Benedict is doing the same thing, and Allen is doing the same thing in the acquisition of the properties, because those schools will need it in the future, okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you, sir.
Story_ID: 393425
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], we've covered a lot and we have a lot to cover.  Your life has been most interesting, sir.  It's a story certainly worthy of being told.  Thank you again for sharing it with us.  Sir, if you'll tell us the elementary school you attended and tell us some of the teachers who influenced you as a young lad in elementary school.
Speaker 2: I lived in the Waverly [Columbia, South Carolina] neighborhood.  The name of the elementary school which I attended was called Waverly Elementary School [Columbia, South Carolina]. The principal was W.A. Perry, who was a very interesting and helpful person. I had a number of teachers there, and one of the qualities of education in my childhood was that my teacher not only knew me as their student, they knew my parents [Charity Nash Adams and Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] as their friend.  And so, there was kind of a passionate interest in my well-being and in my development and in my behavior. So, that personal quality to the relationship between faculty and student at Waverly was very important. There were some very special teachers at that school at that time.  There was an elderly lady teacher named Mrs. Saxson [ph.], who had taught my older brother [Eugene Avery Adams, Jr.] and sister, and was still around when I went there. I think the teacher who taught me in first, second, and third grade was Mrs. Cornwell [ph.], and she invested in making me learn and understand.  And one of my neighbors who taught me was Mrs. Bradley [ph.], and she lived right around the corner. So, you know, if I didn't handle it right on the way home from school, my parents heard about my carryings on.  So, it was--however, I think it was the relationship--you know, and I think relationships are the most powerful thing in the world--the relationships between families and neighbors and friends in the neighborhood school setting when I was growing up.  I don't know whether that's still true now or not.  But then, you know, the teacher was your friend. And I was the pastor's son, you know, and there was an intimacy of relationships, which was a powerful influence in that elementary school setting. So, I did the best I could with all these folks who were so close to me, watching out for me. And they did, they watched out for you. They didn't take advantage of you.
Speaker 1: I understand. We certainly need more of that today.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: In fact, that may be the missing part of--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it is a missing part of it.  Because I remember when I was a young man, and just beginning to circulate in the larger world.  I knew almost everybody I met, and there were relationships.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Now, you don't know hardly anybody.
Speaker 1: Right, you're right.
Speaker 2: And you don't even know the people in your own neighborhood.
Speaker 1: You're right, you're right.
Speaker 2: Because we have become a mobile society, so we drive everywhere we go, and we don't know the folks who live around the corner or up the street.  So, it is the absence of--and I don't want to call it, neighborhood, because that word carries so much baggage.  But I do want to say it is the absence of relatedness in our communities and in our race, which I think is causing us to not progress as fast or as completely as we ought to.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Story_ID: 393426
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you [at Waverly Elementary School, Columbia, South Carolina], and what kind of child, what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I was a maverick in both categories (laughter). I did not become a good student until much later. I think I had the capacity, and I think because I had some capacity, I got by without appropriate effort. And I was, I had, I was a little devilish. You know, I was not an angel, I got into stuff. And as I told you earlier, I took this strong liking for athletics, and caused a lot of distress by my straying away wherever the athletic event was. They--and my parents [Charity Nash Adams and Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] always knew where to find me, because all they had to do was find out where the ballgame was. Fortunately, the only real recreational facilities were on those two campuses of Allen [Allen University, Columbia, South Carolina] and Benedict [Benedict College, Columbia, South Carolina.] And I was either in the gym at Benedict, or Hurst Field.  You know, there was a John Hurst Field [sic. John Hurst Adams Gymnasium] at Allen, and that's named, I was named after the man that field was named after.  He was also an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal church] bishop from Haiti.  He was a Haitian who was elected an A.M.E. bishop.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: And he was, he and his wife were my godparents.  My father loved him, and named me after him.
Speaker 1: Interesting, interesting.
Speaker 2: So, I got a lot of interesting (laughter)--and it's all about relationships.
Speaker 1: It is indeed, it is indeed.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: And did that influence your life, the fact that you were named after an A.M.E. bishop?  And of course, your dad being an A.M.E. minister--
Speaker 2: Well, I think my father was the primary influence.  And there were other powerful A.M.E. voices in my childhood.  There was a Bishop Reverdy Cassius Ransom [Reverdy C. Ransom], who, I think he spoke at the founding of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Niagara Movement.  You know, he was one of the most eloquent men I ever heard.  And you know, there were people like Mordecai Johnson who was a Baptist preacher, but you know, he was a spellbinder.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And so there were a lot of influences, but the main one, however, was of course my father (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your dad. Amen.
Story_ID: 393427
Speaker 1: We'll cover a little bit more of that later on, I don't want to get ahead of myself.  I know that part is going to be very interesting.  But let's explore a little bit more of John Hurst Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams] as an elementary and middle school young man.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Were you well-mannered, rambunctious, mischievous?  You've explained some--
Speaker 2: I would say mischievous. I was not, I would not describe myself as bad, but I was mischievous. And I guess that's part of being a teenager. When I went to, after I left Waverly Elementary School [Columbia, South Carolina], I went to Carver Junior High School [Columbia, South Carolina], named after George Washington Carver (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) George Washington.
Speaker 2: And my oldest, older sister [Charity Adams Earley] was one of my teachers. And again, it was this relationship thing in a small city.   And of course that had a powerful restraining influence on me. But I, you know, did alright in junior high school, it was a different kind of experience.  And then I went to--
Speaker 1: You were about to tell me where you went to high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Columbia, South Carolina].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's see if you had any dreams or aspirations as early as middle school.  Or do you recall them starting later on in high school? And also, tell me who your friends were in junior high school.
Speaker 2: Well, again, my friends were the people in my neighborhood [Waverly, Columbia, South Carolina]. You know, we'd walk to school together; you know, we didn't have all this transportation and stuff that they do now. Columbia [South Carolina] was not that huge a city at that time, and of course the black neighborhood was much smaller. We walked to school. It was about a mile from my house to Carver Junior High School, maybe a little more. But you know, walking a mile was nothing. You know, I walked a mile to church. So, you walked with your friends. And they were your, they lived in the same neighborhood with you. And so, I told you a couple of names--Chris Garrett [ph.], and a boy we called Pap Watson [ph.]. His name was Rudolph Watson [ph.], but we called him Pap. And Earl Counts [ph.], you know, just a whole group of people. A little ahead of me were some men who probably were a little bit more well-known than they are. We had a Maceo Nance [M. Maceo Nance, Jr.], who was for years the president of South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Yes, sure.
Speaker 2: He was a classmate of my older sister's. And you know, Joseph Earl Thompson, who was a very big name in education as well. They all lived in my neighborhood, and they were either my friends or my sisters' friends.  You know, this is the crowd you walked to school with and walked home with.  And you helped each other stay out of trouble or helped each other get in trouble (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 393428
Speaker 1: Did you attend your dad's church [Bethel A.M.E. Church, Columbia, South Carolina]? And--
Speaker 2: Well, my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] pastored, was no longer a pastor when I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was what we call in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church a presiding elder.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And he subsequently became a general officer, which is he became secretary of education, which was the oversight of our A.M.E. colleges and seminaries.  And he sought to be a bishop, but did not get elected a bishop.  And he bequeathed all that support he had to me, and I did get elected.  And you know, I say that's part of the reason I got elected, you know.  A lot of folks can't give other folks credit, but I know whose shoulders I stand on.
Speaker 1: Amen, amen. So, what were church experiences like you, like for you as a young man?
Speaker 2: Well, they were, I almost thought they were perpetual (laughter). You know, and because you were from a clergy family, you spent a lot of time at church activities. In my time, you went to Sunday school, and you stayed for church. And my mother [Charity Nash Adams], I sat with my mother in church.  I was in my own class in Sunday school, but I sat with my mother in church.  And what she used to do to placate her children in church, she used to, she used to make something she called sweet bread, which is really cake, a one layer cake. And she would bring little pieces of sweet bread wrapped in wax paper, you know, and give us a piece occasionally to tone us down. I remember that so clearly. But we had to go to church and then we had to come back. And the A.M.E. church had an organization for young people called the Allen Christian Endeavor League. And you had to go back to church at six o'clock in the evening to the ACE League, we called it. And you sang in the choir and you joined the youth usher board.  I mean, you spent a great deal of your life in church activities. And in reality it was important, because it was the opportunity to do and to be, and to be elected to something--to speak at the programs which, a lot of things which gave you poise and delivery and presence, which our kids, many of our young people don't get now, because they are not active in their churches. And in many of the schools which they attend, they never have the opportunity to be leader of anything. And in our churches, everybody got a chance to be up.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And there were, I guess what I want to say is part of what the black church provided children and adults was a place to be somebody.
Speaker 1: Amen, amen.
Story_ID: 393429
Speaker 1: Other than being greatly influenced by the church as a young man, can you describe other things that may have influenced you early on?
Speaker 2: It would primarily be people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the things that my family made all of us do, was work. And after we got to junior and senior high school, in the summertime we had to find jobs.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And we had to earn a little spending money and save a little money. This was all part of the process, at least in my neighborhood [Waverly, Columbia, South Carolina] growing up.  You found something to do, if it was running errands or if you were doing lawns. We didn't have as much of the fast food kind of jobs that my children worked on, because I inherited the thing that you ought to work during the summer. And so, you met people. For example, I worked as a carpenter's helper for an elderly gentleman named Wheeler [ph.]. And he had, he was, his nickname was the Chairman, because at church he was chairman of everything (laughter).  And so, we called him the Chairman. Well, Chairman Wheeler took me on as a carpenter's helper. He was a carpenter by trade, a builder. And I worked for him, and he had a lot of influence on me, in terms of my work ethic and in terms of the value he placed on work. So, I was, one of my jobs was an elderly lady named Mrs. Manns [ph.], who used me to be her errand boy. And she would call my house and tell my mama [Charity Nash Adams], "I need John [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams]." And my mama would send me there, and I would go to the store for her.  I would cut her lawn, whatever she needed to do.  And she would talk to me the whole time I was around her about different things. The subject matter, I cannot remember, except I remember that she would drop an occasional pearl of wisdom, which to me made sense.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: So, it was the people in the world in which I functioned who were the other great influence. School, church, and relationships did contribute a lot to what I, to whatever it is I became.
Story_ID: 393430
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school?  Who were some of your teachers?  And give us some of your high school experiences, please.
Speaker 2: I went to high school at a place, at a school called Booker T. Washington High School in Columbia, South Carolina.  I lived in the Waverly neighborhood [Columbia, South Carolina], and this was about a mile and a half from my house, but we still had to walk to school. Between our homes and Booker T. Washington sat a large part of the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]. And they really did not want us to walk through that campus, and made it very difficult, you know. So when I see all these black boys playing football, and a basketball team that is totally black, you know, they've come part of the way. I will forgive them when they get a black president. But we walked to Booker T. Washington. A gentleman by the name of Simmons [J. Andrew Simmons] was the principal. And he was not a preacher, but a very eloquent speaker. And the assemblies and the meetings in which he participated were always memorable and influential. And he was a great storyteller, and the one I remember most is that he was talking about--there was a little black bank in Columbia named the Victory Savings Bank (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Victory, right.
Speaker 2: My father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] was in on that, and served both as president and chairman. But Mr. Simmons used to tell the story that he went to the bank and said, "If you got my money, I don't want it.  But you ain't got it, I want it now" (laughter).  And he was making a point in one of his speeches. And the place just roared, you know, and everybody remembered. But he was the principal, and again, you had the same situation that you had at the other schools--that the people who were your teachers were also your colleagues and friends of your parents, and they took a genuine interest in your development. At that time in Columbia they had the dual school systems.  And the series of black superintendents--the first one I remember is a man named C.A. Johnson. And he and my dad, they were friends. And the next one was Mr. Whiteman [John H. Whiteman], and he and my family were friends. And so, I couldn't get away from people who had relationships with me.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Speaker 2: And so, and there were teachers who really wanted the students to do well. And so, Booker T. was a great experience for me. And I was not particularly an honor student or anything. I really didn't take studying seriously until I got to graduate school.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But I was able to not fall behind.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Story_ID: 393431
Speaker 1: Is there any one teacher or member of the staff who influenced you more than others in high school [Booker T. Washington High School, Columbia, South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember.  You know, I think that the most influential person for me in high school was the principal.  There was something about Mr. Simmons [J. Andrew Simmons] I just liked, and I found him to be sort of an inspirational kind of personality for me.  I don't remember any teacher in particular having an unusual impact.  They all taught, and I did their work as best I could.
Speaker 1: Your favorite subject and your favorite extracurricular activity?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, my favorite extracurricular activity then was athletics. I loved to play ball, any kind that was available, you know. And that was really basically football, basketball, baseball, and tennis in my community. I don't know how widespread tennis was at that early time, but that was my favorite activity.
Speaker 1: Any favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite subjects then were really sort of social science and civics kind of stuff. I've always had an instinct for the political.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 393432
Speaker 1: Had you started giving any thought to what you wanted to be in life, whether you wanted to go to college, or?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in my family there was no discussion of whether you were going to college.  You could discuss where you were going, but you had no right in my household to discuss whether you were going. My parents [Charity Nash Adams and Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] made it explicitly clear that if you're going to be in this family, you were going to college. Now, you could talk about where you were going, but you could not discuss whether you were going. So, I went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] for my first year. And I was too young to be away from home making my own decisions without the appropriate and necessary parental and family guidance, and I did not do well. And that's a nice way to put it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I came home and worked the summer and transferred to Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina.]
Speaker 1: What was that experience like at Johnson C. Smith?  Any fraternal organizations, or continued athletics or academics?  What was college experience like?
Speaker 2: I never played athletics at home, because my mother objected to her children submitting themselves to the punishment of athletics; she did not want us to play. But both my brother [Eugene Avery Adams, Jr.] and I played football at Johnson C. Smith.  And I played three other sports one year. I couldn't do that every year, but I was very much into the athletic program at Johnson C. Smith. There were several people in the athletic program that were very influential to me.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: The football coach was named Eddie Jackson [Edward Jackson] when I went there.  He later transferred, and became head coach at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was, I think, brilliant as a football coach. He led Smith to its only undefeated season in its history.  We played eight games, we won five of them, and tied three of them (laughter). And that was my first year playing ball. And the reason I was playing was because my older brother had played, and he was the punter. Although he played tackle, he went back to punting.  He could kick a ball sixty or seventy yards. And he taught me the technique before I went to college. So I used to go out to the football field on the sideline, and I would kick the ball fifty or sixty yards. And Eddie Jackson said to me, "Man, you need to come play." I told him I needed a scholarship.  So, he and I worked it out. And after I was able, under pressure, to get the ball punted soon enough--not to have it blocked--he gave me an athletic scholarship, and I played football. He left after that year and went to Howard, I don't know why. We never got into that, but I continued to play.
Story_ID: 393433
Speaker 1: The other coach, the other athletic person, one of the faculty members, Dr. Coleman [ph.], was the tennis teacher. And--
Speaker 2: L.C. Coleman.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: L.C. Coleman.
Speaker 1: And he was such a caring kind of person.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I played on the tennis team, and he spent vast amounts of time with us, not just teaching us how to play tennis, but you know, how to be a man, you know. So, really those two people were--and the other person at Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], there were a couple of people who were influential. There was Dean Rimes [ph.], who was the dean of men. And he was a character, but a likeable character.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was very helpful. So, there were people there who--and again, you're talking about a black college [HBCU] with a black faculty, and maybe occasionally one or two white faculty members. But they cared about the students, and wanted them to succeed.
Speaker 2: What did you major in in college?
Speaker 1: I majored in history.
Speaker 2: History. Very well, sir. Did you pledge a fraternity?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I became an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] in, while I was at Johnson C. Smith.
Speaker 2: Very well, Sir.
Speaker 1: So I've been an Alpha for over half a century (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Half a century. Very well, sir.
Story_ID: 393434
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], you went to Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina].  What year did you graduate from Johnson C. Smith University in Charlotte, North Carolina?
Speaker 2: I graduated from Johnson C. Smith in 1947.
Speaker 1: And then what turn did your life take at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I went, from Johnson C. Smith, I went to Cleveland, Ohio.  I had a sister who was living in Cleveland, and I went to live with her with the intent of going to Western Reserve University [Cleveland, Ohio].  I think it's Case Western [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], now. But at that time it was the Western Reserve University law school [Case Western Reserve University School of Law, Cleveland, Ohio], because I thought I wanted to be a lawyer. During the course of that process, I acknowledged my call to the ministry. A pastor there in Cleveland, Reverend Charles Spivey, Sr., counseled me through the process.  And with his counsel and with the assistance of my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.], I ended up opting to go to the seminary, and picked going to Boston University [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts] where I went in 1948.
Story_ID: 393435
Speaker 1: Right, and what was your experience like at Boston University [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts]?  Now, we're still talking the Jim Crow era. So, if you'd like to comment on your experience, even at Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and elsewhere as it relates to Jim Crow laws, what was your experience like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, segregation and racial injustice was the culture of the time. And you really don't need to describe it, you just have to acknowledge it, because it was everywhere. And Charlotte [North Carolina], like everywhere else, was a very racist city in the '40s [1940s]. And you felt it, you saw it, you experienced it.  And black folks, having to deal with injustice and racism and segregation during all those years, developed remarkable capacities for survival.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It would do this country well to learn from black folks how to deal with adversity. And we could, we would be a much better nation if we would learn the lessons of how to handle adversity that black folks had to learn in order to survive.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: So, we just, we just, we lived in two worlds.  We lived in the world where we had to go out and deal with that, but we came back to our own world.  And in my view, the black culture, led primarily by the black church, became an alternate society for black folks. And that's why I feel that black folks owe the black church a lot.  And conversely, the black church owes black folk a lot, because they made it their primary institution in the community.
Speaker 1: Any thoughts on our plight had it not been for the black church affirming us and our communities and the village of?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure we could have survived without both the spiritual support and the reaffirmation of our somebody-ness, which the black church did, and the ethical imperative inherent in the Christian faith that caused the black church to be the home base of the freedom movement. All of those things--I think theologically, ethically and spiritually, and really sociologically--the black church was crucial and critical, to not just our survival, but our survival with our sanity intact. And so I think in terms of our history in America during that era of segregation and racism and slavery, the black church, we co-opted the man's faith and used it as our own tool. Now they've taking our stuff and using it in their churches.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Story_ID: 393436
Speaker 1: On to Boston University [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts], it's still the Jim Crow era.  Tell us about your experience at Boston University while working on your, I think you worked on two degrees there, is that right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your experience at Boston.
Speaker 2: Well, I had a different odyssey in going to Boston. And let me just say it the way I can say it easiest. Most of the persons in the church in that era, the late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], who were going to pursue graduate theological education ended up going to Boston--the Sam Proctors [Samuel DeWitt Proctor], the C. Eric Lincolns, et cetera, all of these people went to Boston, and I discovered why.
Speaker 1: Why is that?
Speaker 2: At Boston University, the dean of the School of Theology was a man named Walter G. Muelder. And Walter G. Muelder, of German descent, had created a climate of equality and fairness to all students that I had never seen before.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, black students were welcomed at Boston University. The atmosphere and environment into which they came was one that was supportive and cordial.  And at the time, there was nowhere else that I knew about. I went back a few years ago when they had their Martin Luther King Day [Martin Luther King, Jr. Day] celebration, and this is what the conversation was about.  Why did all of us come to Boston?  And you know, we tried--there were two fundamental reasons. That's the first one, and the most important. The other was economic, because there were ways that they had set up the money issue so that you could come there with no money, but go to school. For example, for Methodist preachers like me, first of all I could go to Boston University School of Theology tuition-free.  They had a fund out of which the tuition for Methodist schools was paid.  So, we didn't have to pay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then you could borrow from the alumni fund the money to pay your room and board, and take the year to pay it back.  So you borrowed it upfront, and during the course of the year you got a job busting dishes or waiting tables or cleaning office buildings, whatever you could find to do. And you would make a little money and you would pay that loan back, so that next fall you could borrow that money again. And many of us were able to go to Boston University. So, the economics and the environment were extremely cordial and attractive at Boston University School of Theology. So many, many, many, many, many black scholars went to Boston University at that time. And I think those are the two main reasons.
Story_ID: 393437
Speaker 1: And as I recall, perhaps the best evidence of the fairness and equal opportunities was the fact that there was a black dean of the chapel there.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, initially Howard Thurman (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Howard Thurman.
Speaker 2: He was dean of Marsh Chapel [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And of course Howard Thurman was himself, you know, a legendary, legendary person in the faith community.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When I was at Boston [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts], Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] having finished Crozer Seminary [Crozer Theological Seminary, Upland, Pennsylvania] came to Boston to get his Ph.D. in the personalism school of theology and philosophy, which was headquartered at Boston. Borden Parker Bowne had developed this theological and philosophical slant called personalism, and it was carried on by Edgar Sheffield Brightman and Harold DeWolf [L. Harold DeWolf], and all those people who were still at Boston when we were there.  And Martin came, and you know, he and Coretta [Coretta Scott King] courted while she was at the Boston Conservatory [Boston Conservatory of Music; Boston Conservatory at Berklee, Boston, Massachusetts] and he was working on his doctorate at BU [Boston University School of Theology], et cetera. It was a wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: I pastored a little church for the bishop of that area. Again, relationships. He was from South Carolina, he knew my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.], and my father knew his father. He said, "I'm going to look out for John [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams]." He gave me a little church, and the church had a parsonage. I had a place to stay free. So, it's been an incredibly blessed kind of journey, because if you build relationships, those relationships will come back to bless you.
Speaker 1: Amen, amen.
Story_ID: 393438
Speaker 1: Did you get to know Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] when he was a student there?
Speaker 2: Very well. Even though the environment at Boston University [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts] was one of openness and fairness, you still had a cultural cluster where we all got together regularly. And so, yes, I got to know him fairly well, and sort of followed him around the rest of his spectacular career. And you know, I was always in support, and whenever possible present, to assist in whatever ways I could. I was never close or in his inner circle, but I-but we were always friends.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other influential African American ministers that you got to know while at Boston University?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of them. As I was saying, the whole interaction--C. Eric Lincoln, Proctor, Sam Proctor [Samuel DeWitt Proctor], Bishop Rembert Stokes of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, Dean Evans Crawford [HistoryMaker Evans Crawford] of the Boston--of the Howard University chapel [Washington, D.C.] for many, many, years. Just a--well, the list is forever. Because as I said, most of the black religionists who were pursuing graduate degrees found their way to Boston in that era. Now that may not be true now, but in that era, it was the place to go. So I met a lot of, a lot of people who had wonderful careers afterwards. You know, there were a lot of people, like Andrew Sullivan [ph.] at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--who is a Boston University graduate, but he's in another area. But it is a school which has produced a lot of important people, and a school which has continuously sought to make itself better.
Speaker 1: And in keeping with your theme, no doubt you've maintained these relationships down through the years and have worked with these people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've tried very hard to maintain relationships. I think I learned somewhere that relationships and people skills--and I learned as a pastor that my people skills were more important than my preaching skills--that if the people thought I cared about them and if I loved them and served them, they would put up with my bad preaching (laughter). And that's true, they will (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's true. Amen, amen.
Story_ID: 393439
Speaker 1: Between Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and Boston [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts], and even beyond Boston, you pastored churches as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your experience pastoring as an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal church] minister during that era.
Speaker 2: Well, I was assigned as a student pastor to a little church, Bethel A.M.E. Church in Lynn, Massachusetts. And it was basically a student, a seminary student appointment. After I left, almost every succeeding pastor until recently has been a person who was working on a seminary degree at one of the seminaries in the Greater Boston [Massachusetts] area. So, it was that kind of an appointment. And they were good people, they were very nice people.  You did not make a lot of money, but they took care of you. You know, they fed you, they housed you. They would not let you have too much want, even though it was a very small congregation. After I stayed there a couple years and finished my work at the seminary, I went to Payne Theological Seminary at Wilberforce, Ohio to teach. And I was on the faculty at Payne and did a little part-time stuff at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  That's where I met my wife [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams].  She came to join the faculty of Wilberforce, from Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], and we met. And you know, the rest is history.
Speaker 1: The rest is history.
Speaker 2: And then I stayed there four years, taught at the seminary. I was the dean of students at the seminary, and tried very hard to work with the young men and women who were going into the ministry, to teach them what little I knew at that time.
Story_ID: 393440
Speaker 1: But in 1956 when I was still in my twenties, I was made president of a college, Paul Quinn College [Waco, Texas]. The bishop, in our denomination, it's usually the fact that the bishop of the district in which the school sits, also serves as the chairman of the board of that school. The bishop of Texas at that time invited me, and asked me if I would come be president. I told him I did not think I knew how to be president. So, he responded to me and told me to learn fast, which is, you know, an incredible kind of experience. And he recommended me to the board, and they elected me president of Paul Quinn in 1956.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And I went down there and I got married that summer. And so in 1956, it was one of the great years. I married my wife [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams] and I got my first big job (laughter) in 1956. And I went and I was the president of Paul Quinn for six difficult but exciting years. I managed to bring a lot of progress and stability to the institution, because as the bishop said, I had to learn fast. Fortunately, there were lots of people whom I had met in my life, and I sought their counsel and advice. I made no pretense that I knew enough to be president of a college. I knew enough to know that I didn't know, and therefore I was willing to seek the guidance and help of a lot of people who did know more about schools than I did. And it worked.
Story_ID: 393441
Speaker 1: By the time you completed your tenure as president of Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Waco, Texas], you had ten consecutive years in academia.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts in terms of your future at that point, as an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal church] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I always managed to stay related and occupied in ministry. When I taught at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], I served as supply pastor at a lot of different churches at the request of the bishop. When a pastor would die, for example, or if a pastor was promoted and a church was open for a few months, the bishop would allow me the privilege to go be the pastor for those few months. So, for most of the time I was in Ohio, I was supplying at some place.
Speaker 1: In Texas, you mean?
Speaker 2: No, in Ohio.
Speaker 1: In Ohio.
Speaker 2: I was at Wilberforce and Payne [Payne Theological Seminary, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Speaker 1: I see, in Wilberforce, I see.
Speaker 2: And in Texas I appointed myself as president, the pastor of the campus church. So I was not only president of the college, I was the pastor of the church on campus, which gave me the opportunity to preach. It wasn't like preaching at a real congregation, because these were basically students.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And I did not have any real financial responsibilities, because the college took care of the obligations of the institution. But it was pastoring.
Speaker 1: It was pastoring.
Speaker 2: And so, I was not only the young people's president, I was their pastor.  And they could mess me up by coming to me and saying, "This is not, I'm not talking to you as the president now. I'm talking to you as my pastor. And this is confidential, and you can't even use it in your administration of the college." So, they could tell me stuff that they had done for which they would have been put out of school if it had not been shared in pastoral confidence.
Speaker 1: I understand, I understand (laughter). Kind of in a box.
Speaker 2: But it's a good box.
Speaker 1: It's a good box.
Speaker 2: The kids needed that.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Story_ID: 393442
Speaker 1: During those six years at Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Waco, Texas], the Civil Rights Movement is in full blossom, '56 [1956] to '62 [1962].  What impact did that have on Paul Quinn and on John Hurst Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams]?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very active in what was going on in Texas at the time.  Texas was not the most vigorous state in the pursuit of civil rights and equal justice at that time.  But we had a lot of things going on.  Let me just give you a couple of things which, which happened. I had some militant students in the student body of the college, many of whom were strongly influenced by Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the movement that was going on in other parts of the country. I was influenced, because I went to a lot of them, and I heard the rhetoric and observed the strategies and tactics used. Without my knowledge, they give me credit for organizing. But I really didn't; the students did it themselves. They organized a series of sit-ins at downtown Waco [Texas] stores and cafes. And of course, the leadership from the city called me. And I told them, I couldn't do anything about that, but I tell you what. If you want to get them out of there, you give them a menu and show them the prices, they'll get up and leave.  Because they couldn't pay for anything. But anyway the truth of the matter is that I supported the students. And eventually the chamber of commerce of that little town, Waco, Texas, came with a proposal--that if I could convince the students to stop sitting in and messing up their money, on a day certain they would announce the integration of everything in Waco. Now, that happened.  And I, the students allowed me to agree to that, because I could not make any promise on their behalf because they were not doing this on my direction, although I supported them in doing it.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But they said, "If you want us to agree to that, Pres, we'll do it."  So those young people withdrew, and the city kept its word.
Speaker 1: Good.
Speaker 2: They announced integration, and some of the merchants were kicking and screaming. But there were also members of the chamber of commerce that had worked this agreement out. So, it worked. I was the person who took the young man to Waco High School [Waco, Texas] to force them to integrate the public schools. I didn't do anything but just walk in the school with him, but the climate had been so created that the school system didn't have any choice except to accept him in class. And of course then all of the schools integrated and, you know, so it was a--I had a lot of fun (laughter).
Story_ID: 393443
Speaker 1: How else were you impacted by the Civil Rights Movement, Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the Civil Rights Movement was, for me, a continuing saga of lessons that I had begun to learn from my own family--my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] and the community in Columbia [South Carolina] which was also active. And I think I mentioned some stuff that they sought to do when I was a boy growing up in Columbia, and this was a continuation of that. And it became clear to me that this country would never be what it was capable of becoming until it dealt with its ugly history of racial injustice. And for all practical purposes, Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was able to articulate this and illustrate this, and demonstrate for this more effectively than anyone had ever done before. And all across the country, including Waco, Texas and everywhere else, people--there were local leadership who bought into the movement. And so, every city in the country probably had a small cadre of leadership that worked in their community during the Civil Rights Movement, to a lesser extent before the Civil Rights Movement, and to a larger extent after the movement, on the issues of racial injustice. One of the things that I hope The HistoryMakers can do is record the stories of the indigenous leadership in these cities and towns across the country, who prior to the Civil Rights Movement had begun to plant the seeds of justice, and whose stories are disappearing because they are now dying; they're my age and older.
Story_ID: 393444
Speaker 1: In the final minute or two in this segment, do you recall any one student or faculty member who went on from Paul Quinn College [Waco, Texas] to more actively participate on a national level in the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah. As a matter of fact, one of the, one of the highly visible incidents of the civil rights struggle is the Lester Maddox, axe, with three or four young men, all of whom I know, two of whom are dead. But Lester--one of the students, one of the men who was in that group was a student who had finished at Paul Quinn and had come to ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] to study. And he and some other students of course decided they were going to integrate Lester Maddox's place [Pickrick Cafeteria, Atlanta, Georgia]. And that's the great axe story, I understand. So, yeah, they, they--some of the students who were in Paul Quinn at the time I was the president were greatly influenced by the movement, and much of their future careers were impacted by it. As a matter of fact, I took two van loads of students from Waco [Texas] to Austin [Texas] to hear Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speak and attend a reception honoring him, so they could get to meet him. And they were very impressed that I, their president, knew Dr. King who by this time was a hero of the race. And it was a great moment. And some of them went on to get Ph.D.'s and join the faculties of big universities, and some of them remained. And most of the pastors, the young men and women who were in Paul Quinn who went into the ministry, continued their activist life. Because being a pastor in the African Methodist Episcopal church, or a black church, gives you the liberty to be an activist, which some of our brothers who don't have that freedom have to be a little bit more careful.
Speaker 1: And that was my next question. To what extent--and I only have a minute left--to what extent can the activism of the young A.M.E. pastors be attributed to their denomination, vis-a-vis anything else?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think you would have to be--you must remember that the African Methodist Episcopal church, brought out of Richard Allen's experience in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], was born in protest of racism. And some of the great heroes for example here in Georgia--the heroes of Georgia like Henry McNeal Turner, you can't belong to the church.
Story_ID: 393445
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], we've talked about your ten years in academia as a teacher and as a college president [at Paul Quinn College, Waco, Texas]. You're pastoring churches simultaneously, and the student body as well. We've talked about your academic experience at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] as well Boston University [Boston University School of Theology, Boston, Massachusetts] where you pursued two degrees. And somewhere along the line, you took courses at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. As I ask my next question, if you'd like to just share with us your reason for doing some studying at Harvard, and then move on to tell us about your experience as a pastor. Or rather, tell us a little bit more about how the fire of an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal church] minister contributes to the leadership of so many A.M.E. pastors in the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, let me start with the latter one first, and simply say that the tradition of our church is one of militance, both in the faith and militance in the pursuit of justice. Richard Allen's experience, which began our church, was in protest of racism and mistreatment of African Americans. He slapped the name African in front of Methodist Episcopal to affirm the dignity of people who were Christians of African descent. Daniel Alexander Payne, the founder of black higher education in this country, was a very militant pastor in Charleston [South Carolina], who gave refuge to the movement there.  The slave rebellions were headquartered in the A.M.E. churches in Charleston.  Henry McNeal Turner did the same thing here in Georgia, and that's just three illustrations of it. And almost every bishop of any fame has achieved that fame because of his outspoken militance, both in the practice of the faith and in the pursuit of justice.  So, that's just who A.M.E.s are. And if you're an A.M.E. and you're not militant about what you believe, and you're not militant about justice for all people, then you're not a good A.M.E., because that is who we are, and that is what defines and describes us.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 393446
Speaker 1: Well, when I left Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Waco, Texas] as president, I was assigned to be the pastor of First A.M.E. Church in Seattle, Washington.  The same bishop who invited me to come to be the president of Paul Quinn assigned me to be the pastor of First A.M.E. And here we go again, relationships are important. And in my view of getting stuff done, relationships are probably as powerful a force as there is. I went to Seattle, and the strong civil rights thrust had just come over the Cascade Mountains to Seattle.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they were just beginning to have serious efforts to address the situation. Part of what needed to happen in Seattle was--of course, the black population there was very small. And, you know, the place where the smaller the population, the less well-defined the race issue is.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And so, one of the things that I was privileged to participate in in Seattle, was to redefine the race issue for the Pacific Northwest--that everything is not all right; we are not well employed, we are not well placed in the public sector. So, racism is alive and present in the Pacific Northwest just like it is everywhere else in America. And in that setting, there had come together a coalition of the leadership of the various advocacy organizations in Seattle called the Central Area. The Central Area was the area where black folks lived, the Central Area Civil Rights Committee. And a C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] preacher named Mance Jackson had been chairman. And his church moved him from Seattle to somewhere else, and there was a vacancy. Listen to the relationship thing again. Several of the members of the Central Area Civil Rights Committee and heads of organizations were members of the church I had just been assigned to pastor.  And they recommended that as the pastor of the largest black church in the Pacific Northwest, that I should be chairman of this committee, and they elected me. And for eight years, I had the privilege of being chairman of the Central Area Civil Rights Committee where we designed strategy, and worked out implementation. As the pastor of a black church, I was the demonstrator and noise-maker and hell-raiser on behalf of civil rights, while other people did the negotiations in the corporate offices and in the political offices. So, we had a, we developed--and I don't know whether--I'm sure other communities did it, but we had a very well-defined strategy of designated responsibility. It was my responsibility as the pastor of First A.M.E. and chairman of the committee, to go public with the issues. The executive of the Urban League [Seattle Urban League; Urban League of Metropolitan Seattle] and the other people--the executive of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and other people on the committee who had more access to the larger community did the negotiating. I did very little negotiating, I just--so I got, I got a big, bad reputation in Seattle as a militant civil rights person.  Whether that's right or not, I enjoyed wearing the label.
Story_ID: 393447
Speaker 1: And we had a lot of significant accomplishments because of the strategy of designated responsibility. We got an open housing ordinance passed. We got the public schools changed. We ended up before I left with a black superintendent, so we had--named Patterson [Roland Patterson], who left there and came to Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's deceased now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But we had a lot of wonderful experiences in jobs, in economic development, and housing and education.  And one of the things which--I just came back from Seattle [Washington] because I was out there to speak at the fortieth anniversary of the Central Area Motivation Program [CAMP], which was the War on Poverty. And it was forty years ago that we went to Washington [D.C.] with a fellow named Walter Huntley to meet with a senator named Warren Magnuson, who called Sargent Shriver [R. Sargent Shriver] and told Sargent Shriver, "You fund this for me." And they funded CAMP. And it was, I believe, among the first, if not the first War on Poverty program funded in the United States. And it was, it was radically different from the traditional War on Poverty program, because this one was premised on community organization and empowerment, as opposed to doing good.
Speaker 2: I see, amen.
Speaker 1: So, I had a great time in Seattle. And the people in Seattle--I have to be fair--the people of First A.M.E. Church in Seattle were exceptionally tolerant of my commitment of so much of my time to public affairs and civil rights and so forth, as opposed to the pastoral duties which I was called to do. And they understood, and they forgave and put up with me.
Speaker 2: But at the same time, knowing the reputation of [HistoryMaker] Bishop John Hurst Adams that I know, you continued to feed the flock.
Speaker 1: Well, you must do that.
Speaker 2: Amen.
Speaker 1: You know, you must meet the needs of the people at their points of pain. And you must preach.
Speaker 2: Amen.
Speaker 1: And I tried to do that to the best of my ability. But again, you build relationships with your people.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I spend an inordinate amount of time trying to understand and relate to people where they are--and that helps. I used to get up at four o'clock in the morning and go and have prayer with my members who were about to go into surgery. I would beat the surgeon to the hospital. Now, you couldn't get those folks to turn on me. Because at their moment of maximum vulnerability, I was there to say that, "You have the strength of the Lord on your side" (laughter).
Speaker 2: Amen, amen.
Story_ID: 393448
Speaker 1: In 1968, the year of the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], you were called to move to Grant A.M.E Church in Los Angeles, California.  Before sharing with me your experience at Grant, would you tell me whether you were still in Seattle [Washington] when Dr. King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What impact did that have you on and the city?
Speaker 2: I brought you some photographs which capture it. But I was still in Seattle, and I still had this mantle of leadership. And the biggest demonstration ever held in Seattle was held in honor of Dr. King on the circumstance of his assassination. And one of the ironic things which happened at the demonstration was that I had in my pocket, among other things, my own notes for what I was going to say. But I happened to have in my pocket the speech that Dr. King made on the occasion of the assassination of [President] John Fitzgerald Kennedy. And for that occasion, I took the liberty not to make the speech I had written, but to substitute this Dr. King speech in tribute to Kennedy, as a tribute to him.
Speaker 1: My Lord.
Speaker 2: And it was, for me, and for the people who knew what--had paid enough attention to history--it was a powerful moment.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. King and President Kennedy were both assassinated during my tenure at Seattle.
Speaker 1: What impact did it have--the assassination of President Kennedy and Dr. King--have on the people of Seattle, and from your perspective, on the country? Because you, by that time, had basically lived across the country, so you have (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think there was, there were some powerful lessons communicated in this, in these two deaths.
Story_ID: 393449
Speaker 1: One is that nobody is immune to tragedy. As well protected as the president is, and as much beloved as John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] might have been, if somebody wants to deal damage, they can find a way. We cannot isolate ourselves totally from the human tragedy. Secondly, it began to make America, I think, take a look at itself in terms of the spirit of hate it had allowed to fester unattended in our culture.  One of the things that--I used to press the case particularly in Seattle [Washington]--was that Seattle was a community where the issues of racial injustice can be dealt with before they get so big that you can't deal with them. And the second thrust was that unless we embrace the poor and the underprivileged into the society, we are going to create a subculture which is going to be more destructive than anything we ever imagined. I'm afraid we have about let that happen.  And so, there were lessons in the deaths of these men.  In the death of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I think the lessons are even more dramatic, because he was killed by an assassin [James Earl Ray] whose motive to this day is not clear. And whether he was part of a conspiracy is still open to debate. So the fact that Americans, like everybody else in the world, can be ugly and violent and destructive with each other becomes clear. I think it was a critical lesson at the time for America to take a look at itself, at what kind of hatred it had allowed to sit and grow in the middle of this very affluent country. I think the unspoken lesson is black folks--marvelous capacity to deal with tragedy and adversity. Even though there were sporadic outbreaks of violence, basically, black Americans, with profound anger and pain, dealt with the death of Dr. King and moved to--let's keep the legacy alive. "You killed the dreamer, but you can't kill the dream," is the way it is frequently phrased.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 393450
Speaker 1: Later that summer as you prepare to begin your ministry in Los Angeles [California], Robert Fitzgerald Kennedy [sic. Robert F. Kennedy] is assassinated in that city (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: And that's on top of the Watts riots.  What kind of atmosphere did that present to you in Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to tell you a funny story about my going to Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the midst of all this assassination and violence, and just after the Watts riots, when the bishop assigned me to go to Grant [Grant A.M.E. Church], Los Angeles, I asked for an appointment with him. And I went to see him, and said, "Now, Bishop, are you sure you want to send a man my complexion to Watts at this time of history?"  (Laughter) And he said, "You can handle it." Well, I, I survived. And again, I survived on the basis of building relationships (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Relationships.
Speaker 2: I made friends with the gang leaders. I made friends with the street people. I spent time in places where pastors did not normally spend time.  But then I began to--you know, so I had a relationship of trust with the people in the community, which allowed me to have both success and safety. Because the church I pastored was one block from Will Rogers Park [Ted Watkins Memorial Park, Los Angeles, California], where the riots started. And some of the people who they say started the riot, I got to know fairly well. And I don't believe they started it. I think it was more spontaneous than planned.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Story_ID: 393451
Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of your pastorate at Grant A.M.E. [Grant A.M.E. Church, Los Angeles, California] and First A.M.E. [First A.M.E. Church] in Seattle [Washington]? After all, these two pastorates would propel you to be the eighty-seventh bishop in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.
Speaker 2: Well, I think the focus of my ministry has always been on two things.  One is the empowerment of people. I'm not much of a builder of buildings, although I have shared in doing that several times. But that was not what I was about. I tried, more than that, to build opportunities for people, and to equip people to take advantage of the opportunities that might come their way. So, that has always been the focus of my ministry. Even the focus of my ministry as a bishop has been the enabling and empowering of young pastors to achieve as much as their talent and nerve would allow them to achieve. And so at both places, the second focus of my ministry has always been causes that are not unique to the church community, but unique to the community in which the church functions. Let me illustrate what I mean by that.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles [California], the church I pastored was at 103rd and South Central--105th [Street] and South Central [Avenue].  We took a survey of our membership, only to discover that within a mile of our church, in every direction, we had only three families that attended our church. Our church was a commuter church.  Watts [Los Angeles, California] was the port of entry into Los Angeles. And as the people came and succeeded, they moved out of that area to nicer areas, allegedly nicer areas. I found nothing wrong with the Watts area--nice houses, nice people. But, that troubled me. Now, there's something wrong with this church if we're sitting in this residential community and none of the residents attend our church but two or three. There's something, something missing. So we designed a program which we call the Saturday ethnic school. And we went that same mile in every direction around our church and recruited children between the ages of four and twelve to come to the ethnic school on Saturday--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from nine to one [o'clock]. Now, first of all, we were providing parents with first-class babysitting services. So, the parents of these children could have four hours of free time on Saturday to shop, to run their errands. Secondly, we taught three subjects--reading, arithmetic, and black history. So the Saturday ethnic school taught competence and African American history, in supplement to the Sunday school, which taught Hebrew Christian history.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And we couched it in how to teach black pride without teaching white hate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was designed to respond to what I thought was an important need for us--the need for the children to have an affirmation of their ego and know who they were, and to be prepared to do well in school. At the same time, it was a recruiting device for their parents to bring them to that church they went to on Saturday.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And both worked.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Speaker 2: So, the business of reaching for people at the point of their need is sort of the kind of emphasis my ministry had, both as a pastor and as a bishop.
Story_ID: 393452
Speaker 1: How were you, how did it impact you that you were selected in 1972 as a bishop? Is there something that you had worked for? Is it something you had prayed for? Is it something that just came upon you? Exactly what happened, and how did that impact you?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a long story. And it is not something that they give you.
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: It's something you have to aspire for.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: And you have to work at. And again, I think my own success at becoming a bishop was based on relationships, and there were many. I told you earlier that I think the fact that my father [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] ran to be a bishop and did not get elected--but he had been friends to many, many young men and women in the church who were still around when I ran. And I think I inherited a lot of support from my father's good relationships with people. So, that's one set of relationships. I am a native of South Carolina. And if you know anything about South Carolina, that's the hotbed of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church. A third of all the bishops ever elected probably came out of South Carolina. And it is the smallest district in our church, geographically, but the largest numerically. So, just being from South Carolina--and the South Carolina legacy is a second relationship. I had taught school in Ohio and pastored on the side, and had relationships there.  I had been president of a college in Texas [Paul Quinn College, Waco, Texas], and had a lot of relationships there. I was a pastor in the Fifth District [Fifth Episcopal District] on the West Coast in two different places. So, I had three or four home bases working for me. And when you put all that pooled together, you know--then secondly, in our church, you know, during Reconstruction when they put black folks out of politics, you know, all those politicians came into the church as preachers. Because that's the only way you could make a living with your voice. And there's a strong tradition of political activity in the life of the black church. And I don't say that to down it, I say that to describe it. And I can't down it, because I'm a participant in that (laughter). But wherever you seek to influence outcomes and to influence people's point of view, you've got politics going on. So, we do have that. And so you campaign, and I campaigned very hard. And it was on the basis of campaigning on certain kinds of issues that added to the already considerable support I had, based on my relationships. And so, I just got elected a bishop.
Speaker 1: And we thank God for that.
Speaker 2: Well, I do.  It's been a marvelous thirty-two years.
Speaker 1: And the viewer of this tape will have a new understanding and appreciation of the importance of relationships. Even beyond one's life for indeed, you have told us how the relationships of your father made a positive difference in your life, and even the election as bishop--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --so that's a valuable lesson for all of us to learn.
Speaker 2: I think it's critical for any person who has any sense of wanting to do anything worthwhile with their lives that you have to build relationships. And you cannot burn bridges, because it may not be there when you have to come back over it.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Story_ID: 393453
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], again, thank you for sharing with us this election process for bishop [in the African Methodist Episcopal church]. Your first tour of duty as bishop was in Texas, from 1978 to 1980, as bishop of the Tenth Episcopal District. Any experiences from that calling that you'd like to share with us at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's a very critical period in one's life as a bishop, is his first assignment. Because that is where you have to learn what your job is, and where you learn and hopefully increase your skills in doing the job which you are authorized to do. So Texas, for me, was a wonderful assignment, in the sense that I had served in Texas as the president of Paul Quinn College [Waco, Texas], therefore I was no stranger to those people. I was almost like one of their adopted sons coming home. And the truth of the matter is they embraced me warmly and taught me how to be a bishop. One of the responsibilities as bishop of Texas at that time was the well-being of Paul Quinn College, which I had served as president. And our struggles, when I went back as bishop, were the struggles with the Southern Association [Southern Association of Colleges and Schools] and the accrediting process. Fortunately, having had some experience as a college president and having an interest in that, it was not a new area of consideration for me. And of course, the college had an able president, and Paul Quinn College got its accreditation issues worked out with flying colors. And that was one of the big things I had to do.
Story_ID: 393454
Speaker 1: Texas also had, earlier in its history, suffered some serious wounds. And part of what I had to do was to continue what I call a healing process in the life of the church [African Methodist Episcopal church]. And so, we had again this whole business of relationship building. There were pastors who had left the church in anger whom I sought to soften their anger and asked them to re-embrace the church of their choice. Some did, and some didn't. But it had, that was part of what I had to do. The other part of what I think happened for me, was at this particular time in Texas the importance of theological training became a focus for me--that increasingly--the black population of this country is increasingly getting an education itself that the community colleges--the land grant universities and the private schools like Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Dallas, Texas] and the schools here in the Atlanta University system [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]--are educating a lot of black folks. And I don't think they're going to be very tolerant of uneducated, unsophisticated and backward clergy. And so, a profound interest in strengthening our churches' commitment to a trained theological clergy began to surface. That's one thing. And these are ideas at this point. Now, I was able later on in each of them to do something significant about implementation. I began to have an awareness that our church in Africa was a victim of colonialism, and the colonialists, colonialists left them leaderless and impoverished, and that the United States was providing vast amounts of money to other countries for development but was doing very little in Africa. Out of this was born what I call the Richard Allen Service and Development Agency, which eventually became PVO [private voluntary organization] registered with the [U.S.] Agency for International Development [USAID], and has been the conduit of large sums of money primarily so far to the Caribbean and southern Africa. That happened later, but the ideas were born while I was struggling with what should a bishop be doing with the awesome amount of authority and opportunity which that office gives you?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 393455
Speaker 1: A third idea occurred to me at that time, and it too was implementation later, although it began in '78 [1978]. Was the organization called the Congress of National Black Churches in 1970. In the--Archie Hargraves [sic. J. Archie Hargrave], who was president of Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] at one time, had been my teacher at the Urban Training Center [Urban Training Center for Christian Mission] in Chicago [Illinois]. And he recommended me to the Lilly Endowment [Lilly Endowment, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana] to serve as a consultant in their religion department. They invited me there, and I was taken with the fact that the black denominations were not talking to each other--that the only reason I knew the A.M.E.Z. [African Methodist Episcopal Zion church] or the C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal church] or the Baptist president in Texas was because I made a personal effort to know them. But there was no institutional nor intentional vehicle by which these people were brought together out of their common interests. And so, that's when the idea of the Congress of National Black Churches began to emerge. And the Lilly Endowment was resonated a little bit with that, primarily through one of its program officers for black religion, named Jackie Burton. And we started pulling that together. All of this happened during my first eight years when I was bishop.  We were able to get the Congress started while I was still assigned to Texas. The other two ideas and things were--had to ferment a little longer, because it was much more difficult to get them going.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 393456
Speaker 1: On a national level between '72 [1972] and '80 [1980], the troops were brought home from Vietnam, and that war was ended. And the whole nation was impacted by many men who came home, and some were disoriented. Was the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church impacted by the negative effects of Vietnam [Vietnam War] and/or its soldiers who came home in need of much care?
Speaker 2: Well, we had ministries which responded to the veterans. But in the life of our church, ministry is done through local churches. We do not do ministry through our judicatories, et cetera.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: But we empower our local churches to give responses to that. The issue for us was about Vietnam and the futility of war. Just as now, the new Vietnam called Iran--Iraq [Iraq War] is about the stupidity of us trying to impose our culture on them. And war is as much about that as it is about weapons. It's about ideas and culture and history and theology and philosophy and habit, all of those qualities--and language. We have taken our people to Iraq, and we have no real understanding of that culture. And we will be clobbered for as long as we are there.
Story_ID: 393457
Speaker 1: And at the same time, do you have any comments about what former President Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] warned us about--the growing strength of the military industrial complex, as is evident by the resignation of a congressman [Randall Harold Cunningham] this past week.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, but he is a petty cash problem in my judgment. They still have not addressed what happened to the thousands of people whose lives were sabotaged and destroyed by Enron [Enron Corporation], and Kenneth Lay is still not in jail. It has nothing to do about all the no-bid contracts which Mr. Cheney [Dick Cheney] arranges for Halliburton [Halliburton Company] to get. This man is a sad tragedy of a man, who greed and corruption got to. But he is small stuff compared to the larger issues of corruption in our culture, with particular reference to the military industrial complex I had--that has been made global and international now. And so, the companies that deal with that are not necessarily American, but are global in their scope and impact.
Speaker 1: Where will this all take us--the growth of the military complex and the corruption that's involved with this operation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we are--the very nature of our society and the very nature of our humanity creates a climate where what I call incremental cumulative culture of corruption takes place. Capitalism, by definition, is a breeding ground for that kind of behavior, where the bottom line is money. Not people, not values, not ethics, not philosophy, but the bottom line is how much money do you make? Wherever that definition prevails, you do whatever it takes to get the money, and that means that you do what the congressman did. You do what Halliburton does, you do what all the people who take personal advantage do, and it creates a culture of corruption which is incremental and builds up step by step.  And it is cumulative (simultaneous)- -
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cumulative.
Speaker 2: --because you give nothing away; it just builds. So, I think we have to take serious the self-examination to which the faith calls us, and stop mouthing these right-wing political religious cliches, and try to understand the essence of what the scripture teaches, which is about justice and righteousness, and not about wealth and power.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Story_ID: 393458
Speaker 1: From 1980 to 1988, you were called to serve as bishop of the Second Episcopal District, the area called Mid-Atlantic.  What memorable experiences and/or achievements can you share with us with regard to that assignment?
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of these other things began to come into fruition. We got the [U.S.] Congress started while I was still in Texas.  But SADA [Richard Allen Service and Development Agency] finally obtained its private volunteer organization status with the state department [U.S. Department of State], and that has become a very important part of the life of our church now. The continued growth and development of the Congress of National Black Churches took place, and became a formidable force. One of the interesting aspects of my tenure in Washington [D.C.] of course is that my eight years paralleled Mr. Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] eight years, and so I had a marvelous opportunity to serve as critic of the icon of the conservative movement. And while I think, I think an excellent reflection of where America is, is the fact is that conservative white folks view Reagan as an icon, and black folks view him as the enemy of justice. And it was that--I lived in that tension for those eight years. And my special work in the Second District had to do with church expansion. What I discovered was that when I went to Washington in 1980, they were doing the 1980 census. By coincidence, a lot of people who worked in the [U.S.] Census Bureau and had fairly responsible positions were members of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church. And in talking to them, they began to show me what the demographics of the district I served looked like. The most outstanding was that Washington is a little bitty city out of which black folks were moving. The suburbs were the future. So, one of the things that I coined was a phrase, "We are going to put our churches in the pathway of growth." And we were able to successfully relocate several churches out of Georgetown, Washington, and downtown Washington to suburban areas where their memberships went from thirty to fifteen thousand. And this happened all over the place. So during those eight years, I was able to either organize or relocate forty churches. And the membership of the Second District grew from fifty-six thousand to a hundred and sixteen thousand. So, it was church growth and development which I would have to say were the particular landmarks of that eight year stretch. At the same time, I was still nursing and nurturing the coalitions. And that's one of the things which I think I can do pretty good, is build coalitions. Relationships, again (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Relationships again.
Story_ID: 393459
Speaker 1: For the first time in your ministry, you came to Georgia to be the bishop of the Sixth District [Sixth Episcopal District] from '88 [1988] to '92 [1992]. Any memorial times, any accomplishments that stand out in your mind?
Speaker 2: Well, as you know, one of the responsibilities which I had as the bishop of Georgia--and I had some very interesting times.  I want you to know that I've been the chairman of the board of four of the institutions in the Atlanta University system [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Which four are they?
Speaker 2: I was by virtue of being the bishop of Georgia, the chairman of the board of Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia.]  And I might add parenthetically that when I was here, it was doing very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Turner Seminary [Turner Theological Seminary, Atlanta, Georgia] and ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia], I was chairman of ITC's board.  And I was the interim chairman of the Atlanta University Center's board, when they had made the transfer from the concept of a holding company to the idea of service provider.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And so, I had a lot of educational experience in Atlanta [Georgia].  But the primary part of it was Turner and Morris Brown. Morris Brown did well when I was here. We had our accreditation reaffirmed for ten years, and it subsequently got in trouble ten years later, but I was gone then. The other part, of course, is again this continuing interest in enabling and empowering young clergy to have, to maximize their opportunities and take advantage of the opportunities as they come. I did a lot of that in the Second District [Second Episcopal District] in Texas, and I continue to do it here. And I have pastors who are still assigned to the church I assigned them to fifteen years ago, and doing well.
Story_ID: 393460
Speaker 1: Parenthetically, permit me to ask you, what is your perception of the future of Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], sir?
Speaker 2: It is extremely difficult for me to answer that question, because my information base is too small. If I were actively involved in its life and knew the details, I could be much clearer. I do believe that it is extremely difficult to kill a black institution. We do not let our institutions die easily, and we struggle with them for long times, because we know how to struggle.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, from the perspective of minimum information, I would guess that the African Methodist Episcopal church is going to find a way to make Morris Brown survive. I think however it will be a long and difficult struggle, unless some angel gives it a name-changing gift which gives it the instant economic capacity to solve its problems.
Speaker 1: Our prayers are that that would happen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, much--all of us do.  But you didn't ask me what my prayer was (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 393461
Speaker 1: My observation in studying your life, sir, is that you have been, you've spent a significant amount of time, not only in developing yourself, but serving as an administrator, a teacher, and otherwise involved in academia--chairman of the board, et cetera, et cetera. It is also my observation that the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal church] does a fine job of documenting its history, of producing a journal. What is it about the A.M.E. that gives it this--not only religious fervor and not only strong leaders, but the tilt toward the academic as well, to ensure that its message is communicated, and that, that things are published for now and posterity?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that that is our legacy. I don't think any of us who are contemporary invented that. I think this is a legacy. As a matter of fact, I think our founding fathers and mothers were--wrote more than we do. Both Richard Allen and Daniel Alexander Payne and Henry McNeal Turner wrote volumes, which are still priceless in their value to the life of the church and the community. But I think the reality is--and I have to talk this kind of talk, because I have to tell the truth as I remember it. I used to go to the late Bishop Fred Jordan's [Frederick Jordan] house in Los Angeles [California] when I was a pastor out there, because he would invite me out to have breakfast. And the purpose of these breakfasts were for us to argue theology and polity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the kind of bishop had such a facile mind, and he needed every now and then to have a serious debate.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: One of the things we debated at his, at one of these breakfasts was why did Richard Allen remain a Methodist even though he was so rudely and racially mistreated at St. George's United Methodist Church [sic. St. George's Methodist Episcopal Church; Historic St. George's United Methodist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?  So Bishop Jordan and I spent a couple hours after breakfast over coffee trying to list the reasons. Listen, one supreme organization, the Methodist church, is the best organized name on earth. As a matter of fact some of us have speculated that Karl Marx picked up the cell system, the cell group from the class leader system, which he saw when he was in exile in London [England]. Now I can't document that, but that's my, that's some of us have suspicion of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 393462
Speaker 1: But we are, the Methodism is--and Richard Allen concluded that black folks, who are oppressed people, need to be well organized. The second reason was the emphasis on personal piety--that black folks need to have strong personal devotional lives if they're going to put up with the antagonism and hatred that they have to. So, they have to have strong inner spiritual strength.  Now, this is Bishop Jordan [Frederick Jordan] and I talking.  Most of this was Bishop Jordan, now get it straight, now. Third reason was annual accountability. In the Methodist church, you are accountable at the next session of the conference which gave you the job.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And if you're not doing the job, you're removed. Compulsory stewardship in the Methodist church--we don't say y'all give. We say, "The conference has asked us to bring X number of dollars, and your share of that is this."  So, there's a designated and compulsory scholarship. The emphasis on learning was part of the Methodist culture, and the passion for justice, which was part of the Methodist tradition in its birth, in response to the pain of the industrial revolution. So, we concluded these were the seven reasons why Richard Allen decided to remain a Methodist, when Absalom Jones and the larger group of people who left St. George's United Methodist Church [sic. St. George's Methodist Episcopal Church; Historic St. George's United Methodist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] went and joined the Episcopal church. And you never heard from them since (laughter).
Speaker 2: Amen.  Thank you for sharing that, sir (laughter).
Speaker 1: So that's, that was our conclusions, and we think they're fairly substantial in, in, in the reasoning.
Speaker 2: They make a lot of sense.
Speaker 1: And so, our love of learning, and our emphasis on education, and our emphasis on justice comes from our heritage.
Story_ID: 393463
Speaker 1: Speaking of learning, let's stay with that for a second.  We are at a juncture in our development as a people where we're learning more about the presence of people of color in the Bible. Even Genesis, second chapter starting at verse thirty-eight speaks of the parameters for the Garden of Eden, and it lets us know that it's right there in northeast Africa. And we're seeing anthropology telling us that the oldest living fossil was found right there in that same area of the world. The scholarship is lining up with the Bible, but the church hasn't taught that people of color--the, the Old Testament can in fact be a black history book in addition to being a spiritual guide. Is there any more that the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, or the church in general, can do to help us understand our role in the salvation history of mankind, how God has used people of color in his salvation plan?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that is a growing reality that we are shaking loose from our European roots and finding our linkages to authentic history prior to Europe. And in so doing, we are increasingly teaching, researching, documenting, and distributing the appropriate information about God's use of people of color in his salvation agenda. I think it does--what, the reality is that the communication systems of the world do not belong to people of color. And as long as European people own the means of communication, what you will see will be their spin on history. When peoples of color--you know, and that's the great--what was the thing I saw the other day where Tony Blair talked George Bush [President George Walker Bush] out of bombing the Arab television network [Al Jazeera Media Network], because that Arab television network tells the story from an Arab point of view. Well, eventually, we're going to have to be in a place in America and around the world where we're going to have to tell the story of the faith from the point of view of the people of color who participated in it.
Story_ID: 393464
Speaker 1: Just as the Arab network [Al Jazeera Media Network] interprets and presents the news from their point of view, people of color are going to eventually have to come to the point where they have the machinery to present the news from their point of view. Insofar as religion is concerned, that interpretation will have to come that way so that it will be global and worldwide in its hearing, as opposed to a single congregation hearing.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, the important religious personalities nowadays are TV preachers, some of whom are not good models.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 393465
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], in 1992, or for the period 1992 to 2000, you had the privilege and honor of serving in your home state in the Seventh Episcopal District of South Carolina as bishop of that region. What--that must have been quite a unique experience, serving at home and being around family and friends. Can you share with us a bit about your service during that era as bishop? And you were presiding bishop by that time, were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I had become the senior bishop of our church in '88 [1988] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Senior bishop in '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: So, with my tenure here in Georgia, and my twelve years in South Carolina and Florida, I was senior bishop, I was senior bishop for sixteen years.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That was sort of a titular office. The--South Carolina was interesting, first of all, because that's home. And I went back, and I was the bishop over people who used to help discipline me when I was a child. And it was a very interesting relationship to see these elderly people come up to me and call me bishop, when they had for years called me by my first name, and sometimes by other names (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm sure they called you bishop with pride, knowing they helped make you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they did (laughter).  They were extremely proud of that fact, and the fact that I came home. In South Carolina, there were two or three critical needs which I had to work on. The first, of course, was that Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] was in, had, had been--it just had sort of bottomed out. And we had to work on rebuilding Allen University, reaffirming its accreditation and getting its enrollment back up, and getting its campus back up to snuff, all of which we worked on. So, Allen University's renaissance and well-being was central. And in South Carolina there's a real symbiotic relationship between Allen and A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal church]. When you say one, you say the other.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: It's that close. The people in South Carolina were extraordinarily generous to Allen University during my eight year tenure. My memory is that they gave Allen almost $10 million from these poor people in these rural churches around South Carolina.
Story_ID: 393466
Speaker 1: The second great issue with which I had to deal when I was in--was the race issue, symbolized by the struggle to remove the Confederate flag from the top of the State House [South Carolina State House, Columbia, South Carolina], which eventually was achieved, but not correctly achieved. But getting it down as a symbol of the state was a major step, and took a great deal of time and fighting and haranguing and politicking, and whatever else you do. But eventually the flag did come down from the dome although they placed it in a prominent spot on the campus of the state capitol, as if the campus of the state capitol is not also black folks' property. And thirdly, the issue of personnel development. South Carolina did not need the kind of expansionist agenda which I had in the Second District [Second Episcopal District], in the Washington [D.C.], Baltimore [Maryland], and Richmond [Virginia] corridor where he started new churches and relocated churches to facilitate church growth. South Carolina already had a church every five miles, all over the state. So, we did not need more churches.  What we needed was more quality leadership. And so, we invested a lot of ourselves in the development of a scholarship program which would send people to seminary. And we challenged Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] that it needed to expand its curriculum so that it would have a program which would assist clergy who did not have much training, to improve their skills. And so through in-service institutes, through Allen University programs, and through scholarship programs, we worked very hard at improving the training and capacity of the leadership of our church, both clergy and lay. I think those three things were probably the items to which I gave the most attention. The ordinary work of a bishop [in the African Methodist Episcopal church] is huge to start with. So, if you've got two or three other things you add to the routine expectations, you've got a plateful.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 393467
Speaker 1: It's my observation that during this period and prior periods during your service as a bishop that the number of women in ministry in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church has increased at several levels to include that of bishop. Would you like to comment on that, sir?
Speaker 2: Well, I, first of all, have to say that I have grown through the process of the evolution of women ministry in the African Methodist Episcopal church. When I was in Texas as the president of the college [Paul Quinn College, Waco, Texas], there was a woman pastor in the city of Amarillo, Texas named Reverend Chance [ph.]. And she sort of was the first time I saw a very successful woman pastor. Our church claims that Richard Allen allowed Jarena Lee to preach and teach. And so, we are not aliens to the idea of women in leadership roles. And in our local churches, women are very dominant in membership, and in some churches in their lay leadership roles. But insofar as women, I think the most interesting development took place in the Second District [Second Episcopal District], and that's the district where Bishop McKenzie [HistoryMaker Bishop Vashti McKenzie] is from. When I went there in 1980, there was not a single ordained itinerant elder in the Second District. I ordained the first itinerant elder woman while I was the bishop, shortly after I got there. And of course after that many, many more, including Bishop McKenzie, and giving her, her first couple of assignments and trying to nurture her ministry. And of course, she's a very talented lady, so she took advantage of these opportunities. Women in ministry has mushroomed in the Northeast astronomically, and to a lesser extent in the rest of the church. There are several other bishops who have been extremely encouraging to women in ministry. I need to say quite frankly that I represent a metamorphosis as a person, because I don't think I began with this kind of openness to women in ministry. But as I observe the way our culture socializes women, they are the caregivers, the nurturers, the teachers. What is a pastor? So, in terms of culturally, the culture has given them the skills of ministry to a far greater extent. Now, they may give the man the executive thing, but the essence of pastoral leadership is not executive, it's pastoral.
Speaker 1: Pastoral.
Speaker 2: So, I have come around to understand that, and now our church has pioneered the leadership role of women in ministry significantly. We have three women who have been elected bishops. We have numerous general officers and providing elders who are women. And so, we think we have set an example, not a perfect example, but we look good when you compare us to our brothers and sisters.
Story_ID: 393468
Speaker 1: At the same time, technology is used in every facet of ministry as well as the business world and life. Has the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, or have you specifically mastered the art of using technology in the day to day operation of the church?
Speaker 2: Well, I need to say that I am personally not an expert in the field. What I do is intentionally see to it that there is somebody--well, when I was active, that there was somebody on my staff who brought expertise in technology. Even as far back as when I was in the Second District [Second Episcopal District] there was a young minister there named Reverend Dana Swann, who was a technologist of the first order, and kind ahead of his time, because this was in '80 [1980]. And in subsequent opportunities to serve, I have always screened it so that the office manager in my office, in addition to being a person with gracious manners to people, was also a person who was an expert in technology, especially computer technology which is what you use most.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 393469
Speaker 1: From 2000 to the time of your retirement in 2004, you served as bishop of the Eleventh Episcopal District, serving primarily Florida and the Bahamas.  Any memorable experiences and/or accomplishments to share from that tenure, sir?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, again, Florida and South Carolina are not altogether dissimilar in terms of the kinds of needs which you had. First there was Edward Waters College [Jacksonville, Florida], our A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] school there. And its success and validation and growth and excellence were issues which I had to address as chairman of its board, to provide the oversight and governance which saw to it that the school's accreditation was reaffirmed, and again reaffirmed recently, not without struggle however. And the personnel issue, again, becomes important--that you need in Florida as you do everywhere else, and particularly as I remember, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida--enlightened well trained people in leadership positions. And so, the sending of young people to school--one of the things I was able to do in Florida was to work out a relationship with the Asbury Theological Seminary [Asbury Theological Seminary-Florida Dunnam Campus] in the Orlando [Florida] area to train our students, in addition to sending a lot of them here to go to ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and Turner [Turner Theological Seminary, Atlanta, Georgia].  But that educational thrust, again, was an important part of the way I had to invest a lot of my energy. The other thing is that Florida is such a big state. When you go from Miami [Florida] to Pensacola [Florida], visiting all of those churches and getting to know the people is an enormous task. And then I had my mission conference in the Bahama islands. And people think the Bahamas is just Nassau, but there are four or five hundred islands and keys in the Bahama chain, and we have worked on five or five of them. It was not a great displeasure in January (laughter) to go visit churches in the Bahamas. But again, it's the development of people, which for me has always been the highest priority. If people are in pain, how do you relieve the pain first and relieve the cause of the pain? And if the person's problem is that they have been denied their possibilities, how do you open the door for them to begin to fulfill the possibilities they see for their lives? And that's what I have, as a bishop and a pastor, made the higher priority, than the physical things. It's been the people things that I wanted to develop.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Story_ID: 393470
Speaker 1: While retiring from your positions in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church in 2004, you've chosen to continue ministry much in the same way you served, by teaching. You're now on the staff of Candler Theological Seminary [sic. Candler School of Theology] at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia]. Tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, there are several things that I continue to do, and what I want to do. One, I accepted a position last year as an adjunct professor at Candler Seminary at Emory, to teach A.M.E. polity and history. And this was done out of a need which the students of Candler explained to me. And they asked me if I would do it, and I said if the Candler authorities ask me to do it, I'll be glad. I had a great time. It was a wonderful experience as a retired bishop to sit with all these aspiring young clergy--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --and engage in debate and conversation with them. Because the class was only seven people, it was an interactive approach to teaching which we were able to use. And that enriched the experience, because I got to hear from them, and they got to pose their questions which they thought I could answer, et cetera, et cetera. In addition to that, I am continuing to serve on the--as chair of the board of the Institute of Church Administration and Management [Atlanta, Georgia], which is now an independent educational institution. And we are struggling to address the issue of first class, state of the art administration and management in the life of the church so that these issues of mismanagement or maladministration don't crop up every time a black person in the church says something the authorities don't like, and then they go after them. And they're vulnerable because, not because they were dishonest, but because their skills were not as sharp as they could have been. So, we're working that. So we have--and of course, I told you I was going to do some--trace five generations of my family--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --through six or seven issues--money, education, et cetera, to see how society dealt with my grandparents, and how society is dealing with my grandchildren (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Grandchildren. Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: --and the three generations in between those two. It's going to be, it's already proving to be a fascinating thing as I collect information.
Story_ID: 393471
Speaker 1: With regard to ICAM, the Institution of Church Administration and Management [sic. Institute of Church Administration and Management, Atlanta, Georgia], are you saying that's no longer a part of ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia]?  It's a separate entity now?
Speaker 2: We were able to obtain a 501(c)(3) as an educational institution of our own. And so, our advisory board has become our board of trustees.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And we have accepted all fiduciary obligations that go with that responsibility. And we are trying to build not just an institution where administration and management are excellent, but to impact the culture of the black church--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --so that excellence and administration and management is the expectation. And we have, that's a very huge job, but we are grappling with it in terms of how to do it.
Speaker 1: Is there a way to contact the organization if one wants to register for a course at ICAM [Institute of Church Administration and Management]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you can just call ICAM's office at area code (404)688-6052, and they will put you in touch with the person to tell you. We do this in two or three ways. One, we have skills seminars in which pastors and lay leadership come here to Atlanta [Georgia] for three and a half days twice. So they have really seven full days of instruction in three or four different areas--financial management, managing change, conflict resolution, legal issues--all of the stuff where you get in trouble (laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand, I understand.
Speaker 2: And then occasionally we go to a church area. For example, when I was active, I had them come to South Carolina and to Florida and do a seminar for the clergy, and another seminar for the laity.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And these were Friday evening through Sunday experiences.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Story_ID: 393472
Speaker 1: As we prepare to wind down, let me ask if there's anything else you'd like to add that I did not ask you, sir (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I think, I feel comfortable that the essence of what I've been about has been covered--the highlight times of my ministry certainly have been spoken to and I feel very good about that.
Speaker 1: May I ask why did you agree to tell your story to us and to the world?
Speaker 2: For the same reason that the lady who put this together--
Speaker 1: Miss Richardson [Julieanna Richardson].
Speaker 2: I think--Miss Richardson. I think it is important for our stories to be recorded somewhere. At some point in time, some great historian of the African American experience is going to want to get into more detail than we have yet had written. I think it's important, secondly, for our children and our children's children to have somewhere to go to find out where they came from, who they are, and how they got where they are.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: And I think this is going to be an invaluable resource in doing that. The other reason, of course, is that I don't think we should expect white folks who held us as slaves to tell our story for us. And if they told it, it would be told incorrectly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 393473
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], how do you feel about the way you have lived your life, and what is important to you now?
Speaker 2: Well, what is important for me now is of course to see to it that I can enable as many people as possible to do the several things which I think are the gateways to progress and success: to get an education, to understand the importance of relationships, not to burn bridges as you live, to speak the truth in love, that is more important to be respected than to be liked. And so, I struggle with those things always, and I spend a lot of time with my children and grandchildren trying to have them understand these same kinds of things, and that money is a tool and not an end.
Story_ID: 393474
Speaker 1: For those going into ministry, especially in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, what suggestions do you have for them, sir?
Speaker 2: My suggestions in almost every area are almost always the same. If they're going to be an A.M.E. preacher, male or female, it doesn't matter to me--the things that I have talked about all through this interview surface again. One, if you are going to presume to offer leadership, you ought to be qualified and trained to offer leadership, so the education piece is always there. Secondly, the relationship piece: that you are a better pastor, you are a better bishop, you are a better layman, you are a better community leader if you've got a sense of how to maintain good relations with other people.
Story_ID: 393475
Speaker 1: I think I know the answer to this.  But would you choose a different career?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Of course not.
Speaker 1: Just as I thought, (laughter) and we're grateful that you didn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have, if I had to do the journey over, I would hope that it would be very similar to the way it was the first time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, sir. The world is a better place and we're all enriched by your service, Sir, thank you. What do you still want to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: There are a couple of places I want to see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's all. I just want to, I just want to see the--I want to go--and I'm going to do that next year. I want to go to China. I want to walk on the Great Wall [Great Wall of China]. I just want to climb up on it and take two steps, and then I'll get back down. You know, that's been, you know, one of the symbols of Oriental history for years.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I just want to go and see China. And I want to go and see Russia. I've seen most of the rest of the world, but I have not been to China, and I have not been to Russia, and I want to go. I've been close to both, but not in either one of them. Because at the times I was close, I had neither the time nor the money (laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand.
Story_ID: 393476
Speaker 1: I failed to ask this during our interview, but I know missionary work is a key component of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  And as bishop, I'm sure you've either been directly or indirectly involved with the mission field. Is there anything you'd like to share regarding the mission?
Speaker 2: Well, a great deal of what I have been taking great joy in is support of our overseas, as we call it--primarily Africa. As a matter of fact I've been to South Africa fourteen times. Well, I just like South Africa (laughter). I've been to the other parts of Africa. I just got back from Liberia. I was in Liberia during the campaign for president, and of course I understand that the lady who was elected president is coming to the United States soon. But be that as it may, we supported--financially we supported--when I had schools in the districts I served, we took a student from each of our six overseas districts on full scholarship each year at those schools with the understanding that that student signed a covenant that they would go back home after they completed their education. So, we have tried very hard to support the work overseas.
Story_ID: 393840
Speaker 1: Bishop Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], as we wind down, I want to capture a little bit more of your wisdom if I can, sir, to share with our audience. What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community, sir?
Speaker 2: Well, I have high hopes for us. I think we are passing through some phases which give me some concern. But I hope that it is only a phase, and that is sort of a season of disrespect for standards and of behavior, and standards of appearance, and just standards, you know. I, I still, I guess I am an old-fashioned person in the sense that I believe that you ought to look your best, act your best, pursue the best, and be the best that you can, rather than this kind of sloppy attitude that I don't care how I look, I don't care how I behave, and I don't care what I do. I think that's a very dangerous climate through which a lot of our young people are passing, and I hope it passes on.
Speaker 1: I do, too.
Speaker 2: And I hope that they can revert to a high respect for standards of excellence in the future.
Speaker 1: Amen, amen.
Story_ID: 393841
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about education, affirmative action, the Civil Rights Movement, sir?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I am a firm believer that education remains the primary gateway to progress and success. And so, I always push that button--go to school and get a good education.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: And secondly, I have been profoundly disappointed in our country, in its brief use of affirmative action as a redress of prior grievances. See, I take the position that affirmative action, as a positive law and policy, needed to be in place as long as segregation was in place, in order to correct the damage which segregation had done.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Speaker 2: Therefore, I have real fears about our situation when affirmative action is rejected, and when the courts are being stacked with right wing ideologues who are going to overturn what little is left of affirmative action. So, for me, affirmative action is the only way for our country to achieve equity, and equity is historic as well as contemporary. To overcome the historic injustices of American society, affirmative action is needed for a long time.
Speaker 1: Amen, amen.
Speaker 2: I think that if the regressive philosophies of governance continue to be elected by the American people, we're going to have to rebuild the Civil Rights Movement into a massive movement again.  As I heard it said recently, while we don't accuse the president of being a racist, he [President George Walker Bush] certainly does coddle a lot of them and surround himself with them. And that creates a climate where all this backward stuff can come out of the woodwork. And of course, the direction in which he is going to tilt the [U.S.] Supreme Court and the federal court system with conservative appointments might pose a much greater danger than anything else.
Story_ID: 393842
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about the role of religion in the African American community? Your thoughts on the role of sports in the African American community as well?
Speaker 2: Well, let me talk about them separately.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The historic role of religion and faith in the life of black people has been so significant and so positive. But in the current climate where theater has replaced theology, I'm very concerned about the role of religion, and the conservative silence of the television preachers on the issues which affect the life of black folks. I find it offensive that they never mention peace.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They never mention justice. All they talk about is salvation and money, salvation for you, and money for them. So, that troubles me, and I hope that the institutional black churches will be able to come back to the fore more significantly than they are now and bring some perspective to the charismatic, independent, black church movement which seems to be the rage right now.
Story_ID: 393843
Speaker 1: And now about--
Speaker 2: The role of sports in the African American community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, sports has joined, for a lot of our young blacks, education, as the gateway not necessarily to progress, but to success, particularly financial success. And it is increasingly evident that the fact that blacks spend a lot of time working at sports in their communities is reflected in the fact that most of the sports teams are predominantly black. You know, so if you see a basketball team walking down the street, you will see a gang of twelve black men with a white leader (laughter), who is the coach in most instances.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But you know, I don't knock sports. I'm a sports fan, I enjoy sports. I view it as an entertainment. What really troubles me about all sports is that they have made it into such a commercial venture rather than a developmental and entertainment venture. So, professional sports is not about sports, it's about wealth, and increasing the collegiate sports is about the same thing. But, you know, we live in a culture that is capitalist, and in a capitalist culture the bottom line is money. And as long as that's the bottom line, everything will be designed to reach that goal. And that's what we have in sports, and religion, and everything else--that it's a money game.
Story_ID: 393844
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life, Dr. Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], what stands out the most for you?
Speaker 2: Well, there are--I feel very good about, first of all, my personal life. I have been married to the same woman [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams] for fifty years. I think that's a significant and important statement to make for our society. I have three children, all of whom are well-educated and productive citizens in the communities where they live. I have eight grandchildren whom I adore, and do everything I can to help and to spoil. So, personally, I have good relationships with my extended family. So my personal thing, I feel very good about. I feel very good about my contribution to the African Methodist Episcopal church in terms of, one, its growth and development; its innovation and new program ideas; and about its educational enterprise. I feel that I've had some significant contributions to the well-being of the schools where I've been privileged to work. And I feel very good that I have never sold out on the justice issue. As a matter of fact, probably in my seventies I am more militant than I was in my twenties. Because after fifty years, if justice has not arrived, when is it coming? So, I feel, you know, those aspects of my life--personal, education, the A.M.E. church, the justice and civil rights part--I feel very good about what I have tried to do in those areas, and only wish that I could have done it better.
Story_ID: 393845
Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important, and why?
Speaker 2: Well, I consider (pause) integrity, self-respect, and respect for others. And I group them as one sense of respect. I have to insert my word, relationships.  I consider that very important. I consider education as a value as well as an experience. Overriding all of this, of course, is my faith journey, my belief system, my worldview, my commitment to God and the things of God as a value which has sort of set the tone for the rest of the stuff. So faith, integrity, respect, relationships, learning, are values which I would lift high.
Story_ID: 393846
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you, sir?
Speaker 2: Well, I would want people to say that I tried to do my best with what I had to work with.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: And I guess the other thing--and this is back at the relationship piece--that I treated people right in my journey, that I did not intentionally or even accidentally mistreat people or abuse them or hurt them. That, I would not want on my record. So, say he treated his brothers and sisters in the world right.
Story_ID: 393847
Speaker 1: What message or lessons do you have for your children, your grandchildren, and the world?
Speaker 2: Well, let me, let me use two very different languages and perspectives to say the same thing. The former president of Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], a gentleman by the name of John Silber, said that what America needed to recover most of all was the willingness to be obedient to the unenforceable--that the standards of fairness and justice and truth which we allege are American, we don't obey them unless the law insists on it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that we need to reach the point where we're obedient to them even when they are not enforceable.  And I want to use in addition to John Silber's language, I want to use the language of Spike Lee, to say the same thing. My word to people is set your own standards, have them based on some authentic human learning, and do the right thing.
Speaker 1: Do the right thing.
Speaker 2: Obedient to the unenforceable--do the right thing. It's the same thing. So, I would, I say to my children--for example I have an argument with one of my daughters every year about Kwanzaa. And I say, I don't need Kwanzaa, I've already got a worldview and an understanding of myself. So, but it's important for people who need it. If you need it, do that. But the values that Kwanzaa advocates, I've already adopted. So, what I have to do is do the right thing. And I have to obey them when nobody is looking, and when there's nobody to enforce them. So, that's what I try to teach them, that you don't do right because you are under the gun of either the law or the rules.  You do the best you can to do right, because that's what is.
Speaker 1: Amen.
Story_ID: 393848
Speaker 1: Dr. Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], what do you want your legacy to be? And that's my final question, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I would, I would stay with what has been the theme through this whole conversation, that I would want my legacy to be one of right relationships and one of the pursuit of knowledge. That--so, it is relationships and education. If anybody wants to talk about me, I would like them to talk about the legacy of relationships and the legacy of an advocate for education.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Thank you for being so gracious with your time, and thank you for the life you have led, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 390139
Speaker 1: That's the classic family baby picture that has been preserved.
Speaker 2: Nineteen--?
Speaker 1: That would be about 1929.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's a photograph when I was finishing college. And that was taken in, that would be in 1947. And it was taken probably in Cleveland, Ohio right after I graduated.
Speaker 2: From?
Speaker 1: Johnson C. Smith University in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That is a photograph taken in the chapel of Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College, Waco, Texas] where I served as both president of the college and pastor of the church on campus. That would be about 1957.
Speaker 2: The two persons standing in the back are my parents, the Reverend [Eugene Avery Adams, Sr.] and Mrs. E.A. Adams [Charity Nash Adams], and my siblings, Avery [Eugene Avery Adams, Jr.], Lucy Rose [Lucy Rose Adams], John [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], and Charity [Charity Adams Earley] in the early--
Speaker 1: Do you have on uniforms?
Speaker 2: They were both in the [U.S.] military. He was in the [U.S.] Army and she was in the WACs [Women's Army Corps] at that time. So that would be in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: That is a later family picture where my parents are seated in the front, and they're a little older now. And my siblings are standing around, and our children are also on the photograph. To the right is my wife [HistoryMaker Dolly Adams] with my baby daughter [Madelyn Rose Adams Cobb] in her lap, my little daughter [Jann Hurst Adams] standing next to her, and our oldest daughter [Gaye Adams Massey] standing by me right behind.
Speaker 2: And this was taken around?
Speaker 1: That would have been taken, I would say about thirty-nine years ago, which would, that would be about 1965.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was when I was appointed pastor of Grant A.M.E. Church in Los Angeles, California.  They gave me a welcome reception and took that picture of me at that time. That would be in 1968.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my wife and me standing with the Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] in his youth when he was still wearing a bush. I think that was taken at the expo [Black Business Exposition] in Chicago [Illinois.]
Speaker 1: And the date?
Speaker 2: That would be in the 1960s, late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my wife and three daughters and me. I believe that picture was taken when we were in Seattle, Washington.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's another family picture of my wife and three daughters. And the painting behind them is an artist named Ken Chu's portrait of my daughters. That would be--that would have been taken in Los Angeles, and that would be in about 1970.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph taken at the Institute of Church Administration and Management [Atlanta, Georgia] with a young lady doing a computer demonstration for the Reverend Dr. Franklyn Richardson [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Franklyn Richardson] of Grace Baptist Church in Mount Vernon, New York and myself. I serve as chairman of that board, and he is the vice chairman. And we were in review of the curriculum at the institute at that time.
Speaker 1: Being very active in the public life when I was a bishop in South Carolina, to the left is Congressman Jim Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn], past president of the Congressional Black Caucus.  The young lady in the middle is Mrs. Inez Tenenbaum, who is the secretary of education [sic. South Carolina State superintendent of education], and next to her is her assistant. And this was taken at a reception for Mrs. Tenenbaum after she became secretary of education. She also served on, both of them served on the board of Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina] when I was the bishop there.
Speaker 2: And the date?
Speaker 1: That would be 1995.
Speaker 2: This is a young people's retreat in Columbia, South Carolina. About--and all of these young people showed up to have a rap session with the bishop. And the way we did the rap session was, we did not make them stand up and ask their questions. We asked them to write their questions out, and leave them unsigned so that their parents wouldn't know which question which youth asked. And I can tell you, the bishop had some difficult questions to answer from the young people.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Mrs. Adams and me trying to prevent bursting out into laughter, but smiling nonetheless. I think we were entering the retirement celebration given for us in Orlando, Florida in 2004.
Speaker 2: We are in the Republic of South Africa at this point. This is just outside the City of Johannesburg [South Africa]. It is at the tomb of the woman who invited the African Methodist Episcopal church to come to South Africa. She had been a student at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Bishop Henry McNeal Turner responded to her request and came to South Africa, and the A.M.E. church began there in 1896. This photograph was taken in the centennial year, 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a rather large crowd gathered in the fellowship hall of Mount Zion Baptist Church in Seattle [Washington] for a very rambunctious civil rights meeting over the issue of open housing. And you will see me standing at the podium trying to interpret the proposed open housing ordinance to the group of people gathered to debate whether the ordinance was appropriate for us to support.
Speaker 1: This is part of a crowd of some twenty-plus thousand people who gathered at the stadium in Seattle, Washington in 1968 in commemoration of the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. We had a march and then a celebration of his life and contribution in the stadium, at which time the governor and the mayor and all the public officials appeared and spoke. And as the keynote speaker for that occasion, I read Dr. King's speech in tribute to [President] John Fitzgerald Kennedy, and substituted it as a tribute to him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is one of the five lines of marchers that converged on the World Fair Center [Century 21 Exposition, Seattle, Washington]. You can see the Space Needle there to the right in Seattle.  We gathered at the stadium at the old World's Fair grounds. That tall, slim, young, good looking man in the dark coat is me, and my daughter is--no, in the topcoat over here, that's me right there. And that's my daughter walking beside me, because I took them to the demonstrations with me.
Speaker 2: I was selected by Ebony magazine in 1994 as one of the best preachers, black preachers in the country. And that's the story that appeared in the state newspaper there, saying that I was one of the best. They didn't say the best what, but that's what they're talking about.
Speaker 1: This is again a copy of the occasion when we celebrated the life and death of Martin Luther King in Seattle.
Speaker 2: That was--this is a photograph, we built a new building to house some programs in Seattle. And to my left is Bishop Harrison Bryant, Sr. [Harrison James Bryant].  In the middle is Kenneth Hahn, who was a legendary politico in Los Angeles County [California].  And to the right--we're all there breaking ground with the handsome young man representing the youth for whom the building was being built.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the bishops of the African Methodist Episcopal church taken at the general conference where the first woman bishop in the black church was elected. You can see her, number five from the left on the back row. And if you're looking for me, I'm in the center of the photograph. And unlike-that's for the photographer. The top of my head is shiny.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph which is sort of symbolic of my ministry in Seattle. When I went in and was designated chair of the Civil Rights Committee [Central Area Civil Rights Committee] and we started the demonstrations and protests and advocacy, I was called a troublemaker. This is some years later when the city had come to respect the point of view which I represented. One of the papers there did a profile and said I had moved from troublemaker to leader.
Speaker 1: All right, Bishop.
Speaker 2: Those, that's Charity in the early--to the left, E.A. Adams, Jr., Lucy Rose Adams, and John Hurst Adams [HistoryMaker Bishop John Hurst Adams], that's from left to right.  Those are the siblings, there are four of us.
