Story_ID: 289336
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell us for it please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Joseph Benjamin Anderson, Jr.  That's J-O-S-E-P-H, Benjamin, B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, and Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is February 12, 1943, and I was born in Topeka, Kansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now, I'm an entrepreneur, primarily owning manufacturing companies that supply the automobile industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the chairman and chief executive officer of several companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And I know one I read about is TAG, I think is--
Speaker 2: TAG Holdings [LLC, Wixom, Michigan].
Speaker 1: TAG Holdings.
Speaker 2: That's the holding company--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the individual operating companies.  I have five operating companies under TAG Holdings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is April 6, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address, but--
Speaker 2: I'm--we're in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, the suburbs of Detroit [Michigan].
Story_ID: 289337
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we ask as kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  I like to make homemade rolls and eat them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably gray.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Diego [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: It is what it is.
Story_ID: 289338
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Joseph Anderson, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you please give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Pearl, P-E-A-R-L, Bertha, B-E-R-T-H-A, Gatewood is her maiden name, G-A-T-E-W-O-O-D, and Anderson's her last name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1909 in McLoud, Oklahoma, M-C-C-L-O-U-D [sic.], McLoud, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Only back to her parents.  Her father [Robert Gatewood] was a minister as was my father's father, so both my grandfathers were ministers.  I did not know my grandfather.  He died, you know, before I was old enough to know him or remember him.  But my mother's mother was located in Topeka [Kansas], in the north side of Topeka, Ella Gatewood Smith was her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now what, what denomination was your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather on my mother's side was Methodist.  My grandfather on my father's side was Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now are there any stories that are passed down from your mother's side of the family, I mean, on that side about Oklahoma?  Abou- well, one story would be about how they came to live in Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: And I don't know that history to speak of.  My mother and father both were from very large families, nine and eleven siblings, in that range.  And being the children of ministers, they both came--the families came to Topeka in that context, although my father came there to go to a trade school and then wound up staying in Topeka working for the Atchison, Topeka, and the Santa Fe Railroad [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I'm gonna--I'm gonna ask about him in a minute--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but I wanna find out about your mother's side of the family and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So there are no stories about--now black people like after the Civil War moving to Kansas and Oklahoma, I mean, there--is there, there any stories about where they came from originally or were they already there?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we have had family reunions on my mother's side of the family and they would be related to Oklahoma, they would be related to Tennessee; I know she had family connections in Tennessee, but it's not something that I have any real knowledge of, recollection of, so I can't speak to it.  You know, we would have family reunions on both sides, but--in my mother's family, it would be mostly related to current activities in the Midwest, so her family was located--her siblings and all were located primarily in Oklahoma, Kansas City, Missouri, and Kansas, and Topeka, Kansas, Wichita [Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--and your, your, your mother's mother, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a minister's wife, and so as I grew up, it was grandmother Gatewood and Smith and she lived on the north side of town, and we'd go visit her there, but she was not working, working.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk about growing up in, in--
Speaker 2: Not particularly, and so I, I just don't have a history of those kind of conversations being part of--you know, both my parents were working as I was growing up and they were out trying to make ends meet.  And so at family reunions and other events and/or dinner table discussion, weekends, whatever, it just was not something that my family engaged in.
Speaker 1: Did she talk about going to school at all in, in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There real--there really is no history there that I can remember them talking about.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so you said your mother's family moved to Topeka.  Your mother moved with your father to Topeka, or, or was it--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so she had a sister and several brothers and they were located in Topeka, working in various careers and so forth, but I presume they moved there when her father opened up a church in Topeka.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he--you said he was a Methodist.  Was he A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: I think A.M.E.
Speaker 1: A.M.E.  Okay. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 289339
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I'm a--he's a--he's a senior [Joseph Anderson, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, same as yours (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1906 and he was born in Nacogdoches, Texas.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: N-A-C-A-D-O-C-H-E-S [sic.] or something like that, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now what do you know about your ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Same--pretty much the same.  His father was a minister and I didn't--did not know him.  My father moved to Topeka [Kansas] I think to go to school.  And I know that his mother and sisters and so forth lived in Topeka for a period of time, but then in the '40s [1940s], they moved to Orange County, Santa Ana [California].  And his father opened up a church in Santa Ana, California, the first black church in Santa Ana, California, in the '40s [1940s], and of course I was born at that timeframe, so I don't remember any of that.  And I can remember early years going to California every summer on the Santa Fe Railroad [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway], visiting my father's mother and siblings in California 'cause they all left Topeka except him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's [Pearl Gatewood Anderson] family stayed in Topeka and the Midwest.  My father's family all moved to Southern California with his mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said your father--now, did he go to school in Texas or in Topeka?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: He went to grade school in Texas and wherever his father was moving around as a minister.  He did not complete high school and was the oldest boy and, and, therefore, found himself looking out for the family more than going to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of his younger brothers did complete school.
Speaker 1: And you, you say he worked for the railroad (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He worked for the Santa Fe--
Speaker 1: Santa Fe--
Speaker 2: --Railroad in Topeka.
Story_ID: 289340
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Pearl Gatewood Anderson and Joseph Anderson, Sr.] met?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the story.  I, I think it was in connection with church or something like that, and they met each other.  My father was widower with one son.  My mother had two daughters from a previous marriage.  And they met and dated and got married, and I'm the only offspring of that marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now who do you take after?  Your mother or your father?
Speaker 2: I look a lot like my father.  I have my mother's personality I guess, so both.
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember going to school, grade school [Washington Elementary School, Topeka, Kansas], and always being a good student and always being motivated by my parents to go to school and do well, and that, that my father did not have a great education.  My mother did have a high school education, but--so my earliest childhood memories are about academic achievement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But do you have an earliest memory?  One memory.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: The first thing you ever remembered, that you remember about.
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't have anything that stands out.  I don't.
Story_ID: 289341
Speaker 1: What did your neighborhood look like and what were some of the sights (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was--
Speaker 1: --and sounds--
Speaker 2: I lived on the--
Speaker 1: --and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: --east side of town in Topeka [Kansas], and those earliest years, it was called Mudtown.  It was on, on the other side of the railroad tracks from the main part of town.  The streets were eventually paved.  It was a segregated community where we lived, on one side of the main street, 10th Street, and white families lived on the other side of 10th Street.  We went to segregated grade schools in the '40s [1940s].  Brown versus the Ed--Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], is about those segregated grade schools.
Speaker 1: Now, you said you lived in a section of town called Mudtown and you talked about it being paved eventually, but was it paved while you were growing up there?
Speaker 2: No.  The, the streets were mud or were unpaved and, therefore, when it rained, muddy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did, did it occur to--I mean, did it--I guess when you were a kid, did you realize that they weren't paved because it was the black side of town or--
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Did you have any kind of sense of that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: This is like a lot of towns and of course you, you know that by now.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: A lot of 'em have the same--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --profile.
Story_ID: 289342
Speaker 1: So in your household when you were growing up, it was--it was your, your mother [Pearl Gatewood Anderson], father [Joseph Anderson, Sr.], you, and didn't you have--were, were your older brothers and sisters there too?
Speaker 2: Yes, so--but my earliest years, it was myself and two sisters.  My brother is fifteen years older than I am, so by the time I was eight or nine years old, he was off in the Korean War.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I have no recollection of my brother being at home living with us, my two sisters, yes, and that they were ten and twelve years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as you can imagine, by the time I was in junior high [East Topeka Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas], they were off in--into their marriages and/or school or whatever the case may be.  So I was pretty much raised as an only child.  And my schooling and so forth with that kind of gap in our age, there was no interaction around friends and/or other things.  They had their teenage lives and I had mine, you know, life as a five, six, seven-year-old doing my thing in terms of school and sports.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's almost like having four parents, I guess, and--
Speaker 2: You know, not really, but they were--they were not part of my sibling environment, if you will.
Story_ID: 289343
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, right across the street from my school--from my house was a school, a white school that I could not attend, but it had baseball diamonds and other kinds of things.  So I remember the earliest years with the kids in the neighborhood, all black kids, playing baseball over there.  I, I was born left-handed I think.  I got changed over, but those things I did away from home, I did left-handed.  So I'd bat left-handed and kick left-footed.  And so when we didn't have enough boys and girls to--boys to fill up all the fields, they'd fill up right field and I had to learn to--excuse me, I had to learn to hit between second and third base if I was gonna play from the left side of the plate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so those are--those are experiences.  Topeka [Kansas] had, you know, hot summer nights and we'd play hide-and-seek and, and games like that.  And--but--and my parents [Pearl Gatewood Anderson and Joseph Anderson, Sr.] and family were very active in the church with both parents--both of their parents being ministers, so I would go to church, Sunday school every Sunday, Baptist Training Union, and we belonged to Calvary Baptist Church in Topeka, Kansas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --pastored by Reverend Bernard Hurd, E. Bernard Hurd, Calvary Baptist Church.  And so, you know, every Sunday it was--I was in church.  It wasn't optional.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so school and neighborhood play--
Story_ID: 289344
Speaker 1: My father [Joseph Anderson, Sr.] was a gardener, so there was always a garden growing in the summertime.  He was a photographer and so there were people, you know, asking him to, to, to photograph weddings, photograph graduations, photograph family reunions, funerals, et cetera.
Speaker 2: Now is there a story behind how he, he got involved in photography?
Speaker 1: Again, I don't know.  It happened somehow, someway, but I don't know the background of that.
Speaker 2: That's interesting kind of a--you know--
Speaker 1: I, I know that he was a photographer.  My mother [Pearl Gatewood Anderson] did the developing.  So there--they had set up a dark room in the home.  The home we lived in and I was raised in, he built, and it was a, a nice home for that part of town [Mudtown, Topeka, Kansas], two bedrooms upstairs, their bedroom downstairs, a bathroom upstairs, a bathroom on the living--on the main floor, and then a basement, which did not have a bathroom, and the dark room was down in that basement area.  And so my mother--he would take the, the photography, black and white at the time, bring home the film, the negatives, and she would develop the negatives into photographs.  He would deliver them to folks, get paid for them, and that was extra cash beyond his job at the Santa Fe Railroad [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway].
Speaker 2: Okay.  You--can you tell us what he was shooting with?
Speaker 1: I don't know which kind of camera, but I have it downstairs; I can show it to you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  I mean, that's, that's, that's interesting 'cause that's--you know, weren't many black people doing that in those days, you know?  To have a town photographer, that's, that's really something.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he built his own house?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, did, did he ever talk about where he learned the skills to--
Speaker 1: No, and when I say built it, I presume he had help from friends and whatever, but it was not a house they bought, it was a house they built.
Story_ID: 289345
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself growing up?  What, what kind of, of a little boy were you and what were (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I was--
Speaker 1: --you interested in?
Speaker 2: I was a, a pretty good kid.  I never got in big trouble, you know.  You get spankings for this or that, but in terms of trouble with the police, trouble with neighbors and all that kind of stuff, I didn't have that.  I was a pretty balanced kid.  I was an excellent student and incentivized to do that by my parents [Pearl Gatewood Anderson and Joseph Anderson, Sr.] with a dime for every A I brought home, you know, and then got to be a quarter as I got older, et cetera, et cetera, played a lot of sports in grade school [Washington Elementary School, Topeka, Kansas], not organized like it was in junior high [East Topeka Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas], but I was--played football in junior high and then integrated junior high school, and captain of the football team in my senior year [at Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas].  I was always a leader, et cetera, et cetera.  I sang in the choir at church [Calvary Baptist Church, Topeka, Kansas] and--you know, and then into college.  I was a lead soloist for the West Point Glee Club [United States Military Academy Cadet Glee Club].  And so just a pretty--you know, played the saxophone, had a little band with--we played in junior high, so pretty well rounded.
Speaker 1: When did you start playing--when did you start playing the sax?
Speaker 2: Picked up the saxophone probably in the junior high timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a, a good friend of mine down the street that played the accordion and I have photographs of he and I playing duets together, him on the accordion and me blowing the alto saxophone.
Speaker 1: It seems as though there's some kind of strong music tradition in Kansas for some reason and I don't know why.
Speaker 2: Well jazz.  Kansas City [Missouri] had--was one of the four jazz centers and so maybe there was just a little trickle down the road to Topeka [Kansas].  But jazz in Kansas City was a major element.
Speaker 1: Now, did you hear a lot of jazz coming up?
Speaker 2: No 'cause my parents didn't have that interest and/or background, so there was religious music related to the church, but in terms of jazz and/or other popular music, that did not exist at all.  My parents didn't drink at all.  There was no alcohol in the home, et cetera, et cetera.  So it was pretty much church oriented.
Story_ID: 289346
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Washington Grade School [sic. Washington Elementary School, Topeka, Kansas].  They were four black grade schools in Topeka, Kansas, that were the subject of that suit, Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and Washington was the one that I went to.  So immediately across the street was a white grade school and I walked three blocks the other direction to go to the black grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting they would let you play on the playground at the school, at the white school, but they wouldn't let you go to school there, right?
Speaker 2: Well, this was primarily during the summer and so nobody's around.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So during the school year, you couldn't go over there and--
Speaker 2: Well they--I wasn't banned from it but I, I--
Speaker 1: But you assumed you probably--
Speaker 2: --did my things at my own school during the school year.  Weekends, I don't remember that there was an issue, but there--I don't ever remember anybody saying you have to get off this property.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, were, were, were the white kids there in the summertime when you played over there?
Speaker 2: Not, not really, although once I went to junior high school [East Topeka Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas], I developed white friends and Mexican friends and so would interact with them in, in later years, but don't remember doing so in my grade school years.
Speaker 1: Now, was Topeka--this Brown versus the Board of Education is a--you know, a major, you know, benchmark in American legal history and, and in the Civil Rights Movement.  How was Topeka stratified in those days?  I mean, was there a black side of town?
Speaker 2: Blacks were distributed throughout, and so these four grade schools, mine was on the east side, there was one on the north, one on the west, and one kind of southeast. And so they were--and, and, and they were populated by the kids of black families that were distributed around the town as opposed to the black community being all on the east, no.  They was distributed throughout.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was--there was a professional community, doctors and attorneys, et cetera, et cetera in Topeka.
Speaker 1: Did they live primarily on one side or the other?
Speaker 2: I would--I would suggest that the, the professional people tended to live more on the west side, which was--and the--if you had to talk about a orientation for the black community, it would've been more on the east side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  That's interesting.  So--well, tell us about the suit.  Now, you were nine years old I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when the--when the suit was filed--
Speaker 2: And so I don't--I don't remember, member, you know, the, the act--activities and details of it.  Judy Brown [sic. Linda Brown] is in the--was in the same grade that I was, and so--
Speaker 1: She was named as the plaintiff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's actually--it's her father's [Oliver Brown]--
Speaker 1: Her father, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's her father--
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but it was about her.  And, and he was a minister, and so it happened in terms of the filing of the suit.  The details of it, you know, did not impact me that I knew of.  And, as I said, the grade schools were segregated but the junior high and high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas] were integrated, so it was just a question of time when I was gonna leave the segregated environment.  And the junior high school, I would walk past the white grade school another block to the integrated junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in that junior high environment, it was just--it was like segregation had never existed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--but the upshot of the suit was that separate but equal was, was basically ruled to be illegal by the [U.S.] Supreme Court.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Though, though things didn't change right away for anybody in the country, but I think they--the language was that school districts and boards should change with all deliberate speed or something like that, you know, which, you know, since they intended to have--they were--you know, deliberate speed might mean, you know, forever, you know?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So it, it was some--it just--it would--it--but it gave, I guess, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] a hand, hold to, you know, fight for, for the change.
Story_ID: 289347
Speaker 1: When you were in grade school [Washington Elementary School, Topeka, Kansas], I mean, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: No, not that I remember.  I know I was always good in math and English, and so forth, and I was an A student, and so it didn't really matter.  You know, we, of course, had all black teachers and--
Speaker 1: Was this like Booker T. Washington grade school?
Speaker 2: No, it was Washington Street on which it was and I, I don't know that it was tied to Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the, the teachers were very much part of the community and very much committed to the education of the--of we black children and very supportive.  I remember as an example of how committed and conscientious they were, I'm--as I said, I was an A student.  One of my teachers in the third grade gave me a B, and I knew I had had the best grades and best performance in the class.  And, of course, that was--that was worth a dime.  And so I challenged the teacher as to why she gave me a B.  And her response was, yes you had the best performance in the class, but you were not working up to your potential and, therefore, I would not give you an A when you were working less than your full potential.  That's--that has stayed with me my entire life as a measure of how committed those teachers were to we young black kids doing our best.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you motivated primarily by your parents [Pearl Gatewood Anderson and Joseph Anderson, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And it was an interesting context in that I knew they valued education and me doing well and getting good grades significantly, but on the other hand, it was not something that they could ever assist and support me with because my father certainly did not have the education beyond an eighth grade I think, and my mother with a high school degree had limited capability to impact what I would do in school, you know, with advanced kinds of college prep programs and that kind of stuff.  But there was never any question or doubt in my mind that there was every expectation that I was gonna go to college and my academic preparation should prepare me for that.
Story_ID: 289348
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to travel with your father [Joseph Anderson, Sr.] on the railroad [Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway] at all?
Speaker 2: No because his job was working as a welder in the shop of the cars in Topeka [Kansas].  But on the other hand, because he worked for the railroad, he had a pass that we could ride free.  And so every year of my life from year one, we would ride to visit his family in Southern California.  So we'd get on the train in Topeka and two and a half days later, a box of chicken later, we'd arrive in, in Fullerton, California, and our--his family would meet us there and we'd spend two or three weeks in Santa Ana [California].
Speaker 1: Now did you find California like different from Topeka?  You know, I mean--I, I know it had to be different, but in what ways was it different?
Speaker 2: Well, the weather, of course, was different, the beaches were different.  But to tell you how naive I was, you know, I had no inkling that, you know, Southern California was John Birch country.  And so we would do our thing around Santa Ana, play and run around and do everything we, you know, chose to do.  But no appreciation that it was as conservative as its history now reflects.
Story_ID: 289349
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was asking you off camera about Orange County [California], the difference between Orange County and, and Topeka [Kansas] in terms of the living conditions and--were your relatives in Orange County living better than your, your--
Speaker 2: No, not really, comparably the same.  But the, the neighborhood and so forth they lived in from my early--earliest memories was--had paved streets, where we eventually got paved streets in Topeka, Kansas.  I don't know that--I don't have any indication that they were--the schools were segregated out there as they were in grade school in Topeka.  But there was clearly racial separation in terms of Hispanics and African Americans and whites.  Although in that environment, they were living in the same neighborhood collectively.
Speaker 1: Well, how, how, how were they discriminated against, I mean, or, or separated even though they were living in the same--
Speaker 2: Well, you know you were racially identified and, you know, we weren't going to the white kids' homes and all that.  You--we stayed with our--with our own environment and community.
Speaker 1: More of a social stratification--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --was customary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --I guess rather than imposed or by some laws.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that was--when did you find out it was John Birch country when you--
Speaker 2: After I had gone away to college [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So every summer in Orange County--any good stories about Orange County?
Speaker 2: It was just always a place for family reunion and picnics and so forth.  As a matter of fact, I've always had a, a greater appreciation and knowledge of the family out there for going there and spending three weeks every summer than my family on the other side of Topeka where I'd see occasionally, but just not concentrated time, not, you know, getting to know them, et cetera, et cetera.  So I, I knew my family in California as well, if not better than some of my family on the other side of town in Topeka.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go to Disneyland [Anaheim, California] out in Orange County?
Speaker 2: Not while I was growing up.  I've, I've been there after, you know, I'd gone away to school and come back and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, I think they built it during the time when you were a little boy I think coming up.  I believe that they, they started building or finished it around in the late '50s [1950s], mid-'50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  See and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of course, I was in high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas] in the late '50s [1950s] and then off to college in the '60s [1960s] and so forth.
Story_ID: 289350
Speaker 1: Where'd you go to middle school?
Speaker 2: I went to East Topeka Junior High School [Topeka, Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: East Topeka Junior High School, which as I say, was about four blocks from my house.  You know, go by the grade school that I couldn't attend and then a couple more blocks to the junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is where you started playing the alto saxophone, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  You know, I was involved in sports there, basketball, football, got involved with sports--excuse me, with music there that I carried into the, you know, the--to, to high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas] and other kinds of things.  But, you know, involved in student government and leadership and, and, and wound up being president of the class my ninth grade which is the, the last year of junior high school.
Speaker 1: It sounds like a pretty active life, you know.
Speaker 2: Very much.
Speaker 1: Sports, music.
Speaker 2: Very, very much, always have been and, and it continues today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you say you were a Boy Scout, too?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, I was a Boy Scout and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --went for my Star, Life and Eagle and all that kinda good stuff.
Speaker 1: Did you become an, an Eagle Scout?
Speaker 2: No, I did not become an Eagle Scout.
Speaker 1: I mean was your--I know sometimes, you know, black scout troops didn't--couldn't--I mean, some people did become Eagle Scouts but others didn't because they--of lack of continuity in the leadership of the troop or something.  What was the case with you?
Speaker 2: And I think it's a combination of me being involved and active in other things, going away to college and other kinds of things that--you know, my, my, my family was not personally involved, you know.  It was more a community kind of commitment investment, so it was not something that I vested in and/or concluded.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--now did your interests change in high school at all or pretty much the same interests, music and sports and--
Speaker 2: Pretty much the same kind of activities.  Can we stop the tape a second, I think that's a--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I was just asking you if your--if your interest was still the same in high school.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was still academically motivated, I still played sports, still very much in the leadership of the school, leadership in the sports clubs and so forth, oriented on college, had anticipated going to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] until the circumstances brought West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] into play and so forth.  But to, to, to make your--to answer your question, the kinds of things that I was doing in the junior high school just kind of evolved and expanded and carried forward into, into high school.
Speaker 2: Now in terms of sports, did, did, did you specialize in any one sport in high school?
Speaker 1: My two sports were basketball and football.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Football, I was one of the co-captains of the football team.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Played tackle.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now did, did you achieve any, you know, I guess status as an All City player or anything like that?
Speaker 1: I was a letterman.  I was not all state or national and/or whatever the case may be.
Speaker 2: So now, now did you--is this where, where you started a band, you know, started playing in a local band?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I started playing in a local band and we would play Saturday night parties and that kind of stuff.  We weren't good, good, but it was something we did and got us a little money for it and all that kinda stuff.
Speaker 2: What kind of stuff would you play?  I mean, kind--
Speaker 1: Kind of, you know, dance music for the kids, sort of rock and roll, whatever the case may be that was prevalent in the mid-'50s [1950s], late '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: That's an era of Fats Domino and, you know, Lloyd Price.  I don't know--who, who did you--did you have a favorite musician then?
Speaker 1: No, I--as I said, it was more dance music than playing the, the, the popular singing because we didn't have a singer with us, so it was more stuff that you could dance to.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Jazz, that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 289351
Speaker 1: So when you look back over, over school, was there any--was there a teacher or, or a mentor along the way that--
Speaker 2: Yes, the principal in junior high school [East Topeka Junior High School, Topeka, Kansas] was a gentleman by the name of Mr. Oiler [ph.], O-I-L-E-R, I guess, white principal, was very supportive and mentored me significantly along the way, and was, was very caring, the same with the football coach in high school and then the mayor of my home town.  His wife was a teacher and so he was also a very mentoring and supported me, particularly as I evolved to the military academy [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: East Topeka Junior High School [Topeka, Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That, that was high school, too?
Speaker 2: Oh, the high school.  Topeka High School [Topeka, Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Topeka High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sorry.
Speaker 1: Was there just one high school in town?
Speaker 2: No, there were--there were two high schools and then a--and then a Catholic high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's Topeka High School and what was the other--
Speaker 2: But that was--I forget the names of the other two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they--that was the predominant school for years and then the other one came up and then the Catholic school and so forth.  So they didn't change the name.  It was Topeka High School.
Story_ID: 289352
Speaker 1: So Topeka [Kansas], I mean, it--it's like a midsize city, what, what 150,000 people maybe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably less than that--
Speaker 1: Or less?
Speaker 2: --somewhere around a hundred thousand people.  Maybe a hundred, 125,000.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  All right.
Speaker 2: It had a major downtown, you know, central downtown and with the, the stores that'd go with a small town like that, and then neighborhoods around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was a river [Kansas River] that divided the north and south side of Topeka and the folks in North Topeka were kinda like the people in Mudtown; they were the other side of town, the other side of the river.  And, know, but, but Topeka would have its floods every, every once in a while because of that river.  It would just flood everything out including my neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you, you, you experience any real bad times because of flood?
Speaker 2: We experienced the floods and things would get flooded and the, the water--river would go down and things would drain and you dry 'em out and go on with your life, you know?  It--but it was--it, it didn't wipe out my family or my home or anything, but floods--the, the flood of '53 [sic. 1951] and others are just very much a reality as were tornados.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Have you ever seen a tornado?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, up close and personal.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're lucky your house didn't--
Speaker 2: Yep.  Yep.
Speaker 1: --didn't--get blown.
Speaker 2: When I came home from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] after graduation and actually was about to get married, a tornado hit and I had my brand new car for--that I bought, you know.  So I took it out to that field across the school, the athletic fields where--away from the trees and parked it out there and came running back to the house to get in ahead of the tornado, opened the back door and, and the tornado took the door; I never saw the door again, door to the house, so--
Speaker 1: But it didn't get the rest of it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --but got the door.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were kinda lucky in that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 289353
Speaker 1: When you're a senior in high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas], what, what--did, did you run for office in high school too?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a, a student representative and then upon graduation, the senior year they identified eight students that they considered the most honored graduates and I was one of those eight and so forth and so on, so always had a leadership role in grade school, junior high school, and high school, church, et cetera.  I was the local president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter, the youth chapter of the NAACP in Topeka [Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that--how did you get involved with the NAACP?  Were, were--I mean, were your parents [Pearl Gatewood Anderson and Joseph Anderson, Sr.] involved or other relatives?
Speaker 2: No, not particularly.  But in terms of community activities like the Boy Scouts, like the church [Calvary Baptist Church, Topeka, Kansas], the NAACP was also an act- activity and, of course, they were anxious to have a youth chapter and kids involved and engaged, and I participated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did, did, did the youth chapter engage in any civil rights action, you know?
Speaker 2: Not, not really, not in terms of sit-ins and those kinds of things, but we met and, you know, addressed issues and concerns.  The swimming pools would get segregated so me and my buddy that played the accordion, he lived down the street, we'd get on our bicycles and at the time seemed like a long way across town, ride our bicycle so that we could go right in the, the pool that the black kids could swim in.  You know, in, in hindsight, it was probably a couple of miles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you go to any conventions with the NAACP?
Speaker 2: No, not that I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 289354
Speaker 1: Now how did you get involved in [U.S.] military? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any, any ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] stuff in--
Speaker 2: No, no.  The way the [United States] Military Academy [West Point, New York] came about is that I was--had the opportunity to participate in [American Legion] Boys State and [American Legion Auxiliary] Girls State.  Are you familiar with them?  Boys State is what I participated in obviously.
Speaker 1: Those are political like mock political--
Speaker 2: Well, they're American Legion sponsored programs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so they're--it's a--it's a program sponsored by the American Legion that's set up to teach young boys their junior year, after their junior year in high school before senior year, what civic responsibility and government activity is.  So we would go off, in our case we went off to the Wichita [Kansas], and organized a city, county, state government for a week.  And I was elected mayor of a, a city.  And then when it was time to end the week, we had to identify two boys to go from Kansas to Boys Nation and represent Kansas at Boys Nation, and I was one of the two selected to do that.  And pretty typical of my entire life is the circumstance whereby I am one of a few blacks in an environment but often chosen in spite of the race difference and the race issues in America and so forth, so of the couple, three hundred kids at Boys State, you know, there were five or six black kids, but I still was one of the two chosen from Kansas to go to Boys Nation.
Speaker 1: How many attended Boys Nation?
Speaker 2: Two from each state, two boys from each state, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you got 104.
Speaker 2: A hundred--a hundred boys there.
Speaker 1: Well, a hundred then, yeah, I guess, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so that was held in Washington, D.C., and when I returned from Washington, D.C., I got a postcard from West Point saying, congratulations on having been selected to participate in Boys State and Boys Nation.  You're the kind of young man that we'd like to have considered at West Point, and so if you're interested, fill out this card and we'll send you some information.  I filled out the card, they sent me the information, and the rest is history as they say.  But back to your earlier question about ROTC, I mean, I was so far removed from the military that I did not know that the Army football team, which, you know, we watch on TV in the Army Navy [U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] game, and West Point were the same.  I thought the Army football team was the United States Army's football team.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's the infantry men they just put in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: That is--now you were removed.
Speaker 2: I, I had--
Speaker 1: You were removed, yeah.
Speaker 2: I had no clue.
Speaker 1: So you, you--
Speaker 2: I, I had--
Speaker 1: --you said you didn't watch that much television, I guess, either.
Speaker 2: I had--you know, and so the West Point story was on TV, you know, and you'd watch that.  But I just had no knowledge and no understanding of the United States Army or the military in America, none.  My brother had been in Korea [Korean War] in the '50s [1950s] and so I remember him coming back from Korea and visiting the family and going back and coming home or whatever.  And, you know, he'd bring these beautiful jackets from Okinawa [Japan] and so forth with the dragons on the back and all that kinda good stuff and, but that's, that's as close to the military as I got as my brother being an enlisted man in Korea.
Speaker 1: 'Cause your father [Joseph Anderson, Sr.] liked missed World War I [WWI] and II [World War II, WWII], right?
Speaker 2: He did not--he did not serve--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in any of the military.
Speaker 1: He was too young for one and too old for the other.  Yeah.  That's interesting.  So--and--so, so West--you didn't know a lot about it until you actually went to West Point.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  And, but more of the same, like Boys State, when I arrived at West Point, there were nine hundred or-nine hundred students in the class, and of those nine hundred students, six were black.
Story_ID: 289355
Speaker 1: 'Kay now you, you graduated in '61 [1961] was it?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty--I mean from high school [Topeka High School, Topeka, Kansas].
Speaker 2: High school.  I graduated from high school in '61 [1961], entered--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right into West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] after that and then graduated from West Point in '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about West Point.  West Point is a place that had been traditionally inhospitable to black students, you know?
Speaker 2: The, the racism at West Point was very dominant and prevalent in the '40s [1940s] when [General] Benjamin O. Davis [Jr.], several other of the colonels that I came to know later were there, and so they would--were segregated in their rooming.  They had all kind of hazing, feces put in their shoes, really a tough and ugly environment in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Now, this is Benjamin O. Davis and that group.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I remember going back to Henry [Ossian] Flipper and all of them, it was even worse.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was back in the 1800s.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where I think--
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: --one student had his ear cut off or--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: One student had his ear cut off and was--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --shackled to a bed, then court marshalled for doing that to himself.  That's what they--that was one of the first students.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is a tradition of abuses and--
Speaker 2: But it had evolved significantly, so by the time the '60s [1960s] rolled around and I was there, we were not segregated, isolated.  There were still only a few of us.  Six entered; two did not make it through the summer, so four of us started the academic year in '61 [1961] and all four of us graduated, survived the four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How--it was about--so it was four out of how many total?
Speaker 2: Four graduated out of six hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the class went from nine hundred to six hundred and number of black cadets went from six to four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Same ratio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was one percent of the class basically.  So, so--well, how, how are things for, for your group?
Speaker 2: So in terms of the race issue, there was institutional racism more than individual racism as a way I describe it.  And so what I'm saying is as I had been a leader in every era of my life and that continued when I entered West Point and that I was a battalion commander of the plebe Christmas, I was a regimental commander for spring break when all the upper classmen would go away for the--for the holidays, and then the plebes could not go home and we were left, and I was always in a leadership position.  But then when it came time to--for my senior year when it really counts as a leadership position, son of a gun, didn't happen.  And, you know, there are explanations why not, but that's, that's the way it is.  Now, the, the thing I'm very proud of is that in my four years at West Point, nobody ever used the N-word.  So the racism of the '40s [1940s] was gone.  But the institutional--
Speaker 1: Or at least it was silent.
Speaker 2: The, the institutional racism acceptance and support and promotion had not yet arrived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so in, in the senior class, there was one individual named Fred Gorden [General Fred Gorden] who became--who later became a brigadier general and commandant of the West Point, of the Military Academy.  There were in the sophomore class two individuals, junior class three, and then the, the freshman class, you know, there were four of us.  So at--in that first year, we were less--we were right at a dozen black cadets out of a corps--a corps of cadets of over two thousand, close to four thousand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did you--did the four cadets in your class--did you--the four blacks stay together?  I mean like try to support one another or do they--
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  We knew each other and would be socially interactive.  None of us came from the same area.  One of the fellows was from Seattle [Washington], another was from Chicago [Illinois], I was from Kansas, and the fourth fellow was from South Carolina, and his father had been in the [U.S.] Army, so he was the only one who had any military background.  But as you can imagine on Saturday night if one of us had guard, there was no bid whist game, you know, and so you just, you know, survived and performed to the best of your ability in a very isolated environment, not hostile, but isolated.  And so none of us were in the same company together.  And so our day to day routine was without any blacks in our environment.  My jun- my sophomore year, there was--I was in the company with a--with a gen- with a black cadet who was a senior, but with the numbers being so limited in that era, it was unusual for a black cadet to be in the same company with another black cadet.
Story_ID: 289356
Speaker 1: You're a young man in college, a lot of young men are socializing in college and that sorta thing, you know, you're in an all-male environment and--you know, what, what did you do for, for a social outlet?
Speaker 2: There was a little town of Highland Falls [New York] right outside the gate at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and so we would get to know people in the community.  There were no black officers teaching at West Point at that time.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, our support came from the enlisted people and/or the employees that worked there on the academy as a job.  And I, you know, remember them well and they were very caring and supportive of us.  When I went back to teach later after getting a couple of graduate degrees, you know, that became one of our challenges.  And so the activities of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth chapter carried on in each phase of my life, whether it was the Military Academy and/or General Motors [GM] and/or minority business ownership, et cetera.  It's just--I'm, I'm of an age that each phase and challenge of my life is often the first--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --circumstance.
Speaker 1: So everything's predicated on the integration of a new situation sort of.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And it's--that pattern is consistent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To--
Speaker 1: I, I--
Speaker 2: Today.
Speaker 1: I know West Point is intense and everything, but did, did you have any access to other college age women or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We got to know some of the young ladies in the little town in Highland Falls.  We would go into New York City [New York, New York] after the plebe year when we could leave the post and socialize with college age kids there.  We would go down to Howard University in Washington, D.C., and, and get to know the folks there, particularly the ladies in the quadrangle there in the, the '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s], so that was very much the case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Are there--are there any particular stories about West Point you can--that, that illustrate what it was like being there or anything that stands out that you--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the, the plebe year and the pressure associated with that is, you know, is just tremendous.  And when I first arrived, you know, there was just no way this was something that I wanted to continue and would survive.  And then after the first week, we had a, a meeting with the chaplain; our freshmen class had a meeting with the chaplain.  And, you know, he, he clarified what it was all about, saying that this is really a, a test.  And so the things that happen to you are not personal from the upper classmen.  It's designed to see if you can perform under pres- pressure.  And if you assume--keep your sense of humor and understand that this is not someone doing these things to you personally and, and, and again, I did not receive any different or harsher treatment than my white peers as far as I could tell, and so with that insight, things all of the sudden became manageable, and I never considered leaving again.  You know, I was an average student there.  You know, when you bring the best students of the country together, you know, then at the end of the day, you know, there are still some who are gonna be at the top of the class and some are gonna be at the middle class, and some are gonna be, you know, bringing up the rear.  I was--I was right in the middle class.  As a matter of a fact, I, I graduated in the exact middle of the class academically.
Story_ID: 289357
Speaker 1: Anything else about West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] before we move to--
Speaker 2: You know, I played football my, my freshman year.  I tore the cartilages in my knee, so that ended that.  I guess the thing that I probably have more recognition at the academy is I was the soloist for the glee club [United States Military Academy Cadet Glee Club], you know, so my singing growing up and music in my background and so forth.  There was no--there was a, a cadet chapel choir, Protestant chapel choir which I was the lead solo--soloist, and then there was a glee club, which I was the lead soloist.  And so concerts that we would sing around the country, you know, Joe Anderson [HistoryMaker Joseph Benjamin Anderson, Jr.] was the lead voice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's no mean accomplishment.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we sang on Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show'].  We sang on (unclear).  We sang at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] and a few places like that.  So it was a--it was a big deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you play sax in--
Speaker 2: I did not play the piano or sax while I was at the academy. The other thing that I did that probably was the excuse not to have a leadership position my senior year is in my junior year, I participated in a program called Operation Crossroads Africa, which is kind of a Peace Corps type program to Africa.  And so the Military Academy allowed three cadets each year to join in that program sponsored by Reverend--or, or Dr. [James H.] Robinson out of New York City [New York, New York], and I went to Uganda for the summer before my senior year and, therefore, missed the military training and, therefore, lost the opportunity for a leadership position my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to Uganda.  Now this was--
Speaker 2: Prior to [President] Idi Amin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was [Prime Minister] Milton Obote president then or--
Speaker 2: No, he was in Zaire [sic.].
Speaker 1: --or, or was it even--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, is--Obote was--was, was Uganda independent then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, you said Obote was in Zaire then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But he had--
Speaker 2: Well you--well in Belgian Congo--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is what it was called then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he hadn't come over to Uganda yet?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I--and so I may--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I may be confused about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But long story short, I spent that summer in Uganda really, really had an awakening experience going to an all-black country and, you know, dealing with my roots, quote, unquote.  There's no indication that East Africa is my ancestry and so forth, but black is black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it was a--you know, so I, I, I lost the military leadership opportunity my senior year, you know.  It didn't, didn't take away my leadership experience and so after that, I went right on to leadership in the [U.S.] Army, active Army.
Story_ID: 289358
Speaker 1: Well tell us something.  Now, this is something a lot of people don't have a chance to do, but you--so you were in Uganda.  Did you stay with a, a family in Uganda (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so it was a, a group of students from a variety of different schools, fourteen of us, and we had a student leader, and we were assigned a project of building a library in a little village out in hinterland in Uganda, and that's what we did.  I mean, I didn't have any con- background in construction and/or doing that, but we did our brick and mortar thing and built this project and put a roof on it and, and that was our accomplishment and contribution to this little village in Uganda in 1964.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, in '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, so in Uganda, pretty much the people spoke English, I mean that, that you were working with, right?  It had been a British colony.
Speaker 2: Yes, but out in the villages not so much, and so we had a combination of English speaking people and then we'd have to have people interpret and translate for us.
Speaker 1: Did you learn any Kiswahili?
Speaker 2: Kiswahili was not the language in Uganda.  That was more in Tanzania and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so forth.  They had their own language.  I forget what it was now, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it wasn't Swahili.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to see some of the sights in Uganda?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  So I saw some of the sights there and did, did some sight-seeing down in, in Tanzania and Kenya, and so forth before I came home.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is supposed to be one of the most beautiful--
Speaker 2: Victoria Falls is just--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --fantastic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there how many months?
Speaker 2: Two months.
Speaker 1: Two months?  Okay.  Did that--did that like--how did that affect your worldview, you know, being in a--
Speaker 2: Well, it just added a dimension to my worldview that I did not have.  You know, I just got back from India this week, same thing, and I had been there before, and all of a sudden it just puts into perspective a new set of global issues and circumstances, relationships, et cetera.  So it was a significant oper- opportunity and insight for me to go to Africa as a college student [at the U.S. Military Academy, West Point, New York].
Story_ID: 289359
Speaker 1: So when you got back, you went through your senior year and you didn't have the opportunity you were talking about, but when you--I guess--well, well when you graduated from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], you come out and you become a second lieutenant?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Second lieutenant in the branch of your service choice; mine was infantry, and I went to Airborne [U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia] and Ranger School, and one year later I was in Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this tour of duty in Vietnam is significant.  So tell us about what happened in, in Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Well, I went over as a platoon leader and, of course, you don't know how you're gonna perform under fire.  You know, you've had all this training, but this is the real deal.  And fortunately, I had good results as a platoon leader.  I didn't lose my people in combat circumstances, but did wind up being the subject of a documentary on the Vietnam War done by a French oriented crew who had been interested in describing what the American experience is in Vietnam as compared to the French who had been there in the Indo--Indochina War [First Indochina War] in the '50s [1950s].  And so I was in base camp at the time when they showed up.  I had just had a pretty significant engagement, combat engagement where I won my first silver star.  I spoke French.  I was a Military Academy graduate.  I was a black West Pointer, which was different, and so whatever the combination of circumstances, they assigned this camera crew to me.  And they followed me around for six weeks, day and night, filmed everything I did in my platoon, and wound up going back to France and putting together a documentary called 'La Section Anderson' that translated to 'The Anderson Platoon.'  This was--so they were with me September, October of '66 [1966].  This was shown in February in France, February of '67  [1967], CBS heard about it and bought the rights to it, brought the producer, Pierre Schoendoerffer, S-C-H-O-E-N-D-O-E-F-F-E-R [sic.], to New York City [New York, New York] and he did the English version.  It showed on television the Fourth of July, 1967, hit the country--took the country by storm in terms of the first real story on what the Vietnam was--War was about other than the news, and it was kinda like 'Roots.'  It was so widely acclaimed that it was shown again three weeks later.  It went on the movie circuit, you know, the foreign films and/or small movie circuit, 57th Street Playhouse in New York [New York] and all that kind of stuff, and had same kind of success.  And long story short was the winner of both an Oscar from the Academy Awards and an Emmy [Award] in 1967 for the best foreign documentary.
Story_ID: 289360
Speaker 1: How did you--I mean, well before we get to the--talking about the--how you felt about the movie ['La Section Anderson'; 'The Anderson Platoon'], how did you feel about your service in Vietnam, Vietnam War's controversial (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, in, in, in hindsight, it's kinda like Iraq [Iraq War], you know.  Why were they--were we there and under what circumstances?
Speaker 1: Did you think about that before you went?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  You were a dedicated officer, committed to performing the mission and leading your soldiers, and find--finding the enemy, search and destroy, and take 'em out.  So the politics of the war was not even a consideration.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's something that was probably--was not--I would assume was not really--well, how was it handled in--at, at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and how did they--
Speaker 2: Well, see, because--when I was graduating in '65 [1965], the war was just getting underway, so there were some people over there in clandestine circumstances, but the first real troop strength began to build as I was graduating, so it was not a subject for discussion at the academy that much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in the active [U.S.] Army, it became more and more a reality as divisions began to be relocated to Vietnam in the mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: And as I look back on it, I was a teenager in those days myself that the, the--it, it--really, the protests around the war hadn't started to really escalate--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at, at, at that point.
Speaker 2: The protests around the wary didn't start until the '67 [1967], '68 [1968] timeframe.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  So--yeah, so you were--I think--I think in '66 [1966], the song, 'Ballad of the Green Berets,' it was starting to become a big deal in '66  [1966] and '67 [1967]--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --where it hadn't, hadn't been that big a deal before.
Story_ID: 289361
Speaker 1: How did you find Vietnam?  Now you--now here, you'd been to Uganda before.  What did you think about Vietnam itself?
Speaker 2: Well, Vietnam was all jungles and our mission was to travel through those jungles and look for enemy camps and individuals, and so it was a marching, moving through a combat environment that was forested and jungle and so forth.  Sometimes you'd have to--even to use machetes to cut your way through.  So, you know, you'd, you'd engage and encounter the enemy on occasion and you'd have the brief fire fights and they'd turn and run and, you know, we would continue the next day.  The really pitched battles and them attacking you as camps hadn't really started at that timeframe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you talked about during the crossroads [Operation Crossroads Africa] trip that you eluded to being able to bond with, with the Ugandans on some level, you know, even though you said you're not from--your roots are probably not in East Africa.  Still, you know, the Africans were black people and you were able to bond with--were, were you able to connect with the Vietnamese?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The villagers that were there, you know, they didn't speak any language that would allow any communications.  Although when--on some occasions we had an interpreter, they were very agrarian and, and rural people that were about tending their rice paddies.  And who we were, soldiers and what we were about, had no relevance as far as they were concerned, just let me do my thing and take care of my rice paddies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there was no--there was no relationship and/or interacting with them as with the villagers and some of the other leaders in Uganda.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you feel any resentment on the part of the South Vietnamese and did they seem like they were--they were glad you were there or did they--
Speaker 2: I think acceptance that we were there.  I, I wouldn't say glad because, again, they just wanted us to--and the North Vietnamese to get out of their way so they could raise their rice.
Story_ID: 289362
Speaker 1: Any stories from that time period [Vietnam War] that, that really stand out that, that would be instructive to black people as they look at [U.S.] military service today and what it--what it means?
Speaker 2: Well, I think a key element was that there was certainly a large percentage of black soldiers there, very few black leaders there, and so the opportunity that I had to lead my troops and/or be a role model for enlisted men and/or others in other organizations beyond my platoon and my company was a, a role that I accepted and dealt with.
Speaker 1: So what kinds of things would you do that, that--
Speaker 2: I would be accessible if there were issues and/or concerns that individuals wanted to raise with me.  I--you know, I wouldn't have an attitude, well it's not my job, you're not in my organization.  If I--if I needed to be of assistance to someone, I was more than happy to do that, always have and continue that today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us an example of the kind, kind of thing that they--that might come your, your, your way that you could help do that, you know, a black soldier would need that they couldn't get elsewhere?
Speaker 2: If they had some personal issues with family and weren't, weren't being heard and/or listened to and, you know, would ask me what they should do and so forth.  And if I could communicate that to their officers and so forth, I would do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So would you say there was just a dearth of black leadership there, there was hardly any, right?
Speaker 2: You know, very, very few in my particular battalion.  I, I may have been the only black officer, again (laughter).  You know, that's just--
Speaker 1: And that's thousands of people.
Speaker 2: And that's just--that's just the way it is.
Story_ID: 289363
Speaker 1: Now the movie ['La Section Anderson'; 'The Anderson Platoon'], now what did the--what was the primary story of the movie?  What did it really show?
Speaker 2: Well, the movie's--one of the political strengths of the movie was that it was apolitical and it was designed from the mind of the producer [Pierre Schoendoerffer] to show what American soldiers do day to day in combat.  So he followed us around, filmed everything we were doing, meals, et cetera, et cetera.  When we got into a fire fight, he would film that and so it took a lot of time and pain to describe in great detail through film what the soldiers do on a day to day basis without in any way reflecting the why they're doing or the politics of why they're doing it.  This is what we do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your day to day routine at--
Speaker 2: We would get up in the morning.  We, you know, depending on the circumstance, if we were out in the field, we'd sleep in hammocks, get up in the morning, clean up our area, clean up ourselves, and then just start moving.  We'd get direction from somebody, go to point A on azimuth, on the compass such and such, and, and we would--we would do that.  We'd have artillery support if we need it, we'd have aircraft overhead if we need it, et cetera, et cetera.  And then when we would encounter enemy and make contact with them, we'd bring in the world, you know, every resource that was available to us to overwhelm them and, and then move on to the next contact.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so do you think the movie was pretty good?
Speaker 2: It was--it was--it was excellent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was excellent.  Again, in saying--in, in the way he was most effective, is he personalized it, so it was each individual by name and where he was from and what his role was in the platoon.  So the audience could begin to relate to the individual as opposed to the United States Army in Vietnam.
Story_ID: 289364
Speaker 1: Now when you were there, you won, I don't know how many medals.  I mean, I was--I read 'em on the bio but (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --it was quite a few.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--
Speaker 1: I mean, you--we're talking about maybe twenty medals--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for one thing or another.  Silver stars, bronze stars, I mean--so you were in the thick of a lot of action that was--
Speaker 2: Yes.  But, again--and this was--and, and all of that would be over two different tours, so I was in Vietnam from '66 [1966] to '67 [1967], back in the  [United] States for three years, then back again, '70 [1970], '71 [1971], so all of those medals were over two different combat--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --circumstances.
Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966] to '67 [1967]--
Speaker 2: Six, six, six--June '66 [1966] to June of '67 [1967] and then July of '70 [1970] to April of '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you--I mean, I would imagine that, that you were in some severe danger and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  And, and more--
Speaker 1: Probably a few times.
Speaker 2: --and more--yep.  There was a--in 'The Anderson Platoon' ['La Section Anderson'] there was a major combat or fight scene where we were, you know, engaged and took on a battalion and, and, and before the documentary, when I won my first silver star, we had, had to go in and rescue an attacked platoon that had been ambushed and had to fight off the, the battalion that had them and, and rescue the, the four remaining people out of twenty-six.  So, you know, there--those--that's what combat is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when, when you were--now, you, you weren't over there in '68 [1968], right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That, that was the Tet--
Speaker 2: Tet Offensive.
Speaker 1: --Offensive--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --and all that (simultaneous) -
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --That was really--when things really started hitting.
Story_ID: 289365
Speaker 1: Can you tell me where you were when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and how you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --how you felt about that?
Speaker 2: I was in Washington, D.C.  I was--I was assigned to Fort Dix, New Jersey, but I was in Washington, D.C., to participate in the swearing in ceremony of General Fred Davison [General Frederic Ellis Davison] when he was about to get his first star, so he would've been the first modern day black general officer, and I was there to participate in that ceremony.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is almost like the anniversary.  This is like the 5th of April--I mean, yesterday was the anniversary of Dr. King's assassination I guess in Memphis [Tennessee] in '68 [1968].  Can you remember what--I mean, when did the news hit you and, and how--
Speaker 2: Well, I was--I was in Washington, D.C., I was in uniform and, of course, the riots and all that broke out and, and I was saying to myself, is this the place I wanna be wearing a [U.S.] Army uniform at this time?  I didn't have any problem, didn't have any incidents, but that's, that's where I was and that's what was going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, riots sprung up all over the country and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How, how did the [U.S.] military react?  I've, I've heard like people in the police department talk about how they--you know, being a minority in the police department how they felt at that time and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --how fireman felt during that time and other--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How did you--how did you feel--how, how did the white officers and soldiers act when they--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --heard the news and--
Speaker 2: There was not a lot of interaction or reaction on a personal basis.  There was a loss of a black leader, but in terms of the military, it had no impact or consequence one way or the other.  Folks didn't dwell on it beyond what they would discuss and consider as a, a news account, you know, whether it's Dr. King or the pope, you know?
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's no story that's--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --connected with that.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 289366
Speaker 1: How was the second tour different from the first tour?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I went back as a company commander the second tour as opposed to platoon leader.  I had a lot more troops and responsibilities.  It was post demonstration and the volunteer professional [U.S.] Army that was there the first tour had now evolved and dwindled to draftees who had one purpose in mind, survive and get back home.  And so the aggressive let's go find 'em, let's fight 'em, let's kill 'em attitude in the '60s [1960s] was a day without a fight is a day without risk in the '70s [1970s]. Now, they were good soldiers.  They performed well, attacked when appropriate but, you know, if, if there had been an opportunity to go home without firing a shot, so be it, whereas in the earlier time period, it was all about let's search and destroy--
Speaker 1: So did, did you find there's--
Speaker 2: --enemies.
Speaker 1: --there's a lot more ambivalence on the part of the soldiers the second time around in terms of what they thought the war [Vietnam War] was about and what they were--
Speaker 2: Again, it was--it was not about discussion, the politics of the war.  It was about surviving day to day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just like Iraq [Iraq War].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those, those soldiers over there are not sitting around talking about, you know, what we should--whether we should be there with Saddam Hussein or not.  They're saying, how am I gonna get home?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I think at this point in the war, maybe 40 percent of the Army was black that I've heard, you know, of the enlisted men.
Speaker 2: I, I, I don't know the, the statistics--
Speaker 1: Does that sound like--
Speaker 2: --on that, but I, I can't relate to it.  My platoon had its--had more than the, the national population would suggest, but I, I can't suggest 40 percent.  I don't--
Speaker 1: That might be too high you think?
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Anything significant about the, the second tour that you went on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, again, one of those firsts, between tours, I left Vietnam and went to Fort Dix, New Jersey, as a company commander, training national guard and reservist and enlisted men to take them through basic infantry training, advanced infantry training.  As a company commander, did that for a while and then was selected to be aide-de-camp to the commanding general of Fort Dix, New Jersey, and as such was the first black aide-de-camp in the Army.  And so back to my point, you know, these groundbreaking circumstances have occurred over the course of my [U.S.] military career, and so when I went back to Vietnam a second time, I was the company commander in Cambodia because when I arrived, we were in Cambodia, which was, you know, the best tactical initiative that I could reflect on in my two tours there where we--you know, it's like here--here's a street and we're gonna cross this street even though it's an international boundary, you know, government sanctioned, and guess what?  Two blocks across the street is where all their weapons and all their ammunition, and all their food is hidden.  But because of international law and so forth and politics, we weren't allowed to cross the street.  Well, we crossed the street, we took 'em out.  And but, of course, tremendous backlash and tremendous demonstrations against us going into Cambodia in June and July of--I guess it was May and June of '70 [1970].  When we came back out of Cambodia and continued our normal search and destroy operations in Vietnam, for the remainder of that period, we did not receive another single attack or shot from the Vietnamese.
Speaker 1: So strategically, it made--
Speaker 2: Tactically, tremendously successful.  Politically and strategically, not my job.
Story_ID: 289367
Speaker 1: You didn't go back to Vietnam again after that second tour but, but you, you were in the [U.S.] military for thirteen--was it thirteen years?
Speaker 2: Thirteen--thirteen years, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I--after that second tour, I went to graduate school at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], back to Southern California, and then back up to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] to teach, and I taught in the political science department and taught comparative government and a course that became my curriculum course, problems of developing nations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now by this time, I mean, had you really started like thinking about the politics of the war and that sort of things or--
Speaker 2: Well, the war was over by this time, you know.  This was--
Speaker 1: So we're about '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: So I was in graduate school from '71 [1971] to '73 [1973]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then taught at West Point from '73 [1973] to '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the war was over.  But the politics of the war as such was reflected in the budget and reduction in time and, and job opportunities, et cetera, et cetera.  And so the reality is, the aggressive, fast promotions, fast pace era of the Vietnam War now was settling into a postwar belt-tightening reduction in the service, et cetera, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you ever think about making a--you know, making the military career, you know and long to become--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had no--had, had no expectations of doing anything else--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but making the military career.  And so--but the circumstance that I described just now in terms of the reduction and slow down of promotional opportunities, opportunities related to leadership and so forth, and an opportunity that I had not anticipated, I--that--'cause in that timeframe after teaching at West Point, I went to the [United States Army] Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, from '76 [1976] to '77 [1977], and then applied for and was selected a White House fellow in the end of the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration.  So I came back to Washington, D.C., as a White House fellow from '77 [1977] to '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very prestigious--very prestigious program, very, very competitive, interviewing two- two thousand, twenty-five hundred young men and women and selecting ten to fourteen as White House fellows.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you learn as a White House fellow and what--
Speaker 2: You--the purpose of the program is to help young men and women and we're in the--you know, we're post '60s [1960s], post, post-Vietnam now that are disillusioned with the United States government and political system.  Okay, instead of sitting around grousing about it, go into Washington, D.C., serve as the highest level of the government for cabinet officer and/or in the White House and so forth, then go back to your community.  And when people are sitting around the table grousing about what's wrong with the people in Washington, D.C., you can speak first hand.  And so it was an--it, it was an involvement in educational program for the best and the brightest, started by President Lyndon [Baines] Johnson and a gentleman named John [W.] Gardner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Started in 1964 and so by the time I participated in '77 [1977], '78 [1978], a number of folks--and so when you talk about alumni of the program, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], Wesley Clark, et cetera, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Now, John Gardner, is this the same John Gardner that started Common Cause, I think?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 289545
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My full name is [HistoryMaker] Joseph Benjamin Anderson, Jr.  That's J-O-S-E-P-H, Benjamin, B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, last name, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, Jr.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is February 12, 1943, and I was born in Topeka, Kansas.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm CEO of automotive supply companies.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 11, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my office and headquarters in Troy, Michigan, suburbs of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what we're doing, we're completing an interview that we started April 6, 2005, here in Detroit [sic. Bloomfield Hills, Michigan], correct?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 289546
Speaker 1: Where we left off, we were--we were talking about you coming back to this country from Vietnam and going to graduate school in UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], I believe it was.  And what, what year is that?  Nineteen--
Speaker 2: I came back from Vietnam in 1971 and entered graduate school at UCLA at that time in preparation for going back to the Military Academy [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] to teach in the social sciences department.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you major in at UCLA?
Speaker 2: I took two master's degrees at--while I was at UCLA for two years.  I have a master's degree in African area studies, the continent of Africa, and then I have a second master's degree in comparative government from UCLA.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what were--what was your thinking at the time in terms of pursuing these two master's?  They seem (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--
Speaker 1: --to be related.
Speaker 2: I had been given the opportunity and offer to come back to the Military Academy at West Point [New York] where I graduated in 1965 to come back on the staff and faculty from 1973 to 1976.  My position would be as an assistant professor in the department of social science at the United States Military Academy.  And the purpose for my going there was to teach a class on third world politics, which was called Problems of Developing Nations.  So University of California at Los Angeles, UCLA, had a very strong African area studies department.  And so I went there to take a degree in African area studies for two years.  What I determined was that I could get it done in one year, and my decision was to take a second degree in comparative government because I was concerned about the [U.S.] Army saying, well he has a degree in African area studies but he doesn't know anything about Europe or Asia or wherever else and, therefore, would not be appropriate to assign him anywhere like that.  So I wanted to take that issue off the table, so I took both master's degrees in the two years I was allocated to take one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--and--now just a reminder for those who--well, most people watching this will watch, watch the first part, but you had a chance to go to Uganda as part of Crossroads [Operation Crossroads Africa] when you were in college, right, before?
Speaker 2: That is correct.  When I was at the academy in 1964, I participated in a program called Operation Crossroads Africa led by Reverend [James H.] Robinson out of New York City [New York, New York], and it was kinda like a Peace Corps program.  And we went to East Africa to--I went to Uganda.  I had two other West Point classmates that went to two other countries in East Africa and it was a two-month program kind of like the Peace Corps.  In my particular case, in Uganda, myself and thirteen other students, a group of fourteen college students built a library in Uganda.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So had, had you--were, were you thinking that maybe you would go back to Africa at some point and or--and--or, or, or just become expert on African politics, using this is a--kind of a--
Speaker 2: I, I, I did not have any thoughts or expectations about that, but when the academy asked me to come back in the social science department, and specifically to teach their class on problems of developing nations, then that facilitated and led me to consider UCLA's African studies program as the best alternative to prepare myself for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us what your thesis was, the, the two theses?
Speaker 2: The thesis at, at--in the African area studies area was on the role of the [U.S.] military in governing in southern Africa.  And I worked on that in both my African area studies degree and in my comparative government program, and went on to actually begin a Ph.D. program at UCLA --
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) in that same area.
Story_ID: 289547
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 1979--I mean '73 [1973], you, you go back to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] as a teacher.
Speaker 2: Correct.  So I completed the two years at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] with two master's degrees, graduated, and went to West Point to teach for a three-year assignment there, and then continued to take a couple of class--courses at Columbia University [New York, New York] to complete the classroom work that I would need to have enough credits for a Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the, the classes (audio cuts out) Columbia were in comparative--
Speaker 2: Were in, in, in government--comparative government, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  Are there any, any teachers or are there any, any things that you learned that really like stand out in this period of time of going to school?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a completely different environment from my military background and experience, so some of the things that I experienced were interacting with students who had political and/or social differences from what I had been exposed to in the last number of years while at the Military Academy.  I entered West Point in 1961.  The Civil Rights Movement was well underway, and I certainly had my thoughts and concerns about my being at West Point while that activity was going on, but was encouraged to continue with my education.  Many of the students at UCLA were of the same age and had been involved in a number of different civil rights movements, and so it was an interesting experience for me to interact with them from my perspective as a military individual and their perspective as students on the campus, particularly UCLA and its political orientation at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--what would be the major difference, I guess, between your mentality coming back and, and the mentality of some of the students of UCLA (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the, the students that I encountered were very active and had strong ideas and views on the [U.S.] military and the civil rights initiatives that were going on and thought there were differences.  What we soon concluded was it was not about the military and/or students, it was about individuals.  And one of the individuals that I rode to class with from the area in which I lived was very much a part of one of the activist movements, but he and I got along just fine because, you know, we were both African American and dealt with some of the same issues.  I just happened to be in a military environment and he was in a civilian and activist organization environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what you're saying is that, that the world is still the same, it's just--you know, you're, you're gonna reach similar conclusions from different standpoints if you--if you really check out--
Speaker 2: And if you--if from the area that you're involved and engaged in-- there are civil rights and, and race issues in the military just like there are civil rights and race issues in the general population of Los Angeles [California] and/or UCLA, which at that time was still trying to generate its first black Ph.D.  And so all these are challenges and struggles that the black community was faced with at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now what--'72 [1972]--I'm just trying to thing what's going on in Los Angeles in '72 [1972] and nationwide.
Speaker 2: Well, Ron, Ron Kareng- Ron Karenga [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] was very active out there and one of the fellas that I got to know very well in the UCLA program was very much involved in his organization, so those were some of the insights into education that was I exposed to.  On the other hand, on a number of occasions, I would show my copy of 'The Anderson Platoon' ['La Section Anderson'] to individual students, and never found them to be personally disrespectful and/or an antagonistic toward me.  They knew that that's the job that I had and were accepting of that that's what I was over there to do and had been trained to do and was doing that for our country as one of our policies.
Speaker 1: Now did you--did you have a expectation that there would be a negative reaction to--
Speaker 2: I, I did not have an expectation but I thought that was a possibility and it did not turn out to be the case.
Story_ID: 289548
Speaker 1: Did you have any difficulty yourself, personally readjusting to the life in the United States after you know, spending so much time in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I did not have any difficulty adjusting.  I had been there before and had come back at that time and gone on a military post at Fort Dix, New Jersey, so it's--it was not a new experience coming back and, and adjusting.  Going to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], I did not wear my uniform.  I was in civilian clothes, so unless somebody knew me and my background, they did not have any way of, of reflecting or describing me as being different than anybody else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I--there's so much literature written about black soldiers in Vietnam returning and they--I mean, there's so many--in so many different venues.  I can think of a comment I read about a black soldier returning and becomes a super hero and is--there, there was a book called 'Bloods: [An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans]' [Wallace Terry] a few years ago in the '90s [sic. 1984] I think that recounted--
Speaker 2: There is a chapter in 'Bloods' on me.
Speaker 1: Is--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  There's--what-'Fallen Angels' by--we interviewed him for the project of--right around--[HistoryMaker] Walter Dean Myers out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and there is so much literature about, you know, black soldiers returning from Vietnam.  Do, do you have any reflections on, on that body of literature and whether it's--what do you think about it?
Speaker 2: I did not have any reflections on it and, and quite candidly and frankly, I have not spent a lot of time paying attention to and studying the post-Vietnam experience and era.  You know, initially I moved on to teaching at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and it was not oriented on Vietnam and so forth, and then as I ultimately evolved to go to General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] after the White House Fellow[s] program, my focus and orientation was learning about the automobile industry.  I have spoken on a number of occasions on the Vietnam experience as a result of my documentary ['La Section Anderson'; 'The Anderson Platoon'], but it's not something that I have spent a lot of time engaged in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't have any specific reflections as a black soldier about it.
Speaker 2: I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I, I know the experience and it--it's a different experience as a black officer as opposed to a black soldier, so I do want to make sure that that's said and understood.  And so as I came back from Vietnam the first time and moved into officer's quarters on the military post at Fort Dix, New Jersey, I did not experience what a black soldier might have experienced going into Oakland, California, or New York City [New York, New York] or St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, do you ever encounter soldiers that, that are enlisted men and have conversations about this at all or--
Speaker 2: I, I do not because, again, just a different, different environment totally at the academy and then from the academy, I went to another school, and then the White House Fellow program, so just not in the mainstream of interacting with folks along those lines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Story_ID: 289549
Speaker 1: What was your experience like teaching at, at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] after having been a student there, you know?
Speaker 2: After my UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] experience, it was a, a, a good experience teaching at the academy.  The classroom numbers are very small, you know, ratio of about fifteen students per class, very motivated and disciplined students.  They read their home--homework and were prepared to take an exam everyday which is part of the West Point system of education, and so--now certainly I didn't have any teaching associates like you might find at other institutions, being a master's [degree] level as opposed to a Ph.D., doctor.  I had a certain level of understanding but had not done in-depth research on any subject and so forth.  I, I would do the homework in preparation for my class, but not something that I had written about and, and ex--you know, and done exposes on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Had you--did, did you finally--had, had West Point changed any when you, you know, upon return?  Did you see it to be, I don't know, different in any way?
Speaker 2: I'm sure it changed.  We older graduates always think that the newer classes have it easier than we had.  This was also a period of transition for West Point in that I was there from 1973 to 1976 on the faculty, and in 1976, it was the first year that women were going to be admitted to the academy.  So there were certainly a lot of discussion and reflection on what impact that would have on the United States Military Academy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you think about women being admitted?
Speaker 2: I, I thought it was a non-issue and a non-event.  My view is if you substituted the, the race issue for the gender issue, the same arguments and the same discussions prevail.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Did you have any women students when you were there?
Speaker 2: No because they were admitted after I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 289550
Speaker 1: Well, you, you taught for three years, so why did you leave [the United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and what was--
Speaker 2: It's a two--three-year tour only.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So when you're assigned there, it's with the expectation that you will be there for three years only, possibly extended to a fourth.  I did my three years and then was assigned to another [U.S.] Army school, the [U.S. Army] Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, for my next level of training and orientation relative to my military development.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to Fort Leavenworth.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so--well, what were you training to do at Fort Leavenworth?
Speaker 2: The Command and General Staff College is a, a college at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, designed to prepare officers, generally majors, possibly lieutenant colonels to take responsibility of staff positions at that level and be prepared for their first commands as a battalion commander.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you were being prepared to be a battalion--
Speaker 2: For the next--the next level of responsibility in the Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So how long were you there?
Speaker 2: It was one year.
Speaker 1: One year.  Okay.  So at the end of the year, do you--do you get promoted to another level or--
Speaker 2: No, normally at the end of that year, you're given an assignment commensurate with the staff level and/or command level that you have engaged in and prepared for.  As it turned out, I applied for the second time for the White House Fellow[s] program, and I was successful in being selected as a White House fellow, so I left Fort Leavenworth and went to Washington, D.C., to start the White House fellow program in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now at this time, Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] is president, and who did you work--report directly to?
Speaker 2: I was selected to be the White House fellow for the secretary of commerce.  Her name was Dr. Juanita [M.] Kreps, and she was the--my principal as a White House fellow.
Speaker 1: Juanita Kreps.  That's K-R-E-P-S?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Well tell us about that.  So, so you worked in the White House [Washington, D.C.] every day?
Speaker 2: No, you worked at--I worked in [U.S.] Department of Commerce every day.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Speaker 2: And so there were fourteen members of my class that were selected from an initial application pool of over two thousand, and so we go through a set of regional interviews.  Well, the two thousand applicants will have their applications read and then out of that, they will have a series of regional interviews; mine happened to be in St. Louis [Missouri].  And I went to that regional interview with twelve, fifteen other students, I can't remember the number exactly--individuals, not students. And then out of that, they will narrow it down to about thirty candidates that will go into Washington, D.C., for the finals interview.  And out of that thirty, they will select twelve, fourteen maybe as few as ten maybe as high as fourteen or sixteen individuals to be assigned as White House Fellows for that one year experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you were still involved in the selection process to become White House fellow.
Speaker 2: Am I now?  Is--is that--
Speaker 1: No--yeah, I mean at that time, you were--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was going through the process.  I applied while I was at Fort Leavenworth--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --began my interviews, and was selected in that late spring timeframe to start the program in, in, in August--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of 1977.
Story_ID: 289551
Speaker 1: So what did you do as a White House fellow with the [U.S.] Department of Commerce?
Speaker 2: You--as a White House fellow, you're assigned to the principal and the cabinet officer and/or the White House staff member or whatever, vice president, will develop responsibility or activity for you.  In my instance, I worked with the secretary [Secretary of Commerce Juanita M. Kreps] on some trade issues.  The, the imbalance in trade was beginning to become an issue at that time, and so she and I went to Saudi Arabia, traveled to Saudi Arabia to work on those kind of issues and did other things.  I also had some activity and interaction with the Office of Minority Business Enterprise, help set up and facilitate a, a meeting between her and minority business owners in the Chicago [Illinois] area.  Another significant aspect of the program is breakfast, lunch, and dinner meetings with the fourteen-member class with significant people throughout the country, [U.S.] Supreme Court justices, congresspersons, corporate leaders, union leaders, civil rights leaders, et cetera.  And so over the course of that year, we had that exposure to key and principal individuals throughout the, the American system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is--this is to inform the Department of Commerce these activities and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, this is--this is to, to inform and educate we White House fellows about how America works.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so meeting with the head of Exxon or one of our guest speakers was the head of Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] and so forth, Supreme Court justices, congress people, cabinet officers, et cetera.  We would meet with them and have a one-on-fourteen discussion about what their job responsibilities are off the record, very candid reflections and insights as to how America works.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Great experience.
Speaker 1: For the benefit of the fellows rather than--
Speaker 2: It's, it's all designed to develop the insight and perspective of the fellows.  The program was started in 1964 by John [W.] Gardner and then President Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, and it was in response to their concerns about the lack of understanding out in the countryside about how the government works.  And so many of the issues that you hear today, reactions to what's going on in the current administration are a reflection of people not understanding how you get things done, like the healthcare program.  Well, you're, you're in Washington, D.C., you see these things happen.  The goal is, you spend that one year with the White House fellow program, then you go back to your corporation or your university or in my case the [U.S.] Army, and when people are sitting around at lunch saying, what's the matter with those dummies in Washington, D.C., you have the ability to reflect how it works or doesn't work, and that's the goal of the program.  And so it started out in 1964 and here we are coming up on our forty-fifth reunion of that initial program, and there are a lot of individuals who are now heads of corporations, members of congress, and so forth that had their early understandings of how the system works in the White House fellow program in the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s], and '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Well, you understand why I might've thought it was for the benefit of the department itself--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because of the, the, the gross misunderstandings of how things work--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --at, at every level.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it sounds like a good program.
Speaker 2: It's a fabulous program and quite educational, one of the highlights of my personal and professional experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Was there any, any particular individual or subject that, that, that you really--you know, that really made a big impact on you that, that you, you could single out or--
Speaker 2: More than anything else, it was just the understanding and insights of how things interact and play out in making our government work, both good, bad, and ugly.  There was not a subject matter that I was engaged in, but understanding, you know, this political system, the economic and social interactions that all play out in our government; that was the education.
Story_ID: 289552
Speaker 1: So, you were there from 1978 to '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: No, '77 [1977] to '78 [1978] was my White House fellow year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As it turned out, I stayed a second year.  The, the secretary of commerce, Juanita [M.] Kreps, asked me if I would consider staying on for an additional year to continue to work with her on some projects that she had assigned to me.  I indicated to her that I would have to go back to the service due to commitments that I had made, you know, from graduate school and the White House Fellow[s] program, and so the [U.S.] Army expected me to serve and pay back for those commitments.  She in fact said, well I can address that if you're interested in staying on.  And so I had been offered other alternatives in industry, and upon reflecting on those options and alternatives, I made the decision to stay on that additional year with her, leave the Army, resign from the Army, stay that additional year with her, and then go into private industry afterwards, which I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you stayed an additional year.  Now, did anything happen during this additional year that, that--now when you, you were there that additional year, that was the year that the hostages were taken in Iran and the year that--the final year of the Carter admin--
Speaker 2: It was the final year--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  And be--being inside government, I mean, did you have any reflections on any of that--the, the hostage crisis and the, the, the country's attitude about it and, and, and how that, you know, the hostage situation may or may not have affected--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --Jimmy Carter?
Speaker 2: I, I, I had no more of a reflection and perspective than anyone reading the newspapers or listening to the news.  You know, I had my responsibilities and assignments in the [U.S] Department of Commerce and they weren't directly oriented on that as they might have been if I were in state or, or some other department and so forth.  So I did not have any particular thoughts and/or reflections beyond, you know, any individual who is exposed to the news and the media on a regular basis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I remember one, one of the secretaries resigned.  It may, may have been before you got there, but do you remember the crisis with Earl Butz, the secretary of agriculture.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I--vaguely, you know, I do remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you don't have any--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I know that--remember that name, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  At any rate, well, so did, did anything significant that you remember happen that year other than just the general, you know, good feeling of understanding more about the government and, and how commerce works?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  It was really a transition year and I was looking forward in terms of what my options and alternatives were in, in industry.  During that period of time, I went out and interviewed at both Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] and General Motors Corporation [General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], finally made the decision to go to General Motors Corporation.  So I was working on things with her for her but really oriented on my transition from the [U.S.] military to private industry.
Story_ID: 289553
Speaker 1: You joined General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] in 1979.
Speaker 2: I, I left the White House Fellow[s] program in--excuse me, I left the White House Fellow program in August of '78 [1978], I continued with the secretary of commerce, Juanita [M.] Kreps, until June, July of '79 [1979], and then reported in and had my first day of, of assignment with General Motors August 1, 1979.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and the note I have is that you went right to the Pontiac Motor Division, right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.  I left Washington [D.C.] and General Motors assigned me to Pontiac Motor Division in the area of director of quality control.  And what that meant is the individual workers that inspected vehicles to assure their quality were assigned to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We have subsequently come to conclude that you can't inspect quality in and have other processes to do that, but at that time, that's the way we approached it.
Speaker 1: Explain that to, to--you know, I mean, explain that to us.  How, how--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --does that work?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the reality is, we're all human and we see things, but if you're looking at sixty cars an hour or a hundred or two hundred parts per hour coming down the assembly line, you're not going to be able to pay attention and identify every single defect.  And so where we are now in industry is you wanna put the processes in place to assure quality, and if there are potentials for errors, put controls in place to prevent those errors from happen--happening, but we certainly don't count on the human eye and, and our attention span to catch those quality defects.  It's just not 100 percent proof--error proof.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So if--so the, the, the attention's paid to the front end of designing the systems and create something that is of quality in the first place, right?  But, but isn't that--isn't that what they were trying to do before, I mean on some level?
Speaker 2: At some level, but not as a dedicated and committed effort, and so inspection was still part of the concept.  It has since passed.
Story_ID: 289377
Speaker 1: Well, I just--you know, when they started like mass producing items, I guess the idea is to--when you mass produce it, you produce it to a standard, everything is the same thing, you know?  Or should be.  But as it comes out--
Speaker 2: At--your--those are the--that's a 2010 perspective (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) there--yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I understand--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: --but I guarantee you, that that's just not the way it worked and people thought at that time.  In hindsight, you're right.  Now in 2050, people will say, there's no way in the world you'd ever create a well 50--five, five miles below the ground without having extra safety items in it.  You understand the point I'm making?
Speaker 1: Well, you shouldn't do that anyway.  I mean--
Speaker 2: But we just--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We're doing it all over the world (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We just--yeah.  I know--
Speaker 2: --today.
Speaker 1: And they're all over the world right now.
Speaker 2: Today.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you won't have that view ten years from now.  Somebody sitting in your chair will say, there's absolutely no way you should do that.  And all I'm saying to you is, the approach to quality in manufacturing evolved from the '60s [1960s] to 2010.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, but, but--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --but you're saying instead of having human inspectors, what, what, what do you do then if, if there's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what, what you do is--
Speaker 1: --if there's something that's wrong with a part?
Speaker 2: --you, you devise--you design the part and the assembly process with error proofing, so that if a part is supposed to go together and a--and the nut goes on below the bolt as opposed to the bolt going on above the nut, it will not go through the--or you put cameras in place.  The cameras don't go to sleep or turn their head.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But can a camera warn you when there's (laughter)--this is off--
Speaker 2: Yes, the cam (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: The cam- the camera is, is, is designed to identify and reflect on the--on the defect and signal to the process that a defect has just been generated.
Speaker 1: So what you describe is--really is a automated process of inspection.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: Absolutely right.
Speaker 1: --where, where human error is not a factor.
Speaker 2: Is not a factor.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Not a factor.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Or a minimal--or minimized--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at least.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you, you were referring to, in terms of the, the crisis we're having now with, with the oil leak in the Gulf [of Mexico], you know, that we would never have--I don't think human beings expected that--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  Just like--
Speaker 1: --that things would--that this would happen because we didn't know--we really don't know enough to, to know what the process (laughter) is in the first place.
Speaker 2: You--all, all I'm saying is that's exactly what the automobile industry was about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it--and steel and, you know, plastics and healthcare products and, you know, all of it.  And, you know, Dr. [W. Edwards] Deming, who actually worked at Pontiac Motor Division [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] and tried to convince us about putting quality systems in place to assure quality and prevent errors from occurring as opposed to inspecting to make sure they didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a, a, a notion about or thoughts about what happened to Toyota [Motor Corporation, Toyota, Japan] this past fall?  We had big crises with, with Toyota Motors over parts (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My personal opinion is they were growing too fast and people were in place that were taking on responsibilities faster than their experience prepared them to handle.  Because when Toyota had one plant in America, you know, the amount of resources they could give and provide to that one plant, but then when you go to four or five plants in America and plants in China and plants in India and so forth, the experienced resource that Toyota had was spread too thin around the world and defects happened.
Speaker 1: A dilution of expertise.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 289378
Speaker 1: You were in the Pontiac Motor Division of General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan].  There was a--now, I don't know if this happened when you were there, but there was a semi-scandal about--at least talk about Chevy [Chevrolet] engines and Pontiac engines really being the same engine when people, the average guy thinks when he's--when he's buying a Pontiac, he's buying something completely different from a Chevy.  You know, they look remarkably alike when they come off (laughter) the assembly line, you know.  I--you know, having worked at General Motors, I had noticed the similarities immediately, but there was a lightweight scandal I think in the--in the early '80s [1980s] or something about, you know, the engines being exactly the same engine, you know?  Do you have any thoughts on--
Speaker 2: I have no knowledge of what was going on beyond--behind that scandal.  I'm vaguely familiar with it.  The argument that would be made today as compared to then is if you define--if you--if you design the best engine, you should use it in all the platforms.  At that time, you know, again, the perspective of an individual is, well I want my Pontiac engine different than my Cadillac engine, different than my Buick or Oldsmobile or Chevrolet engine.  That creates opportunity for error.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Yeah, 'cause I, I never assumed necessarily it was a--would be a good thing necessarily to have a different Pontiac engine from a Chevy--you know, if the Chevy is dependable, then, you know--
Speaker 2: That's where--
Speaker 1: --why not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's where--
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: That's where we're at today. Yeah.
Story_ID: 289379
Speaker 1: Well, is there a good story attached to your inspection supervision [for Pontiac Motors Division, General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I learned about the automobile industry.  I learned about working with the UAW [United Auto Workers; United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America].  I learned about, you know, corporate life.  There were some disillusionments and disappointments, but all in all, I really enjoyed the change from the [U.S.] military to private industry.  I had a very good experience in the [U.S.] Army after West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and have no regrets about that at all, but the transition to the automobile industry and different kind of leadership roles and responsibilities, I adapted to and enjoyed very much so and have no regrets about going to the automobile industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there--what was--what was the biggest--
Speaker 2: Probably the biggest--the biggest challenge and/or difference was, one of my early disillusionments and disappointments was when I determined that the number of parts that were produced on a given shift were a set count as opposed to the optimal count.  And quite frankly in my mind, that's a reflection of weak leadership.  We tend to blame the union for lack of productivity, but what happens quite often is a weak supervisor will say to a union group of employees, if you give me two hundred parts an hour, then when you get that sixteen hundred parts in eight hours, you can quit working.  And the leadership that you would want is, give me the optimal number of parts per hour so that we can compete and win more business.  It wasn't the approach that was taken quite often.  And that was--that was--they call it peg counts.  You give me my sixteen hundred parts in the eight-hour shift, if you get through an hour and a half early or if you get through thirty minutes--thirty minutes early, you know, do what you wanna do until the bell rings.  That was very disappointing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you know, I--I'm thinking here that there was probably a reason for this at some point--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --because--
Speaker 2: The reason for it was that supervisor wanted to guarantee that he got the sixteen parts in an eight-hour shift.
Speaker 1: And I'm also thinking that perhaps when--if they push for too many more, they might not get what they wanted, you know, in terms of quality and--
Speaker 2: Now, now we're back to our earlier discussion.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: If you have the process controls in place and do the problem solving and error proofing that is management and ownership's responsibility to give the union workers or any employees a capable process, then the issue is not about creating defects.  The issue is about the robustness and reliability of the process.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the leadership of the employees to understand and value their jobs and job security so that they will give you the optimal productivity.
Speaker 1: Were, were you able to, to reform the thinking around--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely not.  I was just a small fish in a big pond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the way things worked.
Speaker 1: What, what was the argument on the other side?
Speaker 2: The argument on the other side is, we need these--this number of parts per employee per day to get our results that we need to generate the business that we need.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I guess I'm just--as I'm thinking, here is somebody that used to be a plant employee, I always wonder, like, when they set the numbers of work hours and somebody says that you--a foreman or, or a super--plant supervisor says, well as long as they can give you this many, I'm--I won't mess with their certain amount of time.  Okay, why do they have you work that, that amount of time if it only takes a certain amount of time to get with--you know, I, I don't know.  I just wonder--it's, it's--
Speaker 2: I came--I come back to the original point of weak leadership.  Now, there's the other side of the coin where some of the employees who have been there for thirty years and are working at a given pace, they're not interested in producing 250 parts an hour, if they can--you know, if their comfortable pace is two hundred.  So as a--as an hourly employee on the floor, I'm sure you have heard of instances where somebody says, young college graduate, young co-op, young new employee, you're working too fast.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So it's both sides.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I've heard that.
Speaker 2: It's both sides.
Speaker 1: I heard it the first week of work (laughter).
Speaker 2: You got it.  You got it.
Story_ID: 289380
Speaker 1: And now, if you talk about what it takes to be globally competitive, it's even more traumatic and dramatic, and there are winners and losers, and the losers have been losing market share for both the quality processes that I talked about earlier and for productivity issues in terms of the cost of building the product.  And so when the Toyota [Motor Company, Toyota, Japan] came in and set up the joint venture and operation out in Cal- California in partnership with General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], there were many initiatives that they introduced.  Very few of those came back to be applied here in Detroit [Michigan] even though there was a joint venture.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there, there was a certain amount of--I mean, I, I kinda followed that as a--just a lay person reading the paper, and yeah, I was kinda disappointed that it, it did not seem to--you know, the practices of Toyota and Honda [Motor Corporation] and some of these others did not seem to affect the practices here at all, and yet, you know, supposedly they were striving for the same quality and quantity of vehicles and that sorta thing.  I, I don't know.  Yeah.  It was the opinion of--I think the opinion began to shift, and correct me if I'm wrong, in the '70s [1970s], a Japanese car was considered like a--like a--your second car might--you might--it's a, a car you'd buy for your kid new or something like that but not one that you would buy as your main car in, in the--this country.  Later in the--as the mid-'80s [1980s] approached, Japanese began to figure out how to make steel that would last (laughter) and the, the, the quality went up, you know, because they--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: The, the cars went up which--who already had good, good engines, didn't rust out anymore, you know?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, and, and bottom line, when there were not choices or alternatives to Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], General Motors, and Chrysler [Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], then Ford, General Motors, and Chrysler could raise prices comparably and we, the American public, bought the vehicles.  When there began to be alternatives to Ford, General Motors, and Chrysler, and the quality level was--became higher, and the cost became lower, that began to drive change because as they lost market share, when there was no Honda or Toyota or BMW or Mercedes[-Benz] producing vehicles in this country, then it was the--it was the market of Detroit.  When those factories began to spring up around the country, then there was an alternative.  And with the same labor cost, the productivity and quality were better.  And so that facility of joint venture out in NUMMI [New United Motor Manufacturing, Inc., Fremont, California] taken over by Toyota in combination with General Motors, the same union out there that General Motors had shut the plant down because of their difficulties with that union and the lack of competitiveness, Toyota came in there, opened that plant up with this same union workers and the same union leadership and had the number one quality vehicle in America.  Now who's that a reflection on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, management at the top.
Speaker 1: You got it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, what, what year is this when this actually--
Speaker 1: This happened in the '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 289381
Speaker 1: You were at the Pontiac [Motors] Division [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] doing quality control and was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I was at Pontiac--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and the agreement that I had with General Motors in making the decision to come to General Motors, was that if I came to General Motors and performed adequately, in three years, they would give me a operational responsibility.  Again, my background and experience was platoon leader in Vietnam, company commander at Fort Dix [New Jersey], company commander in Vietnam, so my orientation and preference was line responsibility or leadership in the automobile industry.  As I said--as I've said in, in--jokingly, you know, I went from the infantry of the [U.S.] military to the infantry of the automobile industry where you have a, a volume of people that you're organized and leading to accomplish a mission.  And so I--General Motors said if you perform adequately, we'll have you be a plant manager in eight--in three years, and I became a plant manager in eighteen months, half that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What plant did you manage?
Speaker 2: I took over the, the press metal and plating operations at General Motors, which made bumpers and fenders and, and hoods for Pontiac vehicles.
Speaker 1: And where were they located?
Speaker 2: That was in Pontiac Steel [Company].
Speaker 1: In, in, in Pontiac, Michigan.
Speaker 2: In Pontiac, Michigan--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at the--at the Pontiac complex for General Motors Corporation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so you, you were there until what year?
Speaker 2: I, I joined Pontiac Motor in 1979.  I took over as a plant manager in 1981 and I stayed as a plant manager of that Pontiac press metal and plating operation until '84 [1984] when I left and went off to Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] to the Advanced Management Program.
Story_ID: 289382
Speaker 1: How did you do as a--as a plant manager?
Speaker 2: I, I did--I did well.  I learned the job on the job and the, the General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] approach of recruiting me and other military individuals was that they were looking for leadership among minorities.  They could teach us to be the--to--they could teach us the automobile industry.  They wanted us to come in and bring the leadership, and so the first two full black plant managers in General Motors were myself and an [U.S.] Air Force two-star general.  He went to Cadillac division and I went to Pontiac [Motors] Division, and we were plant managers because during the period of the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] when African Americans would have been first line supervisors, general supervisors, superintendents, general superintendents, all those positions in preparation to be a plant manager in 1980, those opportunities did not exist for African Americans at that time.  So they had to go outside the industry to accrue--to recruit and identify individuals with the leadership background that they could teach the automobile industry to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's an interesting approach to it.  So, now what--was there a big--what was the biggest challenge there?  The same as, as before?
Speaker 2: The biggest challenge was learning the industry and, you know, applying some of the values and principles that had become part of my background from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and the [U.S.] Army, trying to make those same values and principles app- applicable and acceptable in the automobile industry which, you know, was not off base, but there may be a slightly different approach that I would take as compared to others.  And my boss who'd been there for years before me, you know, I had to work within the framework and guide--guidelines and leadership that he had.  That did not turn out to be a problem, so it was a--it was a good environment and I really enjoyed the growth opportunity.  And that was--that's been a driver for me, the decision to leave the Army, the decision to leave General Motors, the decision to buy my first company.  They're all have been about growth and leadership, new challenges, which just inspires me.
Speaker 1: Were there, there any individuals who mentored you or kinda tried to help--
Speaker 2: Yes, there were.  There, there, there was a gentleman named Jim Fitzpatrick [James Fitzpatrick] who I had interviewed with in my first visit to General Motors.  He was in the corporate headquarters, and he had said that that would be a good place to start.  By the time I came back to interview for my final interview and location, I interviewed at Pontiac Motor and, and Oldsmobile, and Cadillac, and so forth, he had transitioned to Pontiac Motor.  So he changed his tune from it'd be good to start at the corporate headquarters to, to it'd be good to start out in the factory, in the field.  And so I, I interviewed and was selected there.  Bob Stempel [Robert Stempel] who later became president of General Motors was the head of Pontiac Motor Division at that time and has always been a mentor and supportive, and there have been many others.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Conversely, you know, you, you were--you were--were you, you and the general you were referring to, were you all the first two plant managers at, at General Motors, black plant, plant managers?
Speaker 2: We were.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was, was, was there a core of resentment from any of the--
Speaker 2: Not, not, not that we experienced and so I came in to Pontiac Motor, I had that eighteen month assignment in inspection.  I got to know the people.  I got to know the system a little bit.  So when I got promoted to plant manager, I'm sure there were other individuals who said, well, I've been here twenty-five years, how, how does he get to be plant manager, but none of that was ever communicated and/or cast upon me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, usually--I've, I've heard a lot of stories about the first black folks and usually it's not without some drama, you know as a--
Speaker 2: And the good news is I did not have that.  As I said earlier in our discussions about coming into West Point, there were four of us that graduated in my class of six hundred.  It was--it was a challenging experience, but I don't think it was every racially driven with the exception that the academy when it came time to senior leadership I think was not ready and able to provide me with that opportunity.  It turns out that General Motors was and did.
Story_ID: 289383
Speaker 1: So in 1990--I don't wanna jump ahead too, too far, but--oh, oh, I'm sorry, 1989, you were appointed director of, of exterior business systems of--of the Exterior Business Systems Unit [sic. Exterior Systems Business Unit], Inland Fisher Guide Division of General Motors Corporation [General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: What the transition has--was from my coming to General Motors, I came in in 1979, I had that director of inspection from '79 [1979] to '81 [1981], I was plant manager '81 [1981] to '84 [1984].  I went off to Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and then I came back in mid '84 [1984] to a restructuring that was going on in General Motors and at that point, I became the head of inspection or--and the head of engineering process improvement for the small car group, Chevrolet-Pontiac-Canada-Group.  And so I had about a hundred engineers working for me.  They were assigned to problem solving in the thirty plants in that small car group, assembly plants, engine plants, stamping plants, et cetera.  So I did that from '84 [1984] to '88 [1988].  And then I made that transition back to an operational or leadership role in Inland Fisher Guide.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I should go--now, tell us about the Harvard--we--you missed that twice and I'm sorry, I didn't--I haven't focused it on it yet, but what happened at Harvard?  What, what did you go to Harvard to do?
Speaker 2: I was assigned--given the opportunity to go to Harvard at the Advanced Management Program, and it's a program kind, kind of like the series of programs in the [U.S.] military to prepare you for the next level of leadership and responsibility.  It was in--at Harvard in Boston [Massachusetts] from January to April of 1984.  It, it, it included students from a variety of companies and industries both in the United States and overseas, so there were German students, Australian students, English, and so forth, and our class had a variety of exposure in various aspects of business management and development, whether it was finance and/or marketing and/or human resources management, et cetera, et cetera.  And so over the course of those four months, we had Harvard professors teaching classes so that when we went back to our individual companies, we would have the background and exposure of that academic experience, comparable to a, a, a intense M.B.A. program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So it's--it was from Harvard that you--
Speaker 2: Went to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To the--
Speaker 2: --Chevrolet-Pontiac-Canada-Group.
Speaker 1: --small car group, yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: The small car group, right.  And then from the small car group, you went to the, the Inland Fisher Guide Division [Ewing, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 289384
Speaker 1: So now, as you're gaining all this knowledge and information, now what, what are you--what are you thinking about your, your, your--when--are--when do you start thinking about going, you know, striking out on your own?
Speaker 2: I did not have any thoughts about that.  When I was running the Inland Fisher Guide [Division, Ewing, New Jersey] first operation which was the bumpers and fascia business, you know, making the bumpers for all of the corporation, you know, I really enjoyed that.  It was a, a full scale business responsibility within General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] where manufacturing, engineering, finance, all of that reported to me, so I was back in a line position, and had a large organization.  I had a second assignment after that a year and a half to the body hardware business unit where we made door locks, window regulators, all kind of small componentry, and in that instance, I had about seven thousand people working for me and had about a billion dollars in sales inside General Motors.  And so it was a huge responsibility and one that I enjoyed immensely in terms of the leadership and challenges.  You know, no, no job was without issues and/or challenges to work through and overcome, but that's what I, I enjoy doing and this was a great opportunity.  The decision to leave General Motors was unplanned and unanticipated.  Two things happened.  Number one, I was contacted by an individual recruiting me to interview with a gentleman that was going to start buying some companies and needed somebody to be president of and run those companies.  The second thing is General Motors was going through a restructuring again and in this restructuring, my scope of responsibilities was going to be narrowed, and I was not comfortable and/or excited about taking a step backwards, which was also some of what caused me to leave the [U.S.] Army and go to General Motors in that having had the White House fellow experience and being exposed to a lot of growth and/or developmental things outside the Army, my next assignment was probably going to be a lieutenant colonel in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].  And being a lieutenant colonel in the Pentagon is like being a private in, in the--on an Army post.  You know, it--obviously it's--I'm exaggerating, but you get the point.  And so the level of responsibility and authority that I was anticipating after the White House fellow program was not very exciting.  The General Motors experience was.  Going through a restructuring after General Motors was not going to be my personal pension for growth and development and additional responsibilities, and so I made the decision to leave.
Story_ID: 289385
Speaker 1: It just says here that after thirteen years of service, Mr. Anderson [HistoryMaker Joseph Benjamin Anderson, Jr.] resigned from General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] and became president and chief executive officer of Composite Energy Management Systems [Inc.].  Now, what--how, how did--what, what really happened (laughter)?  How did--
Speaker 2: What really happened is, an individual owned that company, a finance guy that does acquiring of businesses.  He was not an operations guy and so he had--he'd contracted with a head hunter to find an operations guy that could be president and run this business.  I accepted that opportunity and offer with the understanding that we would be buying other companies and expanding my responsibility and scope and involvement.  Quite frankly, I made a mistake in doing that, and when I thought we were going to buy companies, it wasn't we, it was him, and I was going to be running these for him but not be part of the ownership and decision making ultimately about what we did and so forth.  So having reached that conclusion fairly quickly, he and I agreed to part ways and I began to sort out what I was going to do as an alternative and that's when I made the decision and bought my first company.  I joined him in 1992.  I bought my first company in 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what, what company was that?
Speaker 2: That was a company called Chivas Products [Limited; Chivas Industries LLC] and it was a company located in the Detroit [Michigan] area, Sterling Heights, Michigan, that made interior components for the automobile industry.  So interior lighting, you know, the dome lights and other lights inside the vehicle, when you open the door, the lights come on.  I made pull straps, you know, those handles over the door that you can grab to lift yourself in and out of the vehicle or hang your clothing on when you come from the cleaners, other small componentry like that, I made in this company.  It was about $60 million in revenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went from running a billion dollar operation in General Motors with seven thousand people to running a $60 million--running and owning a $60 million operation with two hundred people.  And it was a major transition and probably the toughest transition that I've experienced.  Because as a--as an entrepreneur and business owner, many issues come to play that had not come to play in General Motors (coughs), excuse me.
Speaker 1: For instance?
Speaker 2: For instance, if I needed capital to launch a new product in General Motors, I could contact my boss and he'd get approval for it, and if I could show the return on investment, the money was there.  In my own business, I had to go to the banks, I had to negotiate with them.  I had to have personal accountability and responsibility for that, and assign my assets, my personal home and assets for that, much different than at General Motors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  There's greater risk and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --higher stakes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now you've--now did you--have you kept this same business all this time or did you--
Speaker 2: That business I did not keep.  I, I owned and operated that business from 1994 until 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you, you sell it to another (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, I wound up having another partner in that business eventually as I restructured that business because of some financial challenges that, again, were much different and much bigger than I experienced in General Motors, and when I left that business, I sold it to that partner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what did you do next?  Did you--
Speaker 2: And then I began to buy the current series of companies that I have now.  The first one was a joint venture that I initiated in 2001 that launched in, in January 2002 and that company made an engine component, engine dampers, specifically, in joint venture and partnership with another larger billion dollar company.  And then over the course of time from 2002 to 2008, I bought a series of six or seven companies.  Several of them joined ventures, a couple of them not.  And that's what TAG Holdings [LLC, Wixom, Michigan] is now, a holding company for those six or--six companies that exist today.
Story_ID: 289386
Speaker 1: Can you describe some of the, the businesses that you--
Speaker 2: Yes, I--
Speaker 1: --acquired and maybe in the order that you acquired them?
Speaker 2: Well, I have four different businesses that do the same thing in different locations.  They assemble components for Honda Motor Corporation.  And so they primarily do all the tire and wheel assembly, so every Honda vehicle made in the United States, one of my companies buys the rubber tires, buy the steel aluminum wheels, the tire pressure and monitor systems, et cetera, and assembles those and ships them to the Honda plant in sequence, so that's several million tires and wheels every year.  And then we do other components in some of those plants like the center consoles where your radio, you know, components come into play and some, some components relative to fuel systems, et cetera, et cetera.  So assembly of components from purchased material is what I do there.  That first company that I described in the current group in 2002 did engine components.  I no longer have that company.  I just recently sold that company back to the joint venture partner that I had at that time.  I do have a company in Korea and China, and that particular product makes temperature sensors for the automobile industry in Korea and other places, and then also makes ceramic disks for the commercial plumbing industry, which I ship into Europe and, you know, Italy and Spain and so forth.  So we have the challenge and, and good fortune to be a global player.  And then I just recently initiated a joint venture with a major Japanese trading company where we will buy product and assemble it and ship it into the major car companies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we have six operating companies now and the calendar year 2010, we'll do about seven hundred million in revenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How many people do you employ?
Speaker 2: I'll have three hundred, three hundred fifty employees in those companies around the world.
Speaker 1: Now were, were you affected at all by the stock market crash?
Speaker 2: Not by the stock market crash but by the economy slow down.
Speaker 1: General recession.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And therefore the slowdown in sales of vehicles, so my customers in 2009 being General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], Chrysler [LLC; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], Honda, Nissan [Motor Company Ltd., Yokohama, Japan], their volumes were reduced and therefore my volumes were reduced, and so our revenue from 2008 was dramatically reduced in 2009, and now it's bouncing back in 2010.
Speaker 1: Do you participate at all in the minority supply--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So I, I at one time in the early 2000 was president of the black suppliers' trade association, National Association of Black Automotive Suppliers called NABAS.  I was president of that organization.  And then subsequently I was also president of the overall trade association for all suppliers called OESA, the Original Equipment Suppliers Association.  So that's a trade association for all suppliers in the automobile industry and I was chairman of that group also. Black and white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, what was the second one again?  The (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Original Equipment Suppliers Association.
Speaker 1: Equipment Association.
Speaker 2: OESA.
Story_ID: 289387
Speaker 1: You know, what do you see yourself doing in the future with (simultaneous) --
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--
Speaker 1: --these businesses?
Speaker 2: I will continue to run these current companies.  My, my major focus now is diversification in the different industries, so I've been primarily in the auto industry, certainly went through the perils of that in 2009, but in terms of other kinds of things, I'm working on some defense military opportunities, aerospace, healthcare, et cetera.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my ultimate objective is to create a series of business opportunities for the people that work for me and have them buy those businesses and be the source for my exit and retirement.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have children that are--
Speaker 2: I do not have any children and I am not married at this time.  I'm divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was wondering if, if you--if other relatives are being brought into the businesses.
Speaker 2: And the answer is no and that I do not have children and do not have other relatives in the business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  It seems like it would be a tremendous thing to have this kind of wealth, you know, brought into a family, but if you don't have other relatives--yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I don't have that and so it's not there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you, you are talking about trying to share the opportunities with people that are currently employed with you who are--
Speaker 2: These are minority-owned businesses.  That is one of the goals of my major customers, and so my objective is to have them remain minority owned and controlled, but be in the hands of people who helped me build them.  And I have those kind of managers and leaders in the company right now.  That's been one of my commitments.
Speaker 1: I know one of the challenges of--
Speaker 2: (Coughs)  Excuse me.
Speaker 1: --business people we've interviewed over the years has been when something gets--a minority business gets so big, you know, there seems to be a natural--once it gets so big like [Robert L.] Johnson with BET [Black Entertainment Television], once it got so big, you know, Viacom snatched it up, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It just--and people criticized him and they said well, you know, he's selling away our, our business and, you know, and his response was, it belonged to me, you know.  And, you know, when he was selling ads, he was saying it's ours (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, but the ultimate reality it is his, you know, and at the end of the day, it's his and, you know, he--the way it was explained to me by several different people is that once it got so big, he had almost no choice other than to let it got.
Speaker 2: That, that is a dilemma--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in that the minority black community has not developed the capacity and the individual or personal wealth to acquire businesses of size like mine.  My particular approach and strategy is I have six individual companies, and so I can group three of those companies that do the same thing for Honda [Motor Corporation] in different locations, Alabama, Ohio, and Indiana, and have one of my individuals who currently runs that operation anyway take on the opportunity of acquiring it if he can come up with the financing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so it's not a requirement to take on the whole thing by one individual.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but you're really--you're putting kind of--putting forth here like a different--well, we haven't really talked about it as such, but a different philosophy of doing business that where you--
Speaker 2: Different exit strategy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 2: --different approach, and in particular, a strong commitment to the people who as a fact run the business day to day for me and who would like to have the opportunity to create wealth for themselves and so--and I'm all for that, and that's stated right up front in my mission and vision statement.
Story_ID: 289388
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be the legacy of your business activities, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, the legacy of my business activities have been to demonstrate that through performance, a minority owned and controlled company can grow and meet and/or exceed customer expectations, particularly a very good customer like Honda [Motor Corporation].  And my ultimate legacy will be and therefore create opportunities for the people who have been in those positions.  And I've been very aggressive about making sure that this minority owned and controlled company [TAG Holdings LLC, Wixom, Michigan] looks like one.  And so the general managers and plant managers that exist in this company, the majority of them are African American, and that's a personal commitment that I've made in spite of.  And ironically, the downturn in recession probably has created some opportunities that would not have been there early anyway with people taking retire--early retirement and being available to do those--take on those kind of responsibilities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that legacy wherewithal, if the capital can be made available to them is in place.
Story_ID: 289389
Speaker 1: We have kind of alluded to the fact that the Japanese car manufacturers had a different approach from American car manufacturers and which have resulted in, you know, them sort of passing up and squeezing out the American car manufacturers.  What's your assessment of, of where that is now?
Speaker 2: I, I think the gap has been closed dramatically, and I really emphasize the word dramatically.  The quality and competitiveness of the automobile, the American automobile industry, General Motors [Company, Detroit, Michigan], Ford [Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan], and Chrysler [FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan], has improved dramatically from the time I entered the industry over thirty years ago, and the competitiveness on quality, the competitiveness on productivity.  I think Toyota [Motor Corporation, Toyota, Japan] and Honda [Motor Corporation] probably still lead in some areas, but I think the American automobile companies, they're not way behind.
Story_ID: 289390
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I, I personally want us to have the opportunity to create wealth in our community.  And so that's the, the macro perspective.  There's a variety of things that have to happen to get from here to there.  There have to be opportunities in corporate America as well as private industry.  To drive that, we have to have very strong educational systems and opportunities for African American youth.  There has to be very supportive family values and family institutions, mothers and fathers that drive and lead young people to want an education and have the right values that could go into corporations and/or do things for themselves.  So I--my goal is for the African American community to mirror the successes and opportunities of the majority community in America.
Story_ID: 289391
Speaker 1: What are some of your volunteer activities?
Speaker 2: I--I'm involved in a great deal relative to youth activities.  There is a organization called Horizons-Upward Bound here in the Detroit [Michigan] area that supports youth coming from inner cities and so forth.  I, I serve on the board of a, a foundation, the National Recreation Foundation, that provides me with scholarship monies each year, grant monies each year to provide--not scholarship, the grant monies each year that provides opportunities for me to put monies into initiatives that can make a difference for young people, and that's, that's generally my focus.  I certainly am a veteran and have the opportunity to participate in veterans' activities and so forth.  I understand and support veterans' activities, but my priority is the African American community.
Story_ID: 289392
Speaker 1: Now did your, your parents [Pearl Gatewood Anderson and Joseph Anderson, Sr.] get a chance to see you become successful in business?
Speaker 2: My parents got a chance to see me graduate from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Pont, New York].  They got a chance to see me serve in the [U.S.] Army.  They got a chance to see me go into General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan].  They have--they both passed and did not get the opportunity to see me in top leadership positions that I've had both in General Motors and as a business owner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I, I assume they were proud of you.
Speaker 2: They were very, very proud of me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very proud.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, is there--so you don't have any children to talk--but, what would you consider your family today and, and--
Speaker 2: I, I have an--a very large and extended family.  We're actually having a family reunion in St. Louis [Missouri] which I am hosting next weekend.  And, and I have a couple of uncles, one just passed last year, another one is, is ninety-three years old that, you know, we are very much involved in, in our legacy as a family on my mother's side.  I have a brother that lives in California.  I have a first cousin that lives in California on my father's side (background noise).  And so I don't have a, a large day to day interaction with family in that I don't have any family members here in Michigan, but in terms of the family reunion on my mother's side and staying in contact with my brother and my cousin in California and so forth, family is important.
Story_ID: 289393
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before--or mention before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, I think you've heard me mention on several occasions and there is a pattern that kinda reflects my age and my generation where as I came along, there were opportunity after opportunity to be the first African American in my community and/or the country to do those certain things.  So--the first African American to go to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] from Kansas, the first African American to be an aide-de-camp to the commanding general of a post, and I did that twice before anybody else.  I was the aide-de-camp to the commanding general at Fort Dix [New Jersey] and I was aide-de-camp to the first cav [first cavalry] in Vietnam, first black plant manager in General Motors [Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] along with another fellow, first member of my country club.  It was an all-white country club and I was the first African American to join that country club.  Walt Douglas [HistoryMaker Walter Douglas] now belongs to that country club, et cetera, et cetera.  So it's been a history and a cycle and a pattern, some of them successes and rewardings, some of them, you know, I was ahead of the cycle, like the frustration that I experienced my senior year at West Point when every leadership position that I'd had as a freshman, as a sophomore, and as a junior did not result to me having a leadership position, position as a senior.  But immediately after that, my opportunity for promotion and leadership in the [U.S.] Army continued, you know.  Whether it was as a lieutenant in Vietnam or a captain and/or a early promotion to major, early promotion to lieutenant colonel ahead of my peers, et cetera, et cetera.  So it's just been a, a cycle that I've been on where I've had the opportunity to break trail, create new opportunities for myself and those that follow that's been a source of inspiration and achievement for me personally.
Story_ID: 289394
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy and has--really has something to do with what you just said (laughter).  Last question is, sir, how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as someone who broke ground, who created opportunities, and saw those opportunities fulfilled, i.e. I facilitated and made it happen as opposed to breaking ground and good luck to you getting it done.  I'm gonna make sure it happens.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so the legacy of three or four individuals that work with me, for me now, being business owners five years from now, that's results.
