Story_ID: 28967
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Antoine we're just going to get started with the interview by slating.  My name is Regina Williams and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And we have no observers today.  And I'd just like to say during the interview I'll address you as Dr. Antoine or sir.  And wanted to get started just by asking if you would please state and spell your name including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, Cornelius, C-O-R-N-E-L-I-U-S, Antoine, A-N-T-O-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--yes.  And would you please state your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is January 14th, 1925, New York City, New York.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 18th, 2004.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview with the address?
Speaker 2: The location is at 2699 Endicott Road, Shaker Heights, Ohio 44120.
Speaker 1: And your occupation please?
Speaker 2: I am a retired research chemist.
Story_ID: 28968
Speaker 1: Okay.  And for this next series of questions, we like to refer to these as "People Magazine"-ish type questions.  And there are about five of them.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, my favorite food?  That's a little hard to place, perhaps grapefruit in the morning.
Speaker 1: Oh my?  And your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is spring.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: A favorite color?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I believe my favorite color is purple although I enjoy having a lot of red in my surroundings.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I do not have a favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 1: Any plans to travel soon?
Speaker 2: Plans to travel soon?
Speaker 1: Yes, for vacation?
Speaker 2: For vacation no, but for travel for a number of different occasions, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, but no favorite?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no favorite.  These are particular events that are coming up in the next few months but does not involve a vacation as such, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying?  Again, I don't think I could pinpoint one immediately, no.
Story_ID: 28969
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well in this next section we'd like to explore The HistoryMaker's family background so I just wanted to begin by asking if you could tell me about your mother.  What was her name and where was she born and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: Oh, her name was Wilhelmina Marie Mitchell and then Antoine after she married.  And she was born in the British West Indies and grew up there.  She was born in 1903 or 1904 and again grew up in the British West Indies in Grenada specifically.  Let's see, the other part of the question was--?
Speaker 1: Well did she tell you much about her background, her growing up in the British West Indies?
Speaker 2: No, actually she did not.  She was raised by a foster mother and as far as we know she indicated she was an only child but we did not know much about her background other than that.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, loving, caring, forceful, determined, always wanting the best for her children and encouraging them in forceful ways to, for them to achieve their best.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she share with you how she migrated from the West Indies to the United States?
Speaker 2: No we did not get any specifics about that.  We, we knew that she and my father [Emmanuel Evans Antoine] met and married in the states, but the reasons for the migration we, we, we did not get any specific reasons.  The general reason was to achieve a--more opportunity than they had in, in the towns from which they came in the West Indies.
Story_ID: 28970
Speaker 1: Well can you tell me a little bit about your father?  Where was he born?  His name first of all and where was he born and where he grew up?
Speaker 2: His name was Emmanuel Evans Antoine and again he also was from the British West Indies and in--from Grenada and Trinidad as I understand.  Specifically where he grew up and those surroundings, I, I do not know.  I'm not aware of.  But he also was interested in greater opportunity and, which was the reason for coming to the states.  And he was a, a carpenter by trade and didn't actually get to pursue that trade in the states but worked at a number of different jobs, whatever he could find to, to keep the family together and do the best that he could for them.  He also at times, opened a business.  He had a grocery store for a while and he also did some investing in, in an apartment house.  These were ideas for doing as much as you could with the, say the limited resources that you had and explored whatever opportunities were open.
Speaker 1: Do you remember with your maternal or paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  I, I did not ever meet my maternal or paternal grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But both parents are then in New York and they meet and marry there or did they know each other before they actually settled in the, New York?
Speaker 2: I must admit that I'm not sure, about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That is something that I could research actually.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But I cannot tell you for certain exactly when, when they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But eventually they do meet--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and they marry.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they start a family.  Can you tell me about other siblings, other children in the family once they're in New York?
Speaker 2: Yes.  They, there was just one sibling, one brother so we were a family of two boys that--these were the only children.  And he--he's two years older than I and that's the, that's the family was the four of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Lawrence Nathaniel Antoine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he is still residing in the United States?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He is still residing in the United States.  He's in Pennsylvania now in a town called Bush, Bushkill, Pennsylvania.  But he lived most of his life in New York and moved to Pennsylvania oh about five or six years ago.
Story_ID: 28971
Speaker 1: Can you talk for a few minutes at least about the neighborhood you grew up in, in New York, the street you lived on, some of the sights and sounds perhaps that remind you of home in New York?
Speaker 2: Well, I understand that I was born in the Bronx in Fordham Hospital and then I moved to New York City, I mean to Manhattan rather, from the Bronx to Manhattan when I was about a year and a half.  And I grew up around 5th and Lenox Avenues, including say Madison Avenue on 115th Street, 118th Street, 117th Street.  We moved a fair amount of times, in each case to getting a better apartment.  We lived in an apartment.  The whole neighborhood was apartment houses and this was in, in what is known as Harlem.  And the streets were varied.  The--well let, let me see.  A particular part of the question was what were the streets like?  Is that--?
Speaker 1: Or just the street where you live.  If you remember living in one apartment for a longer period and you stated some of the others.  Was there a sense there's a real community here?
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.  Well no, in the apartment houses some of them were quite large, let's say ten or more apartments in each building and one building next to another.  So, there were quite a few people in the apartments and in the, in the area, in the neighborhood.  And so there were varied backgrounds, varied interests and the streets of New York as you might imagine were not always the, the best place that one could have to, to, to--in which to grow up.  And so it was a matter of picking and choosing your neighbors, those that you wanted to be friendly with that is.  You had no control over who your neighbors were actually.  But in terms of having a, a neighborhood, you would pick and choose those people with common interests and, and values.  And as I recall most of the, the relations that we had with other people in the neighborhood were mainly through those who were in the church and, or others that we knew from, from people in the church who knew others in other churches who lived in the neighborhood.  And so we would be--the community was based more on knowing people from other, other areas rather than those you would meet in whatever particular apartment that you were in or particular apartment house.  So there was not a sense of community that I understand exists in say small towns where you have single family homes and everybody on that block or in several blocks knows everyone else.  And a child would grow up in, in a, a neighborhood and know all of the people in, in the several around there.  But in, in the city it was not like that.  We were always in--in my family we were encouraged to really avoid the, the street culture you might say so that we could achieve the goals that our parents set out for us.  And unfortunately there were say too many people who didn't have that kind of outlook that we were going to do the best that we can in terms of going to school and getting gainful employment and keeping out of trouble.  There were always the invitations to get into some kind of street gang or the other.  And so the constant vigil and battle to keep us from getting into any of that kind of culture.
Speaker 1: Were any of the neighborhoods that you remember living in, were any of them West Indian as far as the make-up of the community?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, quite, quite a lot.  The, the neighborhoods in which I grew up, there were quite a few West Indians.  There were Americans as they were called, people who were coming up from the South but the West Indians referred to them as Americans.  And yeah, we--there were the people from, from all parts of the West Indies.  It was I guess back in the early '20s [1920s], late teens there was quite a migration from the West Indies to, to New York as well as from, from the South to New York, yes.  But in--well in my church for example, practically all of the membership was from the West Indies.  I would think most, most yes.  Not necessarily, not exclusively but most of them were from the West Indies.
Story_ID: 28972
Speaker 1: And what church did the family attend?
Speaker 2: We attended a, an Adventist church.  It was a Seventh Day Adventist Church and in some churches it was called a Sabbath Day Adventist church with the emphasis being on the Sabbath as a day of rest.  It was a Seventh Day yes, but they were making the distinction between the number and the purpose of the name.  And so we, we were part of the Seventh Day Adventist Conference in that area which included parts of New York and New Jersey, but I remember particularly that the, the church to which we were going had broken away from the conference some few years before I remember attending.  They had broken away from the conference because of the practices that were being carried out in, in the conference.  For example, there were hospitals that the, the church was supporting but they were not available to all members of the conference.  In other words if you were black you couldn't always get the services at, at the hospital and there were other incidences like that which caused the--a number of the churches to say they were leaving the conference and forming an independent branch of the, of the church.  And so the church to which I--we attended was one of those that had broken away from the conference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the, the conference itself is majority American and perhaps European American and then your congregation you said there are a lot of West Indians but is it a, a diverse group within the congregation?
Speaker 2: Now I don't know what the, the make-up of the conference as a whole would, would be.  Excuse me.  But the conference would include both black and white, yes and the independent group that was formed was primarily black.  And the, again the churches that re-attended were primarily West Indian but others in other locations I would think were not primarily West Indian.
Story_ID: 28973
Speaker 1: And you said you were born in Harlem in the 1920s.  And I--as soon as you said that it reminded me of something Langston Hughes said about the Harlem Renaissance.  He said most Negroes didn't know that there was a renaissance and even the ones who did know didn't increase their wages at all.
Speaker 2: Oh.(laughter)
Speaker 1: So I wanted to ask about being in Harlem--
Speaker 2: In Harlem.
Speaker 1: --during the new Negro movement or this renaissance period, were you conscious of the great literary movement and the jazz age and all of that?
Speaker 2: Well actually--in a way yes and more of a way no.  By that I mean--oh let me give you an example.  The minister at our church at the time was very incensed that in some description of Harlem they had someone doing the Lindy Hop and he was saying is this a description of this whole community?  He thought that this was not an accurate depiction.  Well the background of this, part of the background of this of course is that in our church there were some things one was not supposed to do.  No drinking, no alcoholic beverages, no dancing and also some dietary restrictions similar to some that the Jewish people had, no pork, no shellfish.  So I was aware yes that there was a, a jazz era at that time.  I didn't see it in terms of a change in, from before to present as a renaissance but at the same time we were strongly encouraged not to participate in the jazz scene and the nightclub.  We, we could not go to nightclubs for example and so I was not aware of it as such, no.
Speaker 1: Yes.  But did you dance at all?  That Libby Hop [SIC] [Lindy Hop] that was (laughter) I think I've seen that movie.  I was just wondering where you learned that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Okay, I--as part of our church restrictions we did not dance.  Of course each family sort of wrote their own rules in a way.  So some families did permit their youngsters to dance and I remember in my particular family when my brother [Lawrence Nathaniel Antoine]  was, turned twenty-one, we had some people over and my mother [Wilhelmina Marie Antoine]  said he's twenty-one, now we're going to dance.  So the, the restrictions were lifted at home.  Of course we did dance at different places which he knew we weren't, we weren't breaking strict, fast rules.  But we certainly obeyed the prohibition that you had in the house and also if we were going to other people's homes and their parents didn't want us to dance, why we would not.  So it was a restriction which was relaxing at the time and then as I said officially relaxed when she made the announcement that yes we're going to dance here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said your brother is two years younger than you?
Speaker 2: Older.
Speaker 1: Two years older?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was born 1923, so in the era of World War II the family's starting to dance, is that about right, 1940s, '30s [1930s] to '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Oh, that, the specific year would have been twenty-one and twenty-three so--
Speaker 1: '44 [1944].
Speaker 2: --'44 [1944], yeah.
Story_ID: 28974
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I just wondered if you would talk a little bit about your experiences in the schools in New York?
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Were those happy days?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I, I, I'm happy to say that those were, those were happy days.  We, we were in a, it's, well I guess with most people in a changing neighborhood and I remember specific--people have asked me about this before, who were your classmates in elementary school and so on.  And we were--when I was in elementary school I think first grade, I can remember one Jewish student, Abraham Matzah I think his name was and he was there for one semester or one year and then he moved.  And from that time on why there were no white students at all since it was a neighborhood school, the neighborhood had completely changed.  But I enjoyed the--my elementary school days.  I did well.  My mother would always ask me to do well and see that I, that I did.  But, but I didn't have any much resistance from it.  But I do remember that she had, had said on more than one occasion, oh do they give As at that school to which you go to?  If I would come home with anything less than an A, do they give As at that school to which you go to?  And if they don't we'll have to find a school that does give As.  Oh, again I was encouraged to, to, to make As and it wasn't a problem.  I enjoyed that.  So those were pleasant, happy days, yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of the schools you attended?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was at PS184, that's Public School 184.  The schools in New York were numbered.  And I went to Cooper Junior High School which is in the same, initially in the same building as the PS184.  And it was on 116th Street between 5th and Lenox Avenues.  And junior high years were pleasant also.  We--some schools went through eighth grade for junior high and some through ninth.  And in our school we, we had a ninth grade so I was there, in junior high for three years, seventh, eighth and ninth.
Story_ID: 28975
Speaker 1: And what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Oh, I attended Townsend Harris High School and that's, that's an interesting story in it, in itself.  Townsend Harris was a preparatory school for City College [of New York, New York, New York] and City College was open to all students with the proviso that you had to have a high grade average.  The actual number would vary from one year to next depending on the number of students that were applying but usually it was either eighty-five or higher.  And applicants would be taken from all over the city.  Again it was a public school open to all.  But again only most cases the maybe top tenth of each school would, would apply because you had to maintain this high grade point average.  But Townsend Harris was a preparatory school for City College and if you attended Townsend Harris and graduated you did not have to apply to City College, you were automatically accepted if you wanted to go there.  You, you take the entrance exam but it was more for placement in your courses rather than a requirement for entering.  And it was a--had a check in history in this sense that--or two things.  First of all the public education up through high school was funded by the state.  City--Townsend Harris was funded by the City of New York and so there were sometimes when the city did not have the resources and Townsend Harris did not exist.  So there's no problem as such about attending school because you could go to any high school in the city or the state for that matter because the state was funding the education.  So I understand that Townsend Harris started oh, I think around 1915 and it was on the campus of City College but over the years it moved to different locations and as I said before, at times for a year or two it went out of existence because the city could not afford to fund it.  So when I went to Townsend Harris why it was at 23rd and Lexington, 23rd Street and Lexington Avenue which was downtown from, very much downtown from where, where I lived and also in a really a commercial business district.  And we had our high school in a, an office building.  We had three floors out of a twelve or fifteen story building and the school was in three floors out of that building.
Story_ID: 28976
Speaker 1: Okay, Dr. Antoine you said you were a native New Yorker, born there in 1925.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: One of my favorite writers was born in that same year, James Baldwin.  And he always spoke so highly of the education he got in the public schools there.  He never went beyond high school but he said the schools did a good of preparing him for life.  Did you have that feeling too as you prepared to graduate from high school there?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  The high schools, a number of them were set by expected occupation.  For example there was oh, I can't remember specifically the name of it, but if someone was going into secretarial work for example, there would be a high school that was geared to that.  There were other high schools which were for college preparatory and the--I really to tell you the truth didn't know too much about the other high schools because I was interested in college preparatory.  And my mother [Wilhelmina Marie Antoine] had found out about Townsend Harris [High School, New York, New York] and spoke to a ninth grade teacher and a counselor and I was asked if I wanted to take the examination to qualify for Townsend Harris which I did and I passed and so I knew I was going to Townsend Harris and I didn't think about any of the, the other high schools.  Well Townsend Harris as I indicated earlier was a preparatory school for City College [of New York, New York, New York] and this was say about the best education that one could get at that time in the city or most any other city for that matter I would say.  City College has been described often as a poor man's Harvard and so I was in a preparatory school for City College and the education was again as good as, as good as you can get, let's say.  For example, the State of New York had state-wide regents exams.  They had regents exams for schools throughout the state and these were yearly exams I guess similar to the sort of what do they call in Cleveland now the proficiencies.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Well, we knew students from other schools would always talk, oh the regents are coming.  They got fair (unclear) and they were concerned about how well they would do on the regents and so on.  And we found in, in our school that regents were a snap almost compared to the exams that we took as a matter of course in, in our high school.  So we knew that we were getting a good education and it was shown again by comparative testing.  Regents were no concern being--no, no--everyone from the high school did well on the regents and of course you had to do well on your own exams otherwise you would not be in the school.  So yes, to answer the question again I, I think the education that I got at the high school was very well geared for life preparation, yes.
Story_ID: 28977
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said earlier that City College [of New York, New York, New York] is a public institution.  Now is it tuition free or just very affordable for the students who can pass the entrance exams?
Speaker 2: Well in those days--I understand now that there is some tuition but in those days many, many years ago it was tuition free, yes.  Our biggest expense as I recall when we first went was the library fee which was fifteen dollars, but other than that, no tuition.  We had to pay for books I guess but it was free education and again the best available.
Speaker 1: And I understand again from reading James Baldwin--you didn't happen to have any classes with him did you?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: James Baldwin, did you have any classes with him when you were in the public schools?
Speaker 2: Oh, no I didn't.
Speaker 1: Oh, I just wondered.  You were the same years' children.  But I understand from reading biographical material on him that he thought very highly of the New York Public Library system as well--
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: --as a complement to the classroom experience.  Was that your experience?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yes, certainly.  We would go to library quite regularly, the neighborhood and also to the, the downtown large library at 42nd and Lenox I believe or the Avenue of the Americas.  But again our school library was quite formidable, quite adequate. And I, I enjoyed going there to the extent that I remember I think the first semester I was there one of the upper classmen said oh I see you're always in the library.  Now don't forget along with your schooling you want to get an education and he was referring to doing things outside of studying all of the time.  But yeah the, the New York Library system was quite, quite good and again our school library was also and I enjoyed it.  So--
Speaker 1: Now this branch that eventually became the, the Schomburg Center for Research and Black History and Culture [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], I think that was the 125th Street branch, was it not?
Speaker 2: I think it was 135th Street.
Speaker 1: Oh 135th?  I don't know--
Speaker 2: I'm not certain.  I'm really not familiar with the Schaumburg--
Speaker 1: Well you know more about New York than I do so we're going to go with 135th Street.  But it's the Schaumburg now.  But I'm just wondering where that particular library was located in relationship to your campus, your high school campus, nearby or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh no, not at all.
Speaker 1: Not even close.
Speaker 2: Not at all.  No.  Okay, I, when I was going to, when I was going to high school I think it, when I started when were living on 117th Street I believe (unclear).  But again either--I know when I was going to college I was living most of the time on 122nd Street.  High School was on 23rd Street so it was about a hundred blocks separate and our church was initially on 131st Street and then we moved to 135th Street.  But high school was again at--out of the neighborhood completely, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but worth the trip to get there.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but worth the trip to get there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Got on the subway and had a daily subway ride.  So, but it was worth the trip, yes.
Speaker 1: And what train was that if any, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Is that the A train?
Speaker 2: The A train, no.  No--
Speaker 1: It's not the A train.
Speaker 2: The A train was west of--no that west?  Yes, of the, the Lexington Avenue subway which was what I would take most of the time which was on the, the east side.  Fifth Avenue was sort of the dividing line between east and west in, in Manhattan.  And the A train was going out, again on the west side going--taking the A train you're going up, going north, northwest into upper Manhattan.
Speaker 1: Okay, but still Harlem?
Speaker 2: Still Harlem, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, if I can believe what Duke Ellington used to say, take the A train.  Well it's more, it was more Ella Fitzgerald singing about the A train than Duke Ellington's band playing it.
Story_ID: 28978
Speaker 1: But I'm wondering at what point in your career as a student did you decide that you wanted to be a chemist or did you just have this interest in the sciences in general?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I believe that my interest in chemistry particularly was fought when I was in junior high school and some of the descriptions of chemistry and chemical reactions were just fascinating.  And I was interested in science and general, yes.  I liked math and we had physics in high school.  No laboratories but we had physics as a course.  And so I--but I believe I just enjoyed the, that grouping of studies math and physics and chemistry and when I was in college why anyone who was studying chemistry and you know biology let's say, why the expectation was that you would go into medical school.  The idea of doing chemistry as a career was something that was foreign to, to our neighborhood.  I didn't know any chemists and the, again the people that I knew who were going to college and going on most of them were thinking of going into medical school.  So the idea of chemistry as a career was not firmly rooted in my mind.  So people would say oh well what, what are you going to do with your studies?  And I'd say oh I don't know.  I'll be an educated bum maybe but I didn't really mean it.  But did not again know of chemistry as a career and what one would do with chemistry.  So I figured I would worry about that when--after I finished, after I graduated.
Speaker 1: You said you didn't know any chemists growing up.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Were there any chemistry teachers or science teachers who, who served as, you'll like this term, the catalyst--
Speaker 2: Catalyst for it?
Speaker 1: --in this whole process that led to you becoming a chemist?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Can't recall any names of any--?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Story_ID: 28979
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  So it's in you, this desire to pursue the sciences okay.  And how about your experiences at City College [of New York, New York, New York], were they rewarding also?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes very much so.  See, one of the things in going to school in high school and in college, I was not say in my neighborhood.  Physically the school was far away from the neighborhood for high school as I, I said on 23rd and I lived up in the 122nd let's say.  And the students who came to the high school were for the most part out of that area also.  So we were just the neighborhood in school each day and then at the end of the school day why we were completely separated as the students went back to their homes.  Well the educational neighborhood in which I grew up was primarily Jewish.  The, so these are the students who applied and were accepted at Townsend Harris [High School, New York, New York] and of course at that time City College was primarily Jewish also.  Ninety-nine plus percent of the students were Jewish.  In high school I remember some of the Jewish holidays, John Florio and I--John Florio was a youngster of Italian background and he and I would be the only ones in the class.  And there were sometimes also at some Jewish holidays where virtually the school was just closed.  No one would show up.  Sometimes I took off also.  So that--this was also true of the college where again the student body was primarily Jewish and again we didn't live--the school was not in the neighborhood.  But physically the--I was closer to the college from where I lived than I was to the high school but again it was a commuting school.  So the climate was what you enjoyed during the day with your fellow students you get, you got to, to know someone who was say not in the neighborhood of course, but enjoy the challenges that were put to the students and if, if you were doing well why you enjoyed the challenges.
Speaker 1: Were there any efforts to plan extracurricular activities that might create that sense of community or are most people just concerned about going home to a different community?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were attempts to achieve a sense of community.  There were a number of clubs on campus.  Now that I say that I can't specifically remember.
Speaker 1: No chemistry club though or--?
Speaker 2: I was not in a chemistry club no.
Speaker 1: Future Scientists of America, nothing like--okay.
Speaker 2: There was one club that I can't remember what the name of it was but it was an attempt to get the African American students to join.  They said that oh we've got a certain kind of energy that was missing there.  But at the same time I--there was a club that I did join.  It was the Frederick Douglas Society and this was primarily African American students.  And it, I don't know at what point it was formed.  It was there when I started at City College and so I joined the Frederick Douglas Society and it was through that that I learned, I started learning African American history put it that way because it was not taught in the public schools.  And one of the concerns that the society had was that we were encouraged to learn African American history and we also wanted to take it into the high schools so that we did have some sessions on Saturdays at some of the libraries that would encourage high school students to come and we would come and talk with the high school students.  But it was kind of interesting.  We had a competition at one time in the Frederick Douglas Society on learning or answering questions about African American history.  And I remember winning once and I said oh, this--the state of knowledge on African American history must be pretty bad if I could win this competition because I knew very little when I started.  But clubs other than that?  No.  As I said there weren't other clubs but for the most part it was, you'd finish your day at, at the school with your studies and go to the library, then you'd go home, come back the next day.  So it was not too much of a social atmosphere at the school, no.
Story_ID: 28980
Speaker 1: You said earlier that in your childhood there were distinct made between the West Indians and the Americans.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Even if everyone was Negro or colored. Do you find those same kinds of distinctions on the campus of City College [of New York, New York, New York] or is it race primarily that's drawing that community together for the Frederick Douglas [Frederick Douglas Society] group?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember any say tensions or distinctions between West Indians and Americans I would say there.  We have a small number of Negroes at, on campus and we were just students and no, no tensions, no.
Speaker 1: So what year are you graduating then from City College?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I left City College in 1944 because I was drafted into service.  I had enough credits at the time that I left so that I could qualify as for the, the degree to be awarded.  I think I had 121 credits and I needed 128 for full complement.  So while I was in service I did apply for the degree and it was awarded and I, I left service in 1946 and I took some additional courses when I got back.  But I left in 1994, again I took some courses in 1946, but I'm affiliated with the Class of 1945, which was the year I would have graduated had it not been for the service.  So again the degree was based on work that I had done up through September of 1944, started in 1941.
Speaker 1: So you were drafted into the Army?
Speaker 2: I was drafted into the Army, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then in what capacity did you serve while you were in military?
Speaker 2: Oh, well I was drafted into the army and I was placed in the infantry replacement training center.  And so I was being trained to become an infantry man and actually the training was particularly to supply replacements for the 92nd Division which was fighting in Europe and Italy primarily I believe.  And we trained in monthly cycles as they called them and you had a three month--three or four month training--three month training period.  And each month as the one cycle finished, why they were given a permanent assignment.  And I understand that the cycle that trained before the one in which I was in, that they flew them over to Italy and they did because it was such a need for, for replacements in 92nd Division.  They were just being kind of routed at the time.  Normally the--you were transported by boat from the states over to Europe, but the need was so great at the time that they flew that cycle over.  So our expectation was that when we finished our training that we would also be sent over to the 92nd.  But the 92nd was pulled back from the front just about the time that we would be finished our cycle so we were not sent over.  And there was a question of, question about--oh I think actually most of the people that I trained with went to the Pacific.
Story_ID: 28981
Speaker 1: I did not because I had at one point, had been asked about taking an exam for an Officers Candidate School.  And so I took the exam and I scored well, so well actually that they asked whether I wanted to be in the Army Specialized Training Program?  And I said oh, like what is this?  The Army Specialized Training Program was a special program that they had based on need and they needed people who knew languages, Russian and Japanese.  And if you knew that or could be trained to learn these languages--and they also needed people in the engineering sciences.  So my--actually the requirements for the ASTP, the Army Specialized Training Program, the requirements were higher than Officers Candidate School and I scored well enough that I was asked if I wanted to go to Officers Candidate School.  I said no.  Would you want to go to Army Specialized Training Program?  I said yes.  So they said okay we will consider that.  And they asked what would I want to study, engineering or languages?  And I said oh I think I'd like to take languages.  So I was assigned to engineering, that's the Army way you know.  And then they asked what branch of engineering did I prefer?  There was mechanical, civil, electrical.  They didn't have--there wasn't a--there was not a chemical, but there was mechanical, civil and electrical.  And anyway I thought that the electrical was closest to chemistry than the others so I said oh I'd like to study electrical and I was assigned to civil.  But to really be fair let's say, assignments, oh I don't know how assignments were made. The people making assignments had their own reasons but a good bit of it at times, were for need.  And so for example with the languages, there may not have been as much of a need for someone to study languages at the time as for engineering.  And then again maybe there was more need for civil engineers than for electrical at the time.  But anyway, all I know is I asked for one thing, got assigned to another and then I was asked for the second and got assigned to another.  So I was assigned to civil engineering and sent to school to study for civil engineering.
Speaker 2: So is most of this training taking place in the United States or are you in Europe?
Speaker 1: No it's taking place in the United States, yes in the universities that the army engaged to teach these subjects.  So I went to [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] to study civil engineering.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so, you entered the military in the last full year of the war, 1944/45 [1945].  Did you actually see any combat--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --or have any combat experience?
Speaker 1: No.  I did not have any combat, no.  I entered in September '44 [1944] yes, and then I was sent to school in--for the Army Specialized Training Program starting in January of '45 [1945] and I did that for nine months.  And during that period why the war was--did cease.  So they--as an example, not an example, but the Army Specialized Training Program was stopped in about September of 1945, so there was no need.  And actually they had started the program say early in the war.  I don't know specifically when.  They had started it and then they stopped it and then they picked it up again and stopped it a second time.
Speaker 2: So during World War II, let's see we have victory in Europe I believe in May of 1945 and then victory over in Japan in August with the dropping of the atomic bomb.  I would like to talk for a little while when we start up the next segment about the role of scientists you know during that war period and especially about the way the war ended with the Manhattan Project and the development of the first atomic bomb.
Story_ID: 28982
Speaker 1: All right.  Dr. Antoine, as a scientist during the war period, even though you're in that specialized training program, I just wonder if you had any thoughts at that time or even now in reflecting back on that about the difference that scientific knowledge made and how the war was fought in the 1940s and especially with the development of the bomb?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Good question as they say.  Before answering that I do want to mention that we were in a segregated army and there was one graduate of City College [of New York, New York, New York] who went into service before I did and wanted to get into chemical warfare.  But they were not taking any people of color into that part of the service.  Okay, having said that, the--let me think back for a minute to World War I and the use of poison gas and then subsequently the banning of poison gas as part of an arsenal of arms in warfare.  And I think personally that this was a good step forward for mankind let's say where the realization--if you're going to have a war okay, let's say you try and you cannot prevent the war but you do have enough consideration not to use poison gas which can just affect the soldiers who are engaged in the combat, plus the civilians who are in the surrounding areas.  So the idea of fighting a limited, controlled war is say a good one if you have to have a war where it's limited to combatants.  Now the use of technology is always unfortunately developed for one purpose but then useful in war.  And there's a little rhyme, I wish I could remember it which I can't, but the point is that man has always used whatever new technology they have to fight the war and someone said well gee remember back before we had all these modern weapons we had great wars.  How wonderfully slew with what they had to go on.  And so again unfortunately technology is used too much in warfare.  And the development during that time as indicated led up to the atomic bomb.  And there was the question of say did we the United States have to use the bomb?  And the argument is still going on as to whether we say had to and did it save lives and you know whether more people would have been killed had they not used it than were killed with its use.  And again that argument is still going on.  My personal feeling is that we should not have used it and we have the same kind of argument today with the weapons of mass destruction.  Should they be used to prevent more damage than what they actually cause?  My personal feeling is that we just need to do more with ourselves and with our "enemies" to solve the problems short of destroying thousands of innocent people.  Too many people I think really want to try out the new weaponry, see how it works.  And of course they couch it in terms of well this will save more lives.  And we'd better use it first before they use it on us, etc.  So in a way to answer the question, technology is always unfortunately useful to the military mind and in a way we say we can't prevent it, but we should put more effort into preventing whatever weapon it is that will affect the civilian population.  And again we need more waging of peace than waging of war.  I think it's possible to, well definitely possible to do more than we're doing.
Story_ID: 28983
Speaker 1: Yeah, when I think about the way that the war is being fought increasingly in the 1940s, this technology that leads to improvement in an airplane made a real difference in the kinds of opportunities that African Americans and others would have to serve in the military.  And I'm thinking not just about the Enola Gay that's dropping the bombs on Japan, but also about the Tuskegee Airmen and the opportunities they had to fly escort for these bombers.  But was there much talk on the ground stateside about the opening up of new opportunities in the military, new opportunities to serve the country, perhaps flying, the pilots flying airplanes or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I actually didn't experience, personally didn't experience much of that kind of talk and effort to do, say particularly in, for the airplanes.  There was always talk about more opportunities for non-service, service in the sense of we're there as African Americans to help the whites in whatever endeavors they had.  And well going back to the beginnings of the war, most of the African Americans who were brought in were in as they call them service positions.  They weren't going into combat.  And it wasn't until a number of organizations--it's ironic in a way that they're pushing African Americans into combat units rather than just as again suppliers and service people for the, for those who are doing combat.  They did this with the realization that when the war is over, all you have is that second class position of being servants to the whites.  And so there was always that push during the '40s in the service to get into all aspects of the military and not just be thought of as a servant to the majority.  And so that would include the different technological areas and so flying yes, but well as I mentioned earlier just say getting into chemical warfare where you can use the training and the education that you had, use it in the military as well as say in any civilian life.  If--as one indication, instance I mentioned before, this man had finished in chemistry, wanted to practice chemistry but could not do it in the service because he could not get into the chemical warfare group.  So there was a push to do that and also into officer corps, because that was limited severely initially and just any, anyplace that you were say not welcome, there was a push to make it open.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that reminds me of some of the work that A. Philip Randolph was responsible for in trying to get new jobs for blacks or allow them to compete for--
Speaker 2: For, right.
Speaker 1: --job opportunities in defense industries, not necessarily to serve as part of the fighting force, but a part of that whole domestic mobilization of industry and everything else in support of the war effort.  And blacks needed jobs as much as anyone else who was left back home when the other guys were sent over there.  So I know that for a lot of historians you know when they look at the balance sheet of the war years they say that African Americans benefitted in many ways, not just because they could train with the Tuskegee Airmen but also because they could get some of these new jobs and the fair employment practices committee is there as a, sort of oversee you know the awarding of contracts to certain private sector employers that get these contracts for defense industries.
Story_ID: 28984
Speaker 1: So were they talking much about that in Columbus, Ohio that there are going to be new job opportunities and blacks are going to be able to perhaps get hired for some of those jobs?
Speaker 2: Well yes again with the realization that it would take effort, constant vigilance and the realization that well Columbus was in a way, in some ways not much different from Columbus, Georgia or that South Carolina was Columbus.  I say that because when I was in service in Columbus, one day we heard a buzz going through the community, oh did you hear about the, those soldiers that desegregated a place up on High Street?  So we heard all this and found out that they were talking about us, a group of us who had gone into a place on High Street and we were heading back to campus.  This was when I was at Ohio State in the service in the Army Specialized Training Program.  And we stopped at this place on High Street and ordered something to eat or drink, I don't recall and the place was a small place.  They had a few seats and they had some stand up counters.  And anyway, we ordered our food and drink and rather than take it out and, to camp--, we just decided to, to eat it there.  So we did and didn't realize this was a first.  And evidently the proprietors were reluctant to say anything and so we, as I said we did eat there but then found out the next day that oh, this was an accomplishment, we did something.
Speaker 1: So you were in uniform?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: While you were training?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so without a lunch counter sit-in.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You're ushering in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --this period of change.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is you know, this is Ohio, this is north and this is segregated.
Speaker 1: But this war does end in 1945 and then the post-war period there's still that same push, A. Philip Randolph and others.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I remember this freedom to serve, a report that was issued in the late 1940s and I guess sort of suggested how integration should proceed in the military and some of those ideas were implemented during the Korean conflict.  But I'm wondering about the rest of the society in the 1950s.  You're back in school.  Do you see a growing acceptance of African Americans as part of the mainstream experience or is it--?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 28985
Speaker 1: No.  Okay, so what's happening as you finish up your education that would make you say no in response to my question?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I finish my education and well one of the--I mentioned earlier about a buzz of air--I remember one fellow in the service who was very, very strong on getting that edge.  He said everybody that--everybody he talks to he says just get that edge.  He's talking about getting an education.  And so he was encouraging anybody that he encountered in the service when they got out to go and get your education.  Okay, so I finish service yes, excuse me. And I went back, I took a few courses at City College[of New York, New York, New York].  I was going at night actually.  These were just supplementary courses.  I had the degree already and then I worked for a year in a small chemical company in New Jersey and then I decided to go to graduate school and so then I enrolled in graduate school at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  And finishing up there with a, a Ph.D., I was applying to chemical companies who, some of whom came to the campus for interviews and others that we just knew about and we sent applications to them.  But I wasn't getting any positive responses.  I remember particularly in one instance being interviewed on campus and I had a kind of unusual combination of skills let's say.  I was primarily an organic chemist but I was doing some analytical work with some instruments that normally organic chemists don't use.  So it was kind of interesting.  And this one company after interviewing me commented on that, oh that's an unusual skill.  But good luck to you in your unusual combination.  And it was obvious that--good luck so don't bother applying here.  You're not going to get anything.  Well, so again the other applications that I sent out, I got no positive responses.  And so I--before I left Ohio State, I was approached by the president of Clark College in Atlanta, Georgia who said that they were looking for you know instructors and would I consider coming to Atlanta to teach.  And I said, oh I don't really want to teach.  I want to do research and I don't have a position yet, but I wanted to do that.  So he says well he'd like to encourage me to come and he said more.  He said I'm going to get you.  We're going to get you.  So anyway, he persevered and I didn't have a position in industry to which I applied a number of places.  So I accepted the offer and I went to Clark College in Atlanta, Georgia.  But--oh while I was there I answered an ad for an organic chemist and it was from a company in Cleveland, Ohio, Industrial Rayon [Corporation].  And they--I answered the ad, they sent me an application, three, four page application.  Fill this out.  Sent it back to them and they said oh they were interested and could I come for an interview.  And they arranged to fly me from Atlanta, Georgia to Cleveland to, for the interview.  And I did, I came and as soon as I hit the door I was aware that they were not expecting me.  I saw faces popping out from everywhere looking and so they were not expecting me.  And so in the interview they started asking me about well how much mechanical engineering had I had?  And I said well I had a couple of courses when I was in the Army Specialized Training Program.  But other than that, didn't have--oh well we--the person we're interested in should have some mechanical engineering in their background.  And I said well and I turned around and I looked at the lab--well yeah, well most of the time you'll be in the lab, but you might have to go out into the factory.  They made--it was industrial rayon.  They made tire cord so that they had the manufacturing of tire cords going on nearby but the work for the job was actually in the lab.  But anyway, so I asked them I said one moment please, tell me, what are my chances of getting this job?  Well applicants are just coming in and--I said okay, thank you.  So I knew that--so that's why I said no, that the opportunities were not there.  Now this is early, mid-'50s [1950s] and the large companies were not for the most part hiring any African Americans.  Smaller companies on occasion depending on the particular circumstances yes, but for the most part no.
Story_ID: 28986
Speaker 1: Okay. But you're teaching at Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And having the opportunity at least to share knowledge about you know all of this chemical research that you did toward the Ph.D.  And I wanted to ask also did you take advantage of the G.I. Bill to finish up your education or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have to work and try to study and prepare a dissertation at the same time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  That's a great advent--something that the military did right.  It made a positive difference I should say--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the lives of a lot of young people--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --especially young men.  Okay.  And I heard you say also we, you know we sent applications out.  Is this your dissertation advisor who's helping you get the information out or is there someone else working with you at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  I meant "we" in terms of other African Americans in general.
Speaker 1: Ah, um-hmm.
Speaker 2: So not specifically.  Some of the professors, they sort of admitted that they had some question as to where I could find a position.  And they didn't have any say influence with the companies.  And they expressed some, again some question as to where I would find a position.  So it was sort of the, say the makeup of the system and there may be some who say would protest against it but for the most part they had their own problems and they weren't say, out on the front lines trying to make a difference.
Speaker 1: Now I understand you also met your wife while you were in Columbus, Ohio, your future wife?
Speaker 2: That's correct, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me the events, a little bit about the events that led up to your marriage?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well I guess I have to think Rochdale and Pinedale.  These were oh I don't know the history of the movements let's say but on--they had housing, housing was quite different and varied on campus.  There was some campus housing, there was off campus housing and then some of the students say lived in the city at--in private residences.  But there was a venture, a cooperative venture.  For the boys it was Rochdale.  For the girls it was Pinedale.  And this cooperative venture was such that everyone who lived in a particular house would contribute to the upkeep and it was in a way kind of a communal living in that you prepare your own meals and again do all the chores necessary.  And I guess overall it was a way in some instances in getting less expensive accommodations because you didn't have someone else taking care of the place.  You took care of it yourself.  So one of the things that was started was an interchange in dinner arrangements.  So the boys would go over to the girls' house and share in preparation and clean-up afterwards and share dinner.  And so it was at one of those meetings that I met June Sallee and well we started talking and meeting and so on.
Speaker 1: And the rest is history?
Speaker 2: And the rest as they say is history.
Speaker 1: And so when were you married?
Speaker 2: We were married in 1953, June 14th, 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is that before or after you finish the dissertation and the Ph.D. requirements?
Speaker 2: Oh that was after, yeah.  I met her in late 1948 if I'm not mistaken and we sort of got real serious in 1949 and I believe we got engaged in 1950.  And we didn't marry until 1953 until I was finished.  Let's see my wife felt that--her mother asked her to wait till she finished her undergrad work which was in 1951 and then asked her to wait until I finished my graduate work which turned out to be 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So yeah, we were married in June and officially I finished in August of 1953, but everything was done by then.
Story_ID: 28987
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she's with you when you go to teach at Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Your wife was with you when you go to teach at Clark?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: In Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes she was.  Matter of fact, part of the enticement for me to come to Clark was the president offered her a job in the president's office and it was some talk about he sort of created this job as an incentive for me to come.  But she was well qualified.
Speaker 1: Who was the president at that time?
Speaker 2: James Brawley [James P. Brawley].
Speaker 1: All right.  That's a name I'm sure a lot of the viewers will recognize.  And he sounds like he was pretty aggressive in going after good faculty members, James Brawley.
Speaker 2: He was that.  He was that.  And I enjoyed my year at Clark.  It was really a, a rich, rewarding experience so much I was--I'll never forget.  Some people say they're conflicted.  I don't know exactly what that means but you're torn in two different ways.  I wanted to do research as I said and I also enjoyed what I was doing teaching there to the extent that I said I better get away from here, otherwise I'm going to be here for years and not get to do the research.  This is an undergrad school.  They had no undergrad research and they had no graduate school so that the opportunities to do research on campus at Clark was not at all.  So I decided, let me leave before I'm here longer than I really want to be.  And so I, when I left I did not have a job but I did get one in a couple of months after.
Story_ID: 28988
Speaker 1: Dr. Antoine, you mentioned that you taught for a year at Clark University in Atlanta.  And then when that experience ends, where do you go?  What happens then?
Speaker 2: Oh, I started at, employed at NACA, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics and the way I got that job is kind of interesting.  When I was here in Cleveland interviewing for the job at Industrial Rayon [Corporation] at which they said they wanted a, you know mechanical engineering background, while I was in town I called a friend of mine who had graduated a year or so before I did from Ohio State and he was working in Cleveland at NACA.  And so I just called and said hello you know I was in town.  And I told him why and he said oh, why don't you come out here?  We're looking for people.  So I did.  I applied for a position there and got it and started in August of 1954.  And again this was the--it's a civilian agency of the government.  The predecessor actually of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], but it was NACA, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.  So, I was employed in--I was at Clark from 1953 to 1954 and then I started in 1954 at NACA as a research chemist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, I've read certain things that suggest in this cold war era the government was really kind to American scientists and generous I suppose in many ways making facilities available because we've got Russia--
Speaker 2: Oh.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: -- the Soviet threat.  Did you find the government was especially kind to you as a scientist or to others who were employed by NACA?
Speaker 2: I think that the government was kinder than industry was for say different reasons.  And, but you're quite right that one of the driving forces at NACA and then NASA was the fear of Russian progress.  And there were a number of times when we were concerned about the budget and we'd hear that oh, they think the Russians have something and so we'd get our funding.  So it was sort of like too bad but interesting that concerns of what's going on in another country would determine the amount of support that one would get in scientific endeavors.  But of course you know at the same time the space program in the states was really pushed because of the Russian efforts early up until Sputnik and so that spurred the Americans.  And of course today there's some talk that some of the aspects of our present space program is being pushed because the Chinese are venturing into areas that no one else has previously challenged the United States.
Speaker 1: So this era of post-Sputnik scientific research, that's the 1960s?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 28989
Speaker 1: When--and you said that NACA [National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics] was the predecessor to NASA, N-A-S-A [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: So when does NASA come into being?
Speaker 2: Oh, NASA actually was formed I think officially in the early '60s [1960s].  The NACA had oh about four or five different labs across the country and as it said it's an advisory committee for aeronautics.  And it was a government agency that would resolve conflicts between some of the industrial companies and also did research advancing the study of aeronautics, going from the old propeller engines to jet engines.  There are a number of advances that were actually made in laboratories of NACA that were then incorporated into the industrial production of airplanes by the aircraft companies.  And then when the space age started, why the government had labs that had been doing aeronautical research and so they just incorporated them as the basis for or the core of space research taking it from aircraft lines, not so far up to rockets that will fly a little farther up.  And this was sort of like a built in core for the space program.  And then they changed the name from the [National] Advisory Committee for Aeronautics to [National] Aeronautics and Space [Administration] which is, now that I mention it one of the things that say the general public is really not aware of, doesn't think of is that the space agency NASA is National Aeronautics and Space Administration.  The aeronautics part doesn't get much publicity but it's always been part of the program and been involved with improving engines, cleaning up engines.  At one time when the airplane flew by you saw lots of smoke coming out of it, dirty, dirty smoke let's say.  And there was a program throughout NASA to get a quiet, clean engine.  And there was a lot of work done that contributed to that so that you don't get those vapor trails that you used to.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the early '60s [1960s].  I was born in 1959, but I remember sonic booms.
Speaker 2: Oh!
Speaker 1: Not just the smoke in the airplane but all this noise as well.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And so is NASA contributing to the quieting, not only of the engines but also the booms?  Is that a part of the '60s [1960s] experience too with flight?
Speaker 2: Well yes they--say all of the--every program that was involved with, with aircraft that was flying faster than the speed of sound would contribute to the sonic boom.  And--
Speaker 1: You remember those too right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is it my imagination?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  So yes, I don't recall specifically the particular programs but they were in programs again involved with flying faster than the speed of sound.  The super sonic programs were devised, developing aircraft that could fly faster than the speed of sound.
Speaker 1: So this is basically during the era of John Fitzgerald Kennedy as president, early 1960s--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --that the space program is really taking off?
Speaker 2: Yes, because Kennedy set out the program and announced it that we would--oh I've forgotten the exact words now, but gave it life and impetus, yes absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And so space is--oh no this is Star Trek.  I'm about to give President Kennedy something--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --give him credit for something (unclear) the final frontier, that's Star Trek, right?  But a new frontier for Americans and--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --space exploration.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 28990
Speaker 1: Something we associate with the 1960s and something that far outlived President Kennedy because he's assassinated in '63 [1963] and NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] is still going strong here in Ohio.  But I'm wondering in, during the 1960s was your research as a chemist directly related to aeronautics or airplanes that are taking off on the ground and landing at an airport or are you focusing now on outer space?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My work primarily was as a chemist yes.  And initially it involved fuels for jet aircraft.  And as in all vehicle studies, we're always interested in getting better performance, more efficiency, all kinds of improvements in any mode of transportation.  So we were looking for fuels for jet aircraft that were better than the ones that were presently being used.  In some cases, one case they were looking at different kinds of fuel.  Though very quickly and very simply instead of carbon and hydrogen which is the makeup of the hydrocarbon fuels that were used in cars and aircraft and whatever, we started looking at some boron hydrogen compounds because it seemed that they might give you more efficiency, more bang for the buck in some cases.  It turned out that yes they were better in some ways but in other ways they were not.  There were too much deposits left.  So that program was looked at and then dropped.  The Navy was particularly interested in those fuels.  So we looked at different kinds of fuels for jet aircraft other than the carbon and hydrogen fuels.  And then as I said that program was dropped because it wasn't any better.  And then another program we started looking for alternate sources of fuels.  By that I mean a--fuels come out of the ground now.  Petroleum reserves, dig an oil well you get the oil out of it, you process it, a certain part of it goes for gasoline for cars, a certain part goes for fuels for aircraft and a certain part goes for some other uses.  Well we had a crisis, impending crisis that we were going to run out of petroleum fuels.  What can we use?  Well one of the answers was we can use coal and oil shale.  The United States has a lot of coal.  It also has a lot of oil--shale oil reserves and can we get decent aircraft fuel from these sources?  Well okay, let's get some of this out and we'll test it.  As a chemist, we would analyze it, tell the engineers how similar--how different it is from the fuels that they were using.  And so it was a program that was developed to look at fuels from alternate sources.  Well that went on for a few years until they found that oh, we're really not as short on oil as we thought.  We found enough to last for X number of years and the prices had started to go up, then they started to come back down.  And so that program went by the boards also because we don't need these fuels from alternate sources.  Then further some of my work was involved with energy research.  By that I mean well, specifically looking at batteries and fuel cells which are sources of electricity.  And the Navy was interested in the programs that we had.  Well NASA was interested also but NASA didn't have money to support the programs.  So we were getting our support from the Department of Energy and the Department of Defense.  So my work was more for source, for terrestrial uses and also underwater and some instances because the Navy had some underwater aircraft that they wanted to develop some of these sources of energy for and not really related to outer space.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in telling different people ask about that and they said well wait a minute, you're out at the space agency?  And yes, but we do a lot of work that's not directly related to space.  And we were asked to do this and we respond.  And it just happens that most of my work has really not been directed to any project in outer space.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But it's chemistry so.
Speaker 1: So how long were you at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], how many years?
Speaker 2: Well in total, I was at NASA for forty-two years.  I say in total because I left government service as such in 1983.  I started in 1954 and I "retired" in 1983.  But I continued working from 1983 to 1996 at NASA but I was actually employed at that time by Cleveland State University (CSU)[Cleveland, Ohio].  So again I was at NASA for forty-two years, the last thirteen as an employee of Cleveland State University and the first--other years as a direct government employee.
Speaker 1: So at CSU, do you have access to the laboratories?  Can you continue with your research or is it primarily teaching that you provide there?
Speaker 2: Oh.  No actually it was exclusively working at NASA.  The--what was arranged was what they called a cooperative research agreement between NASA and Cleveland State.  And under that cooperative research agreement, Cleveland State would supply NASA with professors as consultants on some projects, some students to work in some of the labs, that was not a very large part of it, and then the largest part of it was for Cleveland State to supply research associates.  And the research associates would be hired by Cleveland State to work at NASA on NASA projects and that's what I was.  I was a research associate so all of my work was done at NASA.  I had no responsibilities at Cleveland State.
Story_ID: 28991
Speaker 1: All right.  Now I know your, you said an upper classman warned you that you can't spend all your time in the library.  You can't spend all your time focusing on chemistry.  So since I know you had a wife I suppose you had a private life as well.  So now while your career as a chemist is advancing, what's happening in your private life?
Speaker 2: Well fortunately I didn't listen to the first director at--that I encountered when I--no, it wasn't the first.  It was the second director at NACA who believed that most of the scientists should not have a private life, at least not until many years after they started working.  He himself didn't get married until late in life and he thought that the engineers and scientists should be working day and night at whatever jobs they were doing.  But no, I didn't feel that way and it wasn't a requirement of the position.  So I was married yes and we started having children five years after we were married.  And I felt and still feel that this is the most important part of your job is to have and maintain a happy home with children that you are granted and your work outside the home is really secondary.  Even though it you know takes say most of the time but it's still secondary.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your children, if you would give me their names in birth order?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Our first child was Janice Marie and she was born in June of 1958.  Second was Albert Sallee and he was born in 1960.  Edward Sallee--this is Antoine of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Janice Marie Antoine, Albert Sallee Antoine, Edward Sallee Antoine.  He was born in 1962 and Lawrence Sallee Antoine, born 1966.  They were children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very interesting, very challenging, very rewarding children.  What can I say?
Speaker 1: And did they share your interest in the sciences?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Well as a matter of fact, yes.  They had all seemed to enjoy math.  That was noticed let's say.  They did enjoy math and I never really pushed for them to say go into the sciences as such.  We really encouraged them to do whatever they really thought they would like.  It was pointed out though that if they were going to go into the scientific areas that considering engineering as a career rather than say as I did just straight chemistry rather than chemical engineering or if they were going into biology, biological engineering rather than say biology and so on.  So they considered engineering as a possible career and again it was based on their love of math.  And so I was surprised when my daughter at one point was asked about what she was going to study and she said oh chemistry of course.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: I jumped because I did not know that that was really in her mind.  But it was and then she followed the advice to try engineering and so she went into chemical engineering.  And then--Albert, the oldest boy went into civil engineering and Edward went into mechanical engineering and Lawrence into electrical engineering.  And--but yeah, without designating or pushing into any particular areas.  They just chose that, yes.
Story_ID: 28992
Speaker 1: I--well you've told me about your children. Now how about your children's children?  I see pictures of little faces--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --around the room.  You want to talk a little bit about your grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Oh.  How much time do we have?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Future scientists, any future scientists in that group?
Speaker 2: Any future scientists?  I don't know.  The oldest is now in college and at one time was thinking of dentistry.  But I think now she's thinking of theater.  She has talents in many areas and is sort of pursuing, looking at different options really.  But it seems that the art--particularly theater.  I started to say the arts and theater but because she does some visual art which initially I didn't know, but she did a number of things for her high school class, her graduation in putting up some artistic works.  And she's, she was in drama when she was in high school and also was in a chorus and at the same time, very well qualified in the sciences.  But I think now that her pull is towards theater so we'll see.  She's in the second year of college so we'll see what happens.
Speaker 1: But she hasn't yet made the announcement that chemistry of course!  She hasn't--not yet?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, not the announcement of chemistry of course, no.  I'm almost certain that she will not go the chemistry way.
Speaker 1: And you said she's the oldest?
Speaker 2: She's the oldest.
Speaker 1: And how many grandchildren do you have?
Speaker 2: We have five all together, four from Janice and then one from Albert.  And Janice's second child is fifteen I believe and in high school and I don't know what her interests are.  She's capable again in all areas and I don't know what her real interests are.  She may--well I shouldn't say.  I started to say she might be a scientist but I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the two younger ones are too soon to tell.  The youngest is six I think and then the other one is eight.  And then our youngest grandchild, Albert's child, she's four.  And what her interests are?
Speaker 1: Well we'll just have to wait and see.
Speaker 2: Right, wait and see.
Speaker 1: And you have a great big beautiful home here in Shaker Heights.  But--and I've seen some of the rooms but I haven't seen a lab here.  So I'm just wondering how you're filling all those hours when you're not doing research anymore?  Or is there a lab here?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  No there isn't?
Speaker 1: No more chemistry?
Speaker 2: There is no lab here, no.  No the chemistry only in keeping up in certain areas with the thought that I will use it in some way, in some fashion in the future.  How do I keep up with all those hours you said?
Story_ID: 28993
Speaker 1: Yeah, well how do you fill those hours--
Speaker 2: How do I fill the hours?
Speaker 1: --that would formerly have been spent in a laboratory?  Is that through reading journal articles or how do you keep up with what's going on in the profession?
Speaker 2: No, it's mostly reading some of the news, chemical news magazines, yes.  I'm not keeping up sedulously let's say in any particular area other than looking at the broad area of renewable energy in the sense that in the future we're going to have to go that way in that we're going to use up our petroleum reserves.  There's a lot of coal but you want to make the best use of that.  And we grow things perennially so if we can get energy out of the things that we grow, I mean initially we used to use wood for wood stoves, heating, all kinds of uses of wood and we still grow a lot of wood.  So we have to look at that and other things that nature renews for us, let's say as sources of energy.  And there's going to be quite a push in that area in the very near future.  I remember one cartoon after talking about possibility of getting fuels out of some trees, I mean cause there are some trees you can extract the sap let's say and stick that in certain kinds of engines and get--it will run.  So the cartoon showed the person in a small vehicle like a Volkswagen or something pulling up to a tree and putting out a hose and saying filler up.  And in a way we're going to be doing that as well.
Speaker 1: So there's more research to be done in that area?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, absolutely.  Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 28994
Speaker 1: If you could just tell us what we're looking at.
Speaker 2: Oh this is a picture of my graduation at--from Ohio State in 1953.  I, of course am in the center with my cap and gown and my parents, my mother and father are with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said 1953?
Speaker 2: 19, 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're ready.
Speaker 2: Oh.  This is a picture of a fractionating column that we had at NASA and the purpose is to take a, what we call a crude oil and separate it into different fractions.  The different fractions would be used for different purposes.  For example if you had something like called a kerosene fraction which you could use in a kerosene lamp and then another fraction that would be used in a car for gasoline and another fraction used in aircraft and then a lower crude oil or oh, another term that would be used in some engines in watercraft for example.  But essentially again it's a--taking a sample of a crude oil and separating it into its various volatility we say in fractions.  Light gases, the light liquids, the heavier liquids and at the bottom, sludge.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) natural here?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is another photograph of a--and a way of fractionating column where we were determining the impurities in some alternate fuels.  It was part of the alternate fuels program.  We were looking at fuels from different sources other than our regular petroleum sources from oil shell and coal.  And one of the problems with some of the fuels is that they had the higher nitrogen content in the petroleum based fuels.  And so we were determining the amount of nitrogen contamination in the fuels, that contamination in the fuel lines and also contamination in the combustors.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So could you tell us about this photo?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Don't quote me here.  (Laughter).  I was giving a lecture somewhere.  I don't know where that is.  I, I'm--I do not know.  Let's see.
Speaker 1: Could it have been (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Unclear). INTERVIEWER:  Lab equipment in the back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it wasn't out at the lab.  It--no. JUNE ANTOINE:  Is that one of the colleges?  We used to visit the colleges?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry? JUNE ANTOINE:  Was it one of the universities where you went to recruit?  Or is that when you spoke for Delta?
Speaker 1: Was that when I what? JUNE ANTOINE:  When you spoke--no I think that's--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'll think of it--June is correct.  It was on a recruiting trip I believe or else it was someplace down here in Cleveland.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, well when you're ready.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture of--taken with Icabod Fluellen and Henry Williamson and it was at an exhibit that they had at one of the schools, I believe it was Martin Luther King School.  They had an exhibit of Cleveland artists and scientists.  And Icabod Fluellen as you may or may not know is a collector, a historian, an advocate of many really progressive ideas.  And again the exhibit was at the school but a number of other schools were brought in, elementary school children particularly were brought in to see the exhibit to show what had been done over a number of years by people in Cleveland. INTERVIEWER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was in New York right? JUNE ANTOINE:  Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture taken in New York at one of the openings of an Adrian Kennedy play that was part of a series that was done at Signature Theater.  Signature Theater was highlighting one playwright a year.  They did this for a number of years and this year they were doing plays by Adrian Kennedy and in this picture on the left as I face it is Adam Kennedy, the son of Joan Kennedy who's on the right and Adrian.  And this particular play was done by Adrian and Adam.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, do I see me in there? JUNE ANTOINE:  You took the picture.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, no so I don't see me.  Okay. JUNE ANTOINE:  (Unclear) this is a picture you took.
Speaker 2: Hmm? JUNE ANTOINE:  This is a picture you took.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This picture shows a group of Clevelanders who are getting ready to take a trip to New York to attend one of the presentations of a play by Adrian Kennedy being given by Signature Theater.  And again Signature Theater was honoring the works of playwrights and they--in this case and other cases are showing a, oh maybe four or five plays by the same author over a period of several months.  And these are members of the then Adrian Kennedy Society who were taking the trip to New York to attend the--one of the openings of an Adrian Kennedy play. JUNE ANTOINE:  You have to do that one over, the presentation of the Lila Wallace Readers Digest Fund Writers Award.  And we were on our way to the New York Public Library at which the award was given.  I believe.  I believe.
Speaker 2: (Laughter). JUNE ANTOINE:  No, no.  No, no.
Speaker 1: Tape over what I said, will you? JUNE ANTOINE:  Wait a minute, no, no, no.  I--
Speaker 2: Hmm? JUNE ANTOINE:  Lenoir Buford.
Speaker 1: Oh okay. JUNE ANTOINE:  And Carline Worley is to the right.
Speaker 2: Yeah. JUNE ANTOINE:  That's Louise's daughter.
Speaker 1: Yeah. JUNE ANTOINE:  And then next to her is Dr. Cheryl Cunningham.  She's a physician.  And let's see, move over to the left of her, that's her mother also Dr. Cunningham who was a high school principal.  Next to her is Edna Stinson who was a high school administrator and formerly a teacher.  And that is oh god, Jile--Gill--wait a minute, Gills, Gilbert.  That was her husband (unclear).
Speaker 2: Her husband is Gilbert. JUNE ANTOINE:  Gilbert, oh gosh.  She also arranged for Charles to do a portrait of Young--no the one that was killed in Africa there for Great Lakes Theater Festival.  She was a (unclear) on the right and then Joe Kennedy and then me and who is that?  Is that you and Edward our son who lives in New York joined us.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Okay, before I say anything where was--yes.  This shows a picture of a reception after a viewing of the play by Adrian Kennedy and we see Adrian Kennedy seated.  On the right standing is June Antoine and to her right is Louise Kent Hope.  June and Louise were co-founders of the Adrian Kennedy Society.  And then further to the right of Louise is Edna Stinson.  And again the Clevelanders went to New York for viewing of the play by Adrian that was put on by Signature Theater who honored Adrian that particular year with the presentation of a number of her plays.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ready?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  This is a photograph of my wife when she was in fourth grade at Campbell Street Elementary School in Sandusky, Ohio.  The school is a, oh it's a monument to education.  It has been--it's over a hundred years old at the present time, still standing, still going strong and educating youngsters.  Again, this was 1939, June Sallee in fourth grade.  Oh, no!
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, this is a picture of the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus and this was taken I believe in West Germany when the chorus was on a European tour and they made stops in England, Belgium, Amsterdam, Luxembourg and West Germany.  And my wife June Sallee Antoine is a member of the chorus and I was a, an observer.  I enjoyed the trip very much.
Speaker 1: Okay, where is she in the photo?
Speaker 2: Oh. JUNE ANTOINE:  Soprano section.  May I point?
Speaker 1: Yes please. JUNE ANTOINE:  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, go ahead. JUNE ANTOINE:  Soprano section, where is my--right here (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Could you tell us about this?
Speaker 1: Oh, this is a cruise ship cruising the inside passage up to and through parts of Alaska.  And it was a--
Speaker 2: They just captured a picture on the computer. JUNE ANTOINE:  Oh so you already have it, oh okay.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah we just need the picture for a second. JUNE ANTOINE:  Okay.  And should we turn it this way?
Speaker 2: Yep go ahead and so you could still tell us about that sure.
Speaker 1: Oh.  The trip was a gift from our children for our 50th wedding anniversary.  And the picture of the happy couple is at an event on the ship during the 50th anniversary cruise gift that we got.  And this occurred in 2003 following the, our formal 50th wedding anniversary celebration on June 14th, 2003.  And the trip occurred at the end of September, beginning of October in 19--in 2003.
Speaker 2: I'll write that.
Speaker 1: It was August/September? JUNE ANTOINE:  Yes you want to correct that?
Speaker 2: August 20--
Speaker 1: We got it. Okay. JUNE ANTOINE:  Signatures quality actors.
Speaker 2: This is a poster announcing the Signature Theater Company presentation of Funny House of a Negro and a movie star has to star in black and white plays by Adrian Kennedy during the Signature Theater Adrian Kennedy season.  And we were fortunate to have a number of autographs by cast members and--oh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and others. (Laughter).  Yes, this is the book of remembrances shall I say that--with which I was presented at my retirement from NASA.  It includes a number of photographs and also well wishes and signatures from co-workers and a volume really to be cherished.
Speaker 1: Okay, next reference please.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in our backyard and it shows a picture of a visitor that we had under the CIP program, CIP being the Cleveland International Program which brings visitors from all over the world.  And in this particular case we have a visitor from Johannesburg, South Africa, Molly Komotumi (ph.).  And she is a social worker supervisor and as the CIP program specializes really in bringing people of different vocations to Cleveland asking them about their work in their particular country and sharing the similar work that's being done in our country so that we learn from them and they learn from us.  And this program, the Cleveland International Program started in the late 50s [1950s] and has continued, is continuing through the present and they really have brought people from all over the world.  And the purpose is of course to foster understanding among peoples all over the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is another picture taken in our backyard and in the photograph to the left is Shin Juan Do (ph.) who is a visitor under the Cleveland International Program.  He is from Mainland China and actually the first participant that CIP has had from Mainland China.  They've had people from Taiwan in the past but with Shin Juan Do's arrival, it was the first that they had from Mainland China.  In the photograph also is my wife June and our daughter Janice and her daughter Nicole.  This picture was taken oh, going on oh about 18 years ago and it shows again we're having a light snack in the backyard.  But interesting, one interesting point is that Shin Juan Do has a, at that time a two year old son and we have exchanged progress reports on his two year old son and at that time our two year old granddaughter. JUNE ANTOINE:  (Unclear) in between.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Let's see.  Oh, wait a minute.  Can I sit over here?  I won't be in the picture will I?
Speaker 1: Well actually you can read the words.
Speaker 2: That's what I want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is a plaque of recognition given to Albert and June Antoine for, and I quote:  "Dedicated volunteer service to the Adrian Kennedy Society, 1990 to 1996."   And they have a comment, "A tribute of excellence to a tireless couple."
Speaker 1: That's a beautiful tribute.
