Story_ID: 660425
Speaker 1: Okay so my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer and we start out by slating the interview, so I need you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including, I don't know if you have a middle name, and so if you'd do that and give your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay do I have to use my middle name?  Do you, do you--it isn't a passport.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Unh-uh.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's [HistoryMaker] Teri Agins, T-E-R-I, A-G-I-N-S.  I'm not using my middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I don't use it any more.
Speaker 1: Date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay November 14, 1953.
Speaker 1: Okay and can we have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is January 16, 2014.
Speaker 1: And, oh I forgot to ask your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, Kansas City, Kansas.
Speaker 1: And then also your occupation.
Speaker 2: Okay I'm a journalist.  I'm a journalist and author.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh and our location too?
Speaker 2: And we're in Riverdale--Riverdale, New York in the Bronx [New York] in my apartment.
Speaker 1: Okay and--see that's good for historical reference, okay.
Story_ID: 660426
Speaker 1: So we ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food? (Pause) Wow, okay you need to be more specific.  You want dessert?
Speaker 1: It doesn't matter (laughter).
Speaker 2: Let's see, what's my favorite food?  My favorite food, I like--you know, they're going to laugh, I like broccoli which I eat every day.  I like fish, most fish, broiled.  I don't necessarily have a favorite food.  I like to eat a lot of salads, but I don't have like one thing that I really lust for.  I also, I do like dark chocolate.
Speaker 1: Okay a favorite--broccoli everyday I've never heard anyone say that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I eat broccoli every single day.  Either broccoli or broccoli rabe every day.  And not just because it's healthy but I actually like it.
Speaker 1: Wow, okay, that's, I'm telling you, you're unique in our collection (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah me and George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] (laughter), because he hated it.
Speaker 1: Okay and then could I have your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Okay favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I'd say fall or spring, just right at the change of seasons.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: I'm going to say now, just because I just came back from there and I've been there several times, is Portugal and I was in Cascais, C-A-S-C-A-I-S, Cascais, Portugal which is on the sea and I like to go there because of friends and where else do I like to vacation.  Also I'm a staycationer.  I like to staycation in New York [New York].  When I have free time I like to do all the things that you don't get to do when you're working.  The theater the--going to plays, going to music, just doing New York stuff.  I mean this is probably one of the best places to vacation.  And also, let's see, tennis camp in Tampa, Florida, yes.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And wait, wait, wait, and also on vacations of course, Italy.  Please yeah, Italy, you know Rome [Italy], Venice [Italy], Florence [Italy], Milan [Italy].  I used to go there regularly for fashion week [Milan Fashion Week] and so I like it a lot.
Speaker 1: And then your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Yes, two of them.  The hardest person to be is the person you say you are.  And then the other one is, and this is from 'The Incredibles,' that Pixar comic.  Edna Mode, you know, with the one--did you see this?  She had the big glasses and Edna Mode said--what did she say--I like to be--she said in the now--oh I forgot it, just a second.  Something, something, something in the now. Because I actually have it on my Facebook page, we're in the now--but anyway it's something like, she was telling the guy, Mr. Incredible, something about--she said I want to--she said, "No we want to be, want to live in the now."  You know like in the right now, okay.
Speaker 1: Living in the right now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's Edna Mode (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mode.
Speaker 2: Mode, from 'The Incredibles,' yeah and I can, I could look it up but for some reason it slipped my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, we can look that up.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Story_ID: 660427
Speaker 1: Okay so I want to start out by asking you about your family background.  You,  you actually are the first that has had--you had two sayings right off and you like broccoli okay.  And Portugal, we don't have anyone going to Portugal.  So--out of our twenty-five hundred interviews.  So I want to start out by asking you first about your father.  Can you give his name and his year of birth and what you know about his family background?
Speaker 2: Okay.  William Eugene Agins [William Agins] and he was born September 19, 1920 I think, yeah 1920, in Little Rock, Arkansas.  He grew up in Kansas City, Kansas and of the, one of--let's see he had a brother and two sisters [Dorothy Agins Wilson and Bessie Agins Course] and daddy was--he always loved the [U.S.] military.  He was in--he enlisted in the [U.S.] Army and was a Buffalo Soldier in World War II [WWII] and in fact that's on his grave whatever the cavalry was--number was.  Anyway and daddy would have been a career military guy but he wasn't.  I mean he ended up--he went to college and, both he and his brother went to college and they both wanted to be like architects or engineers.  And the, the sad thing about black people in that era, you could dream but you really couldn't do any of this stuff.  So daddy and--Uncle Walter [Walter Agins] ended up becoming a civil engineer, never really did finish college and worked as a farmer in a low position but he actually got to do the job.  Daddy, on the other hand, could not deal with all the math and stuff.  He was at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] and he ended up dropping out because he went to school with the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and so he ended doing what every other black man did, worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  So he was a railway mail clerk for many years but he also continued to stay with the National Guard and then as a result when President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] became president and they had the Office of Economic Opportunity and at that time the country was trying to bring in--have blacks be able to get different types of jobs, civil service jobs and daddy had been a warrant officer in the--that was his rank which was I think somewhere in the like lieutenant area.  But anyway it was a fairly high officer rank and as a result of that he got to work for the Office of Economic Opportunity.  So that got him out of the post office, he had to take a test and then he also worked for the consumer products safety commission [U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission] and both of these jobs were in Kansas City.  So, in other words, he ended up having a white collar career and stayed into the National Guard until, for like thirty something odds years until they finally kicked him out because he couldn't keep his weight down (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what about--did he talk about growing up in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  The weird thing about my parents and I think a lot of black people in that era is that they were--my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] used to always say, "I don't want to talk about hard times."  They just did not talk that much about it so we--I'd hear, we would hear snippets of, you know, childhood memories but my mother was one who blocked out stuff completely.  I know that she was maybe, she was born in--but you haven't asked me that question.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 660428
Speaker 1: But let's stay with your father [William Agins] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Daddy, okay.
Speaker 1: --for just a second.  But did he share any childhood stories with you at all that you can remember, if not that's okay too.
Speaker 2: Nothing that was significant.  It was just that his parents, okay his--they were basically--daddy and his two sisters and his brother were basically raised by Aunt Ola [Ola Agins Ross] who was his aunt and because the parents died fairly early.  And so they don't really have that many recollections of their parents but Aunt Ola was the one who was in charge of like taking care of them and she insisted that everybody go to college because Aunt Bessie [Bessie Agins Course], daddy's youngest sister had a master's degree.  She was a social worker, daddy's other--her sister, Dorothy Agins [Dorothy Agins Wilson] ended up being the first black police woman [sic.] in Los Angeles [California] and became a sergeant and was the first black woman who did a lot of things.  She also completed college, she went to Lincoln University in Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri] and daddy's brother [Walter Agins] was a civil engineer.  So they all ended up with white collar jobs which is pretty amazing.
Speaker 1: It is, for the times (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the time but they didn't--but it was just--it was always just like most black people of that era.  Keep your head down, work hard.  You know they weren't activists in the Civil Rights Movement.  I just remember when a lot of that stuff was going on.  The March on Washington and different people were going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for that.  My parents were not you know, they just kept their head down and worked hard.
Speaker 1: See a lot of people--there's been some revision as to history because they'll say they were but really it was a large part that were very conservative and they just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my parents were very conservative, yeah.  They were like, you know--their attitude was you know white people would accept you better if you were--you know if you just kind of basically did your thing.  Although there was a lot of resentment too because they also knew that it was not a level playing field but they--but you know daddy was--worked really hard and also my parents spent no money.  All they did was save, save, save because all they wanted, you know when Michelle Obama always says people don't want a lot, that's my parents.  All they wanted to do was send their kids to college, be able to have enough money security wise so they'd have enough money to be able to retire and have health care and be safe and have a home that was safe and, like I said, send their kids to college and pay for our weddings and that kind of stuff and that was basically it.  They went on very few vacations, they didn't really, you know they bought Fords and kept them forever.  So it's not like they were--they had no extravagances.  They really didn't--if you ever asked either one of them their passion they would really not have really--my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] had--her passion was bridge.  She was a really big bridge player but daddy didn't have any passions because it was impossible to be really ambitious back then.  People were just trying to like, stay out of trouble, be safe, raise their kids and be able to go out to dinner and, and, you know, and, you know, they belonged to the little clubs and so we got--they got to go to formal parties and they thought that they were like well off because they were.
Story_ID: 660429
Speaker 1: So what about your mother? Can you give her name and her year of birth (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay her name, Phyllis, P-H-Y-L-L-I-S, Phyllis, Whe- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) P-H--
Speaker 2: Phyllis, P-H-Y-L-L-I-S, Phyllis Wheatley--
Speaker 1: She was--
Speaker 2: --Jackson [Phyllis Jackson Agins].  Okay there's a good story here.  She was born November 10, 1923.  Okay mommy was born as Phyllis Olivia Jackson and, according to lore, family lore, she--my grandmother read her Phyllis Wheatley poems and things and she said, "Oh I wish my name was Wheatley instead of Olivia," so what people did back then was you just changed it.  So she changed her name to Phyllis Wheatley Jackson and that was her name and at her service last July I went online and found a Phyllis Wheatley poem to read.  Yeah, of course, she doesn't remember anything about this, I mean about the Phyllis Wheatley poem but she just knew that Phyllis Wheatley was somebody who was the first black woman who was published in the United States and that was a big deal.  Mommy's side of the family were all college educated.  Both of her parents went to college.  Her father was a preacher and he went to Biddle--Biddle, which is in the South, I forgot where it was, Biddle University or Johnson C. Smith [Biddle University; Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina], yeah.  And his wife Madeline [Madeline Orr Jackson] who is my grandmother she went to school called Scotia [Scotia Seminary; Barber-Scotia College, Concord, North Carolina] and it was, I think it was in South Carolina [sic.].  So both of them were college educated.  Now she didn't work, she was--but they were--my parents--her parents were dirt, dirt, dirt poor.  I mean my mother she does talk about hard times because--and not much but she would just say, "You don't know how it was not to have enough to eat, to be cold all the time and just wondering where you were going to get your next meal."
Speaker 1: So she was raised where?
Speaker 2: They lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--she was born in Aiken, South Carolina and then they moved to Philadelphia and they she was basically raised in Kansas City [Kansas].  Something happened with her father.  We don't know exactly what happened but he lost his church.  He had a church--they keep saying he was--they called him J.E. [James Jackson] and they would say, "J.E. was a really learned man."  Well anyway he lost his church and as a result he was selling encyclopedias.  So you can imagine like doing this in the '30s [1930s] and her brothers [James Jackson, Arthur Jackson and Harold Jackson] because she was an only girl, I'm sorry she had a half sister [Fannie Jackson] but because her father had been married.  His first wife had died.  So anyway she had that half sister and then she had three other brothers.  All of them dropped out of school to join the CCC in the 1930s because, yeah.
Speaker 1: The conservation corps [Civilian Conservation Corps].
Speaker 2: Corps, yeah.  So they had to work, and my mother did go to college.  She was-out of all the kids she was the only one who went and she went to University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  That's also where she met my father [William Agins] and she was--she went only for two years; two years before she was at junior college in Kansas.  At that time blacks couldn't live on campus, you lived in people's homes and so that was--and to save money to go to college she did, as they called it, day work.  In other words, clean white people's homes.  And I hear her talk about that this one woman that she worked for I remember she said the woman would come out of the shower and walk across the wooden floor and if there was any dust that got on her feet she would tell her, "Oh you haven't like done your job," and she said, "Even if you dust like two seconds later your feet are damp and they go across a wooden floor you're going to pick up some kind of debris."  But she was just talking about some of the weird things that went on doing day work.  But she always tells people, "Don't tell anybody that I used to be--that makes it sound like I was a maid, don't tell anybody that."  There was so much shame, there was so much shame and there was also I think I real shame about being really poor.  She had really bad feet and that's because the shoes that she wore that were hand me down shoes and they were sticking paper, newspaper in them to make them fit and that kind of thing.  So she ended up having to do like serious foot surgery when she was in her late fifties and so she was always telling us about being careful about your feet because, you know, she's just like that was, you know.
Story_ID: 660430
Speaker 1: Well I mean because they--everybody wanted to aspire to things.  Now how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: They met--I don't think it was, it was a blind, not a blind date or something but--
Speaker 1: In Kansas City [Kansas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah well it was at University of Kansas is in Lawrence, Kansas which is right outside of Kansas City and they met.  Daddy [William Agins] even though he was older than she was because of G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] and all that stuff, he started college late.  And so she--because she actually ended up graduating before him and so a friend introduced her.  She was a member of the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] at KU and I think that was--it might have been an inaugural chapter in Kansas City--at the University of Kansas.  So because they did that ivies beyond the wall service [Ivy Beyond the Wall Ceremony] at her--at her funeral.  And the funny thing was that she was not active in the AKAs after she graduated but she did want that service and she had in her papers, "Make sure that I want the ivies beyond the wall service."  She made a big deal about it.  But I mean my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] was really like super organized and she had her hymns chosen and all that.
Speaker 1: So she had organized it all.
Speaker 2: She had organized it all, yeah.  She had her hymns for her--her funeral.  We did a--we actually we had her cremated.  I don't know if she would--I don't think that she would have been up- I don't think she would have objected one way or the other but we had decided to do cremation.
Story_ID: 660431
Speaker 1: So now, now what is your earliest--no I want to ask you about you about your siblings.
Speaker 2: One sister (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you--one sister who's older than you.
Speaker 2: Older.  Yeah Genie okay her name is Phyllis Gene, G-E-N-E Agins [P. Gene Agins] and we call her Genie, G-E-N-I-E, like genie in the lamp.
Speaker 1: So she goes by her middle name, right?  And (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  And she did that because people, as my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] said, she would never--why name people with the same name.  So, you know, she said she would have never done that.  Why--don't name your kids with your name because there is always going to be all this confusion.  So yes so she goes by Genie.
Story_ID: 660432
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay we lived in a neighborhood called Brentwood, which was--Brentwood Hills [Kansas City, Kansas]--which was a black neighborhood but it was not--my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] always wanted to live in a house where white people hadn't lived.  And so they built this house it was a black builder and architect and the whole thing and these were ranch style houses and they bought this house.  Let's see, we moved in that house when I was two years old so this is 1955 and the house had a fireplace and it had a finished basement which we ended up turning into a rec room [recreation room] and it had--you know, and they were able to actually kind of like design how they wanted the house.  My mother did not want it so you could--she did not--you know how most houses you walk in the house you have to go through the living room, she did not want that.  I mean she was very specific about things.  She wanted--big kitchen and everything else and so it was basically a three bedroom house, but a small three bedroom.
Story_ID: 660433
Speaker 1: You're saying that this was built a--a black--
Speaker 2: Black builder.
Speaker 1: Black builder.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, the Robbins [Harold Robbins and Wendell Robbins].  And so initially when they built this development, people--each house was customized, now this was a big deal in 1955.  Okay but then what happened of course they ran out of money, and so what they did is they just started slapping up all these houses that were all kind of in the same grid which actually did not--it didn't help the neighborhood that much because they were trying to sell houses and they wanted them to be affordable.  But the one good thing about this neighborhood was is that it was a black neighborhood and you got a microcosm of society.  There were doctors on there, there were people who were housekeepers, there were teachers, there were a lot of teachers, there were--people worked in factories.  I mean you got a microcosm of the--it wasn't like it was an upper middle class neighborhood because we had doctors in that neighborhood, but we also had people who like, took care of people's kids.  So it was--but it was a nice, stable neighborhood and my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] loved the fact that no white people had ever lived in that house.
Speaker 1: She didn't want to have hand me downs, her whole life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly see but her whole life had been one big hand me down and they lived in that house for--until like, about eight years or so ago and when they moved to--they bought a retirement house, it was brand new.  Because she also did not want to live someplace where white people had lived.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, it would be interesting to even do research about how that even, you know, came to be because I bet that that was something big at the time.  You know, having a development, this is not just one house.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, the development, yeah, Brentwood--it was called Brentwood Hills [Kansas City, Kansas] is the name of the neighborhood (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 660434
Speaker 1: Yeah but that was--my mother, it was--it was, okay, my mother taught school.  She went to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], she taught first grade for many years and then she became a reading consultant but the thing about mommy that was--we called our parents mommy and daddy which is a, people are like (makes sound).  So then when we got older my mother said, "You all are too old to be calling us that," so we called her, her name Phyllis [Phyllis Jackson Agins] we called her P.W.  P.W., her initials were P.W.  Sometimes we would call her (makes sound) so we would get silly with it and daddy's name is Gene [William Agins] so we would also call--well yeah, but they wanted us to stop calling, but although we still did the mommy, daddy thing.  But mommy, when she taught school she also did not--in her school when she had, and you will see in that Vogue article that I showed you, she--on her bulletin boards she had brown Santa Clauses.  She never put a white Santa Claus, and she never bought a greeting card with a white person on it, ever.  She would buy greeting cards with flowers, boats anything but not a white person on the card.  She would always say, "So and So sent you that with those white people on it."  The thing is, she wasn't radical but these were just her little things--and she also didn't like, although I had a blond Chatty Cathy and she didn't make a big deal about it, but we did have black dolls.  I mean she was very--her attitude was black people should feel good about themselves and she hated going to a church and seeing a big white Jesus sitting up there.  That used to also drive her crazy.  She would say, "I don't know why," she said, "My Jesus does not look like that."
Story_ID: 660435
Speaker 1: And we went to Faith Lutheran Church [Kansas City, Kansas], very--it had a white pastor but it was a black Lutheran church basically kind of in the ghetto and we didn't live in the ghetto but that's where the church--it was almost--they called it a mission church because the people who were there were poor.  The only reason we went to this Lutheran church is because they had a really good Sunday school program.  And, and, you know, they had the whole confirmation and everything and she wanted us to go through that and so some of the other people in the neighborhood [Brentwood Hills, Kansas City, Kansas], because several of our neighbors all went to this church particularly because of the education that they got for children.  Her father [James Jackson] was a Presbyterian minister so she wouldn't have necessarily chosen a Lutheran church.  But they really weren't that religious, I mean they all were raised in church but they really didn't--I never, w- when we were at church I never--I watched her and she never did like pay attention to the service.  This was a Lutheran church. There's not a lot of amen or any of that, a very quiet church.  I played for--I played the organ for church.
Speaker 2: You did.
Speaker 1: My--in college--I mean in high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas].
Speaker 2: Oh.  So this is--you know because she's very much a race woman in some--what we call race woman (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Race woman, exactly.
Speaker 2: But so very much that way and then you know these things, black dolls and things were not in ready supply back in that time, they were not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the '50s [1950s], heck no.
Speaker 2: They were not in ready supply.  So but the Presbyterian is different too because there're not--were not a lot of black Presbyterians, okay.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah.  It had--yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  So let me ask--and you said she was raised Presbyterian?
Speaker 1: Because her father was a Presbyterian minister, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because her father was a Presbyterian minister, okay.  Okay.  So she was a preacher's kid.  But wait, she was a preacher's kid?  What about your husband--now your husband, no, he wa- okay.  So your mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] was a preacher's kid in some respects.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in some respects but he lost his church under some mysterious situation but he was still considered--they called him reverend and, you know, but it's funny, but they still didn't seem that religious.  You know, Genie [Agins' sister, P. Gene Agins] and I--my mother, when she died this summer, we had a chance to kind of--we knew that she was going to die and we had like fifteen weeks and we went back to Kansas City [Kansas] to see her and at that point I wanted to ask a lot of stuff but she was just a person--she was very, she called it private.  She was shy and she just didn't--she didn't tell us a lot of stuff.  So that's why I don't, we--there are just big gaps.  When people ask us about certain things about the family I, we just don't know.
Story_ID: 660436
Speaker 1: So can you describe your neighborhood, I mean, you know you talked about the name, but what was--who was on your street and what was the address?
Speaker 2: The address was 3311 North 36th Street [Kansas City, Kansas] and 3311 actually is one of the numbers I always use for like when I need passwords, I use versions of 3311 because of that.  And my next door neighbors were the Dooleys and they had six children and Wanda [Wanda Dooley], Wayne [Wayne Dooley], Wesley [Wesley Dooley], Wilma [Wilma Dooley (ph.)] and Wanda, Wayne, Wesley, Wilma, four kids.  And Mrs. Dooley [Bette McClure Dooley] was a teacher and their father [Richard Dooley] was a hairdresser.  And, anyway they--and then on the other side were the Judys [ph.] who were--what did Mr. Judy do he had some factory job and they had a really nice garden because we used to always like get Mrs. Judy's tomatoes.  They adopted two children.  Also there were a lot of dogs in the neighborhood [Brentwood Hills, Kansas City, Kansas].  We had dogs, there were a lot of dogs, we all had swings, we all had bicycles.  I mean it was one of those neighborhoods where if, you know if when the street lights came on you had to, you know you had to be back home and you know, we had fences.  But it was a safe neighborhood there was no crime and it wasn't loud and noisy or anything.  It was just a--these were just kind of hard working, you know black people.  Working to middle class and then a few affluent people mixed in but everybody kind of considered we were all the same.  People were very proud to live in that neighborhood because it was done by a black developer.
Story_ID: 660437
Speaker 1: So, what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Hm.  (Pause) Grass, yeah because we had yards and stuff.  Sights, I don't know can you give me some prompting?
Speaker 1: No, any kind of sights, sights, well what about smells?
Speaker 2: Smells, okay my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] was not a big cook.  Oh she cooked but she didn't like to cook, she was a bad cook.  I remember when she was in a nursing home and they asked her--they had a question and they were asking her what kind of cook she was and she said, "I was a fair cook."  She was one of these people that of the '50s [1950s] who, you know, we all grew up on canned goods and everything was--I mean roasts would stay in the oven for like three hours so the roast was like grayish brown, chicken was always dry.  I hated, I hated chicken breasts because they were always dry.  My mother could not--she was always--we called her a rush--she was always in a hurry.  Because, when daddy [William Agins] was working for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] he was in four days, out four days when he was on the--well when he was a mail clerk which meant that she had to deal with--she was a working mother and we were latchkey kids.  We came home every day from school, walked home and then, and our lunch, we couldn't use the stove.  So it was chili or something it might have been in a thermos.  We would go into the refrigerator and get the Hi-C and we would drink the Hi-C for lunch and then we would have to lock the door and stuff and then leave and walk back to school.  And our dog would be, some--and the dog Mac sometimes would follow us to school because at that time you know there were no leash laws so dogs would follow around and we would always have to say, "Mac go home, go back home."  He was a--it was a mixed, like a retriever, beautiful dog, Mac.  And Mac got his name because there was a first grade book, 'Mac and Muff,' some dogs and that's how mommy came up with that name, Mac.  Yeah and then we had Mitzie [ph.] and we had a dog called Puppy because we couldn't figure out a name so he just became Puppy.  That was his name from there on and then we had an Airedale [Airedale Terrier] but we had dogs always.
Speaker 1: And several dogs at one time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no these were just dogs--
Speaker 1: Oh, the, the sequence.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sequence, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay one dog at a time.
Story_ID: 660438
Speaker 1: What about sounds?
Speaker 2: Okay sounds, okay music of course.  We took piano lessons.  My mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] also really insisted--the one splurge she did, she did buy a brand new piano also not a hand me down.  All of our furniture was brand new.  That's why they hated antiques.  I collected all this stuff and I know daddy [William Agins] used to say, "I want what they make tomorrow," because he was like they--because my mother never wanted anything used.  Because that's that whole stigma of growing up but anyway she did buy a piano at Jenkins Music Company, I think it was like eighteen hundred dollars so it was a lot, it was a really nice piano and we took piano lessons from Mamie Lewis [ph.], a black piano teacher.  The lessons were $1.50, we went on Wednesdays.  And we had to have--I had a half an hour lesson and my sister had one, we had them back to back.  We took piano lessons all through like--I took them all through college--I mean all through high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas].  And then I played--and then at church [Faith Lutheran Church, Kansas City, Kansas] they asked me--they needed somebody to play for church and so--now this is Lutheran church so it's not like a swinging--this is like really kind of, very kind of quiet hymns.  And I learned how to--Mrs. Lewis taught me how to do the feet on the organ.  'Cause I mean this is really--this is a ghetto church, this is a small church.  But anyway so I played for like all through high school which was--and my mother always wanted somebody to play the piano.  She played but not well.  My sister was the one who was really talented.  Genie [P. Gene Agins] was a talent but she didn't like it and she had to make her practice.  I was the--if you look at me and my sister the one thing you will see is, okay, Genie had the talent, the piano talent but she wasn't that interested. I was the one who was always--I worked really, really hard.  I made straight A's, I was one of those--I really, really applied myself.  Genie was smart but not--she could have been smarter but you know as it ended up she did quite well in life but I'm saying she just wasn't as--I was just more academic; I was more driven.
Speaker 1: She wasn't as directed, then?
Speaker 2: She wasn't as driven.
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 660439
Speaker 1: So music, no sights though, anything--laundry, anything that reminds you of growing up, anything else?  Okay.  What about--can you describe holidays or vacations, but holidays, you remember?
Speaker 2: On vacations--we didn't take a lot of vacations but when we did go we went twice to California.  One time we drove, and that's a long drive.  And we stopped in Tucson [Arizona] so we could see my mother's friend from college [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas], Irene George because she had a swimming pool.  That was a big deal.  We went to Disneyland [Anaheim, California] in like 1960 and that was a big deal because you know Disneyland was a big deal because it was the first amusement park for black people, you know, it was always integrated.  And so Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Agins Wilson] got us tickets to go to Disneyland and mommy [Phyllis Jackson Agins] had a brother who lived out in California too so we--Harold, Jr. [Harold Jackson], he had a son Harold [Harold Jackson].  So Harold and Genie [P. Gene Agins] and I and--Aunt Bessie's son--yeah we all went to Disneyland.  So I remember that and Knott's Berry Farm [Buena Park, California] and that whole experience and then one year we went to Pikes Peak, went up to California twice, went to Pikes Peak in Denver [Colorado] once.  But that was, they--we didn't really go out of town.
Speaker 1: So when you were traveling were you just getting into the car and then driving or were you in a trailer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Driving.  We--we did a trip, we did the trip to Kans- to California by train once, and you know we stayed in motels, modest motels and that was it.  But you hear about people--because I know there were other people in Kansas City who went to places like New York [New York] and Chicago [Illinois] and we even had friends who had gone to Europe.  The Taliaferros who were there, their father was a doctor and they had gone to Europe once.
Speaker 1: Wait, you knew Taliaferro?
Speaker 2: You know them?
Speaker 1: There is a Taliaferro [Ray Taliaferro] that we were supposed to be interviewing and he's been an announcer.  That's a very unusual name so that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure they're related.
Speaker 1: They have to be related.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Taliaferro, this was in Kansas, yeah, Kansas City, Kansas. But they went I think they got to go to Europe I think when we were like in high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas], end of high school.  But that was unusual.  But all the other vacations--remember my mother was always glad because she said the one thing about being a teacher you get the summers off.  So we just did summer stuff.  You know we went to summer--I went to the library and we were also--we were very enterprising kids.  We did--we put on plays in the garage and we had, we had, Genie and Wanda [Wanda Dooley] and I did something called GWT cosmetics, Genie, Wanda and Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins].  And we made these little things out of soap powder, we made little jars, of course we couldn't sell the stuff because it was you couldn't put it on your skin but it was just our little because we were kind of always into fashion.  And then the other thing that we did--we were also really big for Halloween costumes.  So and daddy [William Agins] actually knew how to sew and he would help us make--one year we did a Charleston.  Genie did Audrey Hepburn 'Breakfast at Tiffany's' and she wore these long black socks for the gloves (laugh) and so we did--we were kids who just played a lot.  Also we played paper dolls, I forgot.  We played paper dolls, me and Genie and Wanda played paper dolls all the time and we would you know, we had Connie Stevens paper dolls and [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll paper dolls and so on.  We had all these different kind of paper dolls.  We loved it and we used to make--take the bottom of a shoe box and put these little bucket seats and call that a car and yeah we played paper dolls.
Story_ID: 660440
Speaker 1: Now how old are you when you are talking about these things, are you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All that was--all that was from grade school to you know junior high school [Northwest Junior High School; Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: Quindaro [Quindaro Elementary School, Kansas City, Kansas].
Speaker 1: Quindaro.
Speaker 2: Quindaro.
Speaker 1: And that's Q-U--
Speaker 2: Q-U-I-N-D-A-R-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so are you five when you start, do you start (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started school at four.  I started school at four because my birthday is in November and back then they let you go to school early.  Because I graduated when I was seventeen from high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas] and that's just because of the way--now they make you wait, if you're not.
Story_ID: 660441
Speaker 1: So you and Genie [P. Gene Agins] got along real well.  Was she a, was she a, was she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, we shared, we shared a bedroom.
Speaker 1: Was she a typical older sister, or you were--I mean, 'cause you sound like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're two years apart.
Speaker 1: --you know you sound like, you know, just--
Speaker 2: Twins.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: People used to often ask were we like twins or whatever, not that we necessarily looked alike but we're just very close.  We shared a bedroom.  My mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] used to always tell us, "Will you all stop talking," because we would always talk all--to each other at night and even when we go to visit, here, even, they--she was always saying, "Will you girls stop talking," because we were always like talking.  We are very, very close.
Story_ID: 660442
Speaker 1: So when you--so you, you, you were doing these things. Now were you watching a lot of old movies? Because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you talk about,  you know, Katharine Hepburn and being into fashion.  So were you seeing that through magazines or were you seeing that through TV?
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a good question.  Mrs. Dooley next door neighbor, Bette Dooley [Bette McClure Dooley] was a dreamer and in that generation most people just you know they just didn't have that dream but Mrs. Dooley always dreamed about being a buyer, a retail buyer and one of her friends was a retail buyer, she was an assistant buyer at a store, a local store, department store.  And that was unusual for somebody black to do that and so and she got to go to New York [New York] to go buy stuff for the store which we always thought was a big deal.  So Mrs. Dooley subscribed to Harper's Bazaar and Vogue and that's when I started subscribing to Vogue when I was in like grade school, I mean no--no, seventh or eighth grade [at Northwest Junior High School; Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas].  Yeah and I was subscribing to Vogue, Mrs. Dooley subscribed to Harper's Bazaar and we would always trade magazines.  We were always looking at magazines and that's what we always--we always said we wanted to live in New York, we didn't even know what New York was but it was just we had seen it in the movies and so I, I credit Mrs. Dooley for just, because of our reading those magazines and we devoured those magazines.
Speaker 1: Now was Mrs. Dooley--did she dress real nice, was she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, she was trim, she dressed nicely and now the only thing is they had four kids and her husband [Richard Dooley] was a hairdresser he didn't make that much money and so they were like--they were not that--I mean they always wore--had used cars, they didn't have air conditioning.  See that was the other thing too, in our house we had central air and that was a big deal.
Speaker 1: That's a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean which (laughter) was so funny when air conditioning first started in cars, black folks were driving around with their windows rolled up (laughter) trying to pretend that they had air conditioning when they didn't have it.  Do you know about this?  You don't know this?  This, okay.  Yeah.  Black people would drive around with their cars--with their windows rolled up pretending that they had air.  Because if you saw people with their windows rolled up they had air conditioning in their car which was a big deal.  So people would pretend--you know folk--you know black folks.  But we had, I remember we had--I mean the house didn't come with air conditioning, we had to get it but we had gotten air conditioning.  The Dooleys didn't have it, I think they finally got a room unit but every time we hated to go over there because it was always so hot.  But yeah we did have central air conditioning and, which was a big deal.
Speaker 1: But you know that is, the friend that you said that she had that was an assistant buyer that was very unusual.
Speaker 2: Oh Mrs. Dooley oh yeah her friend, her name was Eleanora [ph.] something, and anyway Eleanora was this assistant buyer and Mrs. Dooley worked as a kind of a secretary at one of the stores and then she actually ended up becoming a teacher because she had gone to college.  But her, her big dream was to be a buyer in New York and it's interesting because her daughter ended up doing that.  But it didn't work out that well because she had other issues.  But--but she married a horrible guy.  So anyway so that was--Mrs. Dooley is the one I think really got us into fashion and thinking about fashion and, on that level and we did watch a lot of movies.  Like that movie 'Back Street' that you heard me mention starring Susan Hayward and she was a designer her name was Rae [Rae Smith] and she spelled her name all in small letters and that's when I started signing my name in all small letters and that was 1968--or 1967, yeah.
Story_ID: 660443
Speaker 1: So are you--what is the discussion happening in the house, though, you know.  Are--is there a lot of discussion around, even though you are latchkey kids, around, you know, issues that are happening or you know people in the community or you know things that you are reading in the newspaper or hearing on television?  Is there a lot of discussion in the house?
Speaker 2: Okay, we were subscribers to the newspaper, to The Kansas City Star which was a morning and an afternoon paper and we also were subscribing to the Kansas City Call [The Call] which was a black newspaper that came out once a week.  So we were not--we were people who did read the newspaper.  We grew up reading the newspaper.  Watch a little bit of television, just watched the usual sitcoms, you know Dick Van Dyke and Donna Reed and, you know, 'Julia' was a big deal when--and I remember when they first had black people on TV commercials and we would--somebody would be you know during a vaca- a commercial someone would be going to the bathroom or going to the kitchen or whatever and if somebody black was on TV we would say, "Spook," and somebody would run in to see who the black person was because it was a big deal seeing black people on TV commercials.  The discussion around the house was basically about just kind of like neighbors and stuff.  We didn't really talk about issues.  I, I went to--we, my sister [P. Gene Agins] and I both went to public schools but really that's when public schools were really good.  So I had any of that kind of stuff about the world or events or everything, I--we got that in school.  And because I was a really good student and liked school--and the other thing, okay this is so key to my background, the World Book encyclopedias ['World Book Encyclopedia'], that was something else.  Back to this my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] believed in investing in, piano, and she got the World Book encyclopedias.  And that was expensive to buy those but she bought those and I would just go in the den and pick up a World Book and just open it to whatever page it was and sit down on the floor and read this for like hours.  I loved the encyclopedias.  She always said--she said that was the--because my sister looked--when she needed to look up something she used the World Books.  I used--I just was just--it was, you know, that's where the curiosity started.  Because I would go through those World Books and she always said it was the best investment.  She would always tell people, "Whatever you do buy some encyclopedias because you know they are really good for your kids," because it gives them--it exposes them to things.
Story_ID: 660444
Speaker 1: Tell me which kind of child you were, though.  You know I mean in this way--you loved, you loved learning, what made you--so you were inquisitive.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And what were you thinking like let's take you to about age, you know seven or eight, what were you thinking you wanted to be or do or, you know, what did you sort of dream about or?
Speaker 2: I didn't--I didn't really think about anything professional until I was in the ninth grade [at Northwest Junior High School; Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas] and I worked on--I took the test to be--to take the journalism class and I took the test because you had--to work on the school newspaper [Nor'wester], you had to take a test.  And then they had--and it was journalism class.  It was one hour, you know, a day and so I--the teacher Mrs. Rucker [ph.] said, "Oh Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins] you like clothes so let's give you a fashion column."  Because she knew I liked clothes, she knew the way I dressed and she also knew that you know that I subscribed to magazines and stuff.  So--and she's the one who came up with that name Teri (unclear) to fashion flare, then I came up with the idea about spelling in all small letters and we had--it was a little the logo.  So that--at that point I decided I wanted to be a reporter.  I didn't even know--I didn't think I was going to necessarily write about fashion, I just wanted to--because I didn't even know that there was a fashion reporter job.  I just felt like it was really cool because it--in the, with the school newspaper--I mean in addition to writing the fashion column I got to go and interview people and I remember there was a bond issue and we did a special edition on that and you know you got to interview teachers and other students.  And I just thought it was kind of cool and you know you also it was kind of like you were important.
Story_ID: 660445
Speaker 1: Elementary was--you said it was--it had a st- strange--what was your elementary (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Quindaro [Quindaro Elementary School, Kansas City, Kansas].
Speaker 1: Quindaro, okay and then junior high was--
Speaker 2: Was called Northwest, Northwest Junior High School [Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas].
Speaker 1: So Northwest goes from seventh (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventh grade to ninth grade.
Speaker 1: So ninth grade--it's at ninth grade that the, that you're working on--
Speaker 2: The school newspaper [Nor'wester] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on the school newspaper, okay.  And, talk about your--and, you know dressing nice and were you, were you a family, you know, 'cause--were you making clothes, was your mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] a seamstress?
Speaker 2: Okay my mother didn't--okay as much as we loved mommy she didn't have--she didn't do mom stuff.  She didn't cook, she didn't sew.  You know she was a--she made sure we went to the library.  Daddy [William Agins] knew how to sew a little bit to help us with the costumes.  I had a friend named Janice Branson my very best friend from junior high school, who is white, from the seventh grade.  And Janice are still very dear friends and Janice--we took--they had foods and clothing and clothing was a sewing class.  You had to--you know other girls had to take all these classes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventh grade because you had home ec [home economics], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah but that was home ec.  It was called foods and clothing.  So foods, I actually did quite well but it was in clothing I was--because I cut with my left hand.  I'm right handed but I used the scissors with my left hand, I don't know why.  And I never was really good at--for some reason I just, I held the scissors awkwardly, I still don't cut well with it.  I've now kind of trained myself to use my right hand for my scissors but anyway I wasn't a good--I wasn't good at that but Janice was like--this Janice had a knack for sewing and so we--Genie [P. Gene Agins] and I would design stuff.  We would go and buy Vogue patterns and come up with ideas on how to change them and Janice would make the stuff and we would pay her.  And Janice made my sister's deb ball gown [debutante ball], she made my sister's wedding dress.  This Janice could sew her butt off.
Speaker 1: Well how did you meet Janice?
Speaker 2: She was in seventh grade, just seventh.
Speaker 1: She was in seventh grade.
Speaker 2: And let me tell you, Janice (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So wait a minute so your school, so that's--
Speaker 2: Integrated school, integrated school.
Speaker 1: --integrated school so there was no bussing.  Was there bussing at that point?
Speaker 2: No, there wasn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just that the neighborhood was--our in particular neighborhood [Brentwood Hills, Kansas City, Kansas] was black but--
Speaker 1: You adjoined.
Speaker 2: Yeah there were white people around and stuff so the school, I would say there was more white kids in the school than there were blacks.  And Janice and I were friends from seventh grade.  Let me tell you, Janice and I are unlikely friends because Janice was fat.  I mean she was very--she finally ended up losing the weight like in high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas] but she grew up as a kind of a fat, lonely kid but she was really, really smart.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were always attracted to the smart kids that you were, okay.
Speaker 2: Always, I was with the smart kids.
Speaker 1: Now were you tracked--do you know if you were tracked back then because they were tracking kids?  Tracking, in school, you know, they would put the smart kids (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, yeah in certain classes.  Oh yeah always.
Speaker 1: It was called tracking.
Speaker 2: Okay always, I was always in the smart class.  I was always a honor roll--there were A's and we called them ones, one, two, three, four and five were the grades and I got straight ones almost all the time and Janice was another friend of mine.  Yeah so we were smart and so--but Janice could sew, I mean this woman has such a knack for sewing and we were the only people she sewed for, 'cause no one else--I mean it wasn't like--she made things for herself but the thing is she just wrote--my mother just died and she wrote--she was one of the last people who actually saw my mother because she and her husband [Gary Branson] went by to see her at the nursing home and she wrote a little tribute to my mother and she was talking about how much she admired us and my mother in particular growing up.  And all those years we used to take fabric over and have her make stuff and everything else.  It was really--it was very touching and I was like really, yeah she just actually just sent this to me about a week or so ago.  So yeah we were making clothes and it's not like--now my mother was very thrifty, so it's not like you know we didn't buy, you know we were more or less the same size but I was a little bit bigger than Genie so.  But we had nice clothes, we didn't get like you know we didn't get a lot of extra stuff but we dressed nice and then we were resourceful.  Because we read the magazines, you know we would try different things and you know try to--even within Kansas City [Kansas] there were still stores that had little you know, boutique stuff and we would try and find those things.  We were really into clothes.
Speaker 1: So I mean this is the time also of the miniskirts and you know, things like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  And the white go go boots and all that.
Speaker 1: Right and then you had pedal pushers, what they called pedal pushers.
Speaker 2: Pedal pushers, pedal pushers yes.
Story_ID: 660446
Speaker 1: So you start this column in ninth grade [at Northwest Junior High School; Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas].  Okay and so are there other people that have columns or are you, you know (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the school newspaper [Nor'wester] I was the only one who had a column, a regular column, yeah.
Speaker 1: So were you a teacher's pet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, teachers liked me because I was a good student and I was an enthusiastic student.  One of the teachers said, "Oh Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins] just loves to learn," I did.  I really liked to learn.  I was a really good student.  Now consequently, which meant I didn't have boyfriends, because, you know, the boys were, you know, they were jocks or, you know, girls just mature faster than boys, right?  And so they, yes so I didn't have boyfriends.  I mean I did have--Clarence Campbell [ph.] who was--I mean he kissed me in the eighth grade.  I'm just trying to think about it.  Did I have boyfriends, not, not--no, but I didn't have boyfriends.
Speaker 1: Were your parents strict too about that, too?
Speaker 2: Ooh girl, yes they were very strict.  Actually, okay we had--they had this--okay you couldn't date until you were sixteen.  When you were fifteen you could (air quotes) accept company which was they had somebody come over to your house was called accepting company (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they that's what they called, accepting--
Speaker 2: They called it--you could have, you could accept company.  And there was this guy named Michael Harris [ph.] who came over to see me and we were downstairs and my mother--like it got quiet down there and she was--and she came down there and she caught us kissing and she sent him home (laughter).  I was so embarrassed; I think I was like fifteen.  I was so embarrassed.  Yeah because it was like one of the first or second times I accepted company and then (makes sound) (laughter).  Yeah but they were very strict.  We had curfew and all that kind--and the other thing is too, is that Genie [P. Gene Agins] and I were really--
Story_ID: 660447
Speaker 1: So in, in high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas], what other, what other things are your interests?
Speaker 2: Okay I was--Spanish club.  I was president of the Spanish--I took Spanish all the way from eighth grade [at Northwest Junior High School; Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas], that was when you could first start taking Spanish, to twelfth grade.  Spanish club, I was--I worked on the yearbook.  I didn't do the newspaper in high school, I did the yearbook and I don't know why but I just decided it would be something different with pictures and things and I so I was with the yearbook staff.  And that was really rigorous.  And I did, I was what they called a banner girl which was kind of like a type of a cheerleader and we wore the little uniforms and--
Speaker 1: You had to try out for that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had to try out, yeah a try out for that.  Then I did something called Saturday seminars which was at the University of Missouri, UMKC, University of Missouri-Kansas City [Kansas City, Missouri] where Saturdays we would go and have seminars, yeah, seminars about different things; about culture and things.  And, also we were in Jack and Jill [Jack and Hill of America, Inc.].
Speaker 1: I was wonder- I was--
Speaker 2: Judy [ph.], that's the Judy connection.
Story_ID: 660448
Speaker 1: I see so tell me about--but see this is what--you're, you have a solidly, in the black community, sort of upper middle class life, or middle class life, solidly--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know because people did not just do--well anyway let's just go on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's true, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We got--we didn't do Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.].  We were country people.  But anyway so you're living in the city so you did Jack and Jill.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jack and Jill.  And Jack and Jill let me tell you, Jack and Jill nowadays you always have to contrast it now from what it was.  Nowadays it is this bougie, competitive, you know, everybody's wealthy all that kind of stuff and people are social climbing and all that, no.  When we were--especially in my chapter, in the Kansas City [Kansas] chapter, Jack and Jill-it's not like everybody--because people would say, "You're so dark skinned to be in Jack and Jill."  Because it wasn't--ours was--I mean we had some light skinned people in there.  I'm not saying that that was not true.  But ours was--the mothers were really committed to the children.  See my parents [Phyllis Jackson Agins and William Agins] their whole life was sacrifice for their children and they were very satisfied with that, and so Jack and Jill was also part of it.  And then we had summer conventions at Jack and Jill and that's where I met Judy [ph.] because we'd go--we were in the Midwest region so Oklahoma was in our region so was Arkansas so was St. Louis [Missouri], Iowa, so we were all in that same region.  We would have these regional conventions which we looked forward to going to because there were parties and boys and all that kind of stuff and I was, of course, I ran for office as I always would do.  And I was the regional reporter.  So I was you know--so there, this journalism--because I had kind of decided when I was in ninth grade [at Northwest Junior High School; Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas] I'm going to be a journalist, I'm going to be a reporter.  The other thing that enlightened me the Dooleys next door their grandmother who was what we called--her name was--they called her Shorty [ph.] but they called her Sharty [ph.].  But Sharty had a roomer, because she had a big house so she would rent out rooms.  The guy who she rented the room to, Larry Whiteside, was a newspaper reporter, black newspaper reporter that covered high school sports at this newspaper called the Kansas City Kansan.  Now he ended up going on to The Boston Globe and became like one of the first black sportswriter in the country.  But Larry Whiteside--so I had also been exposed to journalism because of Larry, 'cause that was an unusual thing for somebody to be being a reporter in like the '60s [1960s] and not covering, you know, I mean what could you cover?  You couldn't cover city hall or any of that stuff because Kansas City was integrated.  I mean it wasn't Jim Crow South, I mean I didn't, I don't have any recollections of segregation but there were also just things that people knew not to do.  You didn't go to certain places; black just didn't go to places even though legally you could probably go.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the places in Kansas City you couldn't go, certain neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: There were like, on the plaza, the Country Club Plaza [Kansas City, Missouri], you would go there but you wouldn't like--you just, I mean you just wouldn't be that adventurous you wouldn't like wander around hotels, lobbies or anything like that.  Certain restaurants you didn't go because you know, you just probably weren't gonna--welcome.
Story_ID: 660449
Speaker 1: So, you know, the other thing I want--you were talking about Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], I want to ask you a question because you had said that your parents belonged to various clubs, you know, and so what were some of those clubs?
Speaker 2: Okay, daddy [William Agins] was in this club called the Buccaneers [Buccaneers Club].  The Buccaneers was just a men's club, now I don't know--the only thing that they did was they did a picnic every Memorial Day weekend and they would do like parties.  You know when black people do those parties at holidays and people put on black tie and dance and all that stuff.  So he was a member of the Buccaneers and then, of course my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] was--my mother started playing bridge in college [University of Kansas, Lawrence, Kansas] and she became--the same group it's called the I Pass Bridge Club.  The first prize was a dollar; the second prize was two dollars.  Two dollars, one dollar and the booby prize was twenty-five cents and they still, I mean you know she and Aunt Judy [ph.] both died this summer.  They were the last surviving members of the original--but I Pass still plays every Wednesday.  So they've got a group of people and--
Speaker 1: Is that like iPad, I?
Speaker 2: I pass.
Speaker 1: Pass.
Speaker 2: Because they first started playing bridge they didn't know how to--'cause they kept passing instead of--they didn't know how to do the bidding really well so they used to, I pass.  I pass, 'cause they didn't--so they called it the I Pass Bridge Club.  So they did that--so then when she retired, she retired from work at fifty-eight.  And the reason why is because her feet were really bad.  'Cause she would have continued to work but she retired and so she started playing.  She took courses and took duplicate bridge.  So she started playing duplicate and then that's why she started learning how to use the computer so she could play online.  My mother played bridge three and four hours a day.  I mean she was like a bridge junkie.  She has all kind of trophies and--
Speaker 1: So they would--she would travel around--
Speaker 2: No the thing is she didn't sleep.  So she had a hard time traveling.  She would she, she played in some tournaments out of town but it was always hard because--like I told you this woman was very complicated.  If you hear--if I were to write a novel, her character would be compelling because she was a person who, she didn't rest well.  She always had problems with sleep.  She was always like, you know, she always got, slept a few hours and she would wake up and so she really couldn't sleep out of town.  She was a person that couldn't do anything out of town.  She couldn't like--when she went out of town she couldn't have a bowel movement.  Now, you know, this is like--you know, I mean seriously this is--you know, because she lived in a little--her little wo- her little footprint was this big.  Even though when you would talk to her this is a very sophisticated woman who read the newspaper, watched television, knew about current events, cared--voted, was interested in what was going on, but did not--I mean there were art galleries and cool things to do in Kansas City [Kansas].  She--I mean if it were--if it was around Jack and Jill or if it was some school activity she would go but she just wouldn't on her own just kind of like venture out and do these kinds of things.
Story_ID: 660450
Speaker 1: --Was the origins of it.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: That hasn't really changed.  I mean the women, you know there may be that whole thing, but you know still it was--you had--you were aspirational.  You have a certain level where you wanted kids to meet who were similarly suited.  Focused on education, I mean so I just want to clarify that a little bit.
Speaker 2: That was clearly the case and then also with--mommy [Phyllis Jackson Agins] was not active with the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], but a lot of her friends were still active.  And so when they had the debutante ball my sister [P. Gene Agins] and I were debutantes with AKA.
Speaker 1: So now you're opening up--you even, you came, you came out, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and the guy had to, had to wear tie and tails and stuff.
Speaker 1: But this is, this is, this is a different story.  I'm just saying so you came out.  That was a big deal if someone were to come out, you know, having coming out balls.  There, there was--how many of your friends were doing that?
Speaker 2: A few--out of my little core group not that many but we kind of moved in a lot of different circles.  We moved in the neighborhood group and then we had our Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] people; Jack and Jill people yes.  Also our debutante ball was also with Kansas City, Missouri, and the Missouri people was the faster, hipper part of the Kansas City, you know the river separates the two cities.  Missouri is the more sophisticated part and so there were a lot of Missouri people.  But my mother's friends who were AKAs they sponsored us and I won the scholarship for the best grades out of the forty girls who were debutantes.  The year that I won I think it was $100--it was three hundred dollars so it was three hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: So when you--was your debutante ball--would you dance with your fathers, that's with The Links [The Links, Incorporated] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah you danced with your fathers, we had escorts, they had stags and we had to, we had to cur- waltz and curtsy and all that stuff.  And during the whole debutante ball season we had to do service work, you know nursing homes and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now did you make money through selling ads in the book or that, maybe that was a different thing (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was still, it was still fairly simple, it was basically the ball and that part.
Speaker 1: And then what did you--so was there a lot of focus on--there was a, was there a lot of focus on material things in your home?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not in my particular home.
Speaker 1: So it was really the focus is education.
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 660451
Speaker 1: What were you thinking you want to do and what is being discussed 'cause Genie [Agins' sister, P. Gene Agins] goes, Genie goes to school before you do.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So where does Genie go to college?
Speaker 2: She went to Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa] and the reason--I don't know why she went to Drake University, it's in Iowa and she only stayed there for two years and ended up transferring to the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] where both my parents [Phyllis Jackson Agins and William Agins] went to school because that's where her high school boyfriend was who she ended up marrying.  They were only for less than a year but she ended up marrying him like when she was twenty-four or so.  And so she went to Drake and she didn't know what she wanted to do.  Also, wait, wait, this is also interesting, about, Genie just wanted to be a fashion designer.  This is something that she had, and my mother said, "Black people don't do that," you know, or Negroes at that time.  "Negroes don't do that," and Genie kept saying ooh she would love to go to New York [New York] and she used to design things for the paper dolls and she would always say she wanted to be a fashion designer.  And--'cause like I told you, we liked clothes, I mean that was our thing.  And so she--what did she end up majoring in--she ended up majoring in journalism.  Now Genie worked--I worked at The Kansas City Star as a summer intern.
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask about--okay I'm glad you mentioned that.  So you're saying intern while you were in high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas]?
Speaker 2: College.
Speaker 1: In college.  But let me ask you the papers so--okay, anyway just keep going, keep going.
Speaker 2: Let me just back--okay also while I was in junior high school [Northwest Junior High School; Northwest Middle School, Kansas City, Kansas], the co- we had--when we went to public schools they were really good public schools and the counselor was trying--the kids that they knew were going to college they were trying to steer them a certain way.  I was not going to go to KU where my parents went and I was not going to be a teacher.  Genie and I both said we weren't going to do that because we didn't really want to be my mother.  As I said my mother who--we loved her and she was really good but I didn't want to live in that--we knew she was limited.  We had dreams and so the school counselor--I had been looking at the fashion magazines and I saw all these women going to these women's colleges, Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I didn't know what it was but they were the top ten college girls, remember those things, grammar.  Anyway I mentioned this to this high school--junior high school counselor.  She gets me invited to Wellesley tea, Smith tea.  At Christmastime alumni would have, to talk to perspective students.  So I started going to those teas with my mother at Christmas and getting to meet those women and they would tell me about the school and everything.  So that's why I ended up going to Wellesley.
Speaker 1: So this isn't--so you had a good guidance counselor?
Speaker 2: I'm telling you, that's what I'm telling--when I always tell people, schools--the difference--we went to public schools and we had good counselors.  Those counselors sent us and they saw I was a smart student and they said, "We are going to like let this girl run with the ball."  And so that helped out plus my parents were enlightened.  So my mother goes--we go to the teas and although my mother was shy and everything she was not backward and she also as they say (air quotes) talked nice, you know what I mean?  And so she was very comfortable around white people.  And so we would go to those teas and stuff and so that's--I didn't even apply--I couldn't even done early decision because I only applied at two colleges, Wellesley and Smith and was not on scholarship.  I was not recruited because people always ask me, "Well oh you went during the time when all those black people were recruited."  Yeah a lot of people were but I was not.
Speaker 1: Because you had the grades?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had the grades plus on top of that and I had--once I found out I wanted to go to those schools they told me you need to take these kind of courses.  You need to do these kinds of activities and stuff because you were not going to private schools so you got to like--this school is about academic excellence.  I was making good grades but it's all relative.  Now you could go to the college to have an interview but I didn't do that because my parents were too cheap.  They should have let me.  You know for me to go all the way to Boston [Massachusetts] and seventeen years old, never be- on a plane by myself, never been away from home like that, that's how that happened.  It's not like they took me--my parents didn't take me to the school.  I went on my own and I wasn't scared either.  But they were--so anyway I knew I wanted to go, hadn't even--I had never seen the college campus, I talked to alums, I had talk to other people and they told me they thought I'd fit in.  I had never been to an all women's college.  I didn't know what any of this was going to be like but it was an adventure.
Speaker 1: So you weren't thinking oh there are no boys, and you know--
Speaker 2: Well I knew there were boys because everybody said that there was Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and all those schools around the area in Boston.  So I knew there would be boys because I liked boys a lot.  And but I was--you know, but anyways I, you know, I went off to Wellesley and then--
Speaker 1: And this is in what year? This is 1970 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Story_ID: 660452
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].  So who--do you remember your first day on the campus?  Because, I mean, it's--
Speaker 2: I remember coming (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ship a trunk or something?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a trunk, I had a big trunk shipped and I stayed at Tower Court is my dorm and I lived there all four years.  And I asked for a single room, I asked for--they said that everybody would have to share but if you wanted--they said on certain circumstances some people could have single rooms and I asked for one.  I heard later that they--black, a lot of black girls, they give us single rooms.  I heard that later that that was when I made the request it wasn't like--because people said, "How did you end up getting a single room in your freshman year?"  I said, "Because I asked for it," because I really didn't want to share a room with anybody.  And so--and then after that we would have a lottery so I would--then by junior year everybody could always have a single room.  We lived on campus, Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] is not a--you know there were no sororities or anything like that.
Speaker 1: It's a pretty campus.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay you know.  Yeah and there were like about four hundred women in my class.  Let me tell you, the woman who is the current wife of the new mayor, she is a year behind me.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Chirlane McCray, yeah she was at Wellesley when I was there, yeah.  So anyway my sister [P. Gene Agins] was a summer intern at The Kansas City Star her junior year and they--she did the journal and she decided she didn't like it.  She decided she didn't want to work for a newspaper.  I used to hear her talk about her stories every time and I'd say, "Oh I want to do that," because I knew I wanted to be a reporter.  So I wrote the city editor and said, "Can I be a summer intern," because you had to wait until your junior year but I wrote him a note when I was a freshman and the sophomore year they let me be in the summer interns, I was a summer intern my sophomore year with The Kansas City Star, where I wrote obituaries most of the summer.  And then the next summer I was at The Boston Globe, that was Watergate summer and I majored in English and political science at Wellesley.  I was not a great student; I was like a B, B-ish student.  Now why is that?   Okay, A it was hard, B, boys.  I was boy crazy in college.  I was going--all the road trips because I hadn't been anyplace.  I mean we were exposed in certain ways but people were going to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] for the weekend and going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] for the weekend and all those cities are close to each other.  You can go and--so anyway I was doing all that stuff.  I made good enough grades, I mean I knew about how far I could--because there was no way I was going to be making bad grades because you know the wrath of my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins].  I--during a break up with a boyfriend, and my ex-husband, I went to a shrink and we talked about a lot of this stuff and one of the things that came out was is that--and, and because everybody says, "Why didn't you ever want to have children," and, "Why were you always," this, that and the other.  Because it was my mother, my mother--children meant sacrifice, meant you couldn't do this, you couldn't--you wouldn't be able to have a career, you would be tied down so I never really wanted children.  To me that represented--because she said, "Well you know if you're a school teacher you are off in the summer and that way you can--it's good for your children."  I'm like no; I wanted to live my life.  I was very selfish that way.  And so when I got married that was one of the things, I did not want to have children.  So that's why when pe- because I was married for twelve years and people would say, "You didn't have kids," and they would say, "You couldn't have children?"  I would say, "No I was using birth control," but I was not, I was not interested in having children.
Speaker 1: So it meant limiting and you didn't want to limit yourself.
Story_ID: 660453
Speaker 1: Academically, was it harder than the school, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] was hard. And We- especially freshman year.  I remember telling my mother [Phyllis Jackson Agins] about how--I said, "These white girls are smart," because a lot of these kids had gone to private school and they were also like--I mean I was a reader but I read magazines and a few books and stuff but these people--we had to read like ten, twelve books for some courses.  I mean it was hard.
Speaker 1: And then the other thing is that it somewhat WASPy [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant], you know I mean in--you're not from a WASPy background, you know.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: How did you find that transition?
Speaker 2: I was okay because I'm always--I'm very open.  I have always been very open, gregarious and I was very popular in the dorm, people liked me.  You know, I was fun, fun loving and so people liked me.
Speaker 1: Now what was the percentage of black girls at that point?
Speaker 2: That was--okay that big group came in 19--that was the group of the class of '69 [1969] from high school.  So they graduated in 1973 and they had like fifty black women in that class.
Speaker 1: Oh really, so it's--
Speaker 2: That class was big.  My class--we were about--we were at like thirty some odd out of like about 450.
Speaker 1: So a little less than 10 percent.
Speaker 2: Yeah a little less than 10 percent but years later--now there're not hardly any black students there now.  I mean there are some black students but not the percentages that we had back then.
Speaker 1: Are you serious?
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm serious, yeah.  Because you know who's there?  Asians, Indians.
Speaker 1: Oh, I know, it's (unclear), okay, okay.  So, so this--but ev- the thing about college is that it's all you know--you're free from your parents.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was it, that liberation from the parents meant that--and we used to go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] all the time for all these parties, we used to hitchhike and everything else.  I was a virgin until I was nineteen.  I lost my virginity with a guy at Harvard in his dorm (laughter) when I nineteen.  Let's see, who else?  I did have a couple of boyfriends in college.  A guy actually from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], I used to go down to Howard to see Judy [ph.].
Story_ID: 660454
Speaker 1: Judy [ph.] and I, I don't know how we reconnected but I ended up dating this guy--
Speaker 2: You graduated--wait, she's, she behind you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's behind me, one or two years behind me.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think she is two years behind me.  And so I stayed in her dorm at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] when I was dating this guy Wallace [ph.] who was somebody else I knew from Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.], from Oklahoma Jack and Jill.  And I'm trying to remember how we like reconnected.
Speaker 2: Maybe because of the Jack and Jill and you're in college and you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah but going down to Howard was really fun.  I had a TWA Getaway Card and to fly down to Chicago [Illinois]--to, to Boston [Massachusetts] was forty dollars and I had a TWA Getaway Card and so--also I didn't work on campus.  We got--I got ten dollars a week allowance.
Speaker 2: They also had People's Express [People Express Airlines] back then too, I think.
Speaker 1: No, People's Express was way after that.
Speaker 2: Okay, it was?  Okay I don't know.  I thought it--
Speaker 1: Well this was before deregulation.
Speaker 2: Yeah because no because I mean I was, I was a year behind you, I'm coming into Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts], a year behind (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh you went to Brandeis?  Did you know Marguerite King [ph.]?
Speaker 2: I sure did.
Speaker 1: You know she went to graduate school with me [at the University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Oh I didn't know that.  So I'm a year behind you so I'm just saying because you could get easily--I don't know how, but you could fly cheaply back then.
Speaker 1: Okay, well TWA Getaway Card, I went, yeah.
Speaker 2: But we were so isolated no one ever came out on our campus.
Speaker 1: Now Brandeis I never went there to visit.
Speaker 2: No, no one ever (laughter).
Speaker 1: But we went to Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts], went to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], we went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: So who are some of the other people you know from that period?
Speaker 1: Okay [HistoryMaker] Laura Murphy because we were friends.  Like I said Laura does the journalism thing that is what brought us together.  And, just different friends.  My educa- you know, it was very black--everything was very segregated.  'Cause see, when I was in high school, my high school [Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas] was integrated and we did stuff with white people.  I even had a couple of dates with white guys in high school.  Dates meaning so and so was your date at the homecoming party or something like that.  I mean it was, it was--our school was really integrated.  When I went to college it became very segregated again.  Because you know it was the black power thing and all the black women used to sit and eat lunch together and I didn't do that because my attitude was that I didn't--my parents [Phyllis Jackson Agins and William Agins] did not send me to this school to be sitting around here looking at a bunch of black folks all the time.  So I was like as I would usually do and I like Latin Americans, so I kind of got friendly with a lot of Latina women in school.  I used to eat with them, I ate with white folks; I didn't always eat with the black folks.  People considered me a little bit strange at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] because I was not--I didn't sing in the black choir, I wasn't--I hate singing; I wasn't interested in it.  I was kind of more--but the social life ended up being, with the boys, that was purely segregated.  I don't remember any white guys from that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah because I mean people were--this is, the thing is that these are black kids going to these schools in numbers for the first time and a lot of them not exposed necessarily to the white communities.  So they segregated, and then the kids are not--the white kids are not, you know--
Speaker 1: People just kept to themselves.  It wasn't like they were fighting or anything; people just kept to themselves.  And so people were in to their little groups and so--there were enough cool, interesting black guys from all different you know--there was plenty--the parties you know just, when--yeah.
Speaker 2: Plus guys liked coming out to Wellesley too.
Speaker 1: Oh yes they did (laughter).  Oh yeah we used to--we would go to parties and there would be all these extra guys.  I would plan my little outfits.  We really, really--it was such a fun time.
Speaker 2: It was a fun time because I can't remember--oh, who was I talking, I don't know if--oh, Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] because he's, he's, he's--
Speaker 1: He's a little younger than us.
Speaker 2: Well a little younger but he said there were no women like the Wellesley women, that's what he said.
Speaker 1: You know he used to date Desiree [HistoryMaker Desiree Rogers].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, uh-huh.  Well I think they met at Harvard at a business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: No, no, no, they met when she was Wellesley.
Speaker 1: Oh, they met when she was at Wellesley?  So she knew him, okay.  Wow.
Story_ID: 660455
Speaker 1: So you are having a good time, you're, you're growing, you're having a good time; you're meeting a lot of people.  So what ha- so your summers you said--the second summer was at The Boston Globe what about the third summer?
Speaker 2: The third summer, okay the summer I graduated, you know what I did?  I had my trunk sent directly to the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] and a week after I graduated I started graduate school.  I had my trunk sent from Boston [Massachusetts] to Columbia, Missouri.  I started graduate school in the summer because I decided I was ready to like--I wanted to start my journalism career.  I knew I was going to--I went to J scho- the reason why I didn't go to Columbia [Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, New York, New York], because that's where I wanted to go but my parents [Phyllis Jackson Agins and William Agins] said it was too expensive.  My sister [P. Gene Agins] was going to graduate school at that time because she had worked and then stopped and gone back to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and they said it was too expensive for us to, and I--University of Missouri was really cheap and it was the oldest journalism school, it is really a good school and I'm actually glad I went because it was fabulous.  Because, so I started there in summer school and that's when I really started dating and I only dated white guys.  Now--not by choice it was just how it just happened.  I ended dating white guys the whole time I was in graduate school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: So you were saying you were dating white guys the whole time.
Speaker 1: In graduate school, but not--the only thing is I don't want to say it like that because it sounds like I made a conscientious decision because it wasn't.  It was just that it just happened that I started going out with these guys in graduate school.
Speaker 2: Did you find any difference?
Speaker 1: Yes and you know the, for the better, for the better.  I in fact, the white guys--the thing is, black men don't really get me.  I'm like different you know, I'm like--I'm not--I didn't--I kind of didn't do what everybody else did.  I'm always doing something.  Everybody says, "You are really like really different."  A lot of black guys didn't get me and the ones even--they were still--there was still a lot of color consciousness.  You know, I mean you know the fair skin girls really did--they were like what I used to call them the light treats.  They were the ones who--a lot of the black guys who probably should have checked some out--some of the exceptional black guys should have probably checked me out but they didn't.  They didn't gravitate to me, I wasn't pretty enough for them and although I was very trim and, you know, I had--and I mean there were guys who went out with brown skinned sisters, but as I'm saying a lot of them just didn't get me, didn't appreciate me.  And the guys in graduate school--the one thing I do and I've dated all kinds of guys and the one thing I will say is this the one thing I like about white men is that--their sense of being free.  And it's, their--I'm not giving them credit for it, it's just this is just--this is a legacy of just being able to do whatever you want to do and not have to think about some limitation.  And I just, they were just--a lot of them were really bohemian.  The sex was better, yes it was, yes it was.  You know why? Because once again uninhibited and there was just this kind of sense of abandon.  I mean one guy I went out with Gary Peterson [ph.] was a--he had been in the Peace Corps in India.  Another guy had gone out--spent all this time in Afghanistan, he actually like did--he like ran drugs with some people.  This guy his name was Kevin Greco [ph.].  He was like a really kind of a wild guy but he was really smart and cool.  Another guy I went out with was from Alaska--why did she stop playing?  And so, so anyway so yeah that was--it was--yeah but I had a really--and I did really well in graduate school.  I made like straight A's much better than I did at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and I also decided I did not want to do the usual summer internship that the--because the graduate program at Missouri is two years and I decided I was going to write a master's thesis because I didn't want to do the reporting in Washington [D.C.].  That's what a lot of people were doing.  I had already worked for a newspaper and I'm like I want to do something different.
Story_ID: 660456
Speaker 1: So, the dean at the school said, "You know, how about going to South America?"  And he knew that I liked--he said about going to Brazil and I said, "I don't know Portuguese and I couldn't possibly learn a language that quickly," but I said, "My Spanish is pretty good."  So anyway so I got some money from the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] it was two thousand dollars and I went to Lima, Peru and I lived there for four months.  That's a government controlled press and that is where I wrote my thesis there.  And I lived in a boarding house, a British boarding house called Pension Beech, B-E-E-C-H [Lima, Peru].  Mrs. Beech was some British woman who had moved there like in the '60s [1960s] and she had this house and she rented out rooms.  And we had a curfew there at nine o'clock.  They--they had some weird something that was going on because they had a military government at that time.  And so we had to be in at nine o'clock every night.  I remember having to be asked--I had to spend the night with some (unclear) priest because I was interviewing somebody for my thesis and we were out after curfew and they just told me I had to spend the night because you know you didn't--you couldn't take a chance of being out on the street after curfew.  They'd, you know, they'd shoot people, I mean it was serious.  But anyway so that was really cool and that was part of my Missouri [University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri] experience, it was fabulous.
Speaker 2: That's amazing that experience to be able to go there.  So did you travel around Peru?
Speaker 1: I went to Machu Picchu [Peru] and just Machu Picchu that was it.  Remember I--two thousand dollars wasn't--even back then it wasn't a lot of money.  I mean I had to--that was my airfare, my spending money and everything.  There was a Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] alum in Lima who I traded money with her.  She gave me black market rates.  My money stretched really far.  My money might have stretched maybe 60 percent more because she would give me the black market rate because they were trying to--people are always trying to buy dollars.
Speaker 2: Right, now they did have a lot of killings and things there because I actually went there but I travelled around just for a month but to Ollantaytambo [Peru] and Cusco [Peru] and you know, places like that. And went--
Speaker 1: You went in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went--
Speaker 2: No, no, no I went in 1980, I'm sorry, 1980 because I went camping and hiking, you know. It was a crazy trip (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm not a camper or hiker.
Speaker 2: It was a crazy trip.  But so you did this so what did you learn though about the, the government controlled press?
Speaker 1: Well what happened is that just in a nutshell the military--they had their first Inca [sic.] president, Velasco [Juan Velasco Alvarado] who was dark skinned, indigenous, and he decided they were going to try and like make up for all the wrongs that white people had done and so he decides that he is going to take away all the news- expropriate all the newspapers from their owners.  And then for seven years, and then give them back to them after the seven years but meanwhile each newspaper was supposed to represent different sectors of society.  Because they said newspapers, all they did was serve rich people.  So the biggest newspaper El Comercio which was like The New York Times they gave it to the campesinos.  Well the campesinos did not even speak Spanish. They spoke Quechua.  I mean it was just--the whole thing was just stupid.  So that--but that newspaper was supposed to have two or three pages everyday dedicated to news the campesinos would be interested in.  Campesinos did not read, campesinos did not--the, Quechua was not a language--it was--a written language; I mean it was a stupid idea.  So of course, what happened is the newspapers lost all their advertising and I went back the seventh year when they were supposed to give the newspapers back to the original owners.  And that's what, I was trying to observe to see what was going to happen at that time.  Well of course it didn't happen.  And anyway, but I got--there were a lot of radical journalists there and it was--my thesis didn't really come to any conclusion but it was just kind of fun just seeing how these newspapers were able to struggle and survive at this time.  Now the newspaper that was dedicated to the people in the educational sector actually did better than the others.  So anyway but that's just a little aside but anyway it was really--and my thesis was like--I mean I got an A on the thesis.  It was great and I came back and wrote in--on a typewriter on my parents' dining room table.  But that experience was so important for me because I really--first time I was abroad, foreign language, although I did speak a lot of English on that trip but I--my Spanish got pretty good on that trip.  And then it was just the idea of being able--you know because all these white kids were going off to Europe and backpacking and stuff and I wasn't going to that but it was--I was glad that I had some kind of experience like that.
Speaker 2: Well it's a unique experience; I mean not everyone is going to Peru either, (unclear).
Speaker 1: In 1976, yeah, I mean nobody was going there.  Yeah so that was, that was kind of cool.
Speaker 2: Yeah because even when I got there they were trying learn tourism.
Story_ID: 660457
Speaker 1: So, is that when you go to the Daily News Record after that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay right after that I went to--yeah I interviewed a lot of different places and then went to--I didn't want to work at a newspaper in a small town because that was--those were the jobs, you know small town newspapers.
Speaker 1: That's how you have to start.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I'm like I don't want to--I want to be in a big city.  So Daily News Record I got this job--the Daily News Record was the menswear and textile newspaper that was accompanied with Fairchild Publications [Fairchild Publications, Inc.; Fairchild Fashion Media], Women's Wear Daily, it no longer exists.  And I worked in the Chicago [Illinois] bureau.  I was the Midwest correspondent.  So it was really work because it was an independent stu- because I basically never saw my bosses.  All the people were in New York [New York] and we would send stuff and you would type things and give it to the teletype operator and she would input it and send it to New York.  So I was in a bureau, but they were everybody who was in a bureau worked for a different publication.  So it was really kind of very independent study because I could come and go as I want and nobody was there to watch to see me come.  It wasn't like--the office manager was there just to deal with logistics but if you came late or early no one knew.
Speaker 1: This is 1977?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay and where were you living and (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I got an apartment in Chicago, one bedroom, North Side, on North Kenmore, 5200 North Kenmore [Avenue].  I wanted--because I lived in dorms and stuff all those years, I wanted an apartment with a one bedroom and the only thing I could--because the salary was thirteen thousand dollars which was really, it was a shit salary back then, it was really bad.  And so I had this apartment and so right after I started working there--I hadn't been like two weeks, my friend Denise McGregor [Denise McGregor Armbrister] who was in business school at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] said, "Come over here and we are having a picnic, come over here and meet some people and let's just hang out," and I'm like, "Denise."  I remember I was stripping the legs of a table and I did not have on rubber gloves and that BX stripper got into my skin and you can imagine how, you know.  Anyway, and I said, "Denise I have a scarf on my head, I'm not," I'm just like--she just said, "Just come as you are, just casual."
Story_ID: 660458
Speaker 1: So I went over there--I got on the subway or whatever and went down there anyway and I met my ex-husband; I met him there at this picnic.  She said, "Here is someone else who knows South America," and Mike's [ph.] father was an entomologist and had lived--in 1950 his father went to Nepal, can you imagine this in 1950 and they lived in Beirut [Lebanon], they lived in Karachi [Pakistan], they lived in Delhi [India] and they lived in Brazil.  He had lived in Brazil from junior--from three years--three or four years he went to the school when they lived in Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil].  And then he got a Watson Fellowship [Thomas J. Watson Fellowship] after--because he went to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] undergrad and he spent a year in Brazil just hanging out.  It was a nice--about seven thousand dollars and he really didn't have to do anything.  So he had just come back from his Watson--he was in his first year of business school and I had not been back from Peru that long so you know we had something--you know here is another black person who knows South America.  Nobody went to South America back then.  So we start talking at the thing and he was telling me because I had this little turban on and he said, "Oh you look like you're Bajan," or something like that.  So anyway we're like talking and so I told Denise [Denise McGregor Armbrister], "You know I really like this guy," and Denise said, "You know he's going out with a friend of mine," she said, "but they are about to break up so just wait until after the summer."  And I told Denise, "I am not waiting," you know if this guy calls and asks me out I'm going.  So anyway he did ask me out, we had sex like that first time I remember, date, and he was working at Morgan Guaranty bank [Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] that summer.  He went to New York [New York] that summer and that's when we--I came up to see him and anyway this thing--anyway we got married the next year.  Can you imagine we got married in Nov- now the reason why we got married--
Speaker 2: Now was he from Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: No he's--remember he had lived all along these places (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, but where was?
Speaker 1: --but his parents were based in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]
Speaker 2: D.C., okay.
Speaker 1: Because his father at that point was at National Institutes of Health.  So Mike and I--the only reason why we got married so soon was because see he was going to join Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] and Citibank was sending him to Brazil and I wanted to get the Berlitz classes because they sent us to Berlitz [Berlitz Corporation], private classes.  You know how much that costs?  I was doing like twelve hours a week, private lessons.  Berlitz--I mean that costs a fortune.  So and we could take as much as we wanted.  So I was, so anyway so I--
Speaker 2: So where had Mike gone to school?
Speaker 1: University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  B school.  He graduated from business school.  So right after he graduated he got this job and the salary was twenty-five thousand dollars a year which was about what banks paid but with all our hardship and everything else when we did our taxes the first year because you still have to file your taxes even though you don't pay taxes--U.S. taxes, his salary was and all that stuff was ninety thousand dollars was his compensation.  You know how much money that was, that was a whole lot of money.  So we had--plus we were living in a third world country where money has gone far so we have a five bedroom apartment, I have servants every day.  It's like we flew down first class, we got home leave every year first class.  That's when I started going to Portugal--we went every year to Portugal like five years in a row.  We just--we took a month off every year and we would go to Europe and Italy and Spain and France and all that.  I mean it was fabulous.  And we didn't--we weren't planning to have kids.  Not that he was making that much money but we were--there was also a black market there so we would--honey we had so many hustles going.  We would go, we would borrow--we would ask my parents [Phyllis Jackson Agins and William Agins] to borrow like two thousand dollars and we'll give it back to you on Monday.  We'd get it Monday and we will give it back to you on Friday.  And then we would--arbitrage.  We would just trade the money on the black market and give them the money back and we'd still--we'd make money on the spread.  So that was like a big--so we were like--unlike most Americans who were abroad who would save their money so when they came back to the states they'd have a nest egg.  Mike and I were living on credit cards, so we like over did it.  And so when we got divorced I was--I had a lot of debt.  When I kept the apartment I had a whole--I mean it took me like three years to get out of all that debt.
Story_ID: 660459
Speaker 1: I actually kind of felt guilty, I said.
Speaker 2: So what is your--so who, who were your friends down there?  Are they other Americans because even that pos- at that point in time (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There were no Americans down there. I mean there were some Americans but Americans were in Rio [Rio de Janeiro, Brazil] and Sao Paolo [Brazil], we were in Salvador [Brazil].
Speaker 2: So how did he get that position and what were the--he was working for what bank?
Speaker 1: Citibank [Citibank, N.A.], but he was a trainee.  I remember he had just graduated [from the University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois].  He didn't do well either, he didn't do well on the job because Mike [ph.] was a kid, Mike was adopted and I think he was adopted at four or so but the thing about him was that he was a person who was his--attitude was other black people had problems but not him.  Because his parents had not--he had not grown up in the states so he didn't have to deal with all that stuff.  They lived like diplomats and so he lived a very nice life and his kind of attitude was is that how--that's how it was always going to be.  So it never did occur to him that we would have bumps in our marriage, it would never occur to him anything.  It's just--oh here's, now we got planes we're dealing with.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It's our first one.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. I was gonna say yeah, 'cause usually, 'cause yeah this is in a flight pattern.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  But anyway he was--so he didn't do that well at the bank.  You know I actually--I don't know about all this but I think that there was racism in the bank.  He was the only black person who worked in Citibank there.  People resented--here we were twenty-five years [old] living like we were sultans, you know.  Because even in the buildings we lived in our Brazilian neighbors were much older than we were too because people couldn't afford to live like that at, you know, at our age unless you inherited something.  Here we were some black folks here and like we were living large, it was fabulous.
Story_ID: 660460
Speaker 1: So it--what was significant also, because you, you pick up languages pretty--did, did you learn--let's see--
Speaker 2: Portuguese.
Speaker 1: Portuguese.
Speaker 2: Yeah (speaking Portuguese). I worked for a Brazilian supermarket magazine--
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: --where I, I wrote one story a month in--I would write it in English except I'd leave the quotes in Portuguese.  I taped every interview and I got paid $100 for each little story that I wrote and this magazine was in Sao Paolo [Brazil] and through a connection through Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] they helped me get this job.  And so that was one of the things that I'd do.  And I was a stringer--at Berlitz I met Warren Hoge at The New York Times and he was a New York Times correspondent who was on his way down there and he said--I said, "Oh can I work for you," and he said yeah.  So I was one of his stringers.  So I got paid fifty dollars a day and a $100 a day if it was a long day.  If you go on line you'll see that I have one New York Times clip from like 1981 about a story that I did about a Mississippi steamboat that conducted tours for vacationers on the second largest river in Brazil.  Not the Amazon [Amazon River] but the Rio Sao Francisco and so yeah I did learn Portuguese and, and I was bound and determined to learn because, well this is me, right?  I'm a person who learns stuff and I'm the person who masters stuff too, fairly well.  And I thought it would be very glamorous to be able to speak Portuguese and also I figured because I thought we were going to be gone for two years.  I didn't know we were going to be five.  But the longer I was there then it was--then you want to fit in.  I mean you don't want to just be--and by knowing a language I just went there to Portugal for Christmas this year and I'm with Brazilians and Portuguese and somebody from Angola and somebody from--and we're sitting here at dinner talking about the crisis, economic crisis in Europe, we're talking about the revolution in Portugal in 1974 and other current events and other stuff and I'm like keeping up with the conversation and talking and contributing and everything else and everybody was just, people keep saying, "I can't believe you speak it so," you know I've been back for thirty years.  People say you still speak this well because I get Brazilian TV.
Speaker 1: You do?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I get two channels, Rede Globo and TV Record [RecordTV] and then I have a few Brazilian friends and my housekeeper who comes every other week she's no longer Brazilian but I had a Brazilian woman for twenty something years.
Speaker 1: So that's pretty--so you enjoyed the culture too?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, that's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: And you lived you said in Bahia [Brazil] and--
Speaker 2: In a city called Belo Horizonte [Brazil].
Speaker 1: Everyone talks about Bahia, what a spiritual place it is.  Did you find that also?
Speaker 2: Oh it was really cool because you know that's where all the slaves came in.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so that was the first capital, Brazil and they had--I went to Candomble which is the--I went like once or twice.  To me it was a little creepy you know like in a black church and people are screaming, the same type of thing with the Candomble.  But it was just--it was very rustic but also when we were there too, it was very--let me tell you that part of Northeast Brazil in the '70s [1970s] is like third world.  I mean it is really third world, it is third world and you see rats in the streets and you see people--there's garbage, it's dirty and all that.  So--but I still I mean, Mike [ph.] and I both spoke really well so we were able to like--you know we had Brazilian friends.  But also we lived in an upper middle class Brazilian existence.  People--you didn't eat out a lot. Well, you ate out at the beach and things but people entertained at their homes.  So there was a lot of home entertaining.
Speaker 1: So you've met friends that you still have?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Brazilian friends, I've got Brazilian friends and then there is one white couple from Citibank who were in Sao Paolo and Peter [ph.] was in the Peace Corps and his wife they were very bohemian and they are really good friends of mine and they live here in New York [New York] and they just moved upstate to--New York.  I'm godmother to their kids and all--we are really close.
Speaker 1: So when his tour--was he told then it was time to come back?
Speaker 2: Well he wasn't doing that well at the bank and they--it was--we figured it was like we need to leave before you get fired or whatever.  And let me tell you, I don't know the problems that he had at work but he did have some problems.  We came back and moved here, bought this apartment, moved here to New York and then the marriage started to go sour then.  And, but we were also--he insisted that I learn how to play tennis because he was a big tennis player so that's why I became a tennis player.  So we lived here and we cooked and entertained and we actually had a very nice life here but we were just growing apart.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then 1990 we split up.
Speaker 1: Okay 19-
Speaker 2: I start at the newspaper [The Wall Street Journal] in July of 1984 so we came back in January of '84 [1984] and I started--
Story_ID: 660461
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you get the job at the newspaper (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 1: --because it's--I mean that's, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah people are like how'd you get to Wall Street Journal?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because what happened was--
Speaker 1: And then, I mean--can I ask one other question, so you told me you were a stringer and you were writing, you know, this feature, but you weren't doing a lot of that, were you?
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't doing nothing; I was partying, learning how to make apple pie, I can make a really good pie crust.
Speaker 1: So that what--I mean I just was like--and I even said that to you last time and I thought well maybe that's not right.
Speaker 2: No you're right. I should never have gotten the job and let me tell you I almost--I didn't do well at the paper in the beginning.  What happened was this, I came back from Peru--I mean I came back from Brazil.  I was looking for a job and people said, "Well you haven't been working, you've been kind of off and on working but you really haven't been working."  On top of that I was too young in my career and so I--
Speaker 1: So your early thirties.
Speaker 2: No I'm just twenty-nine.  I'm getting ready to turn thirty.  And so I--The Journal was trying to get diversity going and they had--and I had a friend, Mike Days, Michael Days [Michael I. Days] you know who is the head of the newspaper [Philadelphia Daily News]?  He and I were in graduate school together, he went to Holy Cross [College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts].  I didn't know him at Holy Cross; we had a lot of friends together.  But anyway my (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were in Missouri together or you were (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We were in Missouri together--University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri] together.  Mike Days was working for the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] bureau for The Wall Street Journal and when I--he's one of the people I called and he said, "Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins] I bet they're going to hire you. You know you like speaking other languages, you're exotic and stuff. They will hire you."  And I said, "I don't know anything about business," and he said, "Well maybe they will."  So anyway I interviewed all these places and they liked me but they weren't quite sure and they sat on the fence for a while and I kept saying, "I don't think," they finally went on and hired me.  But they told--you know it was like thirty thousand dollars was the salary which was not that great and the guy who hired me--it was really embarrassing because he said like, "You know I don't know why we are going through all this because we have to hire her."  So that was that kind of like asterisk affirmative action, we got to hire this woman.  You know I'm like--I said, "Look I don't understand business but I can learn."  I mean you know why should people--people give chances.  So I was the only black woman in the bureau in New York [New York], I was the only black reporter in the New York bureau in The Wall Street Journal in 1984.  And I started--they had me kind of on general assignment and I wrote a small business--I didn't understand business.  I had never taken economics courses and you know this is a sophisticated place.  So they were like--but I just--I remember I would come home crying.  I didn't know what I was doing, I was doing, I was like, I was very--but it, those first two or three years was really, really hard but I, I finally caught on because once again I, like, applied myself.
Story_ID: 660462
Speaker 1: What--who are--what are the backgrounds of the people there?  Are they journalism, are there business or economics (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Journalism.  No, no we had some people who were actually like you know Ph.D.'s in economics and people like economists, but most of the people were just people who were reporters.  Because The Wall Street Journal is basically you're just covering everything--the news through the prism of business.  So now at that time it was more public companies and we had the Washington [D.C.] bureau to cover policy but for the most part you are in New York [New York] so you cover--we'd write about companies, write about public companies and marketing and unions and all that stuff that goes with that, manufacturing.  And, you know, all of it is really quite interesting and the paper--but let me tell you there were a lot of people who were green like this and they--not just black people, everybody.  So they also wanted women because they did, they did, they were trying to get more women to come to the paper.  But I really liked the paper and I liked the fact it was the biggest newspaper in the country.  It was really prestigious and it was you know you called and said you were from The Wall Street Journal people are like, "Oh," but then they'd say like, "You said you were from The Journal and you are asking these stupid questions?"  I remember like I would go and interview somebody and I would write down what they'd say and then I'd come back and I couldn't write the story and I'm like now what the hell did they say because I didn't understand it.  I remember Jim Hyatt [James Hyatt], this editor said, "Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins] call them back. You've got to call them back. Don't get them off the phone until you understand what's going on."  But it was very intimidating.
Speaker 1: So were you doing small business at the beginning or you were doing general--
Speaker 2: But they tell you, it was highly supervised.
Speaker 1: Right so when then they--when you weren't doing well what were--was this in your review I mean they're telling you--
Speaker 2: No it wasn't that, it was just that I couldn't--you know The Journal was all about doing stories--okay.  If a company made some announcement that day, you would cover that; that would be a news story, you knew what to do.  That was pretty kind of like--there was no enterprise, there was no creativity.  The creative stories on the front page was what we called leaders.  Those were stories that everybody wanted to do but you have to come up with those ideas.  You had write to story proposals, you had to figure out what the story was and then kind of figure out the angle.  And that--it's almost like a magazine thing, that's hard to do.  I wasn't getting on page one, I couldn't come up with ideas, I couldn't--it was just like I you know.  So they kept me like just doing little menial stuff. So I didn't get bylines, I mean it was hard and it's frustrating because you're with all these fast people and you want to kind of be up with the crowd, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I--but then of course, then you are bound and determined, I'm going to learn, I'm going to figure it out.
Story_ID: 660463
Speaker 1: And so who is your mentor there? Did you have one or did it take--I mean because--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't?
Speaker 2: No.  I had people who--I had good editors who would help out.  There was a black guy named Johnny Roberts [John Roberts (ph.)] and we are actually still good friends and Johnny is in the Boston [Massachusetts] bureau and I remember when he moved to New York [New York] and we became friendly and Johnny--I would like let him read things to ask him if this is okay.  And then Mike Days [Michael I. Days], you know I would email him--well that wasn't email because at that time whatever the way, telex or however we communicated.  I would send him stuff to like look at or ask him what did he think.  And he kept tell--and then they had some little course that we could take for journalist.  It was like an accounting that was done at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and it was like a week of like some crash accounting course and I raised my hand and said, "Let me take that," because accounting is something you really need to know to be able to do this job.  But you know I got--it was--you know I read the newspaper and I got to work--I'm an early person and I got to work early, I stayed late; I really, really applied myself.  And I really didn't care about my marriage at this point, I was just trying to like--because I wanted to master this.  And probably subconsciously I probably knew that I was going to end up being by myself, yeah.  And my husband meanwhile just took all kind of like weird jobs--anything that would get him to Brazil because he liked going down to Brazil and everything but he was not, he wasn't--
Speaker 1: He wasn't focused, he was off track (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was completely--he got out of position.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And we split up in 1990.
Speaker 1: Nineteen--oh 1990 okay so still you were together for a good long time.
Speaker 2: Twelve years.
Speaker 1: Now the thing that--do you know, or do you, Joseph Boyce [HistoryMaker Joseph N. Boyce]?
Speaker 2: Yeah Joe Boyce.
Speaker 1: Now was he--did you--when did he come to The Journal [The Wall Street Journal]?
Speaker 2: Joe came to The Journal--I'm trying to remember.  He came to The Journal by that time I was really well into--oh yeah but he came to The Journal because he was with Time magazine.  He used to be a policeman you know his whole story.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so he yeah, so I--
Speaker 1: He was senior editor in 1987 I have.
Speaker 2: Okay he was there that early?  I guess he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was there in '87 [1987].  But so when you came you're saying--were there any other blacks?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah there were black people there.  John Roberts [ph.], Chuck Stevens, Mike Crawford [ph.], yeah there were guys.
Speaker 1: But no girls--
Speaker 2: There was one woman in--a black woman, Linda Williams in Atlanta [Georgia] who I'm still friends with and there was me and Linda, there weren't that many.
Speaker 1: Now did they require you to be able to read SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] files?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah we had to be able to read balance sheets and SEC things and--and when companies went bankrupt, having to read a bankruptcy filing.  Oh yeah you had to learn how to do all that stuff.  But you know we had good editors and you know you learn stuff.
Speaker 1: So when do you--and you become also a member of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], right?
Speaker 2: Yes I joined NABJ immediately.
Speaker 1: Because, 'cause that was important, I mean that was a gathering for--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah plus it was fun because that was another like, party over here.  Actually I went to NABJ before--when I was at Daily News Record in Chicago [Illinois], NABJ was like maybe in its second year or something and they had a convention in Chicago and I actually went to that.  So when I came back I immediately joined NABJ and started going to the conventions and seeing people.  But that, that was more of a social thing.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right, right.
Speaker 2: But still it was good because you're around other journalists, you're talking about it and.
Story_ID: 660464
Speaker 1: That's right and I mean so you--it takes you how long then to sort of get your--because you start--
Speaker 2: I start in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you start '84 [1984] but by '88 [1988] you have, you're--
Speaker 2: Okay I'd say about '86 [1986], '87 [1987]; I think '87 [1987] is when I started.
Speaker 1: Well you said three years, so the next year you become a fashion reporter?
Speaker 2: Okay, so I start (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How does that happen?
Speaker 2: Okay well what happened was is this okay I covered airlines [for The Wall Street Journal].  I was a backup reporter for airlines and I did really well for those.  The airlines I did it from like '86 [1986] because I did the courthouse for like a few months too.  I did '86 [1986] to like '88 [1988] sometime '88 [1988].  So and I was a backup reporter so there was somebody else who did all the big feature stories but I got to do some other things.  I got some scoops and I got my confidence and I kind of like, I mean, I can do this.  And so--and then--
Speaker 1: So what scoops did you get?
Speaker 2: Just different scoops for example finding out when Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] was going through a bankruptcy and I remember I got some scoops on just kind of behind the scenes of what was going on with the Teamsters [International Brotherhood of Teamsters] and that kind of stuff.  I mean they were not like scoops but you know they are still scoops, they're news scoops.  So then oh my company started going bankrupt, I mean went out of business, People Express [People Express Airlines], Eastern Air Lines, TWA [Trans World Airlines], all these people started going out of business.  So it was time for me to find--at that point they made the reporters switch beats every three years and so it was time for me to make a little switch and stuff.  So they--we were covering retailing and I said I wanted to cover retailing and we didn't even have a fashion beat.  So I started out kind of covering retailing and then the managing editor said, "I think I'd like to start covering fashion as an industry."  And so of course nobody else wanted to do this so I raised my hand I said, you know, "I'll do it, yeah I think this will be fun." So I had to kind of figure out how to cover it.  I had to, you know, I mean there was no roadmap.  You know I'd look at public companies instead but there was no roadmap, I had to figure it out.
Speaker 1: That's fascinating so why do you think--now what--who was his name, the editor at that point?
Speaker 2: Norm Pearlstine [Norman Pearlstine] and he is now a big honcho at Time Inc.
Speaker 1: Now was that at Time--now where was The New York Times in its coverage or you know--but this is business publications, you know because the other business publications or magazines, whether it's, I don't know Forbes and things like that but why do you think he decided to do that?  Mainly because he--
Speaker 2: Well because I think he saw the fashion was becoming part of pop culture.  I mean that was--the thing that was really cool about my career is that fashion was becoming a big part of pop culture during all this time when I started to cover it and I mean you notice in my book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins] I talk about change in dress codes, the consolidation of the department stores, the whole feminist movement, I mean all this happened.  So you have this confluence of events happening and you know you're there to chronicle all this.  So that's what made it exciting because you know it's really dynamic.  You don't know where things are going.
Story_ID: 660465
Speaker 1: So when you were covering retail, what things are you learning that you, you know, and--and how does that sort of interest you and what, what kinds of things are happening at that point?
Speaker 2: When I was covering retail what did I learn?  I learned about--
Speaker 1: Businesses (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry I'm squirming. Is that bad?
Speaker 1: Yeah you should stay still.
Speaker 2: Sit still, sit still.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):   You're pretty stationary you're not a leaner, wiggler or anything so you're fine.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You asked me about what I learned in retail.  Okay well the thing is that also I saw--okay in airlines I covered two or three bankruptcies and once you learn a bankruptcy you know how to like deal with the creditors and unsecured creditors.  And there are two law firms that basically do most of this work and you get to know those attorneys there.  So that helped out because in department stores we did have that big consolidation.  We had a lot of stores went out of business and so I got to learn a lot about that.  And I just kind of learned about how 7th Avenue worked.  How to manufacture clothes, how to market clothes, how to you know how the design--the whole kind of food chain.
Speaker 1: Now, can--I have another question socially can you ask me--are you in the mix, or what is your social part?  I mean I'm just trying--because part of fashion is it's very social.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah this is a schmooze, this is a schmooze beat and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And at that point in time there is still--well we're getting--I think maybe they weren't having martini lunches but it was--there had been martini--
Speaker 2: The equivalent of that.  Oh yeah, no this is a very--this is a very kind of fun, dynamic beat where there is a lot of going out and also at The Journal, we don't get story assignments so I have to come and tell the editors what we're going to do.  So I've got to go to a lot of these events to kind to see where I can find stories.  That's how you find interesting stories.  And so, and I was very good at schmoozing and I liked to go out.
Speaker 1: So were you in the social scene there because is it the years of--oh god, what was the famous club, the, oh god, what--the club that you had to get--oh god what is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's see, you're talking about like nightclubs and stuff.
Speaker 1: Yeah what was that--
Speaker 2: Area [New York, New York] and (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no there was another.
Speaker 2: Studio 54 [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Studio 54.
Speaker 2: Studio 54 came--Studio 54 was already closed by then.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was closed by then?  Oh it was closed by then.
Speaker 2: Yeah Studio 54 is the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s] but early eight- I think early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Early '80s [1980s] too.
Speaker 1: Yeah early '80s [1980s].  But how are you learn- you say you're learning about manufacturers, how are you learning and were you--'cause are you--at the beginning you're doing retailing, you're not doing fashion?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--retailing is fashion.  They make clothes and they sell them at stores.
Speaker 1: I know but I'm just, okay.  The whole culture (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is a whole culture, the whole 7th Avenue culture with manufacturing and things.  The stories take you where they take you.  For example, the way the--the typical day at The Wall Street Journal is that you come in every day, I would read Women's Wear Daily, I'd see what the news is, I'm looking on the wires to see, you know, public companies like Liz Claiborne [Liz Claiborne Inc.], like VF Corporation which makes jeans, Vanity Fair, bras, those are some of the big public companies. Levis [Levi Strauss and Company] isn't public but it kind of acts almost like a public company.  Nike, Inc. you know they make athletic shoes so that's--I was dealing with mainly American--U.S. based companies.  And those companies would report earnings or they'd tell you about different marketing initiatives and that would give you ideas to then, you know, come up with an idea for a story.  And so, then we would have to write proposals and sometimes you'd spend time reporting trying to figure out what the story was and you talked to editors too and you all would shape stories together.  Some of the biggest stories I did--well I got a call once out of nowhere from someone--this woman said, "I'm a Benetton [Benetton Group S.p.A.; Benetton Group S.R.L.] store owner and that Benetton people are like crooks and I'm suing them and everybody else," and this woman Karle Falkenberg, she was from Alabama and I remember talking to her on the phone and it's sounded interesting but I said, this woman might be wacky because you can imagine we got kind of weird calls.  But anyway this ended up being like one of the bigger stories that I did that I found out that Benetton company out of Italy had done all these--they came up with all those stores were owned by individual owners and they didn't call them franchises, they called them licenses.  Because they were trying to find ways to get around the business opportunity and franchise laws in the United States which they did.  These people were absolutely crooks and I did a big page one story, I'd worked on the story for several months and it--we started a Federal Trade Commission investigation after that story and the story was a really big deal.  So that was--and once when you get a big story like that under your belt that you like figure out, you get the report in you do all this stuff and then, you know, you get confident.
Speaker 1: So what, what year was that you did that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty--the Benetton story I think like '89 [1989] maybe.
Story_ID: 660466
Speaker 1: Okay so a year after you, you became a fashion reporter.
Speaker 2: I start, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you got a page one story, that's pretty big.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got that and then I did--but then I also had two stories killed back to back.  I remember I had two page one stories that I--I had proposed the story that I was going to do on the four guys that used to work for Ralph Lauren and where they ended up and it didn't work out.  And then I had--what was, I had another story killed too and that was really hard because you know you've been working on this stuff and suddenly they don't even like downgrade it and run it in other sections of the paper.  It just like goes away, they spike it and it never gets--sees the light of day.  That was really frustrating.  But little by little I just started to--
Speaker 1: Now how many stories--well how many stories a week or does it work that way?
Speaker 2: It doesn't work that way because you, you know, you--as I tell people I get paid for the stories I don't write.  When you cover a beat you try to keep up with what's going on.  At any given time you usually have some page story--one story in the works that you're--something that you're exploring or reporting, you're writing so and so executive change, company reported earnings.  So you're doing all kinds of hodge podge stuff; so some weeks you are really busy, some weeks less so.  I mean busy meaning stuff being in the paper all the time.  So but it's very--and you're, the thing about--I loved about The Journal [The Wall Street Journal], you were competing.  At that point the paper was two sections and it's not they had a page dedicated for this or a page dedicated for that so you had a space to fill.  I'm competing with everybody else in the newspaper.  So whatever they are covering, if it's manufacturing or oil or something in--except politics, we put that on one back page in one section.  But you're competing with everybody so--
Speaker 1: So you mean placement wise you're competing, so like (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, real estate, there is not that much real estate, that's what we would call it.  There is not a lot of real estate; there is not a lot of land.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And everybody--every day you're competing with.  On page one they had three stories a day; two stories on the opposite ends and then that middle column which is always a quirky story.  And you're competing with every other reporter who's, yeah so stories have to be really involved and unusual and interesting and that's the reason why The Journal was always known for all those really sophisticated feature stories.  Because, you know to try to like compete within your own paper you had to come up with stuff that was you know real exciting.
Speaker 1: So after you had the Benetton story [Benetton Group S.p.A.; Benetton Group S.R.L.], what are some of the people you know--does that raise your profiles (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the editors finally start to say okay, you know, "By George I think she's got it," (laughter).  I mean they start to see that I was actually learning and then the big story, 1990 I did a story about Gordon Henderson who actually was a black designer who had won not the award that I won [Eugenia Sheppard Media Award] but the same night that I won that same awards, Council Fashion Designers of America [Council of Fashion Designers of America] he won an award for up and coming new designer.  His name was Gordon Henderson and Gordon had gotten a financial backer in China and you know they were going like really turn him into the next big thing.  And Gordon was a really spoiled guy who was a pain in the neck and nobody--you know he was this--he was totally full of himself and he had won this little award and he thought he was the hot thing.  I did a story about just showing the tension between you know, "Gordon Henderson bickers with his backer," that was the first line of that story and it was just showing the tension between somebody who's interested in artistic achievement and someone else who's interested in bottom line.  And I won an award for that story from the University of Georgia journalism school [Athens, Georgia]; one of those awards that is in the hall.  And that was a real, that was a real confidence booster because then I'm like whoa, not only am I, you know, in there but I can now write stuff really cool and different.  So little by little I just continued to do that.  And I was interested in the industry, I went to fashion shows and I went to indu- I went to industry events in the evening and you know they call sourcing.  I got--as I tell people this is a job you have to introduce yourself to strangers and get them to like you so they will tell you things.
Speaker 1: Right.  So when did you go to your first Fashion Week [New York Fashion Week]? Are you in your first Fashion Week--
Speaker 2: I went--actually I went now this is a little over that period I went in 1987 to a fashion event where I wrote a story for the arts page.  So that was--but my first fashion--but let me tell you Fashion Week was not--Fashion Week didn't get really organized like it is now until like mid-'90s [1990s].  Back then there was Fashion Week and they had different things but it wasn't--it wasn't even called Fashion Week, it was called the collections, and fashion designer shows all over the city [New York, New York].  And I didn't get good seats, I mean often I get standing room even though it was The Journal because but they said, "Oh well it's The Journal, It's like Newsweek and Time, they really--they don't really cover this on a regular basis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because it--
Speaker 2: --they just parachute in every once in a while."
Speaker 1: Because they're giving front row for Women's Wear Daily, I mean other--
Speaker 2: And Vogue and those publications, yeah.
Speaker 1: Vogue.  Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so, so anyway that was--
Story_ID: 660467
Speaker 1: --All these things even I think, I think in your book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins] yeah in your book you were talking about Women Wear Daily [sic. Women's Wear Daily] and how often it even became the place where--you know it was almost like a press--you know just reprinting a press release on people so that's not real--I mean even though it was viewed as--I mean that part of it is not real reporting is what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: Well it is, it is real reporting but it is--it's all, the thing--
Speaker 1: But it's all--it was a, okay what I'm pointing out was--so what I'm saying is that so when you're going in you're having to--I mean you're sort of in the back, you don't--there is not a recognition of what The Wall Street Journal even has to bring.
Speaker 2: That's true, yeah that's true.  They--and how I basically--I knew that one of these things is the pen is mightier than the sword or whatever the equivalent of that is.  I knew that the way that I was going to get on the map is that I needed to do--you need to break news, you need to get scoops.  And because we did have a circulation, so anytime if I wrote stories--if I wrote a story that was a big deal even if it was buried in the paper somebody was going to see it and business stories have more impact than these other little kind of other stories.  So one of the big stories that I wrote and I actually wrote this with a reporter in Paris [France], I mean I actually brought him in on the story.  There was a--Yves Saint Laurent was perceived as dying this was in the early '90s [1990s] and I mean of course, he ended up living another fifteen years but anyway he was sick and that was during the whole AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] scare and people thought it was AIDS just because they were trying to grab on something.  And we ended up doing a story with--Phil Revzin [Philip Revzin] and I did a story.  He was in Paris and I was in New York [New York] and we did--worked this story together and he gave us access, Mr. Saint Laurent did, and we then found out that the different changes they were going to do with their business.  So we got a kind of a scoop on that and that was fun.
Speaker 1: Oh so he--you got access to him but then he turned that around to give you a scoop on his business, is that it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  Then we, then he decided to talk but truth be told Phil Revzin was in Paris, he spoke French he got a lot of that part but we wrote the story together and it was also the story just like looking at all these people this was fashion's old guard where these guys were going to end up.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about Phil Revzin too?  Was he--did he--
Speaker 2: Revzin is R-E-V-Z-I-N (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) V-S--oh okay.
Speaker 2: R-E-V-Z-I-N.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: No it is not Revzin like Revlon [Revlon, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay I got you, okay.  So who else are you meeting?  At what point are you meeting Anna Wintour and those--
Speaker 2: Okay Anna was--Anna got her job [at Vogue] around the same time that I got mine [at The Wall Street Journal] although--I mean I would see her at events and things but you know not--and she wasn't the type that was going to say, "Hi how are you," very standoffish.  But she wasn't the big deal that she is yeah or anything stretching that imagination.  But the first time I went to Europe to do the Europe shows was in the mid-'90s [1990s] that was like --
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --ninety-four [1994] or so.
Story_ID: 660468
Speaker 1: So up to that point--I'm just trying to get some chronology.  So up to that point we're talking about '88 [1988] 'til mid-'90s [1990s] you're, you're covering more American--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay, American fashions.  So what other stories are you covering?
Speaker 2: Okay well big story, the big story of my career was the whole casual dress story, when clothes went casual.  And I went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]--someone in Pittsburgh told me that this thing all started at, you read that, at Alcoa [Alcoa Corporation] and so I went to Alcoa to see how they were dealing with this--they said, "We're going to have a dress code. You can wear whatever you want for the two weeks of this United Way [United Way of America; United Way Worldwide] campaign."  And they had 83 percent participation and they said, "We're not going back to wearing suits, you don't have to."  And that was a big, big deal.  And that affected retailing because retailer--suddenly people had no reason to buy new clothes.  The old stuff looked good and what you were buying was casual anyway so you get it really cheap and so that was huge.
Speaker 1: It was huge.  Now when you went there was it--it was past the time with the experiment--they had started to dress--I mean to do the casual--was it casual Fridays--
Speaker 2: Well they started--they did casual every day because initially they--it was during the United Way campaign and they said if you wear--the earlier you contributed on the campaign you can wear whatever you want for the rest of the United Way campaign.  And so a lot of people--it was an incentive to get people to contribute early.  So it was one of those kinds of things that stuck and it caught on.  But simultaneously IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] all these other places were starting to change.  'Cause they--
Speaker 1: And it changed the--completely--I remember when I was like--I remember seeing my brother-in-law and I'm like, "You're dressed like that?"
Speaker 2: It was, the casual dress code thing is the biggest game changer in fashion.  I mean and that occurred in the you know in the early '90s [1990s] and that's when Gap [Gap, Inc.] became a big deal and you think about all that and the pocket tee shirt and all that kind of casual stuff.  And you couldn't tell who was wealthy and who wasn't wealthy.  So there were so many ramifications.  How were they going to get people--how was the industry going to get people to dress up.  How would you tell the affluent people from the non affluent people?  What were people going to wear?  Were they going to be only dressy at night and then you know--people just didn't realize--they hadn't figured it out.
Speaker 1: So I want to also ask what is happening with women's publications around this time--oops.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, I'm getting--you can see I'm getting a little sleepy here.  I don't know why I, yeah, I was up so late, go on.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) (unclear) well, okay.
Speaker 2: You see me drinking water because I'm trying like--go on.
Story_ID: 660469
Speaker 1: So what is happening with, with women's--'cause your just getting into your (unclear)--okay, so what's happening with women's publications around that time too, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay what's happening with women's publications is okay women--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had Ladies' Home Journal, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay women entered the workforce in droves in like late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s] and that's when companies like Liz Claiborne [Liz Claiborne Inc.] and Jones Apparel [Jones Apparel Group, Inc.; Nine West Holdings, Inc.] became really a big force in fashion, Nine West shoes, because women needed to have clothes.  They were buying pantsuits, they were buying makeup, they were buying more than one handbag, more than one pair of shoes.  So you saw this big swell of women entering the workplace and needing clothes.  Okay and also this big explosion in shopping malls, more shopping malls because there were more department stores because people needed a place to buy clothes.  And so that was huge and then you also had women who became a lot more, like, demanding.  They're saying, "I'm not wearing these shoes, these shoes aren't comfortable."  That switched but back at their beginning it was people--women were wearing pantsuits because that way it would allow them to go out and not have to--they could cross their legs and not have to worry about exposing themselves and just it was a--women became a lot more like men.  I want clothes that work for me, I don't want to like spend a lot of time dealing with lace, ironing.  I want stuff that works.  And so there was a big--yeah, and so the manufacturers and designers who came up with clothes that worked like Elie Tahari, like Nicole Miller, like Elie, Nicole. Oh, Ann Taylor, Ann Taylor is huge and that's all part of that.
Speaker 1: And there was also the whole focus on dressing for success too.
Speaker 2: Yeah well dressing for success because that was also part of--women wanted to be, look like they belonged in the workplace.  Especially and they are moving up in the workplace.  They wanted to look like they belonged.  And so that having a uniform, because that would basically take away your sexuality and you would now be this--with cojones, you would have this really tough woman who would conquer the world and you know take charge and move stuff around and restructure and all that and that was cool.
Speaker 1: So what about--you also spoke of the four mega trends.
Speaker 2: Okay mega trends.  Okay--people--okay, I said the casual dress code that's the first one.  The other one is people kind of letting go of fashion and that had to do with part of this idea of people just not realizing that--anything goes and they could do that.  The other mega trend was what?
Speaker 1: It was values changes with regards to fashion.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah values changes.  People's values changed because once the suit was no longer a symbol of corporate authority then you have Bill Gates the world's richest man wearing chinos and a plaid shirt coming to work.  This is huge and a big game changer.  And so the whole idea of a suit and tie does not mean what it used to mean.  And, you know, and people were trying to figure out how to make it work.  Do I--do they wear dresses, do they wear suits, did they cover their arms, do they not cover their arms; I mean all of that.
Story_ID: 660470
Speaker 1: It was, no, it was top designers stop gambling.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah well the reason why designers stop--okay this whole theme of the end of fashion is, the end of fashion as we do it.  Fashion was about planned obsolescence.  Clothes came in style and went out of style.  You had ties wide, ties narrow, women's short skirts, women's long skirts in the industry this works because it keeps--fashion works when everybody moves in lockstep.  When people do the same thing at the same time that's when they say something is a trend.  This is when fashion works really great.  The problem when you--the dress code thing was like pulling a book out of the bottom of the stack and all the other books come tumbling.  Because what happens once you had the change in dress codes then you couldn't tell who was rich and who was not.  You also--cheap clothes looked almost as good as--a pair of cheap jeans and a pair of expensive jeans you really couldn't tell the difference.  So most people would say, "Well you know if it's not going out of style and it's casual I'll just wear what I already have."  So there was no--people had no incentive to go back and replenish.  This is bad for the industry.  See the industry now has to go and find ways to get people to buy stuff.  Okay meanwhile, you have this whole explosion of--as these companies are getting bigger; you now have fashion companies that are becoming like public companies.  And once you are a public company you can't gamble on fashion because Wall Street is expecting predictable results.  They do not want to hear excuses about well you know we tried something and it didn't work.  Wall Street wants to see consistency.  So and this is an industry that is based on creativity and it's always been very fickle.  So it's really hard for a company that's in the fashion business to be able to predict with pinpoint accuracy at that point.  How--are they going to make money or are they not, are they going to buy this or are they not.  Now they know how to do that because it's a lot more sophisticated, it's more staggered.  They don't put--they don't gamble, they make stuff in small patches.  So if it doesn't sell they can cut their losses early.  So they figured that out but at the very beginning this was a brave new world and was very tricky because the, the standard rules didn't apply and you couldn't just sell people on something just because it was cheap.
Story_ID: 660471
Speaker 1: Now you said your first trip to--I don't know if it was to Europe was, you know for the paper [The Wall Street Journal] was in the early or mid-'90s [1990s]--
Speaker 2: Let me see, I just, I think it was--for some reason I want to say '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay so mid-'90s [1990s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Milan [Italy].
Speaker 1: --and so talk about that trip.  So that was Milan?
Speaker 2: Milan and I did actually--and I really wasn't covering the collections but I was covering--I did the guy Zoran, the Yugoslavian guy who I wrote about in the book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins].  I was there (unclear).
Speaker 1: Give his real name because Zoran is a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Zoran Ladicorbic, L-A-D-I-C-O-R-B-I-C and he is Serbian and he is a drunk.  A really kind of cool, talented guy but he is just a drunk.
Speaker 1: So (laughter)--
Speaker 2: He drunk--I mean this guy gets up in the morning and drinks like (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) But Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins], why did you go to Milan.  I mean what was the story (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Okay the story was this, Zoran was making clothes.  Zoran was absolutely in terms of like the end of fashion because this is even before I'm doing the book but--we do the best story--best news story is a counter intuitive story; a story that you would not expect.  Companies are supposed to grow--certain things are supposed to happen in fashion.  Zoran was totally counter intuitive.  His company made one size fits all.  No zippers, no buttons, no fastenings.  He made expensive clothes and expensive fabric but you couldn't tell what it was.  Everything was like--looked like a--everything was just you just pull it over your head and it was like incredibly plain but it was really expensive.  He did no fashion shows, he did no perfume, he had no jeans line, he didn't do interviews.  So his company was like one of the most profitable and probably the--they sold more high end clothes, they sold more high end clothes than Oscar de la Renta, than Carolina Herrera than all these people and his clothes he did the same styles.  The style that he did in '97 [1997] was the same style that he did in 2012.  You couldn't tell the difference.  So why did this guy make it.  It was--what I found out about this business I said I don't believe this.  And Vanity Fair did a story on him and I also knew a friend who had done a story and plus he was a crazy guy and he drank vodka and he was like crazy.  And I just said this is a really colorful--you are looking for a colorful fashion business.  So it was colorful because he was this crazy drunk but he was also colorful because he had really figured out luxury goods marketing.  He only sold in one store in every city.  In Chicago [Illinois] he sold at Ultimo.  Joan Weinstein wore him all the time.  If you ever saw Joan Weinstein you remember she used to tie--. Yeah that was all Zoran.  She wore Zoran (background noise) and Zoran's stuff was like seven hundred dollars for this, eight hundred dollars for that.  His clothes were really, really expensive.  Is it noise?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, we can (unclear), it'll go away.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah so, he was just--he was and so I went to Milan because he sold most of his clothes in Milan and he would get a fashion show every--he did his version of a fashion show which was putting some clothes on a rack, having a model stand behind a screen and having her change clothes and him having her come out there.  And he would do it--he would always do it at a restaurant.  And so at the restaurant it would be--he would invite clients.  Because he didn't sell to that many stores so he would invite clients.  When we would come I mean he'd have the model--he maybe had two models walk around and try on these clothes.  And then there would be a dinner and I just went to like--because that was just part of it. Because I wanted to show the scene because he was really--the Italian women really got him because they knew how to dress and his clothes were exquisite but they were just really hard to understand.  It was so high concept, they call that dog whistle fashion.  That you have to be--it's pitched so high that only the cognoscenti can actually recognize what it is.  Yeah it was very--it was Gap [Gap, Inc.] for the rich, that's what they called it.  Because rich people also do not--there are a lot of rich people who do not want to walk around in like jewels and stuff.  They want to wear turtlenecks, they want to wear something that's comfortable but they want the nine hundred dollar like turtleneck that's in you know six ply cashmere.  They want the thing that is quiet but is quiet luxury.  It's one of those things is that's it--Zoran--after I got to see him I saw him everywhere.  Now his clothes, now who picked up on that? Eileen Fisher.  Eileen Fisher is basically a cheaper version of Zoran.  And the other one was Sandra Garratt remember, and they had multiples (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She actually worked with us for a while--
Speaker 2: Zoran had started this kind of thirty some odd years ago and he was very successful with it.  And he's the one who cut people's hair at a party and all that, he was a crazy guy.  And so that was the story--that was the first story I think I did based in Europe.  And then I did--he had a really big running news story was when Gucci and Prada and LVMH [LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton SE] all started--we call it the fashion arms race.  They all started buying independent designers and they were all trying to--they were in this big competition with each other and that went for I don't know maybe six, seven years.  And that was a really good story and that's also when at that point a lot of other publications said, we really need to cover this, we need to really cover this as a business because it's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 660472
Speaker 1: Right because no one--people are covering the other part.  Let me ask you when do you think you're starting to get recognition within the fashion community?  So because I just want to understand timing.  It's part of being part of a club too, I mean you can't--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: You're not gonna--I mean you could be writing until your heart's content, if you're not recognized by their club--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah because this is a real gated community, the fashion crowd, the journalists.  And it's--some of it is elitism, snobbism but it's not necessarily--I mean there's a kind of--whole kind of mean girls thing going there too.  And you--but it's not just like who is cute.  I mean it's not that--it's a lot of things.  It's access--
Speaker 1: Well it's who you are associating with; you know who your friends--what parties you get invited to.  Well am I wrong?
Speaker 2: That's true; all that for journalist winds into what publication you work at.  For the journalist it was--okay I mean I would go to events at Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue], Neiman Marcus and everything else but the reason why I'm invited to these things is because I work for a big publication.  So you used that access that you have because you work for a big publication to figure out how you can get to know people.  Because as I tell people I spent my whole life getting to know people to try to get them to like me so they will tell me something.  And so that is part of the whole drill.  I started getting recognition fairly early and you know why?  The other thing is too, because it was in The Journal [The Wall Street Journal], people are like ooh that's in The Journal.  I did a big story, you saw that in the video with Anna Wintour and Anna, Anna would never have sat down and done a story with anybody else.  But she did it because it was going to be in The Journal because right there that's counter intuitive.  You don't expect to see in The Journal and there it is.
Story_ID: 660473
Speaker 1: And plus its business, all the, the--I mean that's, that's where the people with money and people, you know, who could make things happen.  But what I'm asking is, when does this start to happen?  That's what you to need to tell us.
Speaker 2: It started to happen I'd say like late--mid, late '90s [1990s].  When I did--I took book leave in 1990--oops I'm sorry.  I took book leave in 1997 but it had already started to happen before then.  I'd say like '94 [1994].  Okay the Leslie Fay [Leslie Fay Company, Inc.] accounting scandal that was another big story that I broke.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Okay the Leslie Fay accounting scandal is a very interesting story.  Okay Leslie Fay is one of the largest companies on 7th Avenue.  It started--this was like second generation started in 1940s and the guy who runs it [John Pomerantz], his father John Pomerantz [sic. Fred Pomerantz] had started the company.  And Leslie Fay at the end of the year during their audit, one of the controllers [Donald Kenia] turns and says is that, "The books are cooked here."  He just basically turns himself in and says, "We've cooked the books here," and they are like what?  So one guy--their back office was in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania.  Anyway they had to restate their last quarterly earnings.  Okay, so once they made this disclosure and you wonder when somebody makes disclosure like that then you are wondering what's going on.  So that was the whole thing trying to find out the myth of this, of why they made this mistake.  And what had happened was that a lot of companies when they have--when they do their reconciling with their books okay they ship this much manufacturing.  They will ship like a shipment of, I'm just making this up, a hundred pieces and they get paid for like eighty some or so.  Anyway they pad in the invoices from the future--from the next quarter, they pad those in to help them make their numbers for Wall Street.  In other words, let me just break this down again.  Erase that, let's start over.  Companies on Wall Street, you give analysts an approximation of how much you think you're going earn.  You know, we're going to earn ten dollars a share this quarter.  And so they based that on, based on a lot of different things, on what they've sold in the past, how things are selling and everything else.  And they--you give Wall Street guidance that's so--Wall Street is supposed--because Wall Street when you have these big stock fluctuations--price fluctuations that happens because something happened that people did not anticipate.  And that often is a red flag that there is trouble. In the case of this, this company did not--they were not going to make their earnings targets.  And so they were trying to figure out how to do it.  So they had receivables for the next quarter.  So what they did is they took some of those receivables to pad the numbers.  So in other words they weren't really--all they were doing was taking from one box and moving it to another but they needed at that point to be able to make their targets.  And they will say, "That's okay when we get through we'll just put it back."  In other words, "We'll do it just for the reporting period and then we'll put it back."  Well what happened is they'd been doing that.  It's like nibble nibble, gouge.  They started doing it every little quarter because they weren't making their numbers.  So they would borrow from this other quarter and move into the next.  Well then this thing--they found out when they re-did their earnings that's when they found out $81 million of net income the company had reported did not exist.  Because they had just kept padding these numbers and it went back--we traced it back to almost like about four or five year, they had been doing this every quarter.  And they had been doing it in Wilkes-Barre in that back office and they were doing it you know away from the prying eyes in Manhattan [New York] what was going on.  And I--when the company--this controller announced that, "We cooked the books," it was clear that he didn't do it by himself.  It came from someone high and I solved the accounting scandal.  But it ended up being the chief financial officer [Paul F. Polishan] and he was the one who I talked about with the money and the woman's tampon machine that he was counting to make sure--I mean he was a real penny pincher and he was a real micromanager, because he was the one who was entering all these things that were bad in the books.  They had all these controllers in Wilkes-Barre who didn't work on computers, they worked with pencil and paper and that was done on purpose because that way they could erase things.  They didn't leave a paper trail.  So this was something that they had orchestrated.
Story_ID: 660474
Speaker 1: You said the accountant--why does the controller [Donald Kenia], right, the, why does he say that in the first place.  Why does he say (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because he sees, he sees that the gig--the jig is up.  'Cause they're gonna, they're having an acc-, they're having an audit; it's time for their--
Speaker 1: But he's on his own, he's sort of a renegade saying--
Speaker 2: That's what he is saying.  He comes out and says, "I'm a renegade, I cooked the books," and people are saying no this is like--it was clear that he either did this under somebody--the same thing like with this whole thing with Chris Christie.  I mean you know this person who was an actual actor did not necessarily do this.  We went back to look at the company [Leslie Fay Company, Inc.] and we saw that the CEO [John Pomerantz] and the chief operating officer [Alan Golub], their compensation was based on net income.  So they got a yearly bonus, they took really small salaries like two hundred thousand dollars a year.  But then they get these like $16 million bonuses that were based on net income.  So there was an incentive to make sure that they made those numbers with Wall Street so they could get those bonuses.  We had to back in to that; we had to find out A, what was the motive, why would they do this accounting scandal.  But anyway it was a fairly complicated story; it was a very sophisticated story too and I worked on this story like for a month by myself and I had to figure it out.  And it was really--that gave me tremendous, tremendous confidence.
Speaker 1: Well that would give you tremendous confidence.
Speaker 2: Oh back then I learned about tax loss, carry forward and these little accounting terms and we had an accountant--The Journal [The Wall Street Journal] hired an accountant and we went through three years of ten quarterly--they have them called the 10-K.
Speaker 1: 10-K.
Speaker 2: You know what a 10-K does?  The official document that they--for the balance sheet.
Speaker 1: With the, right.
Speaker 2: Also every quarter they file one and it's called a 10-Q.  So we went through I don't know like how many quarters are 10-Qs.  We had an accountant actually go through here so he could say, "Here's a red flag.  These numbers are not reconciling."  Because I couldn't figure it out--I mean you really need an accountant to go through there, an auditor to kind to sit here and say here are some red flags.  So he started to check all these red flags.  So then I could take this--armed with information I could go and interview them and ask them what had happened.  And I had to ask them the questions in the right order, there were attorneys in the room.  So it was very exciting.  It was really exciting.
Speaker 1: And so they--how did you get access--I mean if--how are you--he makes that statement, that story is reported where, when he made the statement that the books were cooked?  That's in the general press?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he makes a--he goes and tells his superiors and so then it's material information.  Remember when a company is public they have to make disclosures like for example, if somebody has a heart attack they have to--you know Steve Jobs, got sick those are material--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --things and you have to disclose them.  So when he turned himself in, the company then had to go on the wires and say, you know, "We have an errant employee who said that he's cooked the books here."
Story_ID: 660475
Speaker 1: So really that story--that, so you--that story preceded the story with--later in the--
Speaker 2: With--on Saint Laurent [Yves Saint Laurent].
Speaker 1: With--right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah well just hold on, no, no.  Saint Laurent came out in 1990 and Leslie Fay [Leslie Fay Company, Inc.] came out in 1992.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But by then I am rocking and rolling.  I am doing smart stories, interesting stories, marketing stories.  I did stories about when they had men's--when they first came out with the men's no iron shirts and no iron pants and stain resistant pants, I got prototypes of the things and tried them out, washed them at home to see if they worked and wrote stories about them.  I had--I did a lot of really interesting, creative, clever stories about marketing and business.  So yes I was--by then I was starting to rock--and then when you do these stories and you get recognized and often I was on television with them.  Because I was on, 'cause we had a thing with CNBC, CNN or whatever so all that helps you out.  And the more--you know it's like news begets news.  You get a good scoop and then people are like let me call this woman from The Journal [The Wall Street Journal] and also too when those stories ran in The Journal it was a big impact.  I mean we could move markets; we could start investigations, so now you're conce- your perceived as powerful.  So that's when people started to genuflect.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Not genuflect, but they started to be--I got invited to events.  I got--and then--I went to stuff.  I learned how to do cocktail parties, you know I'm chatty, I'm gregarious; I, also, I wore nice clothes.  That was something else, a lot of the reporters were like I'm just a (unclear) reporter and I'm just showing up, no.  I felt like I needed to look the part, I'm not trying to look necessarily glamorous but I want to fit in.  Because I'm already black so I'm standing out, right?  So the one thing I need to do is conform so that I look like everybody else.  So I looked like I belonged there and that also makes people feel more comfortable around you.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And especially because you are dealing with a lot of older, white men too.  Remember I'm not dealing with the swishy, gay, fashion you know all that.  I'm dealing with CEOs, CFOs, I mean these are the people who are most of my--I mean those are the people who I know, bankers, attorneys, those people I know more so than a lot of the designers.  And those are the people who--they are very kind of like, conservative and.  They are kind of unaffected by a lot of this other stuff.  So, you know, I mean you can do some charm school 'cause some of them are very charming and a very kind of fashion-y.  But a lot of times they're just, they're just good executives.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Or bad executives (laughter).
Story_ID: 660476
Speaker 1: You said the companies are public companies and so once they start generating all of this, there's more attention, so.
Speaker 2: There is more attention.  You know, anytime, once--I mean the one thing about--I love about writing about business is, is that the stories aren't subjective.  It either made money or it didn't make money.  I mean there is not all this opinion about, well so and so thinks this should go this way.  No, it's very black and white how this works.  The good dress is the one that sells.  I mean it has nothing to do with what it looks like.  I mean--you know what I mean, from a bottom line approach, and it really does make it for a reporter.  It makes it actually if you understand and if you have any kind of sense of business and how it work and you pay attention, you follow the money.  I follow Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.]; I follow the auto industry.  The auto industry I followed because the auto industry is like the fashion industry.  Cars go in and out of style.  Remember when we grew up, cars were like long with fenders and stuff.  Then cars got boxy, then people--somebody decided a truck is a car.  I mean all that is fashion.  'Cause--and especially nowadays.  Cars don't need to be tuned up; cars are run by computers.  So why should somebody buy a new car?  Okay they stick a couple of bells and whistles on it but it still a fashion thing and so the auto industry is something that I always thought--paid attention to very carefully because it did parallel the fashion industry.  I also always paid attention to what was going on at Walmart because Walmart is like basically--Walmart is like the, you know, like the China in this whole thing and anything that happens at Walmart is happening even in high fashion.  If certain things are selling at Walmart you can extrapolate.  So in other words even companies that weren't public you can extrapolate what's going on at private companies based on what's going on at public companies.  So I always tell reporters when they're--I say, if you're really interested in covering this industry you need to be able to, you need to be able to look at it through the prism of business because you'll come up with better stories.
Story_ID: 660477
Speaker 1: So what hap- how does the book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Fashion Business Forever,' Teri Agins] come about?
Speaker 2: Okay so I decided--well I used to always talk about the end of fashion.  Every time something would happen I'd say, "Hey it's the end of fashion, it's over."  Because I kept seeing all the truism that I thought--
Speaker 1: You start saying that with Alcoa [Alcoa Corporation] then, really.
Speaker 2: That was the first time when I saw that: the feminism and stores going out of business and companies going public.  Just one thing after another; it was very clear to me that we were in this kind of game changing situation and I said, "No one is going to write about this," because people don't understand it.  You need somebody who's got a business perspective but you also have to have somebody who actually understands clothes.  And, you know, they have to put it in some kind context.  And I also wanted to like put my footprint.  I said, "You know I'm doing a good job at doing this and I want to be able to state my claim," and the way you do that is by doing a book.  So that's when I--so I--also too, we had a lot of people were going on book leave.  We had--there were seventeen people going on book leave when I was on book leave at The Journal [The Wall Street Journal]; on different things.  Because business news was very sexy in the '90s [1990s] and people were getting big advances and I said, "I want in," and I had talked to agents and things before but anyway I decided I said "Okay, I'm definitely going to do a book."
Speaker 1: So how long did it take you to think about the concept and who, you know?
Speaker 2: It took me--I--
Speaker 1: We're in 1990--
Speaker 2: Okay I took--I started book leave in Dece- January 1, 1997.
Speaker 1: Okay but had you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And before yeah maybe like six months before I started to like gather string and figure that out.
Speaker 1: Okay but had you put together a proposal of any sort, like a (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, this is the other thing that was really lucky.  This publisher, William Morrow division of HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC] came to me and said--well let me tell you, it was an agent who was friends with this publisher said, "Paul Bresnick wants to do a book about the fashion industry," and he said, "Who could do a good provocative book?"  They said, "Whoever the person is from The Wall Street Journal because The Wall Street Journal does these kinds of investigative stories."  So he said, "Well find a woman, look through her stories and find a woman," and they found me.  They called me and said, "Hey we want you to do a fashion book."  So I was thinking about fashion, doing a fashion book because it had been on my head for a long time but I just--but this is an astute question.  They came to me and said--and I said, "Well what kind of book?"  And they said, "I don't know just a provocative book."  Because he had done--he had published a book on models by Michael Gross.  It's called 'Model' ['Model: The Ugly Business of Beautiful Women'] by Michael Gross that did fairly well.  Actually it was on The New York Times bestseller list.  And so he knew that this was a good neighborhood and it was a neighborhood that was untapped. And Paul Bresnick who was my editor there, he had done the--you know Bill Cosby had done this book called 'Fatherhood.'  It sold like millions and millions copies?
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: That was his book and Paul Bresnick was the editor on that book that was his claim to fame.  He always tells me well you know I did 'Fatherhood,' yeah that was like--what have you done in the last like forty years.  But anyway that was his big book.  So he came to me and said--so this agent says, "Well meet with him," and I said, "Well shouldn't we shop this around?"  First thing is I don't have a topic yet but why should I just like get in bed with this guy when there might be some other people.  He said, "Well let's see what he has to say."  So he said, "You just come up with a topic and write a proposal," and I said, "But you know how are you going to price it," and he said, "We'll just figure that out."  So he gave me twenty thousand dollars just to basically not shop it around.  He said, "I'm going to hold twenty thousand dollars--we'll subtract this from whatever your advance is, but we, I--," in other words I want first right and other words I don't want to give--I don't want to plant this seed and then you go off and take it to somebody else.  So I want to basically lock you down for a few months, and I said, "Okay."  And then of course, my agent said that was the agent who I don't even know is going to be my agent and says, "Don't spend the money because you don't know, you might have to give it back.  You just don't know what's going to happen."  So anyway I said, "Okay."  So then we came up--I told them kind of what I was thinking--I said, "These are some things I've been thinking about because I think there might be a book here somewhere."  And so he said, "Well write up the proposal and then we'll go with that."  And then I just said, "Well how much money is it going to be?"  So we--he even came up with a number before I came up with a proposal.  It was a lot of money.
Speaker 1: That's unusual.
Speaker 2: I'm going to tell you how much it was.
Speaker 1: How much?
Speaker 2: It was $250,000.
Speaker 1: That's a lot, wow, for someone who's--I mean even if you're--
Speaker 2: Can you believe that?
Speaker 1: No, no, even if you're a writer, a well-respected writer you're not going to get advances like that typically.
Speaker 2: But remember now this was 1996.
Speaker 1: A lot of money.
Speaker 2: You know that was a lot of money in 1996.
Speaker 1: It was a lot of money (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a lot of money now.
Speaker 1: No, it was a lot.  Right, there was--right.
Story_ID: 660478
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But remember we got all these Journal [The Wall Street Journal] people.  You've got de- Jim Stewart [James Stewart] that you saw in the video, he's 'Den of Thieves.'  That book, that book was a super bestseller.  We had Bryan Burrough and those guys did that book called 'Barbarians at the Gate' ['Barbarians at the Gate: The Fall of RJR Nabisco'] a little stupid idea for a book.  They got rich on that book.  We had all these Journal people doing big time books.
Speaker 2: That's nice.
Speaker 1: And so when--so my agent the guy--there was this agent guy--
Speaker 2: But the agent didn't have any work to do.
Speaker 1: No he didn't have jack to do and he said--initially he asked for four hundred thousand dollars and I said, "I can't take these people's money, four hundred thousand dollars," and he said, "We're going to start at four hundred thousand dollars and we're going to work backward."  And we worked backward and we got them down to 250 [thousand dollars].
Speaker 2: That is fabulous.
Speaker 1: And because they said no to four hundred thousand dollars they said, "No she's not good."  Anyway--and I signed this contract and I was scared to death.
Speaker 2: Because you don't know--you've never written a book before.
Speaker 1: I didn't even have the conce- I mean I had--anyway so I worked on the proposal and then they said go on and do it.  And I got no help from them.  That book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Fashion Business Forever,' Teri Agins], that book is the biggest--I mean when I--
Speaker 2: When you say you got no help from HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC] is that what you're saying?
Speaker 1: Yeah that's what I'm saying, I got no help from them to help me kind of figure out--I mean I had all these smart Journal people who I was  letting them look at proposals and how should I organize this book and who should be in the book and who should not be in the book.  So I was--but I was basically on my own between that and also just consulting people, you know different friends.  Because I worked with all these smart people which was good.  I could have never done--okay now I'm having a sweat break out.  You see it?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Honey, it's coming, it's like hold on.  And I kept sitting because the other thing too is remember you had to turn in book, it's not like they just hand you a check and you just go off into the sunset.  And wait, if you in the contract--with the book contract if you turn in a book not to their satisfaction, you have to give their money back.  And they have a thing on how--because they don't give it to you all at once.  I mean I got like 30 percent up front and then they give it to you in increments and stuff.  But you have--and they have a pay plan on how to give the money back.  Oh yeah, no this is a contract so it's not like you just could--because people think like oh you got the money and it's gone.  So you've got to turn this stuff to their satisfaction.  I was scared to death.  I lost nine pounds; I had hives every day; every day I was on book leave.  I was gone for twenty months.  I took this--what is the stuff that I'd take for the hives?  I had this--it was called Atarax or something like that.  It was something that yeah--I had to take these pills all the time which left me very dopey, they were--I would bite them in half--and I took them because I was, I was like a nervous wreck.
Story_ID: 660479
Speaker 1: What approach then do you decide, because you do interviews.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I did--I went four trips to Paris [France]--four trips to Paris, two trips to Milan [Italy], one trip to Chicago [Illinois] because I did the chapter on Marshall Field [Marshall Field and Company].  That chapter on Monsieur Ungaro [Emanuel Ungaro]--I went to Paris five times.  I mean an extra last--I stayed at a cheap hotel; it was $100.  I took all the stuff out of the refrigerator at the hotel and then I would go and buy, you know, poulet, you know, like chicken at those places where they have all that stuff and put it in the refrigerator in the hotel thing to like--because you know I had to, with the--it was unpaid (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had to be economical.
Speaker 2: It was an unpaid leave.
Speaker 1: Oh it's an unpaid leave, I thought you said when people were taking leaves that maybe--
Speaker 2: No it was an unpaid leave, and also you had to pay your own health insurance during that time too.  They made you pay your health insurance, they made you pay--yeah, The Wall Street Journal--in other words all they did was my seniority continued to accrue but it was an unpaid leave.
Speaker 1: I see but you know at this point the new- the newspapers are still doing okay right?
Speaker 2: Yeah but the thing is that newspapers always treated reporters like shit.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: You know the people that made money in journalism were in television but not in newspapers.  So my seniority continued to accrue but I had to pay my health insurance, I had to pay--and I had to pay my expenses.  And they don't give you the money based on how much they--they gave me that money based on what they thought they could make.  Because they said they feel like this could be a big book.  We didn't sell anything near what they'd hoped to sell.  So, yeah but you know I get to keep the money because, you know they've already made the contract.  But anyway I was very frugal with the money because I'd just said I wanted to use some of the money if I had enough money left to send somebody to college which I did.
Speaker 1: Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins], that's so--your nephew, is that your nephew [Taylor Nunes-Agins] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no this kid who his mother went to high school with me [at Wyandotte High School, Kansas City, Kansas].
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And he was majoring in journalism.  Anthony [ph.].
Speaker 1: Oh that's wonderful.
Speaker 2: At the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] so it was cheaper.
Speaker 1: So, at what point do you--I mean I know you said you were scared the whole time and you know--you know, worried the whole time but at what point do the interviews start having an impact because you're finding even though you know this industry, you're finding new things out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, no it was just a reported book, and--because I interviewed about a hundred and thirty people in the book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins].  I knew what I was doing.  I was just scared because I--when they tell you you're contracted to do eighty thousand words, I don't even know--I can't even wrap my head around what is eighty thousand words.  What does eighty thousand words look like? Do I stretch out?  And it's not like a term paper where you like--it's a twenty page term paper and you like used different margins and big type and stuff to try to make it--to stretch it out.  It's not you know when you write a book it's got to be a book.  It's got to read like a book.  All I was worried was I was going to get bad book reviews.  I kept saying, "If I get a bad book review," because I don't want people saying, "Oh Teri wrote a good paper, she was a good journalist at The Journal [The Wall Street Journal] but now that she is flying on solo," it's really the impostor complex, "she's really not that good."  So that's what I was worried about.  But while I wrote, I had people read for me and--but I knew that I was doing something smart.  I did do that, I did know that.  And I remember--I wasn't dating anybody during this time, I was dating but I'm not going to talk about that because I had a little moment.  I had this guy who I went to college with who we had a little, just a little kind of thing that went on for several months during--while I was working on the book.  But after the book I kept saying, "I want to start dating again."  And so anyway this French guy--this British guy who ran Dior [Christian Dior SE] in the United States, he and I started--ended up dating when the book finished.  And it was really funny because he was a source of mine for years but we ended up dating and we started dating and I told him--he said, "Well you--how did you do with the book?"  I said, "I've written it but I'll let you read it but it's really not that good."  And I had the galley copy, the bound galley--
Speaker 1: That's how you felt?
Speaker 2: Yeah because I told him--when you've written for so long it just doesn't seem that exciting to you anymore.  And so then I said, "I'm going to show it to you but you know it's not really that good."  I said, "I think it's good but it's not," and then he read it and he told me, "Teri, it is really good."  He said, "It's really, really good."  He said, "I read it in like three sittings and it was really good."
Speaker 1: It's a fast read too. And it's--but it's so much information that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah he said it's really good.
Speaker 1: And he knew the industry too.
Speaker 2: Yeah he knew the industry, yes.  So he said it's really good.
Story_ID: 660480
Speaker 1: 'Cause I had had other people read chapters here and there but he was the first person that read it through--read it all the way through.  And so then that was it.  The book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins]--I got a New York Times [The New York Times] Sunday book review, a whole page and that was a big deal.
Speaker 2: It's a huge deal.
Speaker 1: That was, yeah.
Speaker 2: You said you were on the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show']?
Speaker 1: I didn't do Oprah until 2001.  Yeah but I was on the Oprah Show with the book and I did 'The View.' I did CNN and I got reviewed everywhere and the book did well.  It didn't do--we did better in paperback than we did in hard cover which was--so in other words you make more, in terms of royalties, you make more on hard covers.  But I didn't get--we needed to sell like sixty thousand books or so to get royalties and I wasn't anywhere near that, so--
Speaker 2: How many did, how many--
Speaker 1: We've sold now--we've sold about close to about fifty-five thousand but that's been over--almost what fifteen years?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So now it doesn't--and we sell about two thousand ebooks.  They turned it into an ebook in 2010 so we've sold about two thousand of those.  Because they use it in schools, that's what kept it in print.  So that makes me feel good and I have a Japanese edition, I'll show it to you it's really cute.
Speaker 2: You have three--it's translated into three languages.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, but I don't--I don't have the Romanian one, but I do have the Japanese one because the Japanese one--I have a really big publisher there.  Bunge- Bungei- Bungeishunju [Bungeishunju Ltd.]I think is how it's pronounced.
Story_ID: 660481
Speaker 1: So talk about just the book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins] itself.  What you did with the book and how you structured the book and, and what period you covered?  You should at least (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay yeah so the end of fashion I basically start you out in fashion in Paris [France], that's how it starts and kind of explained to people obsolescence and I first tell you about how the French had their whole system and how it's always been controlled by the government there because the government was using this as a way to try to--fashion industry, all the things that, embroidery, textiles all that.  That was the second largest export in France.  And so there were the Napoleon [Napoleon Bonaparte], the kings everybody really pushed to have--to, you know make fashion--it was part of the national patrimony.  And the other thing too is that it mentioned, important about it is because it was part of the whole refined way of living.  I mean you know this is--you know when you think of Italy and you think of France and everything else this is also part of their culture of beautiful things and craftsmanship and all that.  Connoisseurship and so this is all.  So I start you out in Paris to kind of let people know how everything started and I actually then show the dress code debacle when the dress codes went away.  And I also, the book starts out with Isaac Mizrahi who was this designer who wants to do something that's really super creative and everything but is not commercially minded and he ends up having to go out of business.  And then I just explain that Isaac was thinking about fashion and the past where he could kind of do something creative and it would catch on.  But nowadays that--the end of fashion had occurred, and it was now a marketing exercise and the marketing meant more than anything.  By marketing I mean making--trying to sell people to buy something.  So each chapter has this whole marketing component.  I have a chapter on Giorgio Armani and the reason why he represents end of fashion is because Giorgio Armani came out with a new way for men to dress with the unconstructed suits.  Well a lot of companies obviously copied that look.  Why would people want to still buy the authentic Armani and not the copy and the reason why is because Armani had given--he had another marketing hook and that was celebrities, and Hollywood, and he made that a very appetizing proposition and it really worked for him really well.  And then after that worked, everybody else decided to run to that side of the street.  I mentioned Armani because Armani--doing that particular chapter in the book told me that there's another book which it's now fifteen years later, the book that I'm doing now about celebrities and fashion brands.  So I even at that point I saw that this was a larger thought because I knew that the celebrity thing was going to take off in a big way.  That celebrities would not only become billboards but then they decided wow we can even be our own brands and so that was the, yeah, part of that.
Story_ID: 660482
Speaker 1: But I looked at--Zoran [Zoran Ladicorbic] represented the end of fashion because everything he was doing was counter intuitive and why should his little company stay afloat because he--his marketing was the non marketing which was the whole thing of scarceness and luxury goods fashion that only people in the know knew it.  It was a very kind of a gated community.  And I looked at Marshall Fields [Marshall Field and Company] and at point in the big department stores in Chicago [Illinois] and it was one of the original department stores that had--was really like, belonged to the City of Chicago but through the consolidation of department stores Marshall Fields was this kind of like store that it had been bought and sold to different companies and ended up being bought by Target.  Well at that point it was called Dayton-Hudson Corporation but it was actually--now it's called Target.  And Target Corporation was a big discounter and Target basically remade Marshall Fields in its image and actually made Marshall Fields a better store.  Now of course, all that collapsed because the internet--but at that particular point in time Target Corporation--the precursor of Target Corporation had done a lot to by putting its best practices in the Marshall Fields and made it a strong store again.  And then the other kind of big chapter in the book was about Emanuel Ungaro.  It's Ungaro not Ungaro, it's an Italian name who is a French couturier.  He sells his business to the Ferragamo family [Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A.] and he's like in his sixties and in the end of his career; he wants to sell his business to the Ferragamos so he's trying to figure out--Ferragamos say, "Oh we're going to turn this into a big marketing machine.  We're going to make handbags and shoes," because those were starting to become the new stars of fashion.  But the Ferragamos didn't know what they were doing and they didn't know how to do it.  So that kind of showed just the limitations of an old school fashion house like that.  To try to learn a new trick in that era without having any luck.  And actually Ungaro comes back up in my new book ['Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers,' Teri Agins] because they brought in Lindsay Lohan of all people to do a collection and how--I mean how disastrous that was after one fashion show.  And then the other big chapter in the book was on Ralph Lauren and Tommy Hilfiger.  They represented the end of fashion because they were two designers who didn't--just basically were a stylist who did preppie sportswear and Ivy League looks but they were able to figure out how to give these clothes a persona and a identification that made them cool.  For Ralph Lauren he went the whole Anglophile, Ivy League route.  Tommy Hilfiger went the urban route with black kids and the cities with the oversized clothes and logos and both of them ended up with some really big strong companies as a result.  And that wasn't fashion but it was a marketing exercise.  And then Donna Karan went to Wall Street and I chose that chapter because she had in 1997 a record number of fashion companies went public and she was one of them in 1997.  Even though she was a really good designer, she was a really bad businessperson and the stock was a disaster because they didn't work under the kind of principles of Wall Street and just how that goes to show you that fashion companies for the most part shouldn't be public companies if you are doing a lot of creativity.  It's too erratic and it's too hard to predict consistent earnings.
Story_ID: 660483
Speaker 1: Now who--
Speaker 2: I got that off fast because I've done it so many times (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know.  Who, who did the book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins] upset?
Speaker 2: The book really didn't, the book (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It didn't, it didn't upset anyone?
Speaker 2: Donna Karan, she was not happy because I had written a lot of these stories but now that it's in a book. So every time she looks up people say, "Oh I read about that in the book."  So it bothered her because she didn't--people don't want--people get very--you could tell folks about beating their wives or having an affair but nothing will get to people more than talking about people's business and that they lost money or didn't make money.  Business is very sexy and--but people felt this book was--and the cover of the book has a dress form with a gown that's falling off and on the back of the cover it's all the way on the floor and this was metaphor to kind of show that this industry that has been doing certain things is just like--it's at the last gasp of what it was at that point.  Not that it's going to be bad.  As I tell people the end of fashion is not bad, it's just that it was a new thing.  And even at the end of that book I couldn't prognosticate what was going to happen next.  All I said was, is that the next group that comes along is going to have to figure out how to deal with--the consumer is king and that's who they're going to have to--the powers of fashion, manufacturers, retailers they're going to have to really cater to the consumer.  It's not going to be a designer necessarily dictating to the consumer, they're gonna--it's going to be a kind of a reverse commute here because the consumers are not going to just buy something just because somebody says to buy it.  They're not going to spend the kind of money unless there is a reason to do so.  Now it's so funny because what happened after that was is--that the consumer did end up going back in that direction because designers came up with smart ways to--they came up with these two hundred dollar jeans and said, "You need to buy these jeans.  These two hundred dollar jeans are really better than the fifty dollar jeans."  And they came up with three hundred dollar jeans and they came up with four hundred dollar jeans.  They came up with five hundred dollar shoes and they told women who never paid more than $150 for a pair of shoes that the five hundred dollar shoes were really the shoes that you needed.  And the thousand dollar handbags and these crazy things that happen that was starting to happen with my other book but I had no idea that it was going to explode like this where it became--it was a new--industry found a new way to get people to spend a lot of money on clothes without dressing up.  That was the, that was--because it was clear to me that people would never dress up again.  They would dress up but they would dress up in a different way.  But the industry very cleverly and it's not like somebody got in a room and decided this.  I mean these things evolved and that's what's so fun about covering fashion.  Because there are all these different forces that happen that cause things--that caused things to happen.  The soccer mom and the SUV [sport utility vehicle] and the capri pants and the driving loafers, all that happened at the same time.  And, you know, so in other words it's not like--so that's why I always tell students who are writing about this you can't look at this in a vacuum, you can't look at this as like some designer telling people what to wear.  It is a lot more--it's a lot more complex than that because all these forces are causing people to dress differently.  I mean this social medial thing now when you've got people now instantly being able to stay in touch with folks and now--so you can really start trends very quickly.  Get people in--on and off of trends very quickly because you've got this kind of crowd sourcing where you have people all making the decision togeth- I mean they are making this collective decision that we are all going to meet at this particular place and do flash mob at like six o'clock some place and the same thing with the clothes.  So it's--and also the globalization of fashion which is also a huge thing that, when you used to go to travel--I mean you know you've been abroad and you've seen how people in Europe used to dress one way and then people--I mean people in France used to dress one way versus people in America.  Now everybody is wearing Nikes because the Internet, Hollywood, you know all that has kind of had that homogenization and that is the theme of my new book ['Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers,' Teri Agins] the reason why designers--the new book--this is, when is this coming out?
Story_ID: 660484
Speaker 1: Well I mean im- immediately, but go on you can talk about the--it won't be seen immediately, but go on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay good, the name of the new book is 'Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers' [Teri Agins].  And what I'm basically saying is that now you need to have a celebrity to sell anything.  And--or you're like Michael Kors and you become a celebrity.  Michael Kors became a celebrity on 'Project Runway' and he'd been in business for all these years; he wasn't making any money.  He starts making money soon as he became a celebrity.  And--because people have no natural sense of taste.  You have a lot of consumers who philistines who do not know the difference between a brown buttonhole and French seam.  They don't understand any of the connoisseurship, so what do they identify with?  Logos and what celebrities wear and do.  And the celebrity now is the tail that's wagging the dog and they are now--so that's what this book is about and so I tell you celebrities who like Jennifer Lopez who are--Jennifer Lopez single handedly revived the fragrance industry.  I mean her JLo Glow that she came out with in 2002 and Elizabeth Taylor before that.  So it kind of applies to the same historical stuff but I also like pop into different things to show you--and celebrities as brands and celebrities as endorsers.  But they've been around forever because you know Audrey Hepburn did Givenchy and you think of celebrities, Joan Crawford with the shoulder pads in the '40s [1940s].  So you know the celebrity thing is always been a big part of fashion but now it's different and what it means.
Speaker 1: Are you showing examples where it's backfired like in the case of Lindsay Lohan, I mean where--'cause that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but it can backfire, people (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Kanye West I had them in there and then as, or--in most of the cases it just doesn't take on any place.  People announce they have fashion deals but they really don't make any money.  Then you have companies like Jessica Simpson where they make a whole lot of money.  Why would Jessica Simpson who is this country bumpkin from Dallas [Texas], why should she be able to make--you know, her, the business that she--her brand generates more than a billion dollars at retail.  Can you believe that?  One B.  Of course, she has nothing to do with this; she just--
Speaker 1: She is licensed.
Speaker 2: Yeah she's licensed but also it was the person, the master licensor is the person who was the one who was in charge of like making her, yeah but that's one of those like flukes, first mover's advantage and--it's first mover's advantage and it's also just being with the right manufacturer.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now I want to ask you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See this, this is a book you'd want to read, right?
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.
Story_ID: 660485
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just want to say that, that as a reporter I think what is been a big advantage for me is, is that, okay with the rules of The Journal [The Wall Street Journal] where we can't take free clothes and everything.  It gives me a certain amount of power because I have the power of the circulation and a lot of people reading the paper but once you as a reporter start taking free clothes and start you know actually fraternizing too much with the sources, you're compromised.  If you start becoming friendly with them, I mean like I dated a guy in the industry but I told him I would never write about his company.  Not even with a full disclosure; you're just not going to do it because it's a conflict of interest.  So--and I actually took great pride at being able to say that I you know--I always tell people, "Don't give me that eight hundred dollar dress," because really I'm not going to take it.  My independence is more important than all that.  Yeah, so, yeah, so people would get upset about stories here and there but it was not like they--and because I wasn't mean spirited about it; I've never been mean spirited.  Even in this book ['Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers,' Teri Agins]--there's a lot of stuff to make fun of with celebrities and I have, I have a little bit of that but it's still grounded in basically, I'm--business.
Speaker 2: Now why did you have two--you had two titles with your first book?
Speaker 1: Okay because--that's a good question.  Yeah because the publisher--then we came out with the paperback, he didn't like the--the people--Quill was the--the paperback was done under a different imprint at HarperCollins [HarperCollins Publishers LLC] and it was Quill and they said, "We don't like the title.  Can you change the title?"  So we changed it--I changed it.
Speaker 2: Okay so the first title was?
Speaker 1: Was, 'The End of Fashion: The Mass Marketing of the Clothing Business' which is a horrible title.  And the other one is 'The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever' [Teri Agins], and that's a better title and I wish that somebody had said something about that earlier. Yeah so that's how we got two titles.
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause I (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well look at you, aren't you a sharp shooter.  You, yeah, you're a sharp shooter, you caught that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But no I'm just wondering because people don't usually do that with titles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you don't, they usually don't.  Yeah, but they said, "'The End of Fashion' is the same title so we're just changing the second part of it" (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 660486
Speaker 1: Your book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins] came out you said in nineteen ninety--
Speaker 2: Nine [1999].
Speaker 1: --nine [1999].  But a year before that your mentor--you know, you had a mentor you never mentioned him much.  I read that he was a mentor.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: That's Alan Millstein, is that true?
Speaker 2: He wasn't a mentor; he was just a very good source who I adored.
Speaker 1: I see, okay he was a very good source, okay.  So let me ask (unclear).
Speaker 2: Alan's family worked in the fashion industry, he was like second generation and he was a journalist but he was a--and used to quote him.  If you put my name and his name and you get like a zillion matches because I used to quote him on stories all the time because I just thought he was--I learned so much stuff from him.  He was a really good like kind of a--because some people like reporters and I had several sources like that and people wanted to tell you stuff and help you out and he was one of them.
Speaker 1: I see but he also was the old fashion, in the traditional sense, old school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Old school, heavily old school.
Speaker 1: You know where personality was important and you know people's stature was important.
Speaker 2: And he was really funny too.  He was very humorous because he used to like, "The souffle that didn't rise."  I mean I used to say a lot of his little sayings I would get from.  And he died while I was working on the book and I remember interviewing him because see--I don't know if he had AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] or whatever it was but he was--I think it was something like that and he knew he was going to die and we did several like long taped interviews and I don't even know where those tapes are.  But he was, he was a sweet man; I really liked him a lot.  Oh wow Alan Millstein that takes me--that's a take me back.
Story_ID: 660487
Speaker 1: Let me ask you who of all the people that you've covered are you most impressed with?
Speaker 2: Who am I impressed with?  Oh wow, that's a good question.  I'm impressed with a lot of people.  Okay just in general, I'm impressed with anybody who stays with--I look at somebody like Patrick Robinson who has had a million different jobs.  At twenty-three he was at Armani then after that he went to Anne Klein and then out of business and then he did a little small thing and then he did Perry Ellis and then he did the Gap [Gap, Inc.] and then he went out of business and then he did Paco Rabanne.  I mean he's had like six or seven jobs and several times he was let go or fired but he still just kind of stayed with it.  People like that--because I just know how easy it is--not easy but just how frustrating it is.  Where people just say like, "What the hell, let me do something else."  But he stayed with it and now he's back at Armani.  So I'm impressed with him, I'm impressed with Zoran [Zoran Ladicorbic], as crazy as he is I'm impressed with him just because I thought he did something that was new and different.  I mean he is--I'm sure his liver is the size of a pea at this point because he drank so much.  I mean he drinks a fifth of Stoli a day and then he drinks all this beer, so he is just a drunk.  Let's see who am I impressed with?  Him, with Ralph Lauren; I think I'll put Ralph Lauren in that category because he also I think that he like invented something and--he took something that we all were familiar with; all the Anglophiles, symbols and things, and made it something really cool, something really appetizing, something really fresh. And the same thing about Tommy [Tommy Hilfiger], I mean I'm also impressed with the Tommy Hilfiger organization because it's not him as much so as the organization.  Because the people who were there knew what they wanted to do.  They wanted to come up with a cheaper version of Ralph initially and then they wanted--and they gave it--it got its own identity.  But I'm impressed with a lot of people, Karl Lagerfeld, but with Tom Ford, with Tory Burch, I mean there's just a lot of people I'm impressed with.  [HistoryMaker] Tracy Reese, a black designer.  My favorite designer who happens to be black is [HistoryMaker] Byron Lars.  Yeah he designs a lot of stuff for Michelle Obama (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's newer, right, he--
Speaker 2: No he's been around since the '90s [1990s] but he's been like in and out of business and all that.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  He is fantastic, I mean he does--I have a jacket of his that has like I think ninety pattern pieces or something with it.  I mean he's just--he was--he's trained as a pattern maker.  He's just really creative.
Story_ID: 660488
Speaker 1: Now what about Armani, you don't mention Armani and I'm wondering, I mean--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Well the thing is, I'm not a pantsuit person.  Armani is a pantsuit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see, I see, I see, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean he--Armani's done some gorgeous things.  I mean Cate Blanchett that dress she had on at the Golden Globes I thought was divine.  But he's a pantsuit--I mean I associated him with pantsuits for women.
Speaker 1: I see so you're okay you're more girly.
Speaker 2: Oh, totally, yeah I'm very girly.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So people--what about [HistoryMaker] Daymond John and that whole thing and the you know, oh okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Daymond huh? You saw me make that little like squid eye (laughter).
Speaker 1: You did (laughter).  I didn't know I was going to get that kind of reaction.  But I mean you know the hip--
Speaker 2: Okay, go on.
Speaker 1: I didn't know you--I was going to get that--but I mean the hip hop, you know influence, because he started from the trunk of his car.
Speaker 2: Sean John.
Speaker 1: No Daymond John, Daymond John, FUBU. Daymond John (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, I was--
Speaker 1: I know there's Sean John, but Daymond John.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but there's also--I was confused because there is a Damon Dash, there's a, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, but Daymond John was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Daymond is a very common black name, go on.  Out of a certain generation (laughter).  Yeah no let me tell you, the new book ['Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers,' Teri Agins], I have a chapter on Puffy and his--the Sean John company.  All those guys, I mean I think anybody who does something entrepreneurial, the FUBU guys all those guys does something entrepreneurial I think it's cool.  And they were staking out something new and I guess the FUBU guys--it's interesting that you should mention them because they're probably the most innovative of that group.  Because I mean they were first and they didn't know what was going to go and they--but Sean Combs is the one who--I mean he also all these other people--a lot of times is not the person who gets there first; it's the person who really does the best job.  And Sean Combs is definitely probably done the best job. Now he's (mumbles) (makes sounds).
Speaker 1: What did you say?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, 'cause this is on tape; you all edit these tapes, right?
Speaker 1: No we don't.
Speaker 2: Oh shit.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Don't say that, you can't say that--unless you're, you know, unless you want something edited.  We don't do it but we can, if you want.
Story_ID: 660489
Speaker 1: So I, I do want, though, to ask you about the gatekeepers because Anna Wintour she became a very big gatekeeper.  The gatekeepers in the industry that pride themselves on that.  Decide who's on the list, who's not on the list and I mean there will be--she won't be around forever but I'm just asking what your view on their role is because in today's world, you know because it--
Speaker 2: You're talking about as designers, or just as people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm talking about as people--you know a voice for fashion.  I'm not talking about designers, but a voice.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Because fashion means a lot of things.  It means status in the community, it means--I mean it means a lot a lot of different things.
Speaker 2: Yeah and that's what also makes it fascinating.  Yeah, but let me tell you the thing is that on Anna and I am going to make a couple of comments on her because I think people over--people over--
Speaker 1: Promote?
Speaker 2: Well they over say that she's like such a--yeah she's the most powerful person in fashion, bar none.  Because she has the ability to mobilize people and get things accomplished and raise tons of money and philanthropic causes and then just other causes like for example when this sales after the stock market crashed in 2008 and the sales were--had subsided and she was trying to figure out how we could get people back in stores and she came up with that Fashion's Night Out.  That was Anna--that was an Anna initiative.  And then that took over--caught on around the world.  So you know, I think that she's influential and I think it's important to have influential people in an industry.  Because especially this is an industry where there is all this creativity, all this egos, there's all this--and the thing about taste.  The whole idea of someone's taste it means that it assigns properties.  You're important, you're not important, you're valuable, you're not valuable.  And so I think it takes on a bigger--you know what I mean; takes on a bigger importance.
Speaker 1: And it should.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay but people like to follow their herd.  There is also a very big herd mentality and--
Speaker 2: This is the--fashion is totally, it's herd mentality.  This is lemmings; everybody moves in lockstep and they all try to pretend that they are such an individual but no.  People are all influenced by retailing and it's just like all the subliminal images you see how they advertise things; it's the, it's the same thing in fashion.
Story_ID: 660490
Speaker 1: I want to ask you where you are in--you know, where you--'cause you, you got the big award that you got from Chicago Co- I mean a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Council of Fashion Designers of America.
Speaker 1: Okay and I mean it was high cutting that night, I mean all--
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so talk about who was on the program?
Speaker 2: Okay this was the--Council of Fashion Designers of America is the biggest trade group in the fashion industry.  And the members are designers; you have to be asked to join it's not just because you pay this big old, big fee.  And they--this is the kind of--there are other people were designers but if you're a member of the Council of Fashion Designers you're kind of part of this kind of exclusive club.  And I won the--Eugenia Sheppard was a journalist who worked for the New York Post I think and she--I forgot where she worked.  But anyway, she--the award was named in her honor and she worked for one of the New York [New York] newspapers here.  So now I think they call it the Media Award [Eugenia Sheppard Media Award].  And what did you--I forgot your question?
Speaker 1: I was asking who else was honored that evening.
Speaker 2: Okay so they had their annual--I won this award and I called and they told me, "You won the award and the dinner will be in June," and so the dinner was at the public library and I think then we had the space for about five or six hundred people, it's really small.  Who else was honored that night, Sarah Jessica Parker was honored as the style icon award, Sean Puffy Combs [Sean Combs] won the award for menswear, Tom Ford won the award for international, Donna Karan won an award for the best women's wear designer of the year.  Let's see who else won?  Oh Reed Krakoff who is the designer at Coach [Coach, Inc.] won--he is now no longer at Coach but at that time he was at Coach and he won for best accessories and who else.  I think that's about what I can remember, yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about the evening because I mean it's not only who won, it's who's also in the audience. Because it was a star studded, I mean it's a star (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had the red carpet, it's glamour.  This is the Oscar night for the fashion industry.  It's now done at Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York] but it used to be done--during that period it was done at the New York City public library on 5th Avenue [Stephen A. Schwarzman Building, New York, New York]; beautiful, regal space.  And that's where it's done in the Celeste Bartos auditorium [Celeste Bartos Forum] and there's a space there and that's where they do it.  It was just a very glamorous and they had live music and Fantasia who had just won--Baretamo [sic. Fantasia Barrino], or whatever her last name, I forgot what it was.  But Fantasia won for--
Speaker 1: 'American Idol.'
Speaker 2: 'American Idol' and she--this was her first kind of coming out--her first kind of stage performance at that.  And you know everybody, Marc Jacobs, Ralph Lauren.  Ev- I mean everybody was there.
Story_ID: 660491
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about the other--your, your group of other fashion journalists, because your, you know, 'cause--
Speaker 2: Our community. My community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your community and so who would you count as part of your community.  There's Robin Givhan--
Speaker 2: Givhan.
Speaker 1: Givhan, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: We have Robin Givhan; we have Cathy Horyn, Constance White.  Who else?
Speaker 1: I have Bernadine Morris, Mary Luther [Marylou Luther] (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay I've interviewed them but they don't--both of them--Marylou is like in her eighties.  No, no she's still part of our little--she's a friend and everything but my kind of fashion journalist of people I talk to regularly Cathy Horyn, who is the critic at The New York Times, Robin Givhan who worked at The Washington Post before that she was at the Detroit paper [Detroit Free Press] and then Constance White--Constance C.R. White who at one time was the editor of Essence but before that she was at Women's Wear Daily for many years and also The New York Times.
Speaker 1: But isn't this curious about people being black?  I mean, you know it's just that--I don't think if you asked the (unclear) they would think that surprising.  So can you tell me how is that especially when black people have always been wanting to get in, you know the fashion business.  Whether it's a designer or models or all the very--you know manufacturers or whatever.  So here the people who are commenting, critiquing are black.
Speaker 2: There is--there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean at major, major publications.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but there is also, I mean there is nobody at Harper's Bazaar, there's nobody at Vogue, there's nobody at--
Speaker 1: Well you know you've had Andre [Andre Leon Talley]--
Speaker 2: Yeah but Andre served one purpose.  But I'm talking about--I mean Andre was, Andre did a column and he's a--obviously he's a big stylist and a force and everything but in terms of like having--yeah I mean Keija [Keija Minor] at Brides magazine you know she's a black woman who is the editor in chief.  She's the first one who's ever been editor in chief in any kind of fashion centric publication.  There's nobody in style, there are little people here that worked in different places but in terms of people who are, there are not a lot of us.  I mean it just so happens that two--all three of us have worked at really big publications.
Story_ID: 660492
Speaker 1: What is odd is that you are at big publications that are respected nationally--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that you're there.
Speaker 2: Internationally.
Speaker 1: Internationally, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, internationally.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear) You're correcting me, internationally.  But you're there and no one, I'm telling you everybody who is not maybe even in New York [New York] or not in fashion that would be shocked that that is who's there commenting, critiquing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh people are really--yeah people are now but I am not a fashion critic, I mean you know, do not put me with the other reporters.  I write about the industry.  They write about what--they go to the fashion shows--when I would go to fashion shows, I went to shows but I didn't go to write runway reviews.
Speaker 1: No, I understand, but I'm saying that when we're talking fashion as all aspects and you're one aspect of it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I don't mean to correct you but you're one aspect.
Speaker 2: No, you're correct.
Speaker 1: I mean I'm just saying the normal populace would be shocked--I mean shocked, because when I--I'm not in the industry and I start--I'm like that's odd.  And so can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're right, you're right.
Speaker 1: And so what do you--when you get together what are you talking about and what are your even hopes for, you know, people coming behind you or the industry as it is in your impact.  What are those--because frankly, frankly, in the old days those positions--you come out of the school that is a--it's a school of privilege.  Frankly, in the old days those positions probably would go to people who had training at the women's colleges whether it's Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] or Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] or they were of means.  Women of means would often have those positions.  So I'm just saying what does that mean, the group of you.  What do you see--or even how do you see yourselves, the group of you.
Speaker 2: Okay, I will say this if you look at all of us you know mine is a little bit different because it was The Wall Street Journal but it's still--we all kind of had this interest a while ago and kind of build on it.  I mean Constance [Constance White] was at Women's Wear Daily.  So in other words we all went through the usual--came up the rungs.  My concern in journalism in general is that there's now no place like The Kansas City Star to start an internship or there is no place to kind to get started and get your feet wet to learn things, learn the court house, learn how things work and how to read a balance sheet.  There's--now you've got this whole generation of bloggers and these people who kind of like--so people get rewarded because they string a few sentences together.  But has nothing to do with scholarship.  Their idea of research is Wikipedia online so it's, it's, that is--and that's troubling to me because for all of us--I mean we all kind of came up through the ranks writing about different things and kind of learned about the industry because I would argue that the best reporters who write about this are not people who are really into clothes but people who are just curious and are good reporters and have a kind of a good sense of--in other words I always tell people you don't have to be stylish to do this.  You know, and I think in some ways it helps you with the sourcing if you--if people see that you are somebody who's interested in the industry and you're interested in clothes and you're like--and you dress a certain way then that gives them a certain kind of a comfort level.  And any comfort level you can give a source is excellent because that way that source will open up and tell you stuff.  So that's where that comes from but I am very troubled when I just see that there are no--just in general, it's not just in fashion, it's so many areas, there's just no entry level kind of ways for people to kind of figure out stuff and find their way in.
Story_ID: 660493
Speaker 1: Well journalism sort of fell apart as, I mean, as the media industry fell apart.  The training--schools, maybe they'll get back to it but schools were having a hard time even figuring out what to train, what to do but I'm asking another question before you go to the--we'll go to, I mean we'll go to the young people coming behind you but I'm asking another question and maybe I'm not doing it right but I am wondering if you're--you and your counterparts are aware of your place in history and whether you have staked it out.  That's probably--I mean that's what I'm trying to.
Speaker 2: I definitely realize my place because that's the reason why I did the first book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins].  Oh yeah, I definitely realize my place in history and I knew that I was doing something.  I did break through stuff for the paper. The Wall Street Journal now which has extensive fashion coverage and we have people in Paris [France] and somebody in Milan [Italy] and there's a weekend news--there's a---this section called Off Duty which runs every Friday that has a kind of a lot of fashion and style items.  I mean I was the first person for years I did this by myself with The Journal.  There was no other reporter--other reporter who did this and so it did evolve on to something and so I feel very important because I feel like that I got the ball rolling at the biggest publication in the country.  I got the ball rolling and I think I did it in the right direction because I mean my personality could have a lot to do with how this--I mean it could have--I could have made it strictly financial or I could have made it strictly fashion.  I could have--you know I could have done anything with it that made sense for the paper.  But I think that I gave--I think I put us on a nice level, you know, field and then, you know, the paper went on after that.
Story_ID: 660494
Speaker 1: So but who's come behind you then now?
Speaker 2: You mean people who I've like--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Different reporters.
Speaker 1: Okay but I, I guess I--okay I don't want to belabor this but you and your book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever,' Teri Agins], I mean it's a great book but you almost are--you're colorblind in the book.
Speaker 2: I did that on purpose.
Speaker 1: You are colorblind in the book so I'm asking--I want--I mean maybe that's not something here but really if people--
Speaker 2: That was an astute observation.
Speaker 1: Well you are colorblind in the book (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, you know why--
Speaker 1: You are colorblind as a writer, I mean that's what (unclear).
Speaker 2: And as a person.
Speaker 1: As a person.
Speaker 2: I was married to a black man, I've had boyfriends, white boyfriends, black boyfriends because I mean I went through that little period there in Missouri and then I married a black man and then when I divorced, I dated lots of types of guys.  That detective that you hear me talking--I mean the guy who I thank on the tape, he's a black American.
Speaker 1: The one who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in Dallas [Texas].  He was a homicide detective in Dallas.  So it's like I'm kind like all over the map.  And I really did want this book to be colorblind.  It's funny one of the women who I interview in the book, June Horne who is a buyer at Saks [Saks Fifth Avenue] and she's in the Zoran [Zoran Ladicorbic] chapter and she happens to be black, I don't even tell you that.  Because why should I? She's a buyer at Saks, that's her.  It's interesting some people who will remain nameless said, "Why didn't you do a story--why didn't you do a book on black designers? Why didn't you do a story about black people in the industry?  White people always have people writing about them," and I'm saying--the first thing is nobody white or nobody anybody has written this book.  So I say I'm like Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], I'm not leading black people; I'm leading people and that's how I see.  I'm an expert; I'm an authority on the industry.  I'm not trying to lead black people, I'm leading people.  Some of them have might--you know when I do a story about black folks, it's going to be better than everybody else's because that's something that I'm going to bring to the party.  But I'm not here to write about black designers, I'm not here to write about--I'm not here to like--because the other thing is too is they either rise or fall based on who--they have to sell--I mean FUBU and all of that was a kind of a pride thing and that's one thing but ultimately you have to sell to everybody.  So that's and I think designers--most designers are very colorblind because people will say like why they see like black designers and they say, "Why don't they have more black models in their shows?"  And people will say because they don't want to be pigeonholed and this is not some black you know little ghetto where blacks are supposed to be.  As I said, I'm leading people and I'm very colorblind about that.  A lot of people were really surprised when they turn the thing and saw the author's pages and saw that it was somebody black because they see Agins [HistoryMaker Teri Agins] is not like Althea Jackson or something.  It's one of these names that you can't tell--it doesn't sound like a black name.  So when people say, "Oh I was really surprised when I saw you."
Speaker 1: Now for New York's business community like the investment banking community and the social community, you're the big deal.  I mean there is a source pride there for that because I mean here we are in New York [New York] and it's the center of--you know I mean investment bankers only exist here and so--and black society is somewhat really defined here in a way that it doesn't exist--
Speaker 2: But it's big in Chicago [Illinois], though.  Black society in Chicago--because I lived in Chicago for that short amount of time and black society in Chicago to me is a big deal.
Speaker 1: Well because--but see what drove Chicago is the business community.
Speaker 2: What drives anything is a business community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is the business community.
Speaker 2: Everything.  But yeah but you--all those entrepreneurs from Mr. Johnson to both Johnsons and (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well there were three Johnsons, actually.  There was Cadillac Al [HistoryMaker Albert W. Johnson] you've forgotten him--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but [HistoryMaker] George Johnson and, you know, John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) John Johnson.  Exactly, yeah so that, I mean that's a big--Chicago source of pride thing.
Story_ID: 660495
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you then, what haven't you've done that you still want to do?  And I, and I know you are on the eve of your book ['Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers,' Teri Agins], but what haven't you've done that you still want to do?
Speaker 2: Well I always tell people I'm a person who also believes that if I go, I always tell people, if I go tomorrow y'all can say, "Teri [HistoryMaker Teri Agins] had a great life.  She did everything she wanted to do; too bad she didn't do that second book."  That's what I've been saying--I've been saying that for years.  Too bad she didn't do that second book.  Okay well now I'm going to check that off.  So there is nothing I haven't done.  I have no bucket list, I have no bucket list.  I have had--I believe I've had--I've been blessed, blessed, blessed.  I don't need to buy anything.  Buy stuff for what?  If I make any money--if I have any money, anything that's left, I'm leaving it for education.  Not even to family but I want to set up some kind of foundation or something.  I want--and actually I want to have black boys for school.  The girls--everybody needs help but the boys need more help than the girls.  So that's--but I have nothing that I--I've gotten to travel, I've been married, I have been loved, I had been loved by parents [Phyllis Jackson Agins and William Agins], I've been  loved  by my sister [P. Gene Agins], I've had good health, I've gotten to do a lot of cool things.  I will not get to every country in the world, I really don't care.  There are a lot of places I don't want to go because I don't want to get sick (laughter).  You know, I always think of like.  But there are things obviously that you know, you want more experiences, I want to have a new boyfriend I mean there are things that I want but as far as what I have left to do, nothing.  As far--in journalism what I'm going to do now, I'm sixty years old, this book is going to come out.  I hope that I would get to do speaking engagements and I'll get to talk to people about the industry.  A lot of people--I hear from students--I go online and I see students write these things.  They will say like, "Wow we learned so much from your book," or, "I read your book and I decided not to go in the industry."  "I read your book and decided I wanted to go in the industry," and that makes me feel really good because I see that I'm imparting something and people have told me, "I want to be like you.  I want to do journalism in the way that you've done it."  But I always tell them I'm not--I don't consider myself a fashion person. I'm a journalist.  I could have been--if they had switched me and told me you're going to start writing about oil, the oil industry, I would have been--I would have enjoyed doing that too because I just like doing stories about people and people and their money and business and intrigue and, you know, politics I've never been interested in but I now kind of think I might have been interested in it.  But I'm a person--I have no regrets.  I didn't have children by choice.  The one thing that I do know--I'm a person who always believed that I wanted to--I pride myself on having every experience in life. That's an experience I didn't have.  Not that I would like to do it over but I didn't--because of the way I was brought up I didn't really see the value of kids that much.  I hate to say it but it's the truth.  I mean I saw the value of kids for other people but I wanted a career and I figured I couldn't have both and if I was going to choose, that's what I was choosing.  I was choosing to do what I wanted to do.  And I see I probably could have done both but I probably couldn't have done this as well as I did it if I'd had kids.  I really believe that.  So, and I'm very happy where I am.  I'm like--you know, I do Internet dating, this is real, and I, you know, you do your name and I have a name.  I won't put it out because, just in case I--but my headline is: happy camper seeks new flame. Isn't that cute?  And I'm a happy camper; I am really a happy camper.  Because people say, "Why are you so happy all the time?"  I'm saying it's because I have a fabulous life.  And people are like well you didn't have this, or you haven't--you know I have a ten year old car.  I don't need a new car, my car drives.  If I won the lotto tomorrow would I move, maybe, maybe not?  People say, "Well you can move to Manhattan [New York]." Maybe, sort of but I kind a like--I got my little neighborhood thing going.
Speaker 1: So (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm very content, I'm just a contented--
Speaker 1: Right.  But I mean but not, you know, you dreamed it and it came to be.
Story_ID: 660496
Speaker 1: You manifested your own life in many ways.  You, at--and, as a teenager you became what you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No it's--it's an unusual thing that I didn't have to go through that discovery but the one--let me tell you what the bad thing about this is because there is a bad thing about this, is that you--tunnel vision.  That you don't allow new stuff in.  You just decide I'm on this trajectory, it's doing fine, I'm staying on this.  And I'm not saying that--I mean it worked out fine and I don't know how much more I would have gotten but I kind of wish I hadn't been so rigid.  I just kind wish I hadn't been so rigid that I hadn't allowed myself to--like for example in college [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], I should have done junior year abroad.  But I didn't want to miss out on the parties.  So I didn't do junior year but I wish I had done that.  Some of the times business trips when I went to Europe and I should have stayed a couple of extra days.  One of the things I've done since I retired because I retired from the paper [The Wall Street Journal] in 2009.  One of the things I've done is that I worked for this group called World Retail Congress out of London [England] and they do conferences and they would hire me to come and moderate panels.  One year it was in Barcelona [Spain], two years it was in Berlin [Germany].  It's a really cool place.  Have you been there?  It's--oh my god if you get a chance do go.  Since the wall's [Berlin Wall] come down and everything, I mean it's like magnificent.  And I got to go two years in a row.  So they paid my expenses and then they paid me to moderate these panels and I'd get to interview all these--I mean the people who I moderate with were from over the world.  Businessmen and I had the CEOs and somebody from Arab countries and some people from Europe, it's really cool.  And I did--the first year I did it for free.  They didn't want me to do it because they didn't know me and I said, "I'll do it for free because I'm that good, and I guarantee you will--" and they had me back for two years.  Then they got cheap on the money and I'm like, "Okay, see ya."  And I was mad because that year it was in London and I really wanted to do the London one because I like London a lot.  But anyway I didn't get to do.  But just like my friend in Portugal--this is somebody I met in 2007 at an event and she says--we start talking and she says her name is Fatima [ph.].  "Fatima, oh that's a Portuguese name. Are you Brazilian, Portuguese?"  And she said, "Yes, my family's from Brazil."  So she said, "Before I leave New York [New York] can we see other?"  So I said, "Okay," and I made some time to see her.  I went to her office and she immediately starts speaking Portuguese when I walked in the door.  And she said--we had been there talking for a half an hour and she said, "Why don't you go on vacation with me and my husband and our group.  We are going to the (Unclear) region," and I'm like I just met these people and I told her I said, "Look I like you, don't get excited."  That's what I told her, "Don't get excited, don't over--don't invite me because you don't know me.  You need to check with your husband who is going."  She said, "No it would really be good."  She said, "You get to play and speak Portuguese and," blah, blah, blah.  And I'm thinking this woman is okay but I'm wondering.  Anyway I went on the trip. It was the trip of my dreams and she and I are very good friends.  And that's where I went to just go visit for Christmas and it was like fantastic and I'm really proud of myself for being spontaneous like that because these are strangers.  I didn't know these people.  I jumped on a plane and something said, what is the worst that could happen when you've got a credit card, you speak Portuguese, you've been to the country like six times, you know you can figure it out, and so I went.  And so--the other thing is to I want to get back to Brazil because I haven't been in Brazil in like about ten years or so.  So I want to get back there and see people and just, just go back and kind of see how it is now.  I mean there are little things like that that I want to do but in terms of like, when you're asking like big picture things, nothing.
Story_ID: 660497
Speaker 1: Maybe we start with hopes and concerns first then go to the legacy ones (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, my hopes and concerns for--(unclear) Scott [Scott Stearns] are you ready, tell me?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah I am, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Can I?  Okay.  Okay. My hopes and concerns for the black community in fashion and journalism.  Okay my concerns in the journalism world are I just wish that local newspapers could come back in some way.  And they don't have to be delivered in the same way that they were delivered because that's a very expensive proposition.  But I--when I watch--the fourth estate is very important in democracy and I mean we see what's going on with this whole thing with Chris Christie here where we've got a scandal with--when you have local scandals the way that these things get uncovered is by intrepid journalists who can go through paper trails and look through financial documents and look through litigation and connect dots and expose wrongdoings.  And when we see what's going on with the Tea Party and a lot of the crazy stuff that's going on in the movement.  In this country where we're at this kind of crazy juncture and I talk about the end of fashion, I would say--I call this actually white man's last stand.  I think we're in--white man's last stand basically means is that you've got this huge demographic shift and people are scared.  You have an older white establishment that's scared because they don't know--they think that the country is--(gesture) they are taking over the country and they are taking the country some place crazy which they're not.  It's just that the evolution of things and people are seeing the decline of the United States as a superpower which if you look at history, this stuff happens every two or three hundred years or so.  Most civilizations--no civilization stays on top for more than like three hundred years and another one comes in.  So it's not like we're going to go off the cliff, it means we're going to be in a different position.  I mean you know China, it will be their turn or whoever is going to come up and et cetera.  It's not a bad thing but people who are in power hate to relinquish power because they are scared and it's just a case of fear and they don't know--they feel like it's going to be bad.  So it's like put the finger in the dike and don't give people health insurance and don't let people become legal and keep people from voting.  So somehow we can get keep our finger in the dike to keep this from happening.  Well it's like a fait accompli, it's happening.  It's already happening; this train has left the station a long time ago.  For blacks I--my concern is that okay we look at now.  I live in New York, New York and we've got all these Dominicans.  Dominicans are as black as I am but they have an immigrant mentality and an immigrant work ethic and they have been able to do a lot of things that ordinary--that, you know, that blacks from the South who've come up through the years have not been able to do.  And they have not had--a lot of these immigrants have not had education or money.  So what is that, it's basically work ethic, it's family, it's all those values and cultural things that have allowed them to move up just like any other immigrant group.  I just wish that black Americans who are--who've been around for many generations--you know, I know, it's, this, we're--the legacy of slavery is heavy duty.  This is the thing that lets you know--I mean my friend Doug Blackmon [Douglas A. Blackmon] at The Wall Street Journal wrote that book 'Slavery by Another Name' ['Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II'].  Did you ever read that?
Story_ID: 660498
Speaker 1: That's a wonderful book ['Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II'] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Well Doug Blackmon [Douglas A. Blackmon] is a really good friend of mine and he is a white guy from Mississippi who wrote this book.  And when you read that book--because that also talks about, you know, the reason why they had to keep slavery going in the South because they had to compel people to work.  I mean because they had to compel people to work to basically--they needed cheap labor to make--to build the country back up quickly.  And so this is the legacy of all that, is what we're confronted with.  So I'm not saying black people you all are bad folks and everything else.  I mean--this is kind of--this is the legacy of slavery.  This is how it played out in this country and all that forced convict and work, all that--this is, all that is what we see in today's world.  Not making excuses, I'm just saying that's how it is.  So that's part of that layer of that.  And what I'm concerned about is that in this land grab at this juncture with this land grab and everybody's like I want mine.  That's why people are like I'm going to buy my guns so I can keep mine, keep it away from you.  This whole idea of kind of like looking for a job, you know black people need to be entrepreneurial--I mean all the things that would give us more independence and power.  But you know all that comes from a work ethic and depends on how people--kids were educated in school.  Did they even have this kind of exposure to take them to that next level?  So it's very complex.  So I'm concerned because I see a lot of young, black people just kind of falling between the cracks.  Because the--I mean, I'm a product of public schools and you know middle class parents [Phyllis Jackson Agins and William Agins] who didn't--I mean we were exposed not like overexposed but we were exposed.  But good public schools, good guidance counselors, role models, solid neighborhoods.   And all that kind of stuff which allowed us to thrive.  And so that is what I'm concerned, because I see you know these broken homes.  Not, but let me say--I'm not saying that single mother households are necessarily a bad thing because I'd rather see that then--I mean I also saw a lot of households where there was a lot of fighting and verbal fighting and abuse and all that so I think that's bad too.  But I just--I'm concerned about a lot of young black people because the other thing is now the way the neighborhoods are, we're not all in--in my neighborhood [Brentwood Hills, Kansas City, Kansas], I got to see everybody.  Now these kids--it's truly a class situation and I don't have a lot of stuff in common with a lot of other black people.  And you know, and even though we look the same, we don't have anything in common; we have very little in common.  And so it means that we're going to never probably get--I'm never going to meet these people and they are never going to meet me.  I don't know what I can impart to them; I don't even know if they want me to impart anything to them.  But it's complicated and I do worry about us as a race because I just look at all of the wonderful things that black people--not only did we build this country but things that we've been instrumental in contributing and I'd like to see a lot more young people get--go on that track.  So that is--you know, I mean, I'm kind of rambling here but.
Story_ID: 660499
Speaker 1: So what, what about your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  I just, pe-, I just want people to see me as somebody who applied herself.  They say chance favors a prepared mind, that's another thing that I would, you know.  Chance fa- and I was a person who took advantage of opportunities but I was also positioned to do that.  I mean when I got in position to do something, I went and ceased the day and then, and worked really hard.  Like I tell people, I'm not, I'm not a natural writer, it's hard for me.  I'm slow, anybody would tell you--I will tell people I am slow; I'm not really fast.  I don't think, with the piano, I was not a really good pianist; I'm not really a good tennis player but all these things I do try really hard.  And so I think people would see that about me.  Because I have a good work ethic.  I'm not like a crazy workaholic; I can be on certain things because I also believe in balance.  I need a little bit more of it now in my life because like trying to finish this book ['Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers,' Teri Agins].  But, but I would just like people to see me as somebody who worked hard and also I want people to see me as somebody who--I haven't done a lot of philanthropic things and actually and I'm not just trying to say this because it makes it sound good, but that is something actually that I do want to do.  When I talk about--that's why I said, with anything I left I want to channel it to--and I don't have to have my name on a foundation.  Actually I would probably rather channel it to something that's already established where, you know, it would help out some young people get education.  Because I just think that is huge, that's a main thing.  And also I want people to see me as a dog lover.  I can't have dogs in my building now but I like dogs so much.  Do you have dogs?  Do you--either--Scott [Scott Stearns], do you have a dog?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I don't like them.  And I grew up with a dog, like you, and--
Speaker 2: Don't put the dog.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, you grew up--
Speaker 2: I'm allergic to them.
Speaker 1: Oh, I love dogs and you know, Victor [ph.], this is a British guy I went out with, he had these two cats and I just loved these cats so much.  What is this thing about animals and stuff?  I don't know maybe because they're just unconditional love.  They just, you know, people say, "Oh you could have had a child," and I say, "No a dog is different," (laughter).
Story_ID: 660500
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?  Or, wait, do you want to say anything else?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I--the thing is like I said I'm very happy.  I like my job, I'm really good at it and I'm glad that I've done books because that's another reason I did a second book ['Hijacking the Runway: How Celebrities are Stealing the Spotlight from Fashion Designers,' Teri Agins] because that way I can leave something.  I can A, enjoy it while I'm alive too, but I could also leave something because somebody's going to learn something from that.  So that's really you know, important.  And, but I just want--I have a nephew who is twenty-three and I was just telling him like you know, work hard and the joy of work and there is no, I tell this and I always keep telling Taylor [Taylor Nunes-Agins], there's no there, there.  I mean there is no goal.  As soon as you get to here you've got to go to the next one.  I got to finish this and then the next one.  So there is no, like, end.  It's just like, so you know you want to take pleasure in the things but you definitely want to keep learning and doing stuff because that's the other thing, I am--well you and I were recently at a thing in Miami [Florida] where we were talking to this guy who said that he had retired, remember his wife said, she said, "You don't have enough to do. You need to go back and find something."  He said, "I was doing really well being happy to retire," and we were saying that now he is working and he saying, "Well I'm not that happy," and I'm like, "I bet you are."  Yeah I mean he's got some aggravations and everything but I said, unless you have some really like serious heavy duty hobby which most people don't, you still get the most joy out of working or doing something in the work family.  And I get the most joy out of doing my stories and things.  That's what I get the joy out of because it's--this is what I do and so you know that's just me (laughter).  This is what I do.  But the joy of learning, I'm telling you I just--there is nothing better, don't you agree?  There is nothing better than learning stuff.  I just, oh, I just treasure anything I can learn because yeah it means a lot.
Speaker 1: That's it, that's it, thank you.
