Story_ID: 21622
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Daniel is my first name; Lee, L-E-E, is my middle name; Akins, A-K-I-N-S, is my surname.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: The date of birth is July the 8th, 1941, and I was born in Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a research chemist; actually, I'm a professor of physical chemistry presently at the City College--City University of New York [also known as CUNY in New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, today's date is May the 15th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're in my home, actually, in Teaneck, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 1530 Sunrise Terrace.
Story_ID: 21623
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as sort of a warm-up, and they require like a short answer.  The first one is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Wow.  Yes.  Everything [laughs].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I guess that didn't answer the question, so [laughs].
Speaker 1: Well, that could be the answer, you know.  So, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like the summer.
Speaker 1: All right.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Phrase or saying.  I guess it would have to be 'Never give up.'  I mean, that applies if you're playing sports, tennis, which I love to play.  You know, when you get down and you think you're losing, and you say, 'No, no.  Don't give up.  Keep fighting.'
Story_ID: 21624
Speaker 1: All right.  So now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  And I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, starting with your mother's side first, and then we'll put them together when we ask about both sides.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Clementina, C-L-E-M-E-N-T-I-N-A, Smith.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Miami, Florida; May, and I can't remember the exact day, 1924, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Oh, my grandmother was from an island and I think Nassau [capital and commercial center of the Commonwealth of The Bahamas], called Cat Island  [located in the central Bahamas, and one of its districts, and has the nation's highest point; established in 1999].  I don't know very much about it.  My--.
Speaker 1: In the Bahamas [Caribbean island, known officially as the Commonwealth of The Bahamas], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grandfather was originally from Haiti [officially the Republic of Haiti; It was the first independent nation of Latin America and the Caribbean, the first black-led republic in the world, and the second republic in the Americas when it gained independence in 1804 as part of a successful slave revolution lasting nearly a decade], I was told, but he was brought up in Nicaragua, and I don't know much about the details of that.
Speaker 1: Been brought up in Nicaragua.  Okay.  So, okay.  So, you don't have any stories about how they managed to come to the--.
Speaker 2: No.  The certain thing I remember most was he had fought in the First World War for the French [referring to World War I, 1914-1918], and we had pictures of him in his uniform.  And I always realized, they would say, a bullet had creased his eyebrow, and if it had been one inch off, I wouldn't have been here [laughs], you know.  One inch more, that's all it would have taken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he fought in the U.S. Army, but--
Speaker 2: No, he fought--.
Speaker 1: --under the French?
Speaker 2: No.  He fought for the French.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In the French Army [Armee de Terre]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As a--was he a U.S. citizen?
Speaker 2: No.  He became naturalized later.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He was originally from Haiti.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he fought as--.  Okay.  That's [unclear].  All right.  So he was brought in Nicaragua?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's what I've been told.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think, well.  Now, maybe, this is suggested, maybe he was in the U.S. Army assigned to the French.  That's what the World War--.
Speaker 2: Oh, he had the French uniform on.  And he always spoke French to my grandmother whenever he got--she got upset and he'd start speaking French to her, you know.  So he was clearly somewhat immersed in that culture.
Speaker 1: That may be so, but--yeah, okay.  That could be.  It--I mean, I believe you.  I'm just saying that the U.S. soldiers all were assigned to the French Army, went over, you know, they didn't really, because the Americans didn't want them in there, anyhow; even though they recruited them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I heard of that.
Speaker 1: So.  Okay.  So, as a Haitian national, now even--that is something for somebody to investigate to see how that's--how that could have happened.
Speaker 2: That happened [laughs].
Story_ID: 21625
Speaker 1: Anyway, so he--how did he end up coming to the U.S.?
Speaker 2: I really don't know the details.  He was somewhat like a Merchant Marine or something of this sort.  He ended up, I don't really know how he met my grandmother on that side, but my earliest memories is, of course, of when they were completely U.S. citizens.
Speaker 1: Now were they married before they came to the U.S.?
Speaker 2: I don't believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So [unclear]--.
Speaker 2: Because they would have been in different--I think so.
Speaker 1: He met her here?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's interesting, because, you know, there a lot of--we have a lot of [United States] Merchant Marine stories that you might hear of some people come and, you know, and drop off at a port like Mobile [Alabama] or Boston [Massachusetts] or wherever they end up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of this may be off-base, because I know he worked on a dock, but that's not really being a Merchant Marine.  So, he may have just been a dock worker, you know, so.  But I remember his being somewhat connected with ships.  So, but, actually being formally a Merchant Marine, that may, as I think about it, not have actually been the case.
Speaker 1: Well, yet, he got here some way, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He did something on the ship to get here.  So that's--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All of these are questions that I'm going to have to look into now that you've made me think about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting history though.  So did your grandmother or grandfather ever talk about what life was like where they were raised?
Speaker 2: Oh, not at all.  I mean, they became American citizens and they totally were committed to that; had American flags, everything.  I very seldom--.  Now, on the hand, my brother, who's a couple a couple years than I, seem to know a lot more than I about this, what happened and who was who.  So I'm always thinking about that.  He knows names and things that I know nothing of.  I don't remember anything like that.
Speaker 1: How much older is he?
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, grandfather was a World War I [1914-1918] vet [sic, veteran].  Okay.  Now, is it--do you know what your grandfather did for a living?  Did he work on the docks?
Speaker 2: Yes, he worked on the docks.
Speaker 1: In Miami?
Speaker 2: Yes, in Miami [Florida].
Story_ID: 21626
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so, now, what about your mother?  Did she--.  So she grew up in Miami?
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew in Miami [Florida], mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she have any stories to tell about growing up?
Speaker 2: Only, well, nothing that's sort of interesting other than she and my father got divorced, and she--and I heard her talking about how it happened and how my grandmother almost forced it to happen; basically says, "You stay here."  He said, "Come with me," and she said--my grandmother said, "You don't go with him.  Stay with me."  And so she chose to stay with my grandmother.  And that always came up later about something that shouldn't have happened, you know.  But I don't know much about the details on that either.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she think she made the right choice?
Speaker 2: She never--.  My grandmother--my mother was a person who never complained about anything.  In fact, my father was the same way.  They were very--and maybe it's translated through me in that you don't really labor over things that have passed.  They just, you know, you just move on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother have a chance to finish school in Miami?
Speaker 2: Well, she became a professional hairstylist and had her own beauty parlor in Miami, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was she a part of Madame Walker's [Madame C.J. Walker, first black female self-made millionaire; entrepreneur]  operation or--?
Speaker 2: I know she got certificates, but I don't recall exactly what they said.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't know about Madame Walker at that time, so I wouldn't even have appreciated what it meant, who it was.
Story_ID: 21627
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me go to your father's side, okay.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Daniel Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Akins, A-K-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's--I'm not quite certain, but I think it was--I may have said 1924 for my mother, but I think it was 1927, and my father was 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think I gave that information, their birthdates, on the form that I provided.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: I looked it up.
Speaker 1: So your father's birthday is '24 [1924], and your mother's in '27 [1927]?
Speaker 2: I think so, because he was older than she.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Is she--I mean, your father is older than your mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, then he'd be '27 [1927] and she'd be '24 [1924], right?
Speaker 2: No, '24 [1924] comes before '27 [1927], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So, your father was born in 1924 and your mother in 1927?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  And--all right.  And where was your father born?
Speaker 2: He was born in, I believe, Miami [Florida], I believe, Florida.  Though, I seem to remember something about--well, maybe my grandfather was from Georgia.  But I looked that up, but it didn't stick in my memory.
Story_ID: 21628
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who--what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, I know a lot more about them, though I found out a lot is more recently.  My grandfather was born--lived in Georgia and moved to Florida early on, and he had a big church in Detroit, Michigan, and then they moved it to Miami [Florida].  And it had a school and everything associated with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he went from Georgia to Detroit [Michigan] first--
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact people--the route, but he--
Speaker 1: I guess, back--.
Speaker 2: --and I did visit him in Detroit when he had it.
Speaker 1: Oh, so he had the--well--.
Speaker 2: But he actually went to--I guess he moved to Miami, because my grandmother, his wife, was from Miami, so that they--and then I think he married a LeFlore [ph. splg.], who was well-known from Detroit, and started a big church, and then eventually they moved the church down to Miami.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he married her in Miami, then moved to Detroit, found the church, they moved the church back down to Florida?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: It was Akins's--.  It was not a Baptist church, though.  They played instruments because I visited it.  But I don't remember the name of the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it Church of God In Christ [Pentecostal Holiness Christian denomination]?
Speaker 2: I believe it was, yeah..
Speaker 1: C.O.G.C. [sic, COGIC]?
Speaker 2: I believe it was.
Speaker 1: So it was called Akins's Church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a part of the name.
Speaker 1: Akins Temple or Akins--?
Speaker 2: It's on like 127th Street in Miami, which I visited.  And a lot of stuff I was not aware of, so it was a--.  But, of course, my brother ended up with everything and knew all the details.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Church of God In Christ, they do, it's called Pentecostal Home [unclear] thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They played instruments and things of that sort, you know.  The church I was brought up in, in Miami had--was very formal.  They had a--everything was so ritualized.  And so, when I visited my grandfather's church, I mean, I quite--didn't quite know what to do because everybody was moving around, you know [laughs].  So, it wasn't the type of church that I was used to.  I sort of went to the First Baptist Church.  Mount Zion was the name of it, Mount Zion Baptist Church in Miami [Florida].
Story_ID: 21629
Speaker 1: So, now, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Daniel Thomas Akins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Same as your father?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So he was a junior?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, do you know much about your grandmother on that side?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Otea, O-T-E-A, was her first name.
Speaker 1: And okay.
Speaker 2: She was somewhat of a--well, maybe eight children, and they spread out all over the country.  I did find out that one of my kids was doing a genealogy, and I got into it for a brief time and traced my ancestry back to Aiken, South Carolina, of my 1844, a relative who spelled the name, A-I-K-E-N, but changed it to, A-K-I-N-S.  So for all I know, I may have some wealth in Aiken, South Carolina [laughs].
Speaker 1: There's a, you know, one of the New York historians, John G. Jackson, was from Aiken, South Carolina; and a big official in the Y.M.C.A [Young Men's Christian Association]. is here [unclear].  Okay.  So that's interesting, because I thought about that when I heard the name, but I didn't know.  So, now, did your father have a chance to finish school or did he--?
Speaker 2: He joined the military very young.  I think he was, like, during the Second World War [World War II, 1939-1945], I think he was like seventeen or eighteen, and he became more of a businessman, and actually a manager for several clubs, nightclubs in Miami [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did he do with these clubs, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: They were clubs where, you know, after-hours, evening clubs where people would go, have food and have cocktails and things of that sort.  He managed the whole operations, principally for--in Miami, it would have been close to the part of town that was mainly Jewish, but he was good friends with the owners of those places, so he ran the places for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he hired the people and fired them and all that type of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these are--these are Jewish-owned clubs, but they catered to the black community?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In the segregated days, they had a mixed club in those days.  And so, he managed, actually ran the club--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for the owners who were Jewish, who were not necessarily on the scene?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I got to know them and their children.  You know, they would come by the place and we became friends and that type of thing.
Story_ID: 21630
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right now, is there a story about how your parents [Daniel Thomas Akins and Clemintina Smith] met?
Speaker 2: I don't know it.  I don't know of any story about that.  I just know that my mother was very young, and my father was getting ready to go to war, and so [laughs], they got together, but I don't know any of the details.
Speaker 1: Now, she would have been in high school, right?
Speaker 2: She probably--.  I think, well, she had to be around sixteen or seventeen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm thinking, because I was calculating, because my mother was the same age about that time.  Yeah, she would have been in high school.  So, anyway, so they got together before he went overseas?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And he was there for the duration.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when he came back, in fact, I never remember living with him.  So they must have gotten divorced almost immediately.  I mean, they weren't together for, you know, several years.
Story_ID: 21631
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now, did he go to Europe or the Pacific or both?
Speaker 2: My understanding was that he was in Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he would tell stories that suggested that it was Europe.  But he didn't want to go in too much of the details, so he did tell me he was a machine gun operator, and he had many stories associated with that, and some sort of hilarious [unclear], but they were very serious issues he dealt with.
Speaker 1: Like what for instance?
Speaker 2: Oh, they had clickers, you know, you've heard stories where the American soldiers had clickers, and they throw it and say 'Friend to Friend or Foe', and all of his compadres knew that he paid no attention to that, and he just shot anything that moved, so they wouldn't even go into his direction.  So--and machines gunners didn't have a long life expectancy because everybody attacked those positions.  But he--so he survived this by his practice of shooting at anything that moved basically [laughs].
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is kind of comic [unclear][simultaneous].
Speaker 2: But it has a serious outcome, right [laughs].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he came back after the war in 1945 or is '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something of that sort, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but they never got back together?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.  I mean, I never remember his being there, you know, in the same house.  I mainly was brought up by my grandmother.  I spent a lot of time with her.
Story_ID: 21632
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, give us your grandmother's name--this is your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's mother.  Merlice Smith, M-E-R-L-I-C-E.
Speaker 1: And where was she from?
Speaker 2: Cat Island [Bahamas].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's the one from--okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know her date of birth?
Speaker 2: I think 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She stayed home and worked around the house.  I don't ever remember her going out to do any type of work.  The common job for most women, black women, in Miami at that time was to go over to Miami Beach and to work for--they had to have passes, much like South Africa--to go to Miami Beach and work; be domestic workers for the people on Miami Beach.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--all right.  So--so you were raised by your grandmother?
Speaker 2: Basically by my grandmother, yes.
Speaker 1: What was she like?  What was she like?
Speaker 2: She was a very strong-willed person who would make certain that I did everything I was supposed to do.  I had to take flowers to school to the teachers, and by teaching, she would make certain that I didn't stay out late, you know.  Basically make certain I didn't get into trouble, you know.  And, but she was a very loving person, would do anything for my brother and me.  And, you know, that just went on for years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she raise you and your brother?
Speaker 2: Mainly me.  My brother spent more--a lot of time with my father [Daniel Thomas Akins] and his second wife.  And they lived in Opa-locka, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, but in terms of myself, I viewed that when I went there as visiting.  And, but you know, my home was with my grandmother and grandfather.
Story_ID: 21633
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So when you think about--when you consider their personalities, temperaments, their looks, their talents, who do you think you take after the most amongst your grandmother [Merlice Smith], your mother, and your father?
Speaker 2: I think I probably have a lot of characteristics like my father [Daniel Thomas Akins] in that he had a lot of control of himself, you know.  But my mother [Clementina Smith] was very--what's the word I was looking--I would choose.  She would--nothing would faze her.  I mean, she'd have a joke for every situation, you know, it was something you would not expect.  In reply, her response would always be clever.  I remember when my wife, when she, after we had been married for a while, she said something to my mother, "How do you control him, how do you do so?"  She said, "Listen, he was with me for seventeen years, he's been with you longer than that, so don't ask me."  [laughs]  I always thought that was funny.  But, you know, she'd always have something, some response like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But your father didn't joke around that much?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was a--.  Nah, not at all.  He didn't joke around very much at all.  He took care of his, what he had to--he was a very serious-type person, and he seemed to be a leader too, because he always had people working for him, and he seemed to have to make decisions.  But, you know, I don't really--I couldn't really say that I knew him very well.  I mean, though, I saw him a lot, but I don't think I really knew him very well.  I never, you know, I didn't know he smoked, for example, because he would never smoke in front of me.  I never saw him drink anything, because he never drank--he always had--he would maintain those.  He didn't want me to know about those things, so he wouldn't--he wouldn't do them around me, you know, so.  And when he was ready to leave, we were going to leave; if we left anything, it was too bad.  You couldn't go back to get them, you know, that type of thing.  He was sort of, he controlled the situation.
Story_ID: 21634
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, can you describe the neighborhood you grew up in?  I mean, did it have a--what was the name of that neighborhood?  I know it was--.
Speaker 2: Overtown [Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: Overtown.  Okay.  Did you grow up in the same neighborhood the whole time you grew up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And it was a very warm neighborhood.  I remember thinking as a kid that I was the luckiest kid in the world.  And, you know, not that I didn't have any needs that I'd knew that I wanted.  I mean, I had everything I wanted.  The weather was fine, it just seemed to be perfect, ideally, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, you would think that Miami Beach [Florida] would be--I mean, you know, not that you [unclear] on the beach, but you know, that Miami would be a nice place in terms of the weather and all that.
Speaker 2: I'm sure--yeah, but I'm sure that, you know, as a kid, I mean, that's what you--you don't see the undersides of anything.  You just see the good side, and so, I thought it was an ideal place.  I even grew up thinking that I'll be President of the United States, you know.  So, that tells you I was brought up to believe that I could do anything I wanted to do with no issues to hold you back or anything of that sort.
Story_ID: 21635
Speaker 1: So, who primarily encouraged you?
Speaker 2: To have that point of view?  I'd say, teachers.  I was always successful in school.  I would always be getting very positive comments.  My grandmother [Merlice Smith] was a very strong-willed person.  She told me that no one could take education away from you.  And, you know, just--the church was very powerful.  I remember the minister always saying, you aim for the stars, and if you fall short, you'll be in a good place.  Things of that sort, you know.  And those were the things, I guess, I carried with me ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Mount Zion Baptist Church [Miami, Florida]?
Speaker 2: Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, okay.  So, in your household, growing up it was just you and your grandmother and your grandfather, right?
Speaker 2: And occasionally my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Mostly, well, I guess, you know, he probably would say he was there more than I realized.  He had a different group of friends than I had.  I liked to play sports, and he liked to do other things which I didn't [unclear]--if it had been a younger brother, he didn't want me tailing behind him very much, you know.  So, in fact, he decided to go to another school because he didn't like being--it was a strange situation.  But my mother [Clemintina Smith] decided that she didn't want me to be alone going--starting school.  So she held him back one year [laughs], you know.  And he always sort of didn't appreciate that fact.  So, he went to another school and--but we were always in the same grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I imagine he might resent that [unclear][simultaneous].
Speaker 2: [laughs].  Yeah, I don't know, but, you know, it sounds crazy.  But it's not--it turns out it wasn't that uncommon.
Story_ID: 21636
Speaker 1: Right.  I've heard that kind of story before.  Okay.  So--and do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell me this, and we always ask this question:  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember periodically I would go down to the waterfront and meet one of the captains and go out on the ocean.  My parents [Daniel Thomas Akins and Clementina Smith] would have been shocked.  I'm out in the deep ocean helping a captain of a tugboat, you know, and I was--I enjoyed that and the seagulls and things flying around.  I probably was thirteen or something like that, fourteen, but maybe even younger.
Speaker 1: Any other sights, sounds, or smells while growing up?
Speaker 2: [It's thousands?].  Well, I used to like to play sports.  I knew people who played sports.  It was just those types, just things that kids do, but nothing that[unclear] and sticks out really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here a second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 21637
Speaker 1: All right.  So, we were talking about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  And I know after living probably here in New Jersey, that it's different from Miami, you know.  So, people will listen to this in the future, and what was it like growing up in Miami, what did it look like, and what did it--you know?
Speaker 2: Well, the moon was enormous; I can tell you that, to my eyes. Just the other day, they were talking about the earth being so close to the moon, you're going to get a great view of it a few days ago.  But growing in Miami [Florida], you talk about moon over Miami, I can--the moon just seemed enormous.  And I would lie on the ground looking up at the stars trying to locate the different constellations.  And there was all that excitement about Cape Canaveral [a headland formerly known as Cape Kennedy and is located in Brevard County, Miami], and I would see, I guess, they were sending off spacecraft.  And then sometimes you'd see things in the sky that didn't seem normal.  I remember those sights.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see something that didn't look normal?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, you know, it was--you hate to go into those kinds of things, but I did in life see things that didn't move in the right way that you would think, you know, that you might call--who knows what it was.  But it didn't--I've looked up in the skies many, many nights and I would see things that didn't seem normal, that would seem to approach and then go away at right angles and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Okay.  So, any smells associated with food or the ocean or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No.
Story_ID: 21638
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  You said, during the break, that you liked to draw and paint.  So when did this start?
Speaker 2: Oh, I must have been less than five maybe.  When I first met my wife, in fact, I handed her a drawing of her that I had made just watching her.  And I sketched it and I gave it to her.  I used to do that quite a bit in terms of just some landscaping and things.  But I chose to draw a person.  Yeah, but I used to do posters and things of that sort, you know.  I even learned how to play chess.  I learned to play that very early; found that an interesting game.
Speaker 1: Who taught you how to play chess?
Speaker 2: I really don't remember, it was so long ago [laughs].  And I taught my older daughter how to play chess at a very early age.  I really can't imagine who would have taught me to play chess.  I mean, somehow I learned how to play it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I spent a lot of time by myself just sort of reading, I mean, to the point that my--I remember my grandmother [Merlice Smith] told me I was going to hurt my brain, you know, which was tantamount to telling me keep studying, because I thought it was such a strange to say.  I would sleep with books in the bed and she would--she'd have to move the books over so I could have some room, you know, and told she told me not to read and I would do it anyway.  I was just being rebellious, I guess.
Speaker 1: Tell you not to read?
Speaker 2: Yes, because I was doing it too much [laughs], she felt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you said you liked sports?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what did you really gravitate towards?
Speaker 2: I played basketball and football basically.  You know, now I play tennis.  I mean, but, back then, I mean, if you played tennis, you were considered soft.  You'd have to fight your way home basically [laughs].
Story_ID: 21639
Speaker 1: Now, were you the best artist in class when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I would say so, yeah.  Yeah.  But it's funny.  I had the easels and everything.  I remember going to college, and my grandmother [Merlice Smith] was on me all the time, telling me that you couldn't make a living being an artist.  So, I left all my art, my art material, pushed it under the bed, and sort of just put it away, you know.  But, I mean, she was probably right.  I mean, you know, those--I mean, some of the times, the things that you might be good in, may not be good for you, you know.  So, I never regretted it, quite frankly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't miss art work then?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  But I think one of the things that--what art brought out of me, which is still there is that, I can't start something and leave it alone.  I got to--I mean, I could draw and paint for hours upon hours.  And if I'm into a project, and the same thing comes out, and, you know, now, and today when you do--get data, you got to make it--put it in a certain form so others can understand it, and I take a lot of pride in trying to get a slide or something, you know, in a form that, you know, tells the story that I want to tell.  And I think that takes--that's art work right there.  So, the characteristics that come out that you learned by being an artist, you know, play a big role and be very useful in other fields.
Story_ID: 21640
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in Miami [Florida].  It was an elementary preschool-type thing.  I remember falling out of a tree.  I mean, that's one of my earliest memories, I guess.
Speaker 1: In school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They had a big tree that was sort of--it had a history to it.  And so, I remember falling out of the tree, and on my head nonetheless [laughs].  And that was an early--I mean, that was a big shock to me.  So I remember that.
Speaker 1: This would have been like--you would have started school, say, in 1947?
Speaker 2: I was probably four years old.
Speaker 1: Four years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That would be '45 [1945] then, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: So you were in kindergarten at four?
Speaker 2: I went to kindergarten two years before going to primary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was your brother held back at that juncture?
Speaker 2: We went to kindergarten together.  And I think that's when it first happened, that I had--I was there with him, and then I stayed a second year, but he stayed with me that second year.  So he was always a year behind.
Speaker 1: And so, he's two years actually ahead of you.
Speaker 2: He's a year-and-a-half.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Year-and-a-half?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So is this a Phyllis Wheatley Elementary School [Miami, Florida] that you attended?
Speaker 2: That was the elementary school, but there was a school before that, that I don't recall the name.  There was a primary school, what, a nursing [sic] school.  Maybe I'm thinking about nursing [sic] school.
Speaker 1: A nursery school?
Speaker 2: Nursery school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  There's another--yeah, there's another school, yeah.  It must have been because it says that you attended Wheatley [Phyllis Wheatley Elementary School] from fourth to sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Phyllis Wheatley [the first African-American poet and first African-American woman to publish a book].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Phyllis Wheatley.  And so, you were at another school prior to that but you don't--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you don't remember the name of the other school?
Speaker 2: No.  It was like a woman who took young kids and kept them at her home.  They had a sign up.  I don't know the details, and it was a preschool-type of thing, you know.  And I went there a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But there was something else in there too, because if you didn't start Wheatley until the fourth grade--
Speaker 2: And then before that was, I think it was on the list, it was--I've forgotten the name of the school.  Phyllis--
Speaker 1: Oh, is that [Frederick] Douglass?
Speaker 2: Douglass Elementary School, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Frederick Douglass Elementary School [Miami, Florida].
Speaker 1: So you started out at Frederick Douglass in terms of elementary school?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Mind if I take my jacket off?  I'm a little warm here.  Is that going to be a problem?  Well, I keep it on.
Story_ID: 21641
Speaker 1: All right.  So did--so, was art your favorite subject in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I wanted to be an artist, then I wanted to be a mathematician.
Speaker 1: Now, these two subjects are not often paired together.  You know, art and math.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, it's about beauty.  I mean, symmetry and, you don't know what you're going--the next step gives you something, that you don't necessarily know what it's going to be, type of thing [sic].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They seemed to be connected to me at the time.
Speaker 1: All right.  Mathematicians often speak of the beauty of mathematics and, you know, which is--.  For those of who don't [laughs] are kind of clunky in math [unintelligible].  But you see the beauty in math?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  In fact, I even more, you know, recently, you find out that there's such--there's a foundation, something that math is just not there by chance.  I mean, it derives from some controlling features of our--the universe.  I mean, it's--that's why things have some mathematical expressions.  I mean, there--and so, when you do it, you feel like you're understanding what some of those controlling features are, you know.  And the whole fact that certain numbers have, can be generated and give you structures, that things that have symmetry to them, if you put them down, you know, it's sort of fascinating.  I mean--I mean, there's a lot of stuff going on in understanding math these days that I find exciting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But I a chemist--I'm a physical chemist.  And when I went to college, I wanted to be a physicist.  But when I got to Howard [University, Washington, D.C], they signed me up for chemistry by mistake and I decided to stay [laughs].  So.  But I became--I was more interested in mathematics than physics, and so I became a physical chemist, which combines all of those.
Story_ID: 21642
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, back to grade school.  Now, did you have a favorite teacher in grade school?
Speaker 2: My math teacher was probably my favorite teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you liked school pretty much?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And I had very--a lot of success in school, and it just seemed to be normal, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said you did a lot of studying and a lot of--spent a lot of time by yourself.  Did you have friends?  Were you social or were you popular?
Speaker 2: I think I--I used to think when I thought about this, you know, over a period of time, and I think I was a little bit introverted.  But I did not mind being alone.  I could spend hours by myself thinking about things and not feel that I would have to be with someone or talking about something.  So I--and in those--that kind of characteristic, you know, plays out well if you're in a laboratory doing experiments all times of night, and you're just internal as opposed to, you know, trying to communicate with someone else or think about things.  So, it, you know, I think it's part of my personality to be introverted to a degree.  But, I mean, as time goes on, you know, you change and you take on--you smooth things out and become less introverted than you were before.  But, I guess, basically, and I tend to be somewhat of a loner.  I mean, I don't hang around with a lot of people.  I play sports but, you know, I don't just hang around and--just to talk.
Story_ID: 21643
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you engaged in popular cultures and stuff like music and television and that sort of thing; movies when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you pay attention to popular culture, you know, activities like music.  Did you like music and--?
Speaker 2: Not that much, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it wasn't--you didn't--there wasn't a lot of music played at home?
Speaker 2: No, not much at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you go to movies [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know, during that time, I really found the movies a little bit uncomfortable.  They had movie theatres for blacks and then for whites.  And so, the movies I would go to--theatres I would go to, they would have movies that I didn't really like very much, like Mantan Moreland.  [laughs].  And all I can remember was the guy's big eyes, always afraid of stuff, you know.  And I would get very offensive by that, that type of thing.  And even as a kid I didn't like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these images of black people that are in the white media?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  I mean, remember one of my--I used to ask my mother, I said, I wanted her to--I wanted this skin colored Band-Aid.  And all the band-aids then were white.  So, I asked her why couldn't I get one and she would try to tell me.  I also wouldn't go to parades, because in parades in Miami they would have police on motorcycles sort of rush--rushing up into the crowd like they were going to, you know, run over people, you know, at the parade.  And I couldn't see myself subjecting myself to that type of humiliation, so I wouldn't go to parades either.  So it was a lot of little things like that.  Probably sounds--.  But it sort shapes you, you know.  I mean, I still don't go to parades to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did--.  How were race relations in Miami [Florida] when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, they probably good in the sense that I never experienced anything, I guess, as a kid.  I never got any issues in that regard.  Though, there were these things such as, if you wanted to play football or basketball against the white kids, we could get together and play.  But if they were on Miami Beach, the police would run us back off at us [sic], and then we have to [laughs], you know, they would get us, as you say, "you got to get back across the track by a certain time."  That type of thing.
Speaker 1: So, I'm understanding that they didn't allow black people on the beach in Miami Beach.
Speaker 2: Unless you had pass.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that meant that you were on your way to work or something?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's right.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now was there a black beach at all?
Speaker 2: There was Virginia Key Beach [Miami, Florida] that--and, you know, as a member of the Boy Scouts [of America] and things like that, I would go--we would hike there all the time.  That was a very nice beach, but, you know, all beaches were nice as I viewed them.  But that was the only beach that I actually would go in the water on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did--when your family went to shop, did you go downtown in Miami Beach or did you--or was there another place that black people shopped before?
Speaker 2: In those days--but, no.  I didn't really go shopping with my grandparents.  And most of the stores were local stores.  There was a number of Chinese-owned stores in the neighborhood that you just walk down the block and you get almost anything you want.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there wasn't a lot of need to go Downtown then?
Speaker 2: There really wasn't a Downtown per se.  I mean, it was not a shopping area, per se, or supermarkets and things of that sort.  There weren't those types of things.  I mean, they were, in terms of shopping for clothes, I mean, of course, as a kid I wouldn't--didn't have to do that, so, no.  That's not part of my experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you never--Downtown was segregated--.  There's a white business strip there, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, in Miami, Miami was--had a division that included--a population that included Spanish, Cubans, blacks and Jewish people.  There was--clearly some general whites, but they were not part of the--my normal experience.  I mean, they were not, other than, you know, coming to the school and--Board of--the School Board members and things of that sort.  But, it was a sort of segregated environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did--.  So, you never had any personal encounters with the white police or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about--.  Now, school was segregated, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But there was still Spanish there in some cases.
Speaker 1: But there was some, okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: So were there any Cubans in school with you?
Speaker 2: There were some, yeah.
Story_ID: 21644
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you were at Phyllis Wheatley until the sixth grade, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm thinking mainly of my high school, Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there weren't any Cubans at Wheatley--.
Speaker 2: Not that I remember.  I probably wouldn't have known what they were.  You know, I would have just thought they were kids, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, in high school now, you went to--?
Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Booker T. Washington High School [Miami, Florida].
Speaker 2: And the funny thing, there was statute of Booker T. Washington in the plaza area and, I mean, that was never even discussed.  That was never taught who he was or referred to.  And I went to Frederick Douglass School, that was never discussed who Frederick Douglass was.  Those things never were discussed in any of my schools.
Speaker 1: I suppose Phyllis Wheatley too.
Speaker 2: Nothing.  Yeah.  None of that was.  So, I mean, I learned about Frederick Douglass almost after I had become an--well, maybe before I became an adult.  But, you know, things like that, I filled in gaps.  Now, that doesn't say that all kids were like me during that period.  Maybe I just wasn't so focused on those issues.  But there was never any programs associated, identified who black leaders had been, you know.  Booker T. Washington, you know, I didn't--all I knew, his comment about the fingers on the hand, you know.  That came up.  But nothing other than that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what's that comment, where "We can be as separate as the fingers on the hand"--.[sic, "In all things that are purely social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all things essential to mutual progress."]
Speaker 2: "But in the end, we're working together, you know, we can be as powerful as the fist."  Something to that effect, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, that's significant that, you know, someone took to the time to name these schools after African-American heroes, but the school administration did not see fit to even--
Speaker 2: Educate, yeah, on some, on who those were.
Speaker 1: --highlight that.
Speaker 2: I'm thinking about the--well, I don't want to think about it too long, because I may not--.  Paul Robeson.  I'd never even heard of Paul Robeson, I mean.  And, but when I was a kid, I mean, he was clearly, you know, a hero, an American hero.  He had done a lot of different things.   I think the first time I even saw him was him singing 'Ol' Man River' in--was that 'Gone With The Wind,' or something?
Speaker 1: That's 'Showboat.'
Speaker 2: 'Showboat.'  Yes.  That was the first time [laughs].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, he was a pretty big star in 1941, when you were born and through the early '50s [1950s].  So now, they had a statute of Booker T. Washington in the front of the school.
Speaker 2: In the plaza area, yes.
Speaker 1: And then no one discussed this in the school?
Speaker 2: Hm-mm.
Story_ID: 21645
Speaker 1: So, what activities were you involved in in high school [Booker T. Washington High School]?
Speaker 2: I was in [unclear]--I took art, math, and I took up extra courses and sometimes took two courses in like, chemistry, and then I helped the teacher teach the chemistry course.  I was heavily involved in the school.  When I came along, they were fighting integration, I guess.  So then, I did--and, of course, it predated me somewhat, but when I got to high school, we had all these brand-new buildings.  I mean, we had brand-new science facilities; and I just thought that was the norm.  So, we had, you know, the chemistry laboratories and, of course, that was just at that small window that I, when I was coming through.  And before that, I mean, the kids probably had nothing, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you think that the new schools or the new buildings--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They had new teachers.  I remember--none of my teachers had higher degrees.  In fact, there was a husband and wife team, I remember very well, that all of the boys found her so attractive, you know, and both she and her husband were there.  But they taught science and--.  But that was unusual, I mean, to, I suspect over of period of time that they had talented instructors.  But, you know, they couldn't get jobs any other place doing that at that point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have a favorite teacher at Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: One, you know, I can't remember her name, but, I just--.  Well, actually, I do remember her.  I remember her, but she told me that I could do anything I wanted to do, and I just remember she would always say that to me, you know.  But, I have a picture of her upstairs, but I can't--it turns out that she was a music teacher when I was in, like, Frederick Douglass, and one of the schools, and then she moved [up?] but, I do remember her and some of the things she said.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you join clubs and stuff in high school?
Speaker 2: Boy Scouts, that type of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You ever run for class office?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Work on the yearbook staff or --?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Play sports in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I played basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you a guard?
Speaker 2: Guard, yes.
Story_ID: 21646
Speaker 1: Did you have a sports hero?
Speaker 2: Back in those days?  Not really.  No.  My heroes were in science.  I mean, I used to think of like, [Albert] Einstein, and things and people like that as heroes.  In fact, I had convinced myself that I was--I could do anything [Albert] Einstein could do [laughs].  I mean, I really thought that I had unlimited abilities, you know.  I don't know where that came from, I mean, but, and it always disappoints me when I meet kids who talk about their limitations.  You know, they're already defeated.  And I guess it has to do with this thing about you aim for the stars, and you're going to--you'll be somewhere good anyway, you know.  But, no, I had--I mean, possibility an inflated view of what I could do.  And I don't know where that came from.
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  So, I'm trying to figure out, your hero is Einstein, people like Einstein.  Now who--where were you--.  Now, what--was it the maturing or reading then that you [unclear] [simultaneous]--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the reading, the things I was reading.  I was--I liked to read.  I read a lot of astronomy books.  Some, but--and I, you know, and actually I remember reading a book that--I guess the books were old and I didn't realize it until it would say things there that turned out not to be true, like, it'll make a philosophical statement that, you know, electrons would never be able to be seen.  I mean, well, in some sense you can't see it by eye, but, you know, what if you could actually see through an electron microscope, and you can get a picture of a molecule or a single layer of carbon atoms with electrons.  You can actually see the atoms and the electrons, I mean, which is possible.  In any case, the books were old, you know, but I didn't realize that they were old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a set of encyclopedias at home?
Speaker 2: Yes, mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are these the ones you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used those.  They were books on philosophy, the whole volumes.  My grandmother used to--had a whole stack of books on philosophy and science, most of which I couldn't really understand, but I would try to read them anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was your grandmother or grandfather a reader?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember, no.
Speaker 1: Were they getting them for you primarily?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were feeding in, you know, on your desire to know.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 21647
Speaker 1: Can you remember when you first became interested in science?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have to say it probably was when I--it's hard to say when that was, but I know the first--.  I used to want to try to build things.  And I would rush home from school to jump in the bed so I could fantasize about doing--making something that I wanted to make.  I mean, I would build in my mind a helicopter, for example.  And I have--and I'd reach a certain stage, and the next night I'd go to the next stage, and this would--you know, it was really, in retrospect, so crazy.  But I looked forward to building things, but it was all in my mind rather than material.  So, and that goes back a very long time.  I don't even know when I started.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, would you attempt to build any of these things?  I mean, when you were awake?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, you know, I needed things I didn't have.  And so, I would have to fill in the gaps.  I mean, things, I mean, when you're actually trying to build something, if you don't have the parts, I mean, and then you can't even get started.  But I could envision each step of the way, and so, I would rush home to go to the next step, building these [laughs], but it was all in my head rather than something concrete.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how were your grades in school?
Speaker 2: I had excellent grades.  I was always top in the class or, you know, thereabouts.  In science, I was top in the class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you graduated, did you graduate with honors?
Speaker 2: Yes, mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, did you have counseling about school, about where to go to college?
Speaker 2: When I took the--I must have.  I took the exam for Howard [University] and was given a scholarship.  And I just--and I was given, I think I was given a scholarship for Florida A & M [also known as FAMU; Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahassee, Florida], and Howard, and I just chose Howard.  But, you know, during that time, there were no schools in Miami [Florida] to go to really.  And I didn't realize that some people were actually given monies to go out of state so that they wouldn't have to go to the University of Florida or, you know, schools that were, a majority schools they were--if one had knew about it, one could get money from the state to be able to go to a school out of state.
Speaker 1: We have to pause here.
Story_ID: 21648
Speaker 1: So, you didn't have any formal counseling in high school about where you were going to go to college?
Speaker 2: Not that I remember, but it wasn't anything dramatic or eye opening about it, because I don't have any recollection of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's usually just a meeting, you go to his office and they sit down and tell you, they said, "You want to go to school, this is how you now go."
Speaker 2: That would have--in my case, I think the counseling would have been from the students who had gone before, and they had chosen certain schools.  There was a fellow I knew who I sort of modeled myself after, went to Howard [University].
Speaker 1: So he was from neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I knew him.  And so, I spoke to him clearly and ended up applying to Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I wondered how you got the idea to go to Howard.  Now that's, I mean, it's a good school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I identify schools to where you can get a scholarship.  So, Howard gave a scholarship--oh, yeah.  There was a test that Florida [Florida A&M University] gave, and there were four of us who scored over 90-something percentile, and Howard could get the scores.  And so, they actually contacted us and we--four of us got--all chose Howard as a result of that.  But, I suspect that's the main way, to take these national tests and to do well and then be offered scholarships.  But I don't think I formally set out to apply to any particular school, actually.
Speaker 1: Now, did any of the school administrators or officials take an interest in you?  You got good grades and you're graduating in the top?
Speaker 2: I always of a--they had--I think they had tracking at that point, and the students that I always with were always the good students.  We always took the same class.  I don't know what was all going on behind the scenes.  I don't know how they identified us, but there was something going on there that probably translated in to--I don't even know someone they've called Howard, you know.  I don't know what was really going on there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, you were on the verge of graduation.  Now, did you make any special presentations at graduation?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: I got the Bausch and Lomb Science Award, which was a prestigious thing for my school.  I still have the little plaque that they gave me.  Then grade point average and things of that sort.  But, other than that, I don't recall anything special.
Story_ID: 21649
Speaker 1: Now, did you participate in science fairs and [unclear]--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I used to do the science fairs when I was a kid.  I remember doing soil studies, getting soils from different parts of Miami [Florida], and then checking them for different types of irons and things of that sort.  So, it was like an environmental study way back, you know, before it ever became sort of popular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was one of the things I did.  Of course, and everybody was doing rockets.  And I made rocket fuel.  I blew up the chemistry laboratory I know that; knocked the windows out [laughs].
Speaker 1: Trying to make rocket fuel?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was amazing because the explosion occurred and I was in the midst of it.  All of the windows got knocked out, I didn't even get hurt [laughs].
Speaker 1: Do you think you because you're at the center voided [unclear]--?
Speaker 2: It must have been.  I don't know--.  Everything got knocked--it was right where I was, I got knocked away.  I didn't even recall other than my ears ringing.  Though I did, I did have some accidents.  I remember knocking myself unconscious with ammonia, making some reaction and, in fact, I almost killed myself.  They had to--the only thing I remember was they took me outside, the chemistry instructor was putting ammonia to my--putting some smelling salts--and I'd eaten all the mucous in my throat and everything, you know, because I had been inhaling this stuff.  But I was unconscious, I didn't know what happened.  So I did that also [laughs].  So I had a number of accidents.  But someone watches over you, you know, in those kinds of experiments, in that situation, because, you know, I had no real control of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, did you participate in any statewide competitions?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 21650
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Howard University [Washington, D.C].  This is 1961?
Speaker 2: Sixty, yes.
Speaker 1: Sixty, sixty, 1960.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And you graduated in 1960.  And so, you go to Howard for the fall of 1960.
Speaker 2: I actually graduated from '59 [1959] from high school.
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then went to Howard and graduated in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went to--in fall of '59 [1959] you to go to Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Glad we got that straight.  So, what did you think of Howard?
Speaker 2: It was a very good school.  You know, I had excellent teachers.  I thought it was the best school in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I joined a fraternity in my second year.
Speaker 1: What did you join?
Speaker 2: Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And the guy who I sort of followed to Howard, he was an Omega as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was--.  How long had he been at Howard?
Speaker 2: Probably a couple of years, maybe, before I got there.
Speaker 1: So he's a couple of years older?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, Howard in 1959.
Speaker 2: His name was Sam Stewart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sam Stewart was there.  Now, who were some of the professors that you took classes from?
Speaker 2: Well, Lloyd Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The late Dr. Lloyd Ferguson, yeah, who wrote--.
Speaker 2: Talbert, was one, another.  Eagleson, he was physics.
Story_ID: 21651
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then there's--let's just say--you know, you get an education at Howard, not just in science.  I had a number of professors in humanities.  I can't for the life of me remember his name, but he was famous.  He used to wear bow ties at Howard all the time.
Speaker 1: Well, what did he teach?  Humanities?
Speaker 2: Humanities, sociology or something of that sort.  I remember him so well because he told me that I could be extremely good, but I need to be careful about spelling and writing.  And so, that sort of stuck with me, you know.  It's the little things like that when someone gives you a suggestion or hint, you know.  His name keeps almost surfacing, and it just--but he's famous for--.  He was a longtime faculty member at Howard.  Everybody would know through--
Speaker 1: Sociology?
Speaker 2: Well, he taught humanities.  Maybe he's a--.
Speaker 1: I can't--.  You know, I'm trying to think too.  But was E. Franklin Frazier there when you were there?
Speaker 2: No.  I met him afterwards.  But it wasn't E. Franklin Frazier [Edward Franklin Frazier was a sociologist].  It was--I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Who wore bow ties?  I can't remember.  Got me on that one.  [unclear].  I know Sterling Brown [Sterling Allen Brown was an alum of Harvard University and studied black culture of the Southern United States] was there at one time I remember.  Well, okay, I guess if you don't, I wouldn't [unclear].
Speaker 2: [Laughs].
Speaker 1: It's good as guessing right now [unclear], but, yeah.  Howard is full of professors that--.  Did you take anything from Howard Thurman?  He may not have been there then.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Most of my courses were in science, you know, math.  Though I had some requirements in humanities, so I did take some, but those were not--.
Speaker 1: And did you take, you didn't take any art at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because you said you left your material back--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And also I realized when I was there, there were people I met in art school who wanted to be commercial artists, and things of that sort.  And I could look at their work and I concluded that, you know, they might be better at it than I am.  It was something that, you know, I wasn't--and I had been away from it for so long.  And I was always somewhat practical, and I realized that there were more good artists than there were good scientists and mathematicians.  So that sort of guided me as well, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in terms of chemistry, what did you--were you--.  Now, well, it seems to me that, from your--, that you might have had good instruction in Florida, I mean, in Miami [unclear][simultaneously]--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I did.  I took--as I said, I helped teach the chemistry and physics, but I took instead--.  Normally you take one course, but I took--I doubled off and I helped teach the second course in both physics and chemistry.  And in math I was always sort of a natural in math.  So, I just took on the math.  In fact, I took math even once I got out to Berkeley in the math department, advanced math-type things.   So, I always just played around with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What courses did you take after Howard in math?
Speaker 2: In math?
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Well, let's see.  I took advanced--it was called advanced math, but it dealt with the theory of math--no.  It dealt with different basic sets and things of that sort, like basal functions and all those--which turned out to be something very useful once I got into graduate school, because all the solutions of these differential equations and so forth, I had already done at Howard.
Story_ID: 21652
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--.  Now, you stayed in the chemistry department.  You originally wanted to be a physicist.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I wanted to be a [unclear]?.  I went to Howard [University] to sign up for physics and ended up being signed up for math--I mean for chemistry, and I just decided to stay in it.  But it was a close call.   I remember Eagleson was the physicist.  He was a mainstay of Howard.  He had been there for a long time.  And I remember my first day of signing up for physics, somehow, I had already signed up the major, but I took physics anyway.  And, his first comments--I signed up, and I must have spelled physics, "P-H-Y-S-I-C."  And he said, "Your first lesson in physics is the "S."  [laughs].  I left the "S" off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, you said your hero was Einstein?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any other--did you know about any black scientists when you went to Howard?
Speaker 2: No.  Not when I was there at Howard.  I would say no.  I mean, actually, you know, that was the point of--just of something that I--.  I mean, I didn't learn about black scientists or anything until, you know, much later, though.  A lot of that stuff was not available to you.  It wasn't really.  Most of my instructors at Howard were white also, I mean, and you know, except for Lloyd Ferguson and Talbert, almost everyone else was.
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware in those days that Lloyd Ferguson had written--
Speaker 2: 'Organic Chemistry' book?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Textbook, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  He was--they used the book at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, who's the other person who I--.  It was another famous chemist there, taught general chemistry.  I took the course from him and--but, you know, they were educators more than scientists; though Lloyd Ferguson was, you know, he was actually chair of the department, and he left to go to California.  That's probably where you met him, in California.
Speaker 1: Right.  We interviewed him in California, because he's originally from the Bay Area and went back.  I think I know who you're talking about here, and I'm falling down too in trying to figure his name out, the person who taught you general chemistry.  But, so, you became a member of Omega Psi Phi, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And, did do any--join any other groups on campus?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I never really joined clubs, you know, [unclear] clubs or things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it says here that you were inducted as a member of Sigma Xi?
Speaker 2: Sigma Xi [The Scientific Research Society].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And is this the science and--
Speaker 2: Engineering.
Speaker 1: --engineering fraternity, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Honor Society, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is '63 [1963], or 1963.  Now, you were a senior in '63 [1963], right?
Speaker 2: In fact--I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: At Howard in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: At Howard, yeah.
Story_ID: 21653
Speaker 1: Now, before you graduated, you met Sondra, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And tell us how you met her?
Speaker 2: Well, she--I was in the cafeteria, and she was studying physics, and a fellow told her that if she needed to solve a problem she should come and ask me.  So he brought her over and introduced her, and I helped her solve a physic problem.  And then I proceeded to draw her [laughs].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So drawing a picture.  Did that help?
Speaker 2: Oh, I just liked to draw.  I still do, even though I had sort of put my easel down, I still like to charcoal and things.  And I would do that periodically.  It's funny.  I remember the guy who introduced us.  His name was Major Gear [ph. splg.].  He was an engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But shortly you all fell in love and got married, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 21654
Speaker 1: And, now you graduated in, what, 1960--?
Speaker 2: Three.
Speaker 1: Three.  Okay.  '63 [1963] [unclear].  Well, something was wrong with the outline.  It says '64 [1964], and she says '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So we have to change it here.  Okay.  So, in '63 [1963], now, what were your prospects at graduation?  What were you--?
Speaker 2: I had already applied to--.  I had taken a special math course at Howard [University] by the, one of the founders of UNIVAC [UNIVAC 1: Universal Automatic Computer 1].  And so, he was just teaching a course, and he told me I should go to his alma mater, which was Berkeley.  So I sent my material to Berkeley and I sent it to another major school, I think it was--I just sent it to two schools.  And I was accepted at Berkeley, and I chose to go there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us what UNIVAC is.
Speaker 2: UNIVAC was the first computer--that was the first manufactured computer with all of the tubes, you know, the big tubes that--for count--for making calculations.  So UNIVAC, that was, you now, that's the number one, first ever made.
Speaker 1: And tell us what a computer was like in 1963.  What was [unclear]--.
Speaker 2: From my perspective, you know, I know physically what it looked like, but that was all in the back rooms because they were so big.  But from my interaction with the computer was to type up cards, and punch-out cards, punch cards.  And you get these boxes of cards that would be programs, and you give them to someone at a desk, and they'd take them back in the backroom and feed them into the computer.  Then sometime later on, they'd bring out the output, and they you'd have to try to analyze it.  That's what a computer was.  It was not something you actually would look at, though I knew what it looked like.  It had these "nickey" [ph. splg.] lights and all kind of things that would be flashing.  They were gigantic things.  So when you look at a desktop computer now, that would've filled a gigantic building; I mean, the capacity of these--you know, it's off scale.  I mean, you, yourself probably remember Apple [Incorporated, Steve Jobs] coming out with 128K computers.  I mean, now, you know, to get a hard drive, I mean, you're talking about gigs.  I mean, it's just a whole different order of magnitude.  Yes.  And my interaction, my concept was really reading--back then was knowing what a computer was doing, you know, zeros and ones, and learning Boolean [named after George Boole] algebra; how you basically count, but not really touching the machine; it was all in the card and so forth.  But now you have much more intimate contact with the machine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those days are--.  So, you had to learn, like, COBOL [Common Business Oriented Language; the oldest programming language], and FORTRAN.
Speaker 2: FORTRAN [Formula Translating System; programming language], yes.  FORTRAN was mainly what I used.
Speaker 1: All right.  [unclear].
Speaker 2: Or BASIC [Beginners All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code], yeah.
Speaker 1: To ask it a question, you had to basically fill out punch cards and [unclear]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Wasn't so much questions as you would have to know what you were looking for, and you'd write the program in that language to give you, you know, make the determination that you wanted.  So, if you were trying to calculate energy states, you'd have to know the parameters for that particular system and the overall equation that governed it, and have the computer then make the calculations.  Or if you wanted to optimize something for the system, [you use vary?]--various things to see what the answer would be.  For example, if you want to know the structure of something in it equilibrium  state, you would let things--you would have to write the program to let that--the system move around and calculate some total energy, for example, and then come out with what the bond distances are or what the vibrations are and all those--.  You know, it's very complicated and long and very tedious.  The process now, you know, there's so much out there.  So much software that it's all been engineered for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in those days, you would ask the computer a question that, you know--.
Speaker 2: You would not only have to ask a question, it wouldn't be so much a question--
Speaker 1: But you would--
Speaker 2: --as to give it a formula--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the parameters and variables.  You know, it wouldn't be--you might say, the question might be, "what is the equilibrium structure for a molecule."  And you'd have to feed in initial guesses of bond distances.  But then you have to know what defines the [total energy?] and then minimize that with respect to all of those distances and come up with an algorithm to do that.  But all that's been done for you now.  So now you just use something like Gaussian [a computer program for computational chemistry initially released in 1970 by John Pople and his research group at Carnegie-Mellon University as Gaussian 70], someone's that engineered the software to make--take all those things and others into account, and you give it instructions, the computer will tell you what the shape is, what its vibrational frequencies are, what its spectrum will look like, what its thermodynamic parameters are; all of that, you know.  Yeah, now, that would have been impossible back at the beginning.
Story_ID: 21655
Speaker 1: Now, were you excited about the space race in those days? unclear]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  I wanted--I actually wanted to be an astronaut, but I started wearing glasses when I was a freshman or sophomore, and that was--you know, that was like the kiss of death back in those days.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't take an astronaut if they--if you wore glasses?
Speaker 2: You couldn't be a pilot, you know..
Speaker 1: You couldn't be a pilot?
Speaker 2: Hm-mm.
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware of the black astronauts that were--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tuskegee airmen? [A group of African American pilots that fought in World War II]
Speaker 1: No.  The black astronauts.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean like Nair? [Ronald McNair]  No.  Back then there was--
Speaker 1: Ed Dwight [the first African American to be trained as an astronaut and the sculptor of major monuments] and--
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Ed Dwight and--
Speaker 2: This is before Nair? [sic, McNair]  He was killed in the Challenger [Space Shuttle Challenger on mission STS-51-L]. [unclear].
Speaker 1: But you said before that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Before, you had those two guys that, one of them was killed--one of them was designated, but he never flew.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw that on a T.V. program.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was almost like, yeah, that something happened to the trainer of the plane he was in.  No, I was not aware of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  One was designated but he didn't go anywhere.  And then the other one was designated, and he actually got--was killed before he ever flew, you know.  Then McNair.
Speaker 1: McNair, yeah.
Speaker 2: And [Guion] Bluford came next, you know, some years later.  But, yeah, they did have--.  I think, to tell the truth, I think the one--Ed Dwight started in '64 [1964].  I think it was '63 [1963]; '63 [1963], yeah.  At any rate, so you were--'cause that was, like--so they had started when you were in Florida, you know, the launches that you were saying before that--.  Did you ever go to a launch?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I went on a tour.  My wife and I actually sat right at the--as close as you can get behind the vice president of the United States.  Embarrassingly, it was--well, I shouldn't say.  It was Spiro Agnew [thirty-ninth Vice President of the United States, 1969-1973] [laughs].  And we were as close as all the dignitaries could get, and it was funny the reason that that happened.  I was part of the scientific community being invited to the launch, but we were running late and got to Canaveral after the bus had gone off with the group.  So we had an escort leading us to the launching pad, and with the--they chauffeured us there with police escorts and everything, and they just took us to--I guess they thought we were dignitaries [laughs], so they took us to the best seats in the house, basically.  And so, we got to sit up and see the launch up close.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were sitting next to the vice president, Spiro Agnew.
Speaker 1: [Laughs].
Speaker 2: This would have been in the '70s [1970s], right, when Nixon [President Richard Nixon, 1969-1974] was president?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.  Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: And, you know, Spiro Agnew was the vice president.  I think he got convicted of some crime or something.
Speaker 1: Something, yeah.
Speaker 2: [unclear].
Speaker 1: Corruption of some sort.
Story_ID: 21656
Speaker 1: Right.  So--at any rate, so, after you graduated from--.  Now, is there any particular--.  Was--Dr. Ferguson, you mentioned him.  Was there anyone else at Howard that served as a role model or mentor for you?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, I can't--it's embarrassing.  I can't think of his name, who taught general chemistry, had a general chemistry book that was written, that he wrote.  I can't remember his name.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: He's the one that [unclear]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then there was--.  I actually worked in the laboratory of one of my professors, but I can't remember his name either.  I may be--.  As I said, I tend to not focus on the details [laughs], so I--I just haven't thought about it in a long time.  It'll come to me.  You know, it'll come to me.  After we finish this, I'll say, "Oh, yeah, his name was such-and such."  But not right now.
Speaker 1: Well, now, was there a project in chemistry that you were focused on when you went out UC-Berkeley [University of California in Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: [Pause].
Speaker 1: This is 1963, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Project?  When I went to Berkeley [University of California], I was going to--I had a summer job at Goddard Space Flight Center [GSFC].  They had a program, students could get positions, summer jobs, and that was a great experience working there, and did a lot of on-hands satellite-type work.  But in terms of--actually, I think what I wanted to do was to do theory when I went out to Berkeley.  So I was going--I wanted to become a theoretical chemist.  And so, that meant that I was sort of open to suggestions about what to work on.  But when I got there, I met the person who would ultimately become my mentor.  He told me the benefits of being a physical chemist, a hands-on physical chemist as opposed to a theoretical chemist, and he also told me that people who were there and their strengths and so forth.  And so, at Berkeley there weren't a lot of people doing theoretical chemistry at that time.  So, I chose--.  And then there was a fellow, Pimentel [George C. Pimentel, was the inventor of the chemical laser. He also developed the modern technique of matrix isolation in low-temperature chemistry. In theoretical chemistry, he proposed the three-centre four-electron bond which is now accepted as the best simple model of hypervalent molecules.] , who was internationally known, who recommended my--the guy who was my mentor, and their groups worked very closely together.  So I chose that.   And so, I did spectroscopy, and there's a lot of math associated with calculating things.  So that was a good feel.
Speaker 1: Now, who was your mentor?
Speaker 2: C. Bradley Moore.  See, it's Charles, but he [prefers?] "C", Bradley, B-R-A-D-L-E-Y, Moore.
Speaker 1: Now, from what I understand, he wasn't much older than you.
Speaker 2: Nah, he wasn't.  He was about three years older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he had gone to Harvard [University], and then I spoke to Pimentel Pimentel was--is well-known.  He did a lot of work in education as well.  But he told me that Brad Moore was the best student he ever had, and so, that sort of enticed me to work for Brad Moore.
Speaker 1: Pimentel.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And [George C.] Pimentel, he's well known in so many fields.  He is the discoverer of the first chemical laser, and I was there helping him and his students make this--study that--and I was just--our labs were close and I just helped him turn knobs and things.  So, those were exciting times.  There were a lot of exciting things going on at Berkeley at that time.  And the thing I realize is that, the environment is so important.  If you're not in the right environment, you can't find expression for your talents, you know.  And it's not just in schools.  But, I realized later on that being even in the industry where I was [first reached?], the period of time where I--I started to play with the idea of maybe I could start a company dealing with what that company was dealing with.  But, there was so much--by this such large body of knowledge tied up in the people that, if you try to start from scratch, you wouldn't have any of that intellectual sort of background knowledge that's cumulative.  You know, there was a problem with Polaroid, and the film they found that certain packages of film started to crack, tear basically, where they put--there's--they have emulsions in the--it's just organic material and it starts cross-linking and tear--and cracking and to find what was causing that, you know, you start doing these experiments, but some guy who'd been at the company for many years said, "Oh, that's probably because the packing material gives off formaldehyde and then that, you know, cross-links with the material."  And that's what turned out to be, you know.  So, if you're going to start company from scratch, you wouldn't know that and you're competing against this big company and it has all this intellectual background, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll pause here a minute.
Story_ID: 21657
Speaker 1: We were just talking about Dr. [George C.] Pimentel off camera.  You say he taught the general chemistry courses at U-C Berkeley [the University of California, Berkeley, California].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He taught--he did everything.  It was amazing since, you know, he was really a world-class researcher in developing all types of new things.  He did the cameras, the infrared detectors for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].  They did the work there under his guidance, and NASA went up--and probably what's going up in the ships now, at least--unless they've improve them.  But he was into everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now--.  Okay, so the person who was showing you the ropes and what was going on was C. B. Moore.
Speaker 2: Yes, C. Bradley Moore.
Speaker 1: C. Bradley Moore.  Now, he was married too, right? unclear)(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: He is.  As a matter of fact--Penny Moore.  Yes.  Education.  Science education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But she started working with Pimentel in that area, then she took it over after he moved on to other things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this--I guess my wife probably named the program that they developed.  It's something that's even being used right now, but I can't--I don't know the name of it.
Speaker 1: It's something that Pimentel and Penny Moore developed?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Penny Moore took Pimentel's place at Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think she was--got a position to run that program after he moved on to other things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was a physics--I know she was from, I think, Harvard [University] or [somewhere?] she was a physics major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, C. Bradley Moore met her at Harvard, I guess.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah.  But she was from one of the blue bloods of Massachusetts.  I visited them at Marblehead with all the portraits of the Founding Fathers on the wall; that type of background, you know (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, C. B. Moore was black, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He wasn't?  Okay.  Charles Bradley Moore.  Okay.  I got the impression he was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, they didn't have any black faculty heads at Berkeley when I was there, at least not in chemistry.  They had Blackwell in math.  You may have heard his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He did number--.  He's known for number theory--or numbers theory.
Speaker 1: And can you capsulize what that theory is?
Speaker 2: It's about--what numbers theory is?
Speaker 1: I mean his--
Speaker 2: He dealt with games.  You know, how, if you go to Las Vegas and you're betting, you know, what do you use [and how?]--you know, what's really going on there, and how do you maximize certain profits; that type of thing.  I'm sure that's superficially--a superficial explanation of what he did, but that was--it's known as number theory.
Story_ID: 21658
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, now what did you end up focusing on for your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: It was--as I say, it was in physical chemistry, but I dealt with collisional energy transfer between molecules.  So, I used a lot of lasers to excite molecules, and then have them to glide to one another and see what would happen, where the bonds would break or whether they would scatter and go into other energy states.  These are gaseous systems and they move things--they move around, bouncing.  But if you excite one of them and you can look at its changes, its spherical changes as a function of, let's say, pressure or time or whatever, and you can deduce what the kinetics or interactions are.  And so, it involved a lot of math, a lot of physics, and particularly, a lot of chemistry, but chemistry was a sort of minor part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did--was there any--a specific conclusion that or was it just a series of experiments and colliding--I mean, that (unclear)--?
Speaker 2: Basically, we were aiming at determining the intermolecular potential function between two colliding molecules.  And that potential function tells what's going to happen; whether it's going to--the bond is going to break or it's going to form a new molecular.  But we were personally interested in taking, having some molecules of certain energy collide with another and see what changes the vibrational states, the electronic states, the rotational states that we were looking at spectra the scene changes in vibrational/rotational electronic bands, and applying that as a function of certain controllable control variables, like pressure or whatever, and deducing what the intermolecular potential function dependence might be.  So, it's basic research.  But it gives a lot of insight into what's happening when molecules react--interact.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It took me a long time, actually, to see the big picture, because you're so much into the details.  I mean, there's so much theory and so much math going on, that to step back and understand why you're doing it, it took a few years to gain that sort of sophistication.  But, in the meantime, you learn how to make lasers.  You learn how to use different light sources and spectrometers and, you know, you just learn so much.  But, that's why it's not something you can do just quickly.  I mean, it takes three, four, five years, because you--it's a learning process step each step of the way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a--so what is the use, I guess of--I mean, now, is there a practical use for this--.  I mean, is there a--was there an immediate use for what you were doing (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was basic research, which is what I focused on.  Applied research really became the aim later.  The National Science Foundation [NSF] actually didn't fund applied research back in those days.  They wanted--they funded universities to do basic research.  Now, out of--as I indicated, when you're dealing with such systems, you learn things that might lead to practical applications; for example, the first chemical laser involved putting together molecules and having them interact by either hitting one with light and seeing what would happen.  In that particular case, the system [lays?] and then, so they made something practical.  They can scale it up and some of the most powerful sources of energy, you know, it's from a chemical laser system.  It has practical uses in the military and other places.  But in my research, I mean, it--I would say, what came out of that was just the knowledge to take it to the next level.  In fact, I've moved on since my graduate days, and I do more practical things now, like fuel cells and nanotechnology and catalyst.  You know, those are practical applications.
Speaker 1: So, you earned your Ph.D. in 1968.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 21659
Speaker 1: And, what did you do next?  Did you go back East--?
Speaker 2: I post-doc'd [sic, participated in post-doctoral scholarly research] with a professor by the name of Michael Kasha, K-A-S-H-A.  That's, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, Kasha.  And he was world renown in molecular biophysics.  So I basically helped run his laboratory for a year and then continued with him.  And then after that, I was appointed to be--he went away on a sabbatical, I became a visiting assistant professor and ran his laboratory while he was away.  So I was a post-doc basically.
Speaker 1: And still in--
Speaker 2: That was at Florida State [University].
Speaker 1: Florida State, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you came all the way back East.  Okay.  Now, you were at Florida State.  Now, Florida State is in the same county as Florida A & M [FAMU].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a relationship with the professors over there?
Speaker 2: I would go over, but they thought I was a student, you know.  I was young enough to be a student there, so I just--since there weren't any black faculty at Florida State other than myself as it turned out; I found that out through--they classified me as a faculty member, even though, I guess, for statistical effort--reason, even though I was a post-doc working for this other person.  But when I would go over there, Florida A & M, I would just act like a student; though, I did run into one of them, a student from Florida State, and he said, "Oh, Dr. Akins, what are you doing over here?"  And I remember one of the Florida State students reacting to this and said, "doctor?"  He said, "Where did you get your doctorate from?"  I said, "Oh, well--".  I was reluctant.  I said, "From [University of California] Berkeley."  He said, "Do they give doctorates away there?" (laughs).  So, I said, "Oh, because you know me you sort of feel that it must not be something you can't do, you know, if it's something you can't--if it was something you couldn't do, you couldn't do, I wouldn't be here, right?"  In other words, he had made the association that if I had done that, then it must not have been too difficult, because I just basically--because black people don't do things like that.  I mean, that was the reaction.  I had told him what I heard him say, and he laughed it off saying, "Oh, no, no, no.  [That's no achievable?]"  That was clearly what he was saying.  I mean, I had that kind of experience, you know, in my early career from, not just that, but you done (sic) run across a student and--I remember, being even in the elevator talking to faculty.  And this elevator sort of emptied of faculty, and I'm in it, and one of the students said, "You know, you act white."  (laughs).  And I said, "Why did you step over in the elevator then?"  And I had a conversation with him about what he was saying, you know.  And he apologized.  And then he said he didn't really think about what he was saying.  When he said I just didn't act like I was, you know, common or whatever you want--however you want to [characterize?] me.  But, you know, that's the type--I find that always to be an issue.
Speaker 1: You know, physical chemists are rare.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21660
Speaker 1: You know.  I mean, I don't know if people--.  Well, tell me this now; we didn't discuss any of this, but in Berkeley when you were there, it was like the height of the political (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --free speech movement [The Free Speech Movement (FSM) was a student protest which took place during the 1964-1965 academic year on the campus of the University of California, Berkeley under the informal leadership of students Mario Savio, Brian Turner, Bettina Aptheker, Steve Weissman, Art Goldberg, Jackie Goldberg, and others. In protests unprecedented in this scope at the time, students insisted that the university administration lift the ban of on-campus political activities and acknowledge the students' right to free speech and academic freedom.]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Black Panthers [the Black Panther Party for Self Defense, active from 1966-1982] were on the rise.  All that was going on when you were there.  Did you have a chance to pay any attention to that, because I know you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I [belonged to?] I was there when Mario Savio and Bettina Aptheker and Jerry Rubin, and all of those, you know, took over the administration building and Sproul Hall Plaza [University of California, Berkeley].  I was there during that, then they jumped up on the police car and, you know, and it was--I was there when police would come to the campus.  The California's high patrol, you know, their badges covered with black tape and they would take the students and sometimes throw them down a two-story flight, and the only thing that would save them would be other students who would grab them before they would hit the concrete, you know.  All of these were white students, I mean.  And so, I remember one day that some pregnant students decided they would block the police who had arrested all of these students and then would take them in a bus, and these were pregnant with babies.  And the cops got off the bus, off of their buses and beat them with clubs.  And I said, "Wait a minute, now.  If they're going to do that to them, what are they going to do to me."  So I sort of--I, basically, but I  wasn't at the center of, you know, of their focus, you know.  But it was--that was a daily thing.  It was hard to avoid it.  I mean, it was a very exciting time to be there.  So, when I (unclear), just being on campus, you couldn't miss that.
Speaker 1: Now, did you encounter the Black Panthers at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, I mean, they were people I knew, you now, around campus; then on the avenue, I mean, the coffee houses, I mean, you know.  And, there was always something like a stomp speaker--not a stomp speaker, but a box, you know, soapbox speaker.  The funny part--it wasn't funny, but the John Birch Society was big too, you know.  So every day there was a debate in the Sproul Hall Plaza.  And I can remember--there were even people who were trying to recruit you for different things, you know, for whatever.  I don't know if it's Secret Services [United States] or what, but they were always around; even Soviets [referring to the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics, 1922-1991].  (laughs).
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a lot of activity going on at Berkeley.  But I avoided any real, you know, getting involved with student groups and things of that sort.  But I was in graduate school.  That wouldn't have worked anyway.
Story_ID: 21661
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I just thought I'd ask about that.  And so--okay.  Now, at Florida State, now you--how long were you at Florida State [University]?
Speaker 2: I was there for two years; once as--the first year as a straight post-doc, and second year as a visiting faculty who I took over the position for Professor [Michael] Kasha, and I ran his laboratory.  So, it's effectively two years.  They offered me a faculty position, but I chose to go to--become a faculty member at a different school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did you go?
Speaker 2: To--its University of South Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Tampa [Florida].
Speaker 1: All right.  And, what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: It was very good.  First position, it was successful, I got promoted.  I--but it's probably good that I left because they really didn't--over the years I realized that they didn't pay well in that system, you know.  And so, I got a call from--I had applied for something in Washington [D.C].  It's a long story.  The reason I did apply was my childhood--well, my college friend, my best buddy who became a neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins [Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland], had been killed.  And we had always had these great plans of working together.  So, and just about at that time, there was this book came out called "Realization."  Was it "Realization"?  No, it was another book that, dealing with once you've experienced certain things, you're never the same-type of thing.  And, actually, I decided I'd try something different. So I went and to Washington where he had been--when he had been and is buried.  I met with his mother, and I took on a position at the National Science Foundation as--it was called a Rotator.  You still have your original position, but you rotate to the government.  And I did that for two years.  So that was--and that was--.  And once I got out of--
Speaker 1: This is 1977?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21662
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went to Polaroid [Corporation] for a couple years.  That was my private industry experience.  And I did that for two years.  Then I ended up here.
Speaker 1: Now, what is--what was it like working at Polaroid?
Speaker 2: I was the only black chemist, physical chemist in the whole facility. And it was--I had no one working for me, but I had the title of a senior scientist, and which is unprecedented.  I had all the stuff I wanted; they bought me lasers, and I set up the laboratory, but, normally the position would have--you'd have technicians, but I didn't.  I did everything for myself.  And the reason behind that, I found out later, but there was, as you can imagine, there was some politics going on.  I had written--they asked me to write up something.  They had a consultant who said there was good work, so they offered me the job.  They maybe want to make me the director.  But the physical chemistry division, which would have been new, but once the people there got wind that they were bringing someone else new in to run this, there was some friction, resistance.  So they decided to ask me to come anyway, you know, come in.  But I didn't have the same title, but they gave me for the same money, which was--.  So I did it that way.  But once I got there, I realized that that was untenable, you know, because you don't report to anyone; you just sort of at the good graces of whomever your sponsor is, who you don't even know who that is.  That's one thing I learned, that you got always find out who's backing you.  You know, I didn't even know that was of an issue.  But once I got there and I find out what was going on, I decided I'd get out as soon as I could.  And that took a couple of years.  I was fortunate because as soon as I left, Polaroid fell, collapsed.  But it was--it was clear that was going to happen because electronic photography was going to clearly take over.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's--.  Oh, so, you were thinking of forming your own business at that time you were saying, before--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was doing some things that I thought were very exciting, and they were a spin-off, maybe of what Polaroid was doing.  I really didn't know too much about their field and their science.  I was learning, but I thought I had something new that I could do.  But as I got experienced in the company doing the research, I realized that you really couldn't compete.  I mean, I wouldn't have been able to compete against them, because this is a multi-billion dollar company and, you know, with all the--a lot of people--a lot of buildings and everything going for them.  So, that wouldn't have worked.  That would have been the wrong area because it's clearly electronic photography was on its way in.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1979, though?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, electronic photography hadn't really--
Speaker 2: It hadn't quite kicked in, but it was on the horizon.  You know, I mean, in retrospect, I mean, everyone was saying in the company what was going to happen, but they wanted to diversify.  So they started going into equestrian photography at racetracks and using a Polaroid film to get quick pictures of horse ligaments--you know, legs and things.  But, you know, it's a sort of small business-kind of thing.  They also got into batteries.  Those cameras had batteries, so they wanted to spin off into that.  But I think the general view was that photography wasn't going to be the future, you know.
Story_ID: 21663
Speaker 1: (unclear)--photography.  Okay.  So, '81 [1981].  Now, how did you get the call from City College in New York?
Speaker 2: Well, what had happened, was when I was at Washington at the National Science Foundation [NSF], I ran a granting program that, at the time, it seemed like a lot of money, but I managed--I think it wasn't more than a million dollars, but it might have been.  But in that time, that was [the?] amount, and I had come on a site visit to a grantee at City College, and I met the Dean, and he started trying to recruit me almost immediately.  And so, I negotiated with him.  He started off by offering me one thing, I said, "All right."  (unclear).  So, he finally built it up and I decided to come.  I actually tried to get my old university to match what City [CUNY] was offering, but that was so out of the ballpark.  I mean, they could in no way would have matched that.  In fact, they had a freeze in Florida on salaries that went for about five or six years.  I mean, nobody got any kind of good raises (unclear).  (laugh).  I mean, that was crazy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, City College of New York, 1981.  Now what was it like there?  Were you brought in as a--
Speaker 2: Full professor.
Speaker 1: Full professor.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Without tenure, because I came from private industry.  If you're coming from an institution where you have tenure, you can come in as tenured.  That's a--.  But without tenure (unclear), I same in as a full professor.  I had to get early tenure, applied for early tenure.  So you got to jump over hurdles.  I got that in the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So ([did that one more year?].
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--all right.  City College [New York].  Now, did you--were you attracting researching grants then?  Were you writing for grants?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was very fortunate.  I started off with grants that were focused on things I was doing at Polaroid [Corporation], just an expansion of that research which was cutting edge.  And I built on that ever since.  Actually, I moved on from what I had done there, but that was the launching area, what I had been doing at Polaroid.
Story_ID: 21664
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--and I'm quoting here, "Your principal research focus involved quantum properties of molecular nanostructures and the exploitation of such properties for formulating new nanomaterials with uses in molecular photonic devices, such as MPDs and/or chemical sensors."
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: That's it?  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So, in some cases I use the same type of molecules that I used at Polaroid, and they form in certain concentrations.  They come together to form structures; just like the human body comes about because molecules come together in certain ways and form a certain structure.  These, on a very small scale, form structure--ordered structures that would--even plants, leaves, and things--they're ordered structures.  [I had?] certain molecules that would that, and then, as a result, they create new energy states.  That's separate from the individual molecule, but now, belong to the bigger structure, and these new structures have new electronic and physical properties.  And so, you can exploit them because they don't exist unless you create a condition for them to exist, and then you can exploit those new properties.  For example, you can make materials that would, when exposed to some ambient gas, would, it's spectrum would change, so you can detect, let's say oxygen levels.  You can imagine the scuba diver might want to know what his oxygen level is.   Visually, he can look at something and see that it's changing like an indicator.  And so, that was, you know, that was one practical use.  Another practical use might--since these materials give off unique signatures, you can imagine painting an airline wing, and with--and if you hit the broadcast of a white beam of light, when it hears the sample, it gives off a single color.  So, if you look through a lens of some sort, you could probably pick up where a wing has fallen off or something, you know, because of the signal that would be emitted by that when it's hit with a broad beam of light.  So, it's a lot of application with that.  More recently, I'm dealing with fuel cells and nanomaterials, like graphene and carbon nanotubes, and using them for sensor and energy applications.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now, is there a source of funding for activities--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I've been fortunate to have funding for a wide range of sources.  I've brought in more than--since I've been there, now since '81 (1981), I've brought in more than 30-something million dollars.  And I've--run two--.  I run centers.  I've been running centers for 20 years now.  And I've been funded every year with, you know, major--support.  And then there's also been support for students; training grants and things of that sort.  So I've been very fortunate to be funded all this whole period of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how is your time spent between research and teaching?
Speaker 2: Most of my efforts are in research.  I typically would have maybe one course a semester.  And sometimes maybe one a year.  But because I--but I run a center which has--brings in overhead, which effectively allows me to be released from teaching because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't really teach?
Speaker 2: Not that much.  I mean, I teach (unclear); sometimes, I mean, you know, if the class is small, it's easier to do.  We have--like this past year, I taught a freshman chemistry course, one each semester.  And it was like close to 200 students each semester (unclear).  And it's all kinds of things.  If you take one minute to counsel a student, and you get a hundred students, I mean, it becomes almost, you know, it's a full-time job.
Speaker 1: It's a couple of hours of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, it's just so that, it depends on the size of the class.  And you can't get much else done well when you have a big class like that.  So I tend to stay away from that if possible.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, your research wing is called the City--University of New York's Center for Analysis of Structures and Interfaces, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  CASI.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now--
Speaker 2: But the new center is called CENSES,C-E-N-S-E-S.  But it's part of CASI, C-A-S-I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Let's see.  And so, I don't know; what are the highlights of your research over the past since you've been at City College [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, I would have to say, one of the things that stands out for me is, I developed as a result of this, the molecules and systems, I was studying sort of theoretical understanding, which I published, dealing with why these molecules and aggregates, why do they give off, through scattering, why they scatter light in such a unique fashion.  So I worked out the theory.  It's called aggregation enhanced Raman scattering, AERS.  So, I named it that.  And it explains why one gets the enhanced scattering and what--basically what causes it, and how you might use it, how you can exploit it.  So that's sort of a seminal effort that I would identify.  Beyond that, I've just done a lot of things in nanomaterials and fuel cells.  But in terms of something that was unique to a concept that I developed from scratch, I would just have to say is AERS [aggregation-enhanced Roman scattering].  And it's being used now.  In fact, I've seen a number of papers where people are using it in diagnosis and treatment, really, of malaria.  And, I mean, I never thought that that would be the case.  And what's happening there is that, one can identify in the guts of mosquitoes there are aggregates formed.  And by treating those in certain ways with quinine or whatever, and by breaking those aggregates up, then you can study this spectroscopically by looking at a spectra created by the aggregates, and how they change when you load the system with these molecules that break up the aggregates.  And by doing it in the proper way, you can build up the monomer as opposed to the aggregate, and the monomer will kill the mosquito.  So, and they're looking--and papers have identified the process is AERS as the mechanism for, you know, that this is--[the way?] the signals, what they are, and why they change as you load it with some kind of, like quin--quinine or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here.
Story_ID: 21665
Speaker 1: Okay. So, in '95 [1995], your biography was documented in a book called 'Math: A Rich Heritage.'[Beatrice Lumpkin]
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And it was published by--this was published by Globe Fearon Educational Publishers and Simon Schuster.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's had a wide distribution, I would guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it's being provided to schools so that the students can see what people, you know, what's going on out in the real world.
Speaker 1: Now, at City College [New York], are you--how many black professors are in the sciences there?
Speaker 2: In the sciences?
Speaker 1: Is there a nice little group [there?]?
Speaker 2: Well, in physics, I would say there're none presently.  In chemistry, there's two--one, two; two.  And biology there may be three.  I mean, so they're small numbers--decreasing because there really wasn't--except for biology, everybody else is becoming a senior.  Yeah, so that, engineering has maybe three, four; but, again, mostly everyone that's there are near the end of their academic career.  And, they--I think it's going to be difficult to replace us in the future, you know, because they--.  One of the few [unclear], it's sort of ironic that we brought--helped bring in so much money to the school that it's enabled them to grow.  And then with growth, they want to upscale the faculty they would bring in, so change and bring in people from Harvard [University] or big schools with--with big starter funds, but any young person starting off, especially minority, you can't compete.  So, we talked about the fact that we helped create the environment where that could happen.  But then--they don't--we don't in a sense profit from it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But that's life.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  Now in '96 [1996] you became the Distinguished Service Professor of Chemistry at City University of New York.  And you were the Sigma Xi [Scientific Research Society] Distinguished Lecturer from'96 [1996] to '98 [1998].
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Now.  So, you're doing pretty good that year anyway.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 21666
Speaker 1: Now, you also co-published in '96 [1996] the 'Aggregation of Tetraaryl-Substituted Porphyrins in Homogeneous Solution.'
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, what is--can you explain that in--
Speaker 2: Well, I had been studying dye molecules, thanks--well, I won't give the name.  I'll just say they're dye molecules, which were used in photography, because I had gotten exposed to them, so to speak, in my efforts at Polaroid [Corporation].  Though, for that publication, I realized that there were a lot of other systems that one finds aggregates in.  And porphyrins consist of molecules that play big roles in vision and in all types of human reactions.  Even leaves.  I expanded it out and dealt with porphyrins and was able to explain the spectra, and why the spectra that one gets, why they are as they are, because porphyrins are very important in nature.  And, in fact, that thing I told about mosquitoes, that really has to deal with porphyrin-type aggregation.  So, it's continuing to grow with different types of molecules, not just the molecules used in photography, but molecules used in life.
Story_ID: 21667
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.  Okay. In 1997, eleven under-represented minority students obtained their Ph.D.s at City College [New York] in chemistry and engineering.  Is this a trend that's--from what you were just saying a little while ago, this is a trend that's slowing down.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was funded to--in the Center, and the Center, we identified students from undergraduates to the point that they got their doctorates.  So we had developed a pipeline, and that pipeline bored fruit at that point.  So, we have to recreate that pipeline or do something else.  But that was a good year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But, for instance, now, I guess this past year, how many minority Ph.D.s did you--
Speaker 2: If I had to come up with a number, I personally have had, wow.  I have a number of Asian students, I have a--but the Center, I guess I should talk about the Center rather than just my personal research.  I have, maybe, one minority student in the past two years.  I have another one presently, a graduate student, who should be graduating in a year or two.  But the Center as a whole, I think, has graduated at least five or six minority students, over--.  I think we've graduated, I can only guess at the number, but--overall students, probably around twenty.  You know, so, I mean, we're productive, but we are this--the pipeline for minority students has--is not there.  So we only--we get students who apply to the university from other schools.  What we had done before was to identify them as undergraduates and to nurture them and bring them all the way through.  Now, some faculty don't like that approach.  They think that students shouldn't get their full education in one system.  You know, if you're an undergraduate in one place, you should go graduate school somewhere else.  And, I mean, that's what Berkeley [University of California] was like, but in the environment we are in, that doesn't lead to, you know, high productivity in terms of getting minorities Ph.D.s.  And so, it is what it is.
Story_ID: 21668
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, '99 [1999] you were awarded the 'NSF Integrative Graduation and Research Traineeship Grant.'  I guess this is part of the funds that new graduate student use.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's called an 'IGERT.'[Integrative Graduate Education and Research Traineeship program]  I-G-E-R-T.  Oh, and, yeah, and what we--that, I was able to do with that was, it fund students with, in a very generous way, aimed at minority students preferably, though [once a form?] support any student.  And those students are paid a little bit more than what is normally for graduate students.  But that was parlayed, that whole grant, for five-year grant--was parlayed into developing a new Ph.D. program at the college in nanotechnology and materials chemistry.  So, we now, because of that IGERT, have developed a Ph.D. program that allow students to get degrees in nanotechnology.  And that had not been there before.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, in 2000, you received the 'Presidential Award of Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Mentoring' from President [Bill] Clinton.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is, sounds like a big deal.  You go to the White House?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went to--didn't go--.  Well, let's see.  We went to a hotel, very nice hotel close to the White House, and the White House [unclear]-[President Bill] Clinton was supposed to give us the award, by his science advisor gave it instead.  He was embroiled in something, I think, associated with Monica Lewinsky at that time.  So he didn't show up [laughs].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he wasn't there that day.
Speaker 2: He wasn't physically there, though, his science advisor was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  That's still quite an honor.  Do you have a mentoring philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well, I always tell my students about making decisions, make good decisions, and just get things done.  I don't try to tell them every step of the way.  I always point out that they may have better ideas than I have in certain areas or they're luckier than I am in certain areas.  And so, but they should make--if they're supposed to be doing something, they should make it work.  Find out--you work hard enough to make it work.  And that's really what I pushed; don't give up, work hard, and if you push hard enough, you'll get something positive.  And it's funny as I say that, because I really didn't think about why I had been saying that, but it sounds a lot like what I was told as a kid myself.
Story_ID: 21669
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2009, it says here--now, you've--this is the field of nanotechnology.  You discovered a way to create infinitesimal sensors for medical and other uses.  So what is--.  You were describing some of this before, I believe, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I think the issue there was, one can make nano devices or nanomaterials that respond to an ambient environment, the ambient environment detecting whatever that was there, you know.  So, we've continued to do that.  But we've gone on to loading different forms of carbons, like carbon nanotubes.  We actually make--we make carbon nanotubes, then we load them with certain atoms and/or other nanoparticles, and we do graphene.  I don't how much, maybe graphene is well-known. but I'll just state what it is.  Well, carbon nanotubes are just, basically, one layer or carbon atoms that you fold up and you form a tube.  And it turns out to have unique electronic, physical, and thermo properties far different than normal materials.  And you can exploit them in all types of ways.  We use them to--as supports for catalysts, like platinum, gold; and then one can carry out reactions with these supported catalysts that are much faster and much more defined than normal catalysts.  And do it both with nanotubes and with graphene.  Graphene is that one layer or carbon atoms that is not folded up.  And that's a new material, basically, that's finding outstanding uses in--for catalyst support, and as a new type of material because you can make transistors and FETs, Field Effect Transistors, and other things with these that have unique properties far beyond those of normal transistors.  So one--it's smaller.  So, the idea in that case would be to increase the density of transistors in devices.  But, in our case, we're more interested in using them for--as catalysts and fuel cells, which is the problem for the future for getting energy, basically.  We are working in that field.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, so, you're still doing research and publishing in this field, right, today?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: What's your--what will be your latest work or what'll you--.  Do you have an aim or are you discovering things as you go alone during this research that are surprising you, or are you--?
Speaker 2: Sort of driven by the students and their interests.  So, if I have a student and that student stumbles upon something, I sort of help them understand, then we publish it.  If I have a colleague and we are working together, and there's something that colleague is interested in and we contribute to that, so we publish it.  If--I have collaborations with faculty at Columbia, and if we can amplify that in some way we get together and we publish it.  My research has sort of evolved to where it's about working with others and publishing interesting events of phenomena.  And so, that's been going very well, and we've published quite a--been very productive, actually, in publishing.  And it's continuing.
Speaker 1: Yes.  It says here in 2011 you published ten papers, co-published ten papers.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And most of those I'm the principal author.  I am the principal author.
Story_ID: 21670
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what's your typical day like when you're--you were commenting that we may have long days.  What's your typical day like?
Speaker 2: It's--basically, I make certain everybody else is working, that's--, you know, you show yourself, make certain you're there.  Then I do things that I want to do.  I'm interested in really doing quantum chemical calculations using new software that's available.  So I learned about that, and I try to position myself for being able to use that somewhere down the road.  I'm actually making calculations now with a colleague in Turkey, and that's been very successful.  We've published a couple of chapters in books on different systems.  And so, that's going to be growing with time because you don't need as much equipment, hardware; and as time goes on, as equipment ages, it's harder to get grants.  I think that's--in fact, I think that's the future in general; for science to be more computations rather than to actually try to measure something, because the computations are getting as good as the experiments these days.  It's like a camera.  I mean, the camera, the old kind, these old cameras, you only had a certain resolution that was less than the single reflex cameras.  But, now I'm told you can get digital cameras that surpass regular film.  So, I mean, in calculations you can, you can calculate things that it would be very extreme and difficult to measure.  That would cost a multimillion dollar apparatus to make a measurement.  But, if you can calculate it and it can be used, and then, you know, that's the way to go, at least a starting point.
Story_ID: 21671
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you've been working on this research for a long time.  What keeps you motivated?
Speaker 2: Well, it's more like, you got to do something.  I mean, you know, I'm [often] asked, "Well, when are you going to retire?"  And I say, "Retire to what?  What are you going--."  I mean, you don't just retire and then do nothing.  I mean most people I know retire and then they want to go teach or do something.  I mean, I already can do that.  I mean, I'm already in the environment to do that if I wanted to do that.  In fact, I have the degree of freedoms to do either teaching, do research, or to do whatever, any kind of administration, if you'd like.  So, I just continue doing whatever is my fancy, basically.  I, sometimes, I may feel like doing research; other times I may feel more like teaching.  So, your question was, what keeps me motivated.  I guess I--it's diversity.  I can change, switch.  That's--and also the money helps [laughs].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because you could retire and [do anything you wanted?]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, yeah.  I mean, but you know, I'm of the belief that--I mean, if I'm publishing as much as I am now, why stop, you know.  If I'm getting money externally to do research, why stop, you know.  But, the only reason for stopping is if there was, you just didn't love what you were doing.  I mean, as long as you love what you're doing, I guess, you may as well keep doing it.
Story_ID: 21672
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question:  When you look back at everything you've to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could?
Speaker 2: I would--any major thing that I would do different?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There's some things I would do that I didn't take time to do, because I didn't just didn't take the time.  I would probably learned a couple of languages.  I would probably learned more biology, you know, so that I could--they would have allowed me to do things that--for expanding ways that I can't presently.  But it--they typically have to do with education.  I want to learn something, you know.  I can't imagine just sitting around.  I heard a commercial today, in fact, someone was saying that, when a person retires, they're have like six thousand more days, or something or other like that, and this person said, this is the first day, this is his first day of retirement, he said, "I realize that I can now do nothing," because he's retired.  He could--I mean, that sounds like purgatory to me [laughs].  Just sitting around doing nothing.  Who was it who said--oh, that was one of the politicians who said that, after he had recovered from some illness, and he started playing golf, he thought about it, he said, "You realize that God didn't put him here simply to improve his drive," you know, so he decided to do something that's more active than just play golf, and he got back into the political race.
Story_ID: 21673
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have like some sort of an overarching goal for the program that you're running at City College of New York--at City University?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a little bit--.  I mean, realism is setting in because, it's like one of colleagues said, it's like I'm been outlasted.  And the tenures that I wanted to make don't seem to be--become so stationary standard, you know, ongoing.  New directions are being defined by new people, and I don't see them, you know, once I cease being there, whether they would be interested in.  That's so--that's the downside.  I, you know, there's just--there's no one to really replace me in there.  That's another reason that, I guess, I stay, you know.  So, your question is:  Is there anything I would--maybe I.  It wasn't is there anything I would do differently.  Is there anything I would like to do--or how did you phrase that?
Speaker 1: The last one was just like, where do you project or what would be your idea of projection for your project that's as it's [endowment?]?  Where would you like to see it at, you know?
Speaker 2: [Endowments?]  Well, the idea would be to find someone who could be as attached to it as I am and have that go on.  Though I don't really think that's the reality.  You know, just first of all, there's no sort of sponsor to--I mean, the reason that I'm able to do this is that, I personally am writing proposals and getting funded, and I don't see anyone new coming along and being able to replace that for.  Because, you know, I have a track record, and so, that would--you just don't say, identify someone and say, "take it over."  They have to be able to bring in money.  And that's unlikely, you know, in this environment.  I mean, it's--so, I don't really have much expectation, to be honest with you.  I just keep going and, hopefully, things will work out, you know.  I mean, I guess I feel that what is supposed to happen, will happen, you know.  And you just stay in the game long enough to move it in that direction, and we'll see what happens.  Because, I mean, we have no real control of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, ideally, you--if someone would come along that could pick up what you're doing and keep it moving?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Take it far--.  Because, there's been a lot of time and money put into the centers; there two centers, and I am sort of thinking that in a few years, I do have a deputy, Hispanic person, and, you know, I suspect they will take over, and it'll go wherever it goes at that point.
Story_ID: 21674
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we always ask this question too:  When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, it would simply be that I have worked hard and in [essence?], I did well, you know.  That would be my legacy.  I mean, I wasn't a victim.  I mean, I succeeded in what I was doing, and I created an opportunity for a number of people who have been successful.  I mean, if in, in terms of impacts, I mean, on students, they've been at least twenty, thirty students--I'm talking not--I mean, even just minority students, that come back from time to time, and they've been successful.  Even students that I'm not even aware of who have benefitted from what's been created.  I mean, there are a lot of students who--high school students who have summer projects because of what's established; students from other schools, they come in for summers.  We have a research experience for undergraduates.  And so, I don't even necessarily get to meet them, but they--I say hello to them on their first day, and then they get engrossed in what's going on.  So this--there're things going on that I don't even know about, and my hope is that that is all positive in the long term, you know.  But we never know..
Story_ID: 21675
Speaker 1: Okay.  We always ask this question too:  What are some of your own concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: I think without--I have to say when I talk to my colleagues, some of them, my black colleagues, what they say, well, I guess I can agree with them, that it seems like we're swimming upstream, and unless more people get involved, the more leaders are identified; the more people will really get energized.  I mean, we don't have enough of a flow here to maintain this whole enterprise.  I mean, I've always felt, you know, and that's just from day one, I've always felt that you've got to have someone in the room where the decision is made.  And I would tell my students, because NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] was the place I was involved with, and when they sent up that first--when Sagen sent up that first time capsule to distant planets, hopefully, that he gave a representation of Planet Earth, and he put a hydrogen atom, you know, so hopefully, aliens, any alien civilization would know that.  And he put an example of a male and a female, and they were caucasian.  I have nothing against that, per se.  But if I had been in the room, I would broach the question, "Why?"  You know, and I think it was different things--it would--no one wants that question that's asked, would simply dismiss your comments.  I mean, it's obvious that if you're in the room, you'd have an effect on that, on that outcome.  And that's why I think it's important--people aren't necessarily bad.  They just don't--it's not in their interest to think about that, and if they don't think about that, so certain outcomes occur.  So, but you got to--you got to be--play a role in defining the future or you just have to be a victim of the future.  So that, you know, that's one of my keys, is to make people aware of the need to be in leadership roles, whatever the endeavor is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what about your family; did your parents [Daniel Thomas Akins and Clementina Smith] live long enough to see you get our Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was your grandmother [Merlice Smith] around when you got your Ph.D.--before your got your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was.  I mean, I had my Ph.D. by the time she passed.
Speaker 1: Well, what did she think?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, she--you know, my grandmother was very special.  I mean, she'd say--I remember when I was at--and she never changed.  I mean, she'd give me the shirt off her back, I mean.  When I was at Harvard [University], every day I got a letter with, I don't care, with a dollar in it or some change or whatever, she sent me something every single day, I mean.  And when I--well, after I finished my doctorate [at University of California, Berkeley], I mean, she continued that way.  But at some point she got sort of dementia, whatever it is, you know, dementia.  And she'd talk about me as a kid, even though I might be there as an adult.  So she--which was sort of a very sad thing in some ways, but I always realized that that was a way to deal with one's predicament.  I mean, if you--it's like the human body doesn't want to deal with this reality, so it puts the mind somewhere else.  And so, she talked about me as a little kid even though she was talking to me, and so, it was not the reality of what the situation was, but she had in her head, which was almost a blessing in many ways, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to pause here again.
Story_ID: 21676
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  Not really.  I mean, when you asked me that question, I starting thinking about sort of humorous things that--like my tennis game, how good is that (laughs), type of thing.  But, no.  That's not anything I would--we would talk about (laughs).
Speaker 1: You play a lot of tennis?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I try to play a lot of tennis, yeah, you know.  I like the competition, you know.
Speaker 1: So, are you any good at it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I'm pretty good, I mean, but I realize that, that when you look at real professionals, I mean, I'm just--I don't play it for--to be that good.  I play it for the exercise.  I had, because, you know, I mean, it's not--I mean, I've done--but, in my--.  When I first started, I actually envisioned--thought to myself, "You know, I could be a pro at this," you know.  But, that's even--that's something I couldn't even think about now.  But, I probably couldn't think it--it wasn't realistic then, either, but I didn't know it.  But I can definitely tell now, I mean, when I look at the players that they have today.
Story_ID: 21677
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  Now, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Oh, you didn't--.  Oh, you didn't tell us about your children.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: Well, I have two daughters; one is an engineer, and the other is a dancer/singer.  The engineer has two children, a boy who's enormous for his age.  He's fourteen now, but the last time I checked he had a size sixteen shoe.  And there's a little girl who's nine, and I think she believes she's Queen Elizabeth or something of that sort.  You know, she has a very special view of herself.  So, then my daughters are all very committed to what they're doing.  It's amazing that they, well, the one with the children is more into design engineer, mechanical engineering design, and she makes toys for kids.  And the young one loves to dance and sing.  I remember when she was a little girl, I asked her--I always ask kids, what are their five-year plans.  I mean, I even ask the five-year kid that, and I've gotten all kinds of responses ranging from "I'm two." (laughs).  That's the one that's probably most appropriate.  But I asked my younger daughter what she wanted to be when she was--before she, you know, went to college, and she described herself as driving around with sunglasses on, you know, during the day.  And I jokingly said, "That sounds like a drug dealer more than anything else."  (laughs).  But the reality is, as being Broadway, she can almost attain that, because, you know, it's sort of she has a lot of freedom during the day, and so, she more or less attained what she wanted to do.  And my older one is, she just loves to design, you know, toys and she loves children, so, she seems extremely happy; both of them, so I'm happy.  And I've never had to really bail them out from anything, you know.  And it's like, you know, money in my pocket.  I mean, I know so many people who have to--to take--get their kids out of trouble or whatever that--and that all takes away from their own lifestyle.  But that's never been a burden to me in any sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now my wife, of course, she is so--she's such a good person, that I think I am probably the luckiest man in the world to have found her.  And so, luckily, we've been married virtually all--I mean, she was like eighteen, nineteen when we got married, and I was a couple of years older than she, two-and-a-half years, I think.  And so, we've just been together, working together.  Not working at jobs, but doing, you know, living our lives together.  That's, you know, that's a blessing.
Story_ID: 21678
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is similar to a legacy, but a little bit different:  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would have to say I just would want to be considered a good person who tried to do the right thing, and that I know--when I run across students and they tell me what they--the things I said to them and how it affected their lives, I always felt good about that.  And typically, I always get the same comments in which--and when I said it, I wasn't--or impressive enough or I didn't know the impact, but I would always them, just make it happen, whatever, you now, whatever you got to do to make it happen, make it.  If they were working on a project and they were having problems, and I would impress upon them, just work harder at it and it'll work out.  And invariably it does.  And so, when students have told me what my impact on them, I mean, I just hope that--that that view that you can get things to work, you know, is taken to heart by the people I come into contact with, and that they get a good life as a result.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you for sharing.
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 21679
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Clementina Smith].  She looks very, very young.  She's probably about seventeen.  And to her right is my brother.  He's more than a toddler, so he looks like he's about two almost; and me, in her arms, and I'm an infant.  And her name is Clementina, but everyone called her Clementine.
Speaker 1: This is 1941, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. (next picture):
Speaker 1: This is my father [Daniel Thomas Akins].  Everyone--his name is Daniel Thomas Akins.  Everyone preferred to call him Billie, and he always dressed with a hat and tie and suit.  He always was clean (laughs).
Speaker 2: He was running that corn, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah. (next picture):
Speaker 2: This is his mother, Otea, O-T-E-A.
Speaker 1: Otea, what's her last name?
Speaker 2: Akins.
Speaker 1: Okay. (next picture):
Speaker 2: Now that's--we can take this out, if you wish.
Speaker 1: Yeah, could we.  Well, let's do the first two on top, then.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The first one is my--the first is my grandmother, Merlice Smith, and she had sent me a picture of--about every day [when I was?] in school with money.  On the right is my grandfather, Clement.  I never--I don't I even mentioned his name.  C-L-E-M-E-N-T.
Speaker 1: It says here you had a grandfather named Clement and--
Speaker 2: Mother.
Speaker 1: --mother named Clementine.
Speaker 2: Clement.
Speaker 1: Take that one end.  Oh, let's go and do that anyway, (unclear).  I'll look for it.  It's in here somewhere. (next picture):
Speaker 2: This is a choir in which I'm the one right beside the--.
Speaker 1: You're right here?
Speaker 2: Yes, and the music instructor.  And I sang soprano for this group.  I was the youngest one in there.  My brother is on the right, the first row.  He's a little pudgy there, but he's--that's not normally what he looks like.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Going through pudgy period?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Let's see, this slides off this (unclear).
Speaker 1: I'm just embarrassed that she knows so many more than I do, that's all. (next picture):
Speaker 2: Okay.  Bottom left.
Speaker 1: Bottom left, that's my mother.  I believe she was getting a cosmology [sic, cosmetology] degree in that photo.  On the right is my brother and me.  And as usual, I have my tongue sticking out of my cheek.  Every picture of me as a kid has me doing that.  And we're always dressed up in suits hats, much like our father.
Speaker 2: That was the era for that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: (laughs).
Speaker 2: I looked like Clark Kent on a couple pictures I had.
