Story_ID: 40017
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today for the History Makers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  James William Andrews, Junior, J-A-M-E-S, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Andrews, A-N-D-R-E-W-S.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 12, 1970.  Place of birth, San Jose, California.
Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Occupation is entrepreneur, Digital Media Communications Strategist.
Speaker 1: Okay and sir what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March 18th, March 18th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 40018
Speaker 1: Now before I go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as a warm-up and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I have a favorite food.  My favorite food--it's a really difficult question cause my favorite food is usually the best place in the best city that I'm in at that particular moment.  Love sushi, big fan of sushi.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm very fond of blue, all shades of blue as well as purple.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year, I love winter, I love being indoors, I love family.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination, Rio, Brazil.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite, yeah I think right, right now my favorite phrase or saying is, oh, I can't remember what my favorite phrase.  My favorite phrase right now is, is, is dream big.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Trust more.
Story_ID: 40019
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And your father's side.  But I'm going to ask about your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay so we don't get mixed up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Patricia, P-A-T-R-I-C-I-A, Diana, D-I-A-N-A, Bostick, B-O-S-T-I-C-K.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Sure, 11/24/45, Grotto, Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what's the story about Grotto, Italy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I can go back to my great-grandfather.  My great grandfather was a wealthy manufacturer in Germany.  He was Jewish and under Nazi Germany, was taken to a concentration camp.  My grandfather left Germany during Nazi times and went to Italy to go to school.  There he met my grandmother and they had a child, which is my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know I really don't know a lot on my grandmother's side.  My grandmother was Italian, born in Trieste.  I had the opportunity to spend probably you know, ten years with my grandmother.  She was an amazing woman.  So after '45 [1945], my grandfather came to this country and served the U.S. Army and moved his family to California and lived in a town outside of Santa Barbara called Santa Maria, California.  And he was an amazing man, he was an accountant but he served as an Intelligence Officer for the U.S. Army, spoke five languages.  Actually went to Denver [Colorado] too, to meet with a Rabbi who actually helped him rescue his father, my great-grandfather out of concentration camp.  My great-grandfather's leg was amputated in the concentration camp.  And my grandfather you know, upon moving to this country, going through Ellis Island, setting up his family, eventually getting to California, became a successful accountant in, in Santa Maria.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  So, so your grandfather actually was born in Germany.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay escaped during the war.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And he was able to rescue your great-grand--his father.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Your great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And bring him to the--
Speaker 2: Bring him to the States, yeah to Chicago [Illinois], actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have like famous opera singer relatives in Rome.  I have a, a--quite a big family in Trieste and Rome.  And yeah, so it's, it's an amazing story.  They've come to this, you know my, my grandfather came to this country really because he wanted to fight in the war and then was able to establish himself as an entrepreneur.
Speaker 1: Okay now how do you spell Trieste?
Speaker 2: T-R-I-E-S-T-E.
Story_ID: 40020
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your grandfather or your great-grandfather have any--did you meet your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: No.  No, I didn't get to meet my great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, well did you--well did your grandfather passed on any stories about your, your great-grandfather's captivity of the Nazis or anything?
Speaker 2: Not a lot, not a lot.  Before he passed away I tried to you know, do sort of a historical kind of oration time with him and didn't know a lot about what happened, just know that he served some time in a concentration camp.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is your grandfather an observant Jew, did he--
Speaker 2: No, no.  When he got to Italy he converted to Catholicism.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so my family started off, my mother started off as a Catholic, Roman Catholic.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So well let's see, so is there any--so your mother was actually born in Italy.
Speaker 2: Yes my mother was born in Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay and now what was your, what was your grandfather, your great-grandfather's name and your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather's name--I had this for you too.  My, well here's the thing.  So when my grandfather came to this country he changed his name as, as most immigrants did from Corinski to Corins, C-O-R-I-N-S.  He's John Ludwig Corins.
Speaker 1: To John Ludwig, Ludwig--
Speaker 2: L-U-D-W-I-G.
Speaker 1: K-O--
Speaker 2: C-O-R-I-N-S.
Speaker 1: C-O-R-I-N-S, all right, okay.  So this is a--I mean Corins, is that Italian or is it--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, so he's German so my grandmother's name is Diana Parovel, P-A-R-O-V-E-L.  So obviously she gave up the Parovel name for Corins when she married my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay now what did your mother tell you about growing up?  Now she grows up--she was born in Italy.
Speaker 2: So yeah she's born in Italy and in '50, 1950 she moves to the United States.
Speaker 1: So she's five years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so she spent the first five years in, in Trieste.
Speaker 1: Okay and what did she say about life in New York?  I mean growing up.  Now she grew up in, in--
Speaker 2: Yeah she grew up in Santa Maria.  Santa Maria, California, which is horse country.  So you know, life there growing up for them, they were the, you know, sort of the immigrant family, right, with the Italian speaking mom and you know German dad and you know it was very, you know it, it was definitely horse country.  So my, my mom grew up riding horses, taking care of horses.  She actually was a barrel jumper and you know it was a town that you settled in California.  It was a town that my grandfather decided to build his practice.  And for her it was a town that she wanted to get out of quickly.  She was looking to get out of dodge, and so were all her brothers and sisters really were, were ready to get out of dodge.
Story_ID: 40021
Speaker 1: Yeah so what's important to know is actually I spent my junior high and high school living with my aunt.  So she almost raised me, a second mother.  So my, my mother had one sister whose name is Michela, also known as Micky, we called her Micky.  Michela is M-I-C-H-E-L-A.  Aunt Micky who's younger than my mom.  And she had two brothers, one John, John, Junior and the other Julian.  My Uncle Julian was the second oldest and he was blind as well and he unfortunately when I knew him he was in a special home facility, like a, a mental facility.  And I knew him as a uncle who was away, who didn't spend a lot of time--they would bring him sometimes for Christmas, but he wasn't--he was blind and he was also--he was being treated.  I don't know all the particulars around it.  It's a very touchy subject in my family, like how they treated him, how they handled him and think things are done very differently, you know these days obviously with people with problems, psychiatric problems.  But he clearly when I knew him it was, he was an uncle that I found, you know obviously going through some difficulty.  And then I have another Uncle John who's still alive today, who's the youngest, who lives in New York City.  He also is blind.  In my family there's a disease called RP [Retinitis Pigmentosa], which is a retina disease.  It's--I don't know the exact medical term, it's called RP.  Millions of people around the world suffer from it and you, you slowly go blind.  So my uncle has gone blind, my aunt was going blind before she passed away.  And so my uncle too is blind and he's a playwright in New York City.
Speaker 2: Okay what's his name?
Speaker 1: John Corins, he's, he's John, Junior.
Story_ID: 40022
Speaker 1: Okay now, now was your--how far was your mother able, able to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah so my mother [Patricia Bostick] graduated from Santa Clara University and yeah she did very well, she graduated like top of her class in high school and she was going to med school I think at Santa Clara.
Speaker 1: So she wanted to be a doctor.
Speaker 2: Yeah her goal was to be a doctor.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right was this--was she able to go?
Speaker 2: No my, my mother actually never became a doctor.  She--my mother while in college, got involved in a bunch of movements, initiatives, and I know we'll get into this when we cover my paternal side, but you know my father ran with the Black Panthers, so my mother was really involved in, in the movement in the Bay Area in the '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 40023
Speaker 1: All right so we'll leave her story right there and we'll take your father's, then we'll get them together.
Speaker 2: Cool.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, James, J-A-M-E-S, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M--
Speaker 1: Exactly the same as yours.
Speaker 2: Exactly the same as mine, Andrews.
Speaker 1: I do that every time, every time we--
Speaker 2: Trying to play by the rules.
Speaker 1: So you know what is his date of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  You know my father left, just so [unclear], my father left when I was young, so I don't know as much about him.  It will be a shorter set of questions.
Speaker 1: Was he about the same age as your mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah he's about the same age as my mother, slightly older.
Speaker 1: A little older?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay so maybe 1943, '42 [1942]?
Speaker 2: I would probably suspect, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right and where was he--
Speaker 2: Saint Thomas, Virgin Islands.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's from Saint Thomas, Virgin Islands.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right and what, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family, and--
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  I know that my father came to this country from what I'm told, and lived in San Diego, was playing baseball, was a decent prospect I think, had some opportunities to play baseball I think on a professional level or minor league professional level.
Speaker 1: Now did he come here as a baseball prospect?
Speaker 2: You know that's what I think, I don't know.  I'm not exactly clear on the details.  He, he--after San Diego or somewhere in there he actually ended up going to San Jose State [University], which is I think where he met my mother.
Speaker 1: Where is this town?
Speaker 2: San Jose State.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he was friendly with, you know, Dr. Harry Edwards, John Carlos, kind of that crew of athletes who were coming up in that time period.
Speaker 1: So this is, yeah this is a--when Black Power Era.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So this is--would be in the mid-'60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he probably came in '60 [1960], you know '67 [1967] or so, '68 [1968].  I was born in '70 [1970], so--
Speaker 1: Okay so John Carlos, Harry Edwards and--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: This is, these are the people that really founded I guess what the media picked as a Black Athlete Movement.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Tommy Smith--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, Tommy Smith, exactly, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did he play ball at San Jose State?
Speaker 2: I don't think he did.  Yeah so I don't know all the details, but I, I don't think that he was a baseball player at San Jose State.  Not exactly sure what happened to his career.
Speaker 1: Did he have any other relatives here in the States, or did he--
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Or do you think he did come as a prospect?
Speaker 2: No, I think he came to live with a family in San Diego.  I, I don't know all the details, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was at San Diego State during that era?
Speaker 2: He was in San Diego, and then he went to San Jose State, so I don't know if actually went to San Diego State, but yeah.  Started off in San Diego.
Speaker 1: San Jose State.
Speaker 2: Yeah, San Jose State.
Speaker 1: Okay I'm sorry.  Okay now so he's in college, so we know he got out of high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 40024
Speaker 1: So, so he got involved with the Black Panthers?
Speaker 2: Yeah so I, you know to what level, you know I think he was an activist across the board.  You know I don't know if he was an official officer of the Black Panther Party per se.  But it, you know the Black Panthers and, and the Movement did shape my childhood.  I eventually--I grew up living--I was born in San Jose, but I ended up moving to the East Bay to Oakland, Berkeley where that was pretty much where my childhood was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was involved, you know--I mean just you know, sort of the early years I was involved in, in the Free Huey Breakfast Program and my mom, my mother spent you know, mother and father both spent you know time with, you know Huey Newton and some of the others, the other names.
Speaker 1: Bobby Seale.
Speaker 2: Bobby Seale and yeah I mean you know I, I became kind of a, a bit of a Black Panther historian.  I thought it was, it was fascinating just being from the Bay area and yeah you know knowing that my, my mom and my, and my father both, you know, ran in those circles.  It was really interesting.
Story_ID: 40025
Speaker 1: Now is there a, a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: God I don't know it, no I don't know it.  Again, I just know that there was, you know my aunt, my aunt also went to San Jose State cause my aunt left Santa Maria to go to San Jose State.  And she worked with, with Tom Hayden and his Student Organizing Committee as well.  So you know my mom and my aunt were involved in, in activism in the Bay area during this time period.  And I assume that through those, through activism they met my father.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you think, I mean now I guess as you're older you may have reflected on it.  Do you, do you think it's the--your mother's family background, going back to the Holocaust and all the injustice in Europe that led to them being, her and her sister being activists in California?
Speaker 2: Yeah I never thought about it, but I think that they're, they're--I think that shaped them, obviously.  I think that moving to what they would probably characterize as like a redneck, California town with an Italian mother, with a brother who was mentally unstable.  You know, you know they saw injustice across the board.  So I think their background, I think that they were very much you know, a fish out of water in Santa Maria, California.  I think that there were some instances even after I was born that my grandmother, you know, I was called nigger in this, in this, in this small, little California town and my grandfather, my grandmother literally chased the guy down the street yelling and screaming at him with a knife and you know like I think they came from a family that were naturally activists and stood, stood up for you know, what is right, you know and, and for the human cause.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah I thought that might be the--a direct connection there.  So--
Speaker 2: I, I guess I, I say cause I don't know how deeply Jewish they grew up and how much of the reminder of the Holocaust.  I would have to believe that it was, it shaped them because you know my grandfather did work to get his grandfather out and think he actually ended up living with them for a while.  So I would have to believe that stories of his foot being cut off and amputated and stuff, had to shape them in terms of you know, what's right, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah that's a story that once people find out about it, it really [unclear] really--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, to do something with your life, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you ought to do something or at some--case of some of the right wingers, they can deny it.
Speaker 2: Yeah right, exactly.
Speaker 1: It's too awful to consider, you know.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah I don't have the real story about how they met.  But I do know a lot about, you know, being in the Movement.  You know my father [James Andrews] left and you know, my father unfortunately, you know had other women, you know.  I have brothers and sisters my same age.  So you know I know that there are some of Huey Newton's ex-lovers that my father then got with and you know, I know that my mother smoked weed with Huey Newton and I know about, you know the places in which they gathered and had meetings and you know I know a lot about the Panther history from my mother and then other people that I've met along the way.  Like Jane Fonda actually was really helpful in shaping all that sort of Panther background.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 40026
Speaker 1: Yeah so my father also was abusive, physically abusive to my mother, I do remember that.  Very painful memories of, of my father's abuse.  So at a point we moved away from San Jose and we moved to Alameda--I'm sorry we moved to Berkeley [California] and Oakland, and the directive I have from my mother is if, is if my father ever came around, to not let him know where we lived.  So I grew up with a faint memory of him being around, but really probably at age nine living in Alameda, California at this point, you know the directive was to stay away from my father.  So ironically one day when I was nine, I was playing baseball and I was going to baseball practice.  And I got there kind of early.  And I looked across the field, actually no, this is where the story starts.  So I'm, I'm nine years old and I'm in class, California, Alameda, California.  It's a hot day and I look out the door and I live in a town actually in Alameda where there weren't a lot of African Americans, so I see this African American man standing outside the door and I just looked and he was like kind of far away.  And I was like that's my father.  I hadn't seem him in a long time, but I was like I know that's my father.  So I actually tried to leave the class and go through an accordion door which connected to the other classroom.  And before I could get to the other side, my teacher said James, your dad's here to pick you up.  And I was like oh, shit cause I remembered my mom said never let him know where you are and don't talk to him.  So I go and I have this conversation with him and he's like hey, how you been, I haven't seen you in a while.  And, and I was like okay, okay, I got to go, I have baseball practice, you know, talk to you later.  So I ride my bike through back streets and back woods so that he has no way to find me and no way to follow me in a car, grab my baseball glove, grab my mitt and I head off to baseball practice, which is across town.  Crusey Park in Alameda, California.  And I get to Crusey Park and my father's already there waiting, talking to my baseball coaches.  So it was, you know it was crazy, I was like how did he find my baseball practice?  This is crazy.  And he says to me after practice, hey, you know I'd love to see you play this weekend.  Here's my number, give me a call, I'd love to see you pitch this weekend.  And I got back and told my mother and she was like you have to call him and tell him you never want to see him again.  I was like shoot, this is a big ask for a nine year old.  I mean now that I reflect back on it.  It's like wow.  But clearly she didn't want to talk to him and somehow the message must have got to him.  I actually don't know--I need to ask her how the story--but he actually did not show up at my baseball game.  And I was conflicted.  I, I didn't know exactly--cause I wasn't sure of all the details.  I do remember, you know obviously there was some physical abuse.  I do remember my mom being abused.  And--but I wasn't exactly sure why I had to at nine years old, make that big call and then why, you know, why I couldn't see him, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah that is a tough position to put a nine year old in.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, but difficult situation for her.
Speaker 1: Yeah it was, and not knowing everything and I still to this day haven't asked her why she had me do that.  But, but you know I had to grow up, you know in a fatherless house so I was doing a lot of things at that time that I had to be a man, you know.  I had to at nine years old, just totally different.  I was taking trains and buses and going places and you know I was doing things that were, that were different than most eight or nine year olds.
Story_ID: 40027
Speaker 1: Okay now I always ask this question even though you didn't know your father that well.  From what you know of him, with what you know about your mother which is a lot more, when you think about their personalities and dispositions, interests, their hobbies, their looks even, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I probably take after my father [James Andrews] from what I'm told.  He was very charismatic, very talkative, loved women.  You know I mean I think you know, think I definitely took after him.  You know I'm definitely--my mother actually is a bit of a pessimist, which I'm not.  She--and there's a lot of qualities about my mother that I'm not.  So you know I think I'm definitely from what I hear, more like my father.
Story_ID: 40028
Speaker 1: Now do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I do.  So I have a younger, one younger brother who has a different father, same mother.
Speaker 1: Is his father Black or White?
Speaker 2: His father's Black, mm-hmm, his father's name is George Bostik, which my mother kept his name.  My brother is eight years younger than I, so my stepfather was with us for a while.  And you know he--I don't know if he necessarily shaped me, he kind of didn't come at a point where I probably allowed him to, you know, really shape me and he was, you know I kind of--you know you have that, that feeling that you have a stepfather, it's a different thing.  But he definitely disciplined me.  You know I have one story that I'll go ahead and tell.  I actually burned down my house when I was about, I was six I guess.
Speaker 1: You burned down your house?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah I burned down the house.  I was actually a latchkey kid like most kids.  I lived in Berkeley and I was just, you know, come home after school and I was bored, you know I was like going to watch Space Family Robinson or whatever, Edge of Night, whatever was on at the time.  And I remember playing around with matches and I was playing around with them, I threw it in the garbage and there was like a, like a bed cloth that hung over, and the bed cloth was in the garbage can and it caught fire and the house begun to, to catch on fire.  My bedroom began to, to go into flames.  And I immediately ran out of the house, I was by myself.  And I ended up getting taken away by the police.  And because I was a latchkey kid, I actually got put into foster care for what probably was a week, but it felt like a year, you know.  I was living in a foster care home waiting for my family to come pick me up.  And my aunt who again was like my second mother, would come to visit me in this foster care home.  I do remember that.  That was a really--as I look back on it, that was a very comforting, and probably what started a very special relationship I have with my aunt.
Story_ID: 40029
Speaker 1: How old were you when you burned the house down?
Speaker 2: When I burned the house down I was seven I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so that's 1977.
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], yeah, yeah '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: So well were your, was your mother angry at you?
Speaker 2: Yeah I got a beat down, yeah I definitely got a whooping that day by my father, my stepfather.  And more than the spanking, I had to live with--every time there was a fire on TV or every time something happened my mom would go you see, you see, arson, that's what you were.  Cause they actually tried to try me as an arsonist, you know, I don't think at eight years old or seven years old I was--but, yeah--
Speaker 1: Somebody, who tried you?
Speaker 2: Well I mean they definitely were, you know, they definitely--the word arson and my negligence was thrown around.  I'm sure me being a latchkey kid was somewhere in there as well, but yeah I remember being an arsonist.
Speaker 1: Seven years old is young to be a latchkey kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It really, really is.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was a latchkey kid very early, very early.
Speaker 1: That's second grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's going home, opening the door for yourself.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, had the key around my neck and yeah I mean I, I, I pretty much grew up from seven--I mean my whole childhood I was a latchkey kid, pretty much.  I mean I always--I never had anybody--
Speaker 1: --start going home with a key [unclear].
Speaker 2: No, there was no one ever home when I went home.  My mom worked.
Speaker 1: So you're talking about from the time, from kindergarten or first grade?
Speaker 2: Probably first, second grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, seven you're probably in second grade.
Speaker 2: Yes, let's see, my daughter is ten, yeah probably in second grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah sixth grade, you're six when you start first, normally, five kindergarten.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was probably--first or second grade, yeah I definitely was going home by myself.  And my wife, not my wife, my mother would come home probably about 5:00, you know.  I had a special code.  If something ever happened I'd call my aunt, it was a special ring, you know.  I'm sorry.  She would call me with a special ring because I didn't answer the phone.  And the only phone, phone I answered was when the special ring, it was like a special code.  So they'd ring once and then ring again, and that's when I would answer the phone.  And sort of my lifeline.  And that's really why my aunt I think, you know as I grew up I, I had a very confrontational relationship with my mother.  And at, at--by eighth grade my aunt was like, come, come move with us, come live, come live with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now so your household would have included I guess at that point, I mean when you were little I guess it was your mother until she met your stepfather, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then it would be the three of you?
Speaker 2: It'd be, it'd be the three of us and then my brother was born.
Speaker 1: But that's eight years later, right?
Speaker 2: When I was eight he was born, so yeah, so one year post my arson.  And, and yeah it was mainly the three of us for a little bit.  And, and yeah it was, you know, again I, I mean I--from my, if recollection serves me well you know my stepfather was in out and too, they weren't completely together.  They didn't get married.  But we ended up moving from Berkeley to Alameda, and Alameda is a very different town than Oakland, it's an old naval town, primarily you know, very small number of African Americans.
Story_ID: 40030
Speaker 1: Now all right so is that--well we always ask people about their earliest childhood memory.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do, do you have an earliest one?
Speaker 2: I do remember, you know, all those places I lived.  You know I remember, I remember San Jose, you know living in San Jose, you know when I was really young.  I remember you know, Berkeley [California], Oakland [California], the house I burned down, I remember Alameda [California].  So I can go back, you know probably to, to age, you know, probably five.
Speaker 1: Is there a typical place that you would live in?
Speaker 2: Apartments.
Speaker 1: Apartments.
Speaker 2: Yeah apartments, definitely was an apartment kid until I moved to Palo Alto [California], it was an apartment.
Speaker 1: Would these be in big buildings or like a half of a house or something?
Speaker 2: Some, no some big buildings.  Actually, actually in Berkeley I lived in like a duplex I think.  You know, older home, older Berkeley home off University Avenue.  I lived near a place called Spenger's which is famous in Berkeley.  I lived about, I would say four miles from UC [University of California] Berkeley's campus.  And because I was a latchkey kid, I roamed the streets a lot.  I was walking around you know, Berkeley a lot.
Speaker 1: Now were you close to the school?  Was the school very close to where you lived?
Speaker 2: My elementary school?
Speaker 1: Yeah when you were a latchkey kid.
Speaker 2: My mom actually got me into a really school.  So actually I commuted across town to Thousand Oaks Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the time that the house burned down, were you going like across town to school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And coming back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't even know how I was getting back.  I can't remember exactly, I wish I know, it fuzzes around this.  I, I remember Alameda more, which is the next town we lived in.  But I don't remember exactly how I got to and from in Berkeley.  I probably took a school bus or something.
Story_ID: 40031
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Berkeley because I lived off of University Avenue, which at the time was a bit seedy, I saw everything.  I saw liquor store, I saw the pimps, you know the drug dealers, I saw the hippies.  Obviously I lived near UC Berkeley's campus, you know, you know, People's Park.  You know I saw you know lots of marijuana growing up.  I saw lots of, you know, definitely drug usage.  I saw you know Berkeley was just a very special place, it's very eclectic, it's-- and when you think about 1970, you know, '76 [1976], '77 [1977], it was coming out of, you know the '60's [1960's] and you know it was, it was an awesome place to be.  I saw multi-culturism [ph.] in Berkeley.  I took Swahili at a Swahili school.  I remember being in the, in the breakfast program, the Huey Newton Breakfast Program.  I just remember culture in Berkeley.  I moved to Alameda, it was more like moving to Mayberry, which was very close, right over, but it was very, very homogenous, you know, and very--I imagine it was probably like Santa Maria for my mom.  She did it for school, she did it for education cause she wanted me to have a great, great education.  She thought Alameda would be a better place than, than Berkeley or Oakland [California].  And Alameda was a small town, you know, cars parked diagonal, Main Street, you know.  Very, very different.  It was on the water so it was like a beach town.  It was on the Bay.  So there was like a strip of just water and Bay side apartments and, and for me Alameda was fun and I was a huge Oakland Raider fan.  A lot of the Oakland Raiders actually lived in Alameda.  So I had the opportunity to, to--at an early age I, one of my friends was the next door neighbor of Todd Christianson, he was a tight end and that's actually where I learned about Mormonism from Todd Christianson cause he would tell me about this big tower in Oakland where his church fellowshipped.  I met Lester Hayes who used to come around and took us to the movies one time and just was great with all the kids.  I lived around the corner from Willie Brown.  He actually lived down the street from me.  So I was a big, big, big Oakland Raider fan and the Raiders actually practiced in Alameda [California].  And so when they were away, my friends and I used to ride our bikes to the practice facility and we found a way to sneak in and we actually kicked field goals.  And I remember one time Todd Christianson brought us to the locker room and so it was pretty amazing.  It was definitely a great sports upbringing growing up in Alameda.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's interesting to have that kind of personal relationship with the players.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot of kids don't have that.
Speaker 2: Yeah I think it shaped me even today because you know my work, work with celebrities.  I was meeting famous people when I was younger, you know.
Speaker 1: [Unclear] those guys were--
Speaker 2: Yeah oh, man.  It was great.
Speaker 1: You know, standouts [unclear].
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  They were just larger than life characters and the Raiders just meant so much to me.  I mean this is--this is now '79 [1979] you know so it was, it, it was after the great years and getting ready to--for, for the next championship run.
Speaker 1: Yeah I remember them beating the Browns [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, like the one season where they were dominant and then they took a little break and then they'd come back in the '80s [1980's].  And--or late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s].  So I was there during that ride
Story_ID: 40032
Speaker 1: And you know Alameda was very different.  It was, it was very, very different.  I very much knew that--Alameda made me aware that I had a White mom, you know.  There were definitely--whereas Oakland/Berkeley was more like you know, normal.  Alameda was like you have a White mom, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay because in Oakland and Berkeley a lot of kids [unclear].
Speaker 1: Yeah it was very, like--
Speaker 2: --kind of mixed.
Speaker 1: Exactly, and it's very close but very different.  In Alameda it was very much like where I heard the word nigger before, you know, where, where they were afraid to go over the bridge to Oakland.  You know like it was very much like Oakland felt so far away, but it wasn't.  Now when I drive through, I'm like this is so weird.  Just a hop, skip and jump to Alameda and Oakland, they're separated by a bridge.  But it felt so far away.  And, and the smells, you know like I--barbeque, like I to this day think that you know, Oakland has some of the greatest barbeque places, or did at that time.  And just you know, the smells I smell are you know, white bread, ribs and links, we do links really well in, in, in Oakland.  And there's a relationship between the migration of African Americans and in Oakland is very much Texas.  L.A. [Los Angeles] is Louisiana, Oakland is Texas.  So I felt, you know I felt that, it felt like the south.  I mean really as a city in the south.  Oakland was like the south and Alameda was like this new town.  And going to Oakland was like going to Birmingham.  And I loved it, I loved going and, and exploring Oakland and going around Oakland and it just was way more majestical.  Alameda was very like homogenous.
Story_ID: 40033
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now okay go ahead--
Speaker 2: Well I mean it's such, such a difference in my life between that and then going to Palo Alto.  Like I, it was like a whole new chapter.  So just talking of my childhood, pre--you know up to 12, age 12, cause my life changes at 12.
Speaker 1: Let's go back and recapture the school.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: And where did you start elementary school?
Speaker 2: So I started elementary school--
Speaker 1: Or did you go to kindergarten first?
Speaker 2: Yeah, kindergarten first at Thousand Oaks Elementary in Berkeley, California.
Speaker 1: Now that's in Berkeley, okay.  Now what, what was the population like that, I mean like at--
Speaker 2: Thousand Oaks?
Speaker 1: Thousand Oaks, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was just everything.  You know it was a nice mix, primarily White but you know it's funny I didn't see Black and White the same way I did when we moved to Alameda, so you know it was primarily White but very progressive, obviously.
Speaker 1: So you had that kind of deep sense of [unclear] Berkeley.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and my mom is--the thing I'll say about my mom is my mom is very intentional about me maintaining my sense of Blackness.  Like it was, it was to the point where she was very intentional, very strategic about making sure that I maintained a sense of being a Black boy.  You know my mom--even when I was in high school it was like questioning me why I was dating White girls.  Like why you're dating White girls, what's your problem, where's the Black girls?  So my mom is very down, you know, cook soul food you know like, you know my mom definitely identifies with African American people.  So we lived, you know, in Berkeley in a time--
Speaker 1: Is she a darker Italian?
Speaker 2: No, no she's--but it's interesting.  You know in, in the Bay area that was so normal, it was like so many people that you didn't quite know, right.  But yeah my mom definitely, you know we had lots of Black friends and you know so it was, it was a big move for her to move to Alameda.  It took her out of her comfort zone.  Her comfort zone was around Black people.  Her comfort zone is actually not around White people, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, so, so K to I guess to second grade.
Speaker 2: K to, I guess it becomes third grade I think it is.  I'm a little fuzzy in the details, but third grade I lived in Berkeley.
Story_ID: 40034
Speaker 1: Okay so then, then you moved to--
Speaker 2: Then I moved to Alameda.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: About the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the name of the school there?
Speaker 2: I went to Lumm, L-U, Donald Lumm Elementary, L-U-M-M I think.  Went to two elementary schools, actually don't know why.  I went to two different elementary schools in Alameda, the second I don't remember.  The second one is the one where my father tries to come back.  But I went to two elementary schools and I do remember [unclear] I do remember why [unclear] elementary school.  My mother has recently told me that they, because I was a Black boy, were challenged with dealing with me and she was always in the office.  Like trying to defend me.  I was one of the few Black children at the school.
Speaker 1: Now this was at Lumm?
Speaker 2: This was at Lumm in Alameda, yeah.  I'm sorry, this was the school before I go to Lumm.  I don't exactly remember.
Speaker 1: Okay do you know the name of the other school?
Speaker 2: No, but I, I don't remember.  I can probably look it up, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: All right, well okay.
Speaker 2: I'll look it up [unclear] exercise in between the break.
Speaker 1: All right, all right so now so you were there at Donald Lumm at fourth grade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, fourth, fifth grade, fifth grade I want to say cause, yeah cause junior high started in sixth grade in Alameda.  So fifth grade I'm at Lumm, fourth grade I'm at some school I don't remember the name of.  I identify them because each school had a, had an associated park with it.  And the park is where you play baseball, so you play for the park team.  So when I was at the first school, that was Crusey Park and I played for that baseball team.  And then the second school is where I played another, another--older baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay now okay so middle school I guess it starts in sixth grade, and where did you go?
Speaker 2: So middle school I went--was that two years or one year?  I went, I went one year of middle school in Alameda cause it starts in sixth grade.  So I went to Lincoln Junior High School in Alameda. Okay.  Now before I get to the high school, I just want to ask you like were there any--did you like school first of all?  Did you like going to school?
Speaker 1: I, I did, you know I was very talkative in class.  I loved other kids, I'm very social.  You know I loved hanging out with other kids.  And I loved learning about, you know, interesting subjects.  I was an avid reader and I was pretty voracious and I also loved reading encyclopedias.  I was like fascinated with encyclopedias, I read lots of encyclopedias for fun.  In school I probably was a bad kid, you know I was characterized, and this is probably my problem my mom had with the school is like I was unjustly characterized as a bad kid.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And when you look back on it, you think that you actually caused more trouble, or people expected you to cause trouble, or--
Speaker 1: Probably.  I'm this little kid with the big old afro coming into an all White community.  You know yeah I probably you know, definitely stood out.  I loved sports, I played sports constantly.  You know I was always on the basketball court playing basketball, played baseball.  So yeah I probably, you know I probably stood out, you know with a White mom, you know, like what's up with him?  He's got the big afro with the fight the power on the back with a White mom.  I mean you know it probably--
Speaker 2: Did you have the t-shirts with the--
Speaker 1: I had the patch, I had the free, I had the jean jacket with the patches, you know I had, yeah, definitely we were full on.
Speaker 2: Okay so your looks and then the messages on the clothing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I don't know if I, yeah messaging, yeah messaging and I'm sure my mother was, you know, not afraid to stand up to--and allow me to represent, you know, my Blackness at that school.
Speaker 2: But in Alameda though, the way you describe the community it's Mayberry.  This is intimidating to Mayberry, right?
Speaker 1: I'm sure, yeah.  I'm sure you know I mean we played the game.  I'm sure she, you know my mother knowing how to play the game, you know.  But yeah I'm sure we stood out, definitely.  Sure I stood out, you know.
Story_ID: 40035
Speaker 1: Now were there any special teachers who reached out to you or who you admired along the way in these grade school, middle school situations?
Speaker 2: More coaches than teachers.  I was really shaped by my coaches.  You know I had some pretty awesome coaches.  I don't even remember their names--one, I know one coach for me cause I had a crush on his daughter.  He was great, he lived near the baseball park and I thought his daughter was fine and I never forget I actually--cause girls played the same team with boys and she was rounding third and she was stealing or something and I like tagged her out and I swiped her face and cut it with my mitt and I was like distraught.  But I loved him, he was a great guy.  He definitely stood out.  There was another--I played what you would call AAU basketball today.  I played competitive basketball.  It was a church league.
Speaker 1: This was in middle school?
Speaker 2: In, this is in, this is in middle school, yeah.  Am I jumping ahead?
Speaker 1: Well not necessarily.
Speaker 2: Because I don't really remember any teachers, all, all coaches really.  But yeah my last, I guess my last year, last couple of years being in Alameda, fifth and sixth grade I played competitive basketball. And there was a coach, Coach Bullock.
Speaker 1: Okay now what did you play?
Speaker 2: I played basketball.
Speaker 1: Yeah but what position?
Speaker 2: I played a one and a two, yeah.  I played--I mean I fancied myself a one, but I also loved to shoot, you know.  But interesting enough, when I played for this competitive league, it really--the competition stepped up.  I played in the competitive Oakland [California] church league.  So that's when we started going back over to Oakland and I played--it's a pretty famous church, the Gary Payton, Jason Kidd came out of this, J.R. Ryder, Brian Shaw.  And I played in this--
Speaker 1: You [unclear] great basketball.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was great basketball.  Yeah I played, I played really, really competitive basketball in the church league, but I played for Alameda.  So it's interesting that--actually J.R. Ryder and I played in the league basketball, and the whole Ryder family.  Ryder is a little younger than I am, Isaiah Ryder.  But this point I'm playing, you know, competitive basketball.  It's, it's when you start to go over to Oakland.  So I played for Saint Albert's, but you played Saint Louis Bertram and Saint, and Sacred Heart, and Saint Patrick's, and Saint Liz, and all these teams are all Black.  You know so we're going over, me and this largely White team from Alameda playing you know, all these Black teams.  And the coach, one of the kids on the team his dad was Coach Bullock.  And it was great, it shaped me really to, to really compete and to realize that like you know, my, my friends across the bridge in Oakland were playing basketball at a whole different level.  But the kids I played with were good, but like the kids in Oakland were really balling.  And it was great.  It really got me--it was really actually weird being the, you know one of two Black kids on the team with all White kids going to Oakland.  There was--I felt very much that weird feeling of like I'm with all the White boys.  Like you know what I mean?  Like it was a very weird feeling and I definitely felt like their intimidation.  Like they were nervous, you know they were like super nervous and I was like they're making me nervous with their nervousness, you know.  And--but I definitely felt that.
Story_ID: 40036
Speaker 1: So then when you were growing up, did you, did you feel like comfortable?  I mean as a--did you feel like a fish out of water [unclear]?
Speaker 2: No that's the thing, and that's what shapes me today is I felt very, you know again you have to realize every Christmas I'm going to Santa Maria, or I spent summers in Santa Maria.  So like I'm very comfortable around--I'm very comfortable being the fish out of water.  I'm, I'm actually usually the fish out of water.  So my experiences and my background because my father wasn't around, I was always the Black kid with the White people.  So I never felt--I felt at home, you know like my family you know, was my family and I never looked at it as weird.  It, you know I didn't think about it.  I was like these are just the people, it's my grandfather and yeah, Jews in my family and my mom is White and it didn't really--it felt normal to me.  It felt like everybody should have this opportunity, I felt actually really blessed, to be honest with you.  To have this rich tapestry.  So I wasn't uncomfortable in Alameda.  Alameda was not, you know, even though I knew I stood out at the time, I was very comfortable being a Black kid in a White neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But retaining my Blackness, you know so it's kind of interesting.  Cause there's a duality that goes with that and shapes people who have to grow up in that situation.
Story_ID: 40037
Speaker 1: You were saying that you read a lot too, you read a lot of encyclopedias.
Speaker 2: Yeah I read a lot of historical books and I was into history.
Speaker 1: What aspect of history did you, were you drawn to?
Speaker 2: I think I was drawn to the war because my grandfather was--it was in World War II.  You know I used to watch a lot of war movies and I was into the war and you know loved, you know, history of, of World War II.  I didn't really read a lot about--I guess I was living in it, so it was too close to me, but about the '60s [1960s] and so forth.  That, you know cause I was living, I lived during Patty Hearst and the, you know the Army, the--I remember that vividly, that was near my house.  I remember all those sort of moments, so that was like historical stuff that was like very close to me.  So I was fascinated by the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] and the music and the music and the fashion and all of that that came out of the, the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s].  I think that's probably what shaped me historically.
Story_ID: 40038
Speaker 1: Yeah that's what I was going to ask you next, about the music that was going on and all that.  Bay area is home for a lot of great unclear] music and a lot of artists.  Did you--I mean what kind of music were you listening to as a kid growing up?  Did your mother play--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah so we had--I was, I was fascinated by, by records.  Obviously I think it's shaped me today.  Either records in Santa Maria, so like you know it could be Italian records.  But then what we played at home was really Stevie Wonder, Earth, Wind and Fire, Rufus, Chaka Khan.  So I was literally--there was a collection of vinyl that sat next to my fireplace in, in the sitting area in Alameda.  And I would just go through every day and look at those beautiful album covers.  I can see them all, how they--you know Stevie Wonder or, or Earth, Wind and Fire, all the Earth, Wind and Fire albums I was like blown away by the artwork.  And I spent time with every intricate detail of the album cover.  Interestingly enough, my father somehow was friends with Bill Withers.  That was always the story that came up in my life.  So I was fascinated by Bill Withers' albums cause I heard my father was friends with Bill Withers.  And I just, you know I loved '70s [1970s] soul, funk music, you know.  When I was able to, I started recording on eight tracks all the radio shows and all the music and I, I kind of became like a disc jockey myself, making tons of tapes.  That was really early on.  You know I, I was fascinated by radio, fascinated by the music.  And then when I would go to Santa Maria, I would go through their vinyl and, and play their records.  I knew everything about vinyl.  I knew, I, I you know, I knew like if we didn't have the little center thing, you know those little center things used to play with record players.  If we didn't have that center piece--
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah with 45's, you actually had to make one.  And I knew how to make like the little center piece.  So I started buying 45s at a really early age, I would say age nine.  I would go down to the store.  My first 45 was an Earth, Wind and Fire 45.  So you know I was really a record collector from, from Day One and it's--until I'm sitting here talking to you.  It kind of shapes who I am today.
Speaker 1: So you're like ten, eleven when you're buying Earth, Wind and Fire?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, definitely, definitely.
Story_ID: 40039
Speaker 1: I was fascinated, but we would go over people's houses sometimes and I knew they were like, they're rich or they were really like super hi-fi aficionados because they had the reel-to-reel.  I was fascinated by the guys who really loved music to the point where they had the reel-to-reel.  And, and that shaped me too.  I was like these guys are ser--like I would go to friends of my stepfather, you know, and they're probably sitting around smoking weed and listening to music.  And I would go wow, like they got the reel-to-reel, that, that's some serious music loving right there.
Speaker 2: Those were the days too when the guys would talk about the kind of equipment, the kind of speakers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: [Unclear] expert quality.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.  They would talk about like wine you know.  And they would talk about bass line riffs, I mean they would talk about bass players, talk about just the music was so rich in tapestry and had so many flavors, you know.  And yeah living in the Bay area, we had, we had amazing radio stations.  So we had college radio stations that are the best today.  We had KALX, we had KPOO, Kpoo in Berkeley.  We had the San Francisco stations.  Then on the commercial side, we had on the pop side I think one of the greatest pop stations ever, which is KFRC.  And then we had KBLX which came later, which I mean really ushered in the Quiet Storm.  Even though Kathy Hughes at WPGC came up with the term Quiet Storm, we were living the Quiet Storm.  So that's really--sitting in the back of these amazing cars like my stepfather loved like Cadillacs and he had a Cadillac Seville, '78 [1978], '79 [1979].  You know I, I, I listened to KBLX all day, that's what really--I was forced to listen to it.  And yeah I mean the Bay area was just rich in music tapestry.  Everywhere you turn, everybody had a band, everybody was starting a band, everybody was into band.  And yeah it definitely shaped me.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay so--
Speaker 1: So fascinating when I was [unclear].  I sat and watched Sheila E last night on Uncut and she grew up in Oakland too.  And she talked about the very same thing, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Sheila Escovedo.
Speaker 1: Yeah and they lived right in East Oakland.
Speaker 2: Percussion and bongo sound [unclear].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah and fascinating, that Latin sound, that you know--I mean let me just add this.  The thing about the Bay area that sets it apart is that we all lived amongst each other.  Chinese, Latino, African American.  We had to live and there were--in San Jose there were fights, there were wars between African Americans and Mexicans.  I do remember those distinctly.  But just musically, I grew up listening to Santana, listening to like Latin percussion music cause that was part of the culture.  And I, I also grew up speaking Chinese because that's part of the culture.  You know Oakland China Town is one of the best China towns.  I grew up knowing about Chinese Culture.  And so when you grow up in the Bay area, you're forced to grow up, you know, part of this entire experience.
Story_ID: 40040
Speaker 1: Okay we're just talking about some of the music that you grew up with.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's--you know radio, the records, the music, the exposure, it was rich, it was rich in tapestry.  You know but I grew up listening to rock music, I grew up--Alameda, which was this redneck town, you know I grew up with a lot of people's older brothers who were into classic rock.  So I actually also grew up a classic rock fan.  I really loved Journey, Boston, Def Leppard, you know I grew up really loving like real classic rock, REO Speedwagon, Led Zeppelin, I'm a huge Zeppelin fan.  So that really shaped me as well.  You know because like we lived in this little, you know this little largely White town listening to a lot of rock records and, and listening to their vinyl as well and loving you know these rock records.  So--
Speaker 1: Did they play a lot of the real hard rock stuff, where the guys wear the skeletons on their shirts.
Speaker 2: A little bit, yeah, yeah, you know that's almost a little past me.  I actually--the period I remember is really--it's kind of when--honestly with music in general in the Bay area, I remember a period where there wasn't, there weren't these distinctions between Black and White music.  It was just good music.  It was good, soul, soulful music and records.  But the--you know cause arguably like, you know, lead singer of Journey as got like so much soul and, and, and you know Rolling Stones and all those guys were, were obviously borrowing from our influences, but you could hear the soul influences in those records.  So I, I grew up really before the hard distinction of Black and White records although I lived in Alameda where you know, those people were like hey, I'm going to expose you to our music.  You know this is what we listen to and I loved it.  There were a bunch of really great records that, that I still play to this day.
Story_ID: 40041
Speaker 1: All right so in high school, let's go to high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah well there's a part of junior high that's still--so my, my entire junior high experience was split.  So I left Oakland Alameda and went to Palo Alto for seventh and eighth grade, which that's when junior high starts in Alameda.  It also starts in Palo Alto [California].
Speaker 1: Family moved?
Speaker 2: No, so I had a really contentious relationship with my mom [Patricia Bostick].  I you know, which is really bad, you know I was hanging out with the wrong crowd in Alameda and my aunt [Michela Bostick] had an idea and her idea was you know why don't we have James come move to Palo Alto with me and let me try to raise him, let me try to--let him get a different exposure.  And, you know see how that works out.
Speaker 1: That's your Aunt Micky, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, my Aunt Micky, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you--let's talk, can you just talk about that a little bit more?  Her relationship with you and--cause it seems like it meant a lot.
Speaker 2: It did and it's a hard one to talk about because she passed away from cancer not too long ago and it still kind of burns.  And she was like a second mother to me.  It was really interesting, interesting relationship because not having a father, my aunt who was a, who was an athlete as well, was the one who threw the football around with me.  She taught me how to throw with a spiral.  You know she taught me, she bought me my first baseball glove.  And she was just a very unique, special individual.  And yeah it's just--I think at the time you know she really, she saved me.  She saved me from I mean despair.  You know, she saved me from a life where I wouldn't be sitting here, you know, if it wasn't for the ability to move me to Palo Alto cause I was, I was headed for destruction.  You know I was headed for just doing bad things, stealing things.
Speaker 1: You hanging out with guys [unclear].
Speaker 2: Hanging out with just some, some you know, just crazy, you know kids and just you know--
Speaker 1: It sounds like you had an awful lot of freedom.
Speaker 2: I had a lot of freedom, I had a lot of freedom.
Speaker 1: Maybe too much.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a lot of freedom, lot of freedom.  And I had a lot of responsibility then being a big brother, I felt that, you know--I think my aunt really saw so much potential in me, you know.  She's my biggest fan, you know.  So--
Speaker 1: So how was life different with your aunt than with your mother?
Speaker 2: Yeah well the story gets interesting at this point.  So, so I, you know my aunt was an entrepreneur.  My aunt started a graphic arts company in Sunnyvale, California.
Story_ID: 40042
Speaker 1: Yeah my aunt was a, my aunt was an entrepreneur and my aunt [Michela Bostick] started you know, a graphic arts communication company in Sunnyvale.  And you know it was fascinating.  This was at the point where you had to like typeset.  This is pre-technology so she started this company.  She had a partner, a business partner, a business partner named Pearl Pappas who was Greek.  And so when I went to live with my aunt, I thought I was just living with my aunt and she told me her, her business partner.  But as the years went on, I began to realize my aunt was a Lesbian and that this was her lover.  So I lived with two lesbians.  And it was really fascinating.  So mind you my aunt's partner is Greek with blond hair, my aunt has dark hair.  And so my friends at Palo Alto [California] would come over and like who's this White lady?  It's my aunt, okay check, I got that.  Who is this White lady?  It's my other aunt, you know.  I didn't want to tell--I didn't really, I wasn't sure cause she never really told me that she was a lesbian.  And, and she had realized early on that she wasn't going to have kids.  And so this was--she raised me as her own.  And it was a, it was an interesting experiment.  One that ended up to be probably the best thing that happened to me.  And got me out of a situation and a town that was just stifling.  I moved to Palo Alto which is like moving to--Palo Alto is a very special place.  There's a reason it's the center of Silicone Valley.  It's a, it's a place where you know some of the greatest minds are there, have gone there to create technology and to create our country's defense, and you know, technology around our country's defense, or world's defense and solve problems.  There's something about being in a town like Palo Alto that has Stanford University that makes it very, very special.  And I got to experience that.  I mean it really--for me I grew up in the shadow of Stanford's campus.  You know it definitely permeated my upbringing.  So I moved to--in junior high from a you know, a White town that's kind of you know, middle of the road, you know middle, middle class kind of--to Palo Alto that was very wealthy, you know very wealthy, very rich.  Not just financially but in the type of stimulation, the type of education, the type of kids that I was running around with, you know.  Their parents were professors at Stanford or some of them were--maybe their parents were professors for two years and they were from another part of the world.  So you know a lot of Jewish kids.  I had never actually met Jewish kids until I moved to Palo Alto.  So--
Speaker 2: Were you able to tell that you were part of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah I was always kind of part--I was very transparent.  And you know it was very much a part of my, my upbringing.  But again I was living in another town where I was one of in terms of Black children.  So there was this--I think when you're, you know, it's one thing to be transparent and to be ten, you know nine, ten and 11.  When you're coming into you know, your teens, and you're going to a school like that, you know you definitely want to like be cool with the Black kids who were coming from these Palo Alto, who weren't living in Palo Alto, some of them.  Or they were living in Palo Alto and maybe not such the best neighborhoods in Palo Alto.  There's very much this, you know, you want to be down with the Black kids, but you're also with the White kids.  It was, it was a juggling act.  You know then you had--then to compound that, you know, you have two lesbians as your quote/unquote, parents.  So it was, it was a, you know, I mean it's--again as I look back on it, it really shapes me and who I am.  You know I am not--I didn't grow up normal and so therefore I am not normal today.  I, you know grew up having to do a dance, you know but my aunt being an entrepreneur, being, beyond an entrepreneur, being a dreamer, being an intellectual, being an activist, being someone who was probably very different fundamentally than my mom.  You know, complete opposite in how she thought.  It was very, it was a great period of time for me to, to move with my aunt and to move to a town like Palo Alto that really shapes me.
Story_ID: 40043
Speaker 1: So who were some of your heroes then say when you were a freshman in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people you were looking up to?
Speaker 2: So when I got to, to high school, yeah my, my cap was off.  You know I was, I was so exposed to so many people.  I, you know my high school actually sat a stone's throw away from Stanford [University].  So I'd go across the street to Stanford a lot and met tons of interesting individuals.  My, my aunt's [Michela Bostick] lover Pearl [Pappas] had a couple of brothers who were characters.  I'm not sure I would characterize them as heroes, but they were very charismatic, Greek figures.  One's name was John Pappas and he was an entrepreneur who made a bunch of money and lost a bunch of money.  Made a bunch of money, lost a bunch of money.  And he shaped me in interesting ways.  I'm probably putting this down in historical fact.  He was a character, he was a hustler.  He was the first hustler I ever met.  I mean he was a real, bona fide hustler.
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Big stake hustler, yeah, big, big, early Silicone Valley hustler, right.  He was one of the early ones, right and grew up in Palo Alto, went to Palo Alto High School.  You know, loved women.  He was an older guy, loved young women, always had young women around him.  Loved drugs, loved cocaine.  He was really into cocaine.  I mean it was a party, nonstop party at his house.  He had two daughters who were the nieces of Pearl [Pappas], and they shaped me too.  You know they lived between a town called Saratoga, which if you can believe it was actually probably wealthier than Palo Alto.  So I went, I spent a lot of time in Saratoga, you know, saw a lot.  Saw sort of the birth of MTV.  You know kind of started to shape me musically.  And you know my, my--Christy Pappas, who was the niece of my aunt's lover Pearl, was an athlete and she was a party animal, and I loved it.  She was just, she was like my hero, like she's great, she does everything, she's an athlete, she taught me things, gave me my first Playboy.  You know I mean like she was just amazing, like she was amazing, you know, hindsight.  She was my babysitter, right.  I mean I, again I was sort of a latchkey kid at this point too.  And she was a great, great, great teacher, taught me a lot of things, and was a free spirit and I really, really appreciate her.  And her father was John Pappas, clearly cut from the same mold.  But yeah high school, ninth grade, you know I had people like that.
Story_ID: 40044
Speaker 1: You know what was interesting about my high school is all these amazing people come speak at my high school.
Speaker 2: And I remember we had Tom Peters who wrote 'In Search of Excellence' come speak at my high school.  It was pretty big.  Like the guy was talking about huge theories in marketing and communications and he, I remember he talked about Nordstrom's and just like their customer service and it just blew me away.  And I was the type of kid at this point that would go like listen to lectures at Stanford.  Like I would sneak in and go listen to lectures.  Like so I was, I was soaking it all in you know.
Speaker 1: Now that's something.  I ask that question of a lot of people and I'm surprised that some people that grow up near these universities never go over there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah right.
Speaker 1: But you actually--you're going over there to hear these lectures then.
Speaker 2: Stanford was my, literally like my backyard and my playground.  I played basketball there.  You know some of my--more of my mentors were like--there were a couple of African American football players that played for Stanford.  A guy named Bruce Richardson whose actually here in Atlanta today.  I got to connect with him one day.  He was a Stanford football player that really, you know taught me about Greek life and he was an engineer and they, they took me as a little brother.  And I was going to Stanford parties by tenth grade.  I was hanging out, you know we--I mean I was a, I was a girl chaser.  So I was, you know, trying to talk to the college girls when we were in high school.  I mean we were fast.  I mean we were, we were definitely some fast kids.  And so I, you know I spent a lot of time on Stanford's campus hanging out with those guys, but just taking it in.  You know taking in both the, the, you know the culture of the kids, you know frat houses or whatever, and then also like trying to figure out like you know, my--Pearl's brother Nick Pappas was a professor at Stanford.  And so I would go sometimes with him, he studied Greek history, Greek culture.  And I would go to his class sometimes and so I was, I was soaking it all in.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the lecturers that you--
Speaker 2: I don't remember offhand.  I don't remember offhand.  I do remember that I was fascinated by--there were, there were some really fascinating bookstores on College Avenue which is Palo Alto.  I would spend a lot of time in a couple of those bookstores.  And I would--I just really roamed Palo Alto.  Like my bike was my, my car.  And again I was, I was a latchkey kid in Palo Alto as well.  I roamed Palo Alto.  I like, I, you know there's lots of nooks and crannies--like if you go up above Stanford and there's, there's a huge, famous research institute called Slack.  And I would go up to, you know I was--you know I would just kind of like roam around Stanford.  I would eat lunch there, I'd play basketball there.  I knew the athletes definitely and all the football players that played football.  I mean that's kind of--I tried to play with the older guys and the older Stanford kids.
Story_ID: 40045
Speaker 1: Now in high school did you play any sports?
Speaker 2: I did, yeah.  So I played basketball.  I played one year of football in--two years.  Played two years of football in eighth grade for you know, a Pop Warner team, and then I played ninth grade football for about 30 seconds until I got hit really hard and I was like I don't think I'm gone do this.  So I went to basketball.  And there's a Filipino family, a guy by the name of David Esperiz [ph.], and David Esperiz was my best friend, he was a guard on the team.  And his brothers all played Palo Alto high school basketball as well.  And they were our coaches, we played ball with them.  I played basketball constant--I mean I probably played basketball you know till it was super dark every day all through high school.  So I mean I was--and we literally would go, you know we would, we would go on runs.  I mean on weekends we were playing in San Jose, we, you know someone's older brother would take us to parks where there were runs.  I mean I knew street basketball.  I pretty much played basketball all day, every day.  Went to camps in the summer, you know Santa Clara University camps and knew all the local, young basketball players.  And so I was, I was a basketball junkie.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite player in those days?
Speaker 2: Walter Berry, you know played for Saint John's, Lorenzo Romar, just cause I, I used to go to Warrior games when I was younger, I went to a lot of Warrior games.  And I remember instead of Lorenzo Romar having Nike on the back of his shoe, he had customized Nikes that said Lo.  I thought that was the coolest thing that you could customize your Nikes.  And, and yeah I was definitely shaped--there was actually another sports figure that shaped me early on that I really should mention, it's really important in my childhood, you can cut this any way you want.  But Ricky Henderson really shaped my childhood.  Ricky Henderson was from Oakland [California] and I used to see him around town in his Mercedes, his convertible Mercedes.  And Ricky Henderson's career as a baseball player was like my life.  I literally lived to see Ricky Henderson steal bases.  He used to do this thing where he would actually wiggle his fingers and you actually knew he was going to steal a base.  And it literally shaped my childhood.  I actually cut school--there was a particular moment where Ricky Henderson was going to steal, was going to break Ty Cobb's record, stolen base record.  And he could have done it in Oakland.  And everybody was going nuts.  I cut school, to the BART [Bay Area Rapid Transit], went to the baseball game to see Ricky Henderson actually break this record.  And they called him out on a controversial steal.  And so he ends up breaking the record the next night in Milwaukee.  But like you couldn't tell--Ricky Henderson was my hero growing up.  And so I also interestingly enough would see Ricky Henderson around North Oakland, Bushrod Park, which is where he grew up cause I actually used to have a babysitter that used to take care of us sometimes, and she grew up right across the street from Bushrod Park.  Bushrod Park is actually where Ricky Henderson grew up and I would see Ricky Henderson go by.
Speaker 1: Did you have a chance to meet him?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did, I had a chance to meet him and that was again, I know I'm always mentioning athletes, but Ricky Henderson I saw as, as an amazing figure.  And he would shape, shape my career.  But back to basketball I think you know, so many, I was such a fan of so many, you know, basketball players.  But I loved UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] basketball, I loved UCLA, watching it, watching the [unclear] and really again, part of who I am.  It really kind of, kind of profound impact on--basketball, UCLA basketball had a profound impact on the decisions I made.
Story_ID: 40046
Speaker 1: Okay now in high school now were you a member of any clubs, did you get active--how were your grades?  Let me start with grades.
Speaker 2: Yeah, important things in high school.  So I got to high school and I again you know, the--excuse me.  I got to high school and you know the challenges were different than the East Bay, Oakland [California] and Alameda [California].  But there still were challenges there.  And I actually began to get into cocaine, into drugs.  Not because I needed the money, but it was like what all my other friends did, you know, even my Mormon friends who lived in big, palatial mansions.  You know we did cocaine and sold cocaine cause that's how you got girls, right.  And I knew plenty of very wealthy families with very wealthy kids who were all into cocaine.  This is the '80s [1980s] when cocaine really was starting to hit.  So we sold cocaine for fun.  And that was like you know, like a hobby almost.  Like let's go get some cocaine.  Actually John Pappas who was a mentor, actually sold us the cocaine.  He would give us the cocaine and we would, we would just run and do it.  It was crazy.  So I would say by about sophomore, junior year, I started getting into cocaine.  And I had probably been smoking weed since like I was--I probably started smoking weed at ten.  And--but I graduated to cocaine in high school.  And cocaine and selling cocaine and, and running with the wrong crowd was part of my experience and my grades suffered.  I was actually academically ineligible for basketball in my junior year, I had like a 1.9.  I struggled through high school, struggled, struggled through high school.  I was a bright kid but I struggled.  At one point I remember they actually put me in the, in like you know what you would call the slower class.  And like some of my friends were like why are you in our class?  Like what are you doing here?  You know we know you're brighter than this.  And they, you know they just didn't know what to do with me.  But yeah, I really, really struggled in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is throughout high school?
Speaker 2: Throughout high school.  I finally got my act together and worked hard toward the end.  Graduated like a 2.1, 2.2, and I remember there was a song by Kool Moe Dee that was out, it was called 'How You Like Me Now'.  Many of the administration actually doubted that I would graduate from high school.  And so there were a few of us that they doubted we would graduate from high school.  And on graduation day we taped on the back of our gowns 'How You Like Me Now', and we walked across, we actually turned around to the crowd, say 'How You Like Me Now'.  It was, it was kind of a--
Speaker 1: This was like '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: This was '88 [1988], I graduated in '88 [1988], yeah.  And yeah it was, you know hip hop really shaped me in high school and Kool Moe Dee song really shaped me.
Story_ID: 40047
Speaker 1: The emergence of hip hop was what, about '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Eighty four, yeah '84/'85 [1984/1985].  And sure enough here I am living in Palo Alto [California], not a town you would think would shape me musically, but Stanford's [University] college station had a DJ [disc jockey] named DJ Kevvy Kev Cool Breeze, Kevin Montague is his name, still around today.  I'm friends with him today.  And he was a Stanford college student who was from the Bronx [New York City], who basically brought us hip hop.  I mean college radios really were hip hop [unclear], and that's why a lot of my early hip hop records.
Speaker 1: What was your first hip hop cut you ever heard?
Speaker 2: Definitely Rapper's Delight, you know a lot of us grew up in the hip hop generation.  That was the, that was the song.  And that I did not hear in--that was pre-'84 [1984].  That was in Oakland/Alameda.  That was, you know, sort of the evolution of disco going out into hip hop.  And that I distinctly remember being in Oakland and hearing Rapper's Delight.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's--
Speaker 2: Sugar Hill Gang.
Speaker 1: Sugar Hill Gang.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was the first one.  That was amazing.  But Palo Alto [California], I struggled academically, had a few teachers that really cared about me, which was awesome.  I mean I do remember you know, I have--even though I did poorly, I have fond memories of my high school and I'm very, very proud of my high school.  And I'm glad I got out and it was, it was one of the best experiences I had going to Palo Alto High School, even though I graduated with like a 2.1.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so you did make it and that was triumph.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was triumph that I made it out, made it out alive.  I mean you know I wasn't involved in, you know, crack cocaine, I was involved in, you know cocaine.  So you know it was, it was still a trying adolescent time period for me as a, as a teenager who was selling cocaine and on his own really, you know, had a car by 16 and you know was driving around.  Drive all over, you know, the Bay area.  Would drive to Santa Barbara [California], you know.  I mean again, I kind of had my own apartment living with my aunt cause she was an entrepreneur and she was gone.  So again, I kind of had my own, a lot of autonomy.
Story_ID: 40048
Speaker 1: Now what were you thinking about doing when you graduated?  Like now I'm finally free, or--
Speaker 2: You know I, I felt like I was free.  You know I did feel overwhelmingly desire, excuse me--I did feel, I felt an overwhelmingly desire to, to get out of Palo Alto [California].  I thought I would play basketball.  I thought I would actually--I thought I was--I mean I was academically ineligible which hurt me in terms of basketball.
Speaker 1: Were you doing well on the basketball team?
Speaker 2: I did okay, yeah.  I mean I, you know in my head I probably thought I was better than I was, but--
Speaker 1: Did you start on the team?
Speaker 2: I started, yeah I started--it was JV [junior varsity].  Sophomore, junior year I was, you know I was making that jump into the varsity team.  And I wouldn't say I was one of the better players necessarily going into varsity at all.  But I worked hard.  I didn't like the offense that we ran, it was very stifling.  I was used to--we ran a very like traditional kind of play style and it kind of annoyed me cause I was much more of a playground player.  And they definitely tried to mold me into this sort of like, you know, structured thing.  So I got my, my abilities were kind of freestyle in like outside, I played like another AAU league called ARC [American Roundball Corporation].  I played at Stanford and a couple of other places and you know so I was struggling with like how to like be a fundamental player and yet do the stuff we did on the playground.  So I, I think I had a shot to, to get my act together but then in junior year when I was ineligible I just kind of partied.  You know I played a little ball but I really kind of partied and chased girls, I mean really.  So--but I still thought that I would have a shot coming out of high school and play junior college basketball.  I think a coach told me I could play at a junior college nearby.  And so I went to go try out and kind of play in the summer league, play on their team.  They had a summer league team where they kind of evaluate you over the summer.  And I was playing on the summer league team and you know what?  I was like--I had these Mormon friends, they were like hey, why don't you come to Utah with us?  And I went to Utah with them and I was like this is beautiful, I can go here.  And they were like yeah, hey you know we know, you know we'll hook you up with the junior college here and we can get you a meeting with the basketball coach or something to that effect.  And so I ended up going to Utah and deciding to go to school my freshman year in Provo, Utah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Going to Utah Valley Community College, UVCC.  And with the desire of actually playing on the basketball team.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay UVCC.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  UVCC in Provo, Utah.
Speaker 2: Yeah it's actually Orem, yeah.  I lived in Provo.
Speaker 1: Okay it is in Orem?
Speaker 2: Orem, O-R-E-M.
Story_ID: 40049
Speaker 1: Okay what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: Yeah that was a trip.  So there were nine Black people in the entire town.  All of us were athletes, okay.  Nine.  We knew everybody in the town, okay.  Let me give you an example.  We literally--we were such a freak show that we signed autographs everywhere.  Like people wanted to touch our hair, okay.  The positives are being nine Black people, eight of them Black males, is that we were definitely, we ran things.  I mean like girls wanted to be with us.  It was to the point literally I lived in a cul-de-sac with--I lived with all BYU [Brigham Young University] athletes.  So it was where Brigham Young University is, but I went to the junior college.  So I'm living in BYU housing.  Girls would literally drive in our cul-de-sac.  It was just like a free-for-all, I mean basically it was just--I, I had so many girls in this year it was, it was surreal.  It was like really being a kid in a candy store, being an African American in an all Mormon town.  It was pretty fun.  And there were--you know actually in the summer when I went there, these guys would come back, BYU's football team.  And I was like they're coming back to train here even though they play on an NFL football team?  Like they're from Pasadena [California], from Compton [California], like Chicago [Illinois], like but they were coming to hang out in Utah, but I got it.  Totally realized we were literally legends in the town, and it was fun.  I had a great--I partied more, you know.  I found all the Jack Mormons they call them, all the party Mormons.  And I ended up not playing basketball and even dropping out of this college, you know. I actually realized at that point that I probably--my skills had diminished to the point where I was not ready for Utah Valley Community College.  Like Utah Valley Community College is in a league that is pretty much the minor leagues of NCAA.  So you play in a pretty competitive junior college league which is like Kansas, Idaho, Mount St. Jack, you know like it's its own league of junior college where you pretty much stuff kids there, get their grades up until they go to Kansas and some of the top programs.  I was not ready for this.  Like that's not, like I couldn't play on that same level.  I realized that pretty quickly.  Although I could shoot, I couldn't shoot like those Mormon kids.  Like they can, you know they were gunners.  And I think at that point I realized like okay, this is not going to be the thing for me.  You know, I'm not going to be a basketball player.  I didn't quite realize that, but I had an idea of it, I was probably not headed down that path.  But I played basketball consistently with the BYU athletes.  So all my friends were athletes or football players.  So I consistently, I stayed in shape but, I--it was kind of like this is a different level of athletic performance.
Story_ID: 40050
Speaker 1: So Utah was, Utah was fascinating.  Utah was a real learning experience.  You know interestingly enough in my faith background, my mother sort of turned her back on religion.  Early on she had gone to Catholic college, Catholic school, and she kind of was you know, an atheist of sorts.  And I had this burning desire to go to churches.  So when I was seven I used to walk to a Baptist church down the street from my house and I was in the choir and they all thought it was hilarious.  I literally walked in the church by myself.  So I was always fascinated by faith, was completely fascinated with like you know the, the Catholic relics and I even went to Catholic, on my own I went to Catechism and I kind of went to a Catholic program in Alameda on my own.  And so when I got to Utah, I was still a seeker.  I began to realize like I still had this desire to learn more about religion.  And so I was surrounded by Mormons and a lot of my friends were turned missionaries and were about to embark on a mission.  And I actually kind of chilled out for about four months and kind of got into the Mormon religion and ending up getting baptized Mormon.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it was sort of a knee jerk reaction to kind of, you know, take my party lifestyle down a notch and to get serious and to get focused.  Cause I pretty much just chased girls the entire year.
Speaker 2: Okay so it was so much fun that you basically had to reflect on it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know I had these periods in my life, in high school I had done cocaine.  And there was a moment before graduation, myself, Rob Florez, James Hicks, we were the three amigos, we did cocaine a lot together and graduation night we held hands and we said we're the trio and we did cocaine and I never did it again, ever, 1988 graduation.  And I was like guys this is the last time, I'm good.  Those two unfortunately continued to do cocaine and do drugs.  But I, myself was done, I was done with drugs.  And so I kind of had these moments in my life where I, I literally can just stop things and just rid myself of it.  And so that's kind of where I was embarking a bit at this moment when I became a Mormon, it was short-lived Mormonism, so-
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 40051
Speaker 1: So you, you go back to California?
Speaker 2: So yeah, so I lived in--I want to add this other story.  I lived in a house my last, I guess few months of living in, in Utah with a, with BYU's first ever African American basketball player.  His name was Jeff Chapman and he was a god as you can well imagine with a small G, living in Utah.  And between he and Carl Malone they ran the entire city, I swear.  And I lived with Carl, I lived with Jeff Chapman and a black returning missionary who really was fascinating, helped me kind of rationalize and shape things for me being a new convert to Mormonism.  But I, but I knew that I wasn't going anywhere fast and I had a friend of the family, Coach Philip Matthews, who was a coach at Ventura College.  And I called him up through a friend of mine, James Hicks, and he said hey look, you know we'll take you in the program, you'll be in our program, I'll take you into Ventura, but you may not play, but you'll be in the program.  I was like okay, cool, it's worth a shot.  So I left Utah and I went to Ventura, California.
Speaker 1: Okay now this is, this is 1989?
Speaker 2: This is 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you're in Ventura College.
Speaker 2: Ventura College, yeah.
Speaker 1: Ventura, California, okay.  So well how did things go there?
Speaker 2: So I went to Ventura and I was in the basketball program.  Another little sleep California town where the only--pretty much we were there to play basketball and to be athletes and Coach Matthews became a father figure.  Coach Matthews was a no BS [bullshit] man who was a tough coach.  People sat behind Coach Matthews to hear him curse at the refs.  He was a very vocal individual and that played out through his life, you know both off the court and on the court, and he really cared about these young Black boys that he was--he brought to this sleepy beach town in California.
Speaker 1: Now was he a Black coach?
Speaker 2: He was a Black coach, absolutely yes.  And, and the, the team had won championships before, state championships, Cedric Ceballos who went off to the NBA [National Basketball Association] and a couple of NBA players that come out of this program, Pookie Whittington, Clifford Seton Hall was a little point guard.  So they had this rich history of sports.  And Coach Matthews really had me in the program I don't think with any intentions that I was going to play basketball there.  But being in the program, being in study hall, working out with the team really helped shape me.  It also was another moment when I realized I wasn't going to play basketball anymore cause these guys were bigger, taller, faster and were primed and ready to go play NCAA basketball and I was like okay, this is my reminder that I'm not going to play basketball.  So I got my--I really focused on my GPA.  I focused on getting my GPA up and taking advantage of every student athlete, you know, gift you would say, that you would get in the junior college athletic program.  So we had tutors, we had, you know, we ate Sizzler on game day, you know we had, we had it all, kind of all there for us and it really helped me get through junior college.
Story_ID: 40052
Speaker 1: Now did, what did you major in?
Speaker 2: I majored in, I got my AA [Associate of Arts] in history.  And you know I think even bigger than the degree that I got, so there's a moment in high school [unclear], there's a moment in high school my junior year where a lot of these kids had gone off to prestigious boarding schools and a friend of mine went off to a prestigious boarding school and came back with a story about '86 [1986].  And she says I met this guy, he's amazing and I know he had to be Black cause the way she's describing him.  He's amazing and he's going to come to Palo Alto to visit me.  I was like okay, great.  She said you should meet him, you remind me so much of him.  So this guy comes to town and his name is David and he tells me, he tells me his story, he lives in Beverly Hills, goes to a boarding school, he's African American.  I'm like this guy is pretty cool.  And then he tells me his mother is Dionne Warwick.  I was like that's awesome.  And he tells me about his lifestyle and he goes you should come down and visit me.  Like come down and hang out.  So in high school I started going to Beverly Hills.  And, and hanging out with David.  So when I chose Ventura [College] as a college, I got to spend more time with David and I got to drive down the coast.  You know I'd probably go down maybe once a month or every couple of months, and he had gone to San Diego State University and I got to go hang out with David who was Dionne Warwick's son in Beverly Hills.  Completely blew my mind.  You know it was like fascinating.
Speaker 1: Now you're checking out Beverly Hills.
Speaker 2: Yeah so now I'm going to Beverly Hills and it was amazing.  So I'm, you know I'm living in Ventura, but like I'm able [unclear] cats from Compton and South Central and Chicago [Illinois], like I got a friend of mine that lives in Beverly Hills.  So I would take them to Beverly Hills, they'd be like whoa, this is crazy, you know.  He lived in a mansion right on Sunset Boulevard.  And it was during those trips that I really began to catch the music bug and kind of realized I probably wanted to be in entertainment in some form or fashion.  I think the moment that really crystallized it was David who was so talented, he was like an athlete and played video games, play basketball, and he's a songwriter.  And he had dropped out of school to become a songwriter.  And he wrote 'Here and Now' for Luther Vandross, and he like was nominated for a Grammy.  Like while I'm in my junior college.  I'm like this is crazy.  So like he's making money, he's like got this Grammy nominated song for Luther Vandross, it's a hit.  And I'm going hanging out with my friends, you know my friend David.  And that was phenomenal.  And it really motivated me and pushed me to really get out of junior college and, and go to the next level.
Speaker 1: Yeah that is something.  I didn't realize he did that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, super talented.
Speaker 1: That's a great song.
Speaker 2: And then just spending time with her.  I mean so I started to get to know her and then when I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles], I got to know her really well.  But at this point I'm--I'd met her, she knows me as David's [Warwick] friend.  But it was during this period that, you know, I met Sammy Davis Junior, Patti LaBelle, Whitney Houston.
Speaker 1: Whitney Houston is starting out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I met Clarence Avon, LeBaron Taylor, you know sort of the pioneers of Black music all downstairs, I'm shooting pool in Beverly Hills, going to this junior college.  So it was a really, really defining moment for me in terms of like the light bulb going get your act together, let's get focused, let's do this.
Story_ID: 40053
Speaker 1: So then there's a certain point that you decided you were going to go to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles]?
Speaker 2: So I graduate, I graduate from, from Ventura with an AA and I get accepted to all these schools.  I got accepted to Berkeley, got accepted to Irvine and I got accepted to UCLA, you know and I chose three UCs [University of California] I applied to.  And you know Berkeley would have put me back at home, and I think my mom wanted me to go to Berkeley and be closer to home.  But I chose UCLA and there was one condition.  I had to take a class, a math class at Santa Monica College, but I was going to UCLA, which was my dream.  I mean it was really a dream come true you know.  I grew up a UCLA basketball fan, basketball fan.  I then got to be in L.A. [Los Angeles] which I found fascinating.  I loved L.A.  I loved L.A. from the first time I went there.  Just it blew me away, it was so majestical and--
Speaker 1: By this time the [Oakland] Raiders are in L.A. too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Raiders moved to L.A.  But I really also living in Ventura [California], you know I got a--going home on the weekends sometimes, my friends are from South Central [Los Angeles].  Like I got to really know L.A.  Like I got to really, really hang out in Westwood you know and I, I got to really understand all parts of L.A.  Hanging out with a couple of the players on the team.  So yeah it was no, it was kind of a no brainer for me that UCLA was the place that I was going to go to.
Story_ID: 40054
Speaker 1: Now this is the last--
Speaker 2: This is, this is, this is '91 [1991] I think or '90/'91 [1990/1991].
Speaker 1: Now were you in L.A. then when the riots hit [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah that's a big part of my story.  Yeah I was right there, yeah.  So I go to UCLA and I was dating my girlfriend who was my wife at the time--and actually I was living with her at the time.  And the, you know the riots happened right there.  We all went to UCLA, we were activists, you know we were involved as Black students, you know.  And, but it was an interesting moment where you know the--we were there to, to create a statement and to do something and to say something about, you know, injustice and Rodney King and I just saw a bunch of football players like stealing stuff out of the store.  I saw people getting over and I was like wait a minute, like I grew up like you know, Panther, you know what I mean?  Like we're not doing anything, we're just--cats is running in there, you know taking things and it was a real defining moment for me that I was like wait a minute.  Like where is the activism?  This is--a lot of talk but you know this is not activism, this is people stealing stuff, you know.  And I do remember that.  I remember it being a very tense moment, you know.  There was National Guard at the Ralph's grocery store.  A White girl spilled a soda on my wife by accident and the White girl said when my wife was looking for an apology, don't be such a bitch.  And my wife and I chased this girl throughout the campus.  And it was a very, very tense moment.  There was some interesting moments that, that shaped me.  But yeah I was right there in L.A.
Speaker 1: Just for those who are watching this and don't know what happened, Rodney King [unclear].
Speaker 2: Sure, so Rodney King, Rodney King like so many of us was a victim of Los Angeles Police brutality.  I mean it was, it was my world.  I lived through Oakland Police brutality and then also Los Angeles Police brutality consistently being, you know, pulled out of cars.  And Rodney King, you know was beaten, you know, sense, sense--you know like a, like a, like a piece of meat by the Los Angeles Police Department.
Speaker 1: This was on the--
Speaker 2: It was on the news, it was on video, it was pre-social media, you know.  It was on video cam, it was the first social media moment, ironically that really, you know went everywhere and shaped and, and turned to riots.  You know it was, it was crazy in Los Angeles, all over this country.
Speaker 1: Okay so national [unclear] incident and--
Speaker 2: Yes national incident.
Speaker 1: Were you, you a part of the different forums, I know Jim Brown, Ted Koppel from Nightline was involved in meetings with the Crypts and the Bloods and the different gangs about the--and community leaders in L.A.
Speaker 2: No I wasn't.  You know I was a student, I was neither a gangbanger nor was I an activist.  I was kind of in the middle.  I was, I was just getting to L.A. and I was trying to, you know, get out of college and figure out who I was.  I wasn't involved really.  My wife, you know we were activists in that I lived in this apartment building.  I lived with my wife, with a neighbor whose name was Chris Madison, he was very active.  Went to Howard and was always you know, looking for a conspiracy and, and we were definitely, you know we were definitely thinking about what should we do, what's our place.  My best friend in college was Sir Bailey, his father is Phillip Bailey and so we actually had like a, sort of a, a salon that we used to meet together and talk about you know, what's happening in, you know, in Los Angeles, what's happening with Black people in Los Angeles.  And so you know it definitely, it definitely--there were a lot of conversations that we had but we were not a part of any famous forums.  We were our own forum.  There was a, a teacher on campus named Mogla [ph.] Malekai Eesy [ph.] and Mogla was, was helping to organize a lot of the African students.  But, but you know there's so much history in, in--that I also being a history major, and being, you know a child of the Bay area and the Panthers, there was so much history in UCLA's campus and the Black Panther party and I was looking for something, I was looking for the jump-off.  I was looking for the--and what I saw was just silliness, right and I wish I would have found those, those activisms.  But we created our own activism, we really--when I look back on it, we really created our own forums, you know our own moments where we talked about Blackness in Los Angeles in that moment.
Story_ID: 40055
Speaker 1: So okay now did you--was your major history?
Speaker 2: It was, yeah.
Speaker 1: At UCLA?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I was a history major.
Speaker 1: What, what focus, what, what aspect of history were you focused on?
Speaker 2: African American, yeah African American history.  You know I don't--I think I, I chose honestly I mean I was so passionate, it kind of worked.  I was passionate about history, loved history.  But I also at this moment, at this point in time, knew or was counseled that in order to go to law school, I need to be a history or political science major.  So I was fascinated by history of all kinds.  I mean I, I have to shape my college career by not just the education I was getting on UCLA's [University of California at Los Angeles] campus, but I used Los Angeles.  You know so Ms. Dionne's house, Dionne Warwick, was probably ten minutes from campus.  So I spent a lot of time at UCLA at their house studying the history of the exploitation of Blacks, the Jews, the Mafia, and the relationship to Black music.  So I was getting a really rich history at this point, a really rich educational opportunity.  Not just at UCLA but also off campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was it--I think it's either Iren Berg [ph.] or Leon Ludwack [ph.] or somebody at UCLA that--the two--is a Jewish historical specializing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Irving Berlin, let's see--
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: Berlin, yeah I think you know, cause I wasn't in that department.  There was a huge music ethnocology [phonetic] group at UCLA and Kenny Burrell was one of our professors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And yeah Kenny Burrell, a jazz guitarist, was a, was a professor there.  And so I, I didn't take any classes over there.  I took one music class.  Again my music history classes if you would, were literally downstairs shooting pool with guys that most people never heard of, but are famous in the business.
Story_ID: 40056
Speaker 1: So well tell us how you met your wife.  Now we didn't even get into that, we didn't talk about that [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah so Sir Bailey who was my friend, who's Philip Bailey's son from Earth, Wind and Fire, which was awesome, so awesome to become friends with Sir Bailey.  Met him through the Dionne Warwick connection and the David connection.
Speaker 1: Was he into music himself?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was, Sir Bailey?  Yeah at the time he was a rapper and you know I got to really just being a fan of Earth, Wind and Fire and growing up in the business, I started to get into this circle of like, you know all these amazing people that I met.  And Sir became my friend because we both love music, you know.  It's also very--being the child of a celebrity is a very--you have to really be careful who you trust.  And so I became sort of this inner circle of kids of--by being friends with David.  So Sir and I had a great relationship.  We love basketball, we love girls, we love music and we really, really hit it off.  And then he was going to UCLA.  So when I met him he was an incoming freshman at UCLA.  And he said hey man, let's go to this, you know the grad students are having a party.  The African American grad students at UCLA are having a softball game or something like that.  No, it was a birthday party.  And it there was a third guy that was our friend whose name was Gary.  Now Gary was in the grad program, the African American students grad program, and he was a White guy from Boston, red hair.  He looked like, he looked like a red haired White boy who would, who basically would break you down in Black culture, literally.  He would, you know he would say hey brother, check it out, you don't understand your history, man.  I mean literally it was fascinating, he was part of our crew, we were like a motley crew with this red haired White guy who knew more about Black culture than most Black people.  And he said hey man you know, listen you know these fine sisters over here are doing this, this party and we should all go.  We should get in the car, we should all go.  So we go to the softball game and I see my wife and I was like whoa, I was like you know she's amazing, she's obviously beautiful and stunning.  And I, I was doing everything I could to try to, to connect with her that day.
Speaker 1: A softball game, so she's playing [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah she's a grad student with a bunch of other grad students.
Speaker 1: So she's older than you.
Speaker 2: She's older than me, yeah she's--don't tell her that, I'm not supposed to put it on tape.  But yeah so my wife is older than me.  And--
Speaker 1: She doesn't know it?
Speaker 2: She knows it, she doesn't look it.  So my wife looks in her 20's today, which is pretty awesome.  But no she doesn't like me to tell people her age, got definitely a southern belle thing going on.  But she didn't give me the time of day.  She thought I was annoying.  And I later saw her on campus and I asked her to dinner.  I scrounged my little money, and I was also a well read kid.  So I knew like you know the equivalent of Zagats.  Like I would read restaurant reviews.  And so I knew there was this amazing restaurant called Hamlet Gardens in Westwood.  And I saved up my money and took her to Hamlet Gardens.  And at the time Sir was also working on the TV show Rock, and so I did a double doozy.  So I got--I did like a date where I took her to dinner and the next night we went and saw Rock.  And we sat and went behind stage and met Charles Dutton and the whole nine, and I was like this is great.  I'm going to win this girl over, I'm going to pull out all the stops, right.  And she was totally wowed, she was like whoa, this guy really knows restaurants and gave her kind of a unique experience going to see the TV show Rock, and it was pretty phenomenal, yeah.  I also at this time at UCLA I was hanging out with a bunch of kind of the Beverly Hills/Hollywood group.  So I was hanging with a bunch of broke actors, one of which is a guy named Vince Vaughn who's famous today.  At the time he was just Vince Vaughn my friend and this guy from Chicago [Illinois] who was trying to make it in L.A [Los Angeles].  And Vince and I were friends.  He wasn't going to UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] but he dated a sister I knew.  He dated this African American girl I knew.  And we just hung out and our life was largely going to Hollywood Hills parties.  If you've seen the movie Swingers, the movie Swingers was my life during UCLA.  It was going to school and then hanging out in Hollywood kind of running around L.A.  So yeah, so my wife was kind of like being brought into this world which was a strange mix of people.
Story_ID: 40057
Speaker 1: I would guess that getting married kind of settled you down a little bit.  So how did you decide to get married.  You're having this really wild kind of life here and you decided to get married.
Speaker 2: Yeah I decided to get married.  I think--you know we lived together for I guess a couple of years and then we decided to get married.  I just knew my wife was the one to settle me down.  She's so amazing, so smart, so organized.  I need that, I need that.  I end up actually not finishing UCLA.  I end up getting kicked out of the dorms, having to live with her, and then my grades totally slipped cause I then fell into party mode again.  Hanging out at Roxbury, trying to be at Arsenio Hall's party and Magic Johnson's party.  And my grades slipped, I dropped out of school and I ended up living with her.  And she helped me put structure around what I wanted to do because I basically--I had a chance to get back into UCLA and I told my family let me pursue the music industry.  I really want to pursue the music industry.  So while I was in school I worked in at an entertainment law firm, worked at a record store and I realized I didn't want to become an entertainment lawyer while I was at UCLA.  And I said I really want to work at a record company.  And so my wife really helped shape me and say okay look if you want to work at a record company, let's get you serious, let's get you focused.  And she really you know, cleaned me up if you would.
Speaker 1: Okay now this all happens pretty quick too.
Speaker 2: It does, yeah, more lightening moments where I'm like you're screwing up, James, you're screwing up, you're screwing up James, you're screwing up.  You know I had to take those moments and say okay let me get back on track.  So she helped me do that.  My wife really helped me at an early age get back on track.  So I ended up getting married at 23.  I think I met my wife when I was 22, 21, 22 and got married shortly thereafter.
Speaker 1: Okay so 1993.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 40058
Speaker 1: Okay now before you got married you, correct me if I'm wrong, you landed a job as a Senior Director of Marketing at an independent record label, Immortal Records. Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now how do you go from your first job is Senior Director of Marketing?
Speaker 2: Because it's a lofty title.  When you work in the record business, they're all over-inflated titles of course.  You know Immortal Records was a startup record label started by a guy named Happy Walters.  He had made a ton of money managing a couple of big rap acts, Cyprus Hill, House of Pain.  And you know you--when you start off at a record label, you can work your way up really fast.  In the music industry in general you can start off and work your way up really fast.  So yeah I got this lofty title and you know made a little bit of money and you know it was kind of, kind of the emergence of hip hop divisions of record labels.  And so I was one of the first, I was one of the first you know tier of executives that worked exclusively in hip hop music.  I interned in college at Columbia Records, so I got to see it.  But this was the first formation of a job, department that specializes in rap music.
Story_ID: 40059
Speaker 1: Now okay well back to that internship for a minute.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now when did you--so you actually worked at Columbia Records then as an intern for a period of time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that shaped me, that was huge.  I actually worked--here's the hustle.  I worked in an entertainment law firm called Alexander Schenker, Halloren and--because I thought I was going to work in entertainment law.  And I literally got the quote/unquote internship because I used to like, I used to hustle and I used to sell my used CDs or sell CDs and I was trying to get money, right.  And I went one day and sold some of my CDs at this, they used to call them used CD shops.  And they were giving me money, look, cause I basically would live in this record store.  And I just [unclear] and I wanted to know everything about the records and what are you playing and there was a guy named Jeff that worked at Penny Lane in Westwood.  One day Jeff says to me, he says see that lady over there, she works at Columbia Records.  I bet you can talk to her and get an internship.  So I went in there and talked to her and she was like come in tomorrow.  So I went and saw this woman and she ends up hooking me up with a guy named Demette Guidry and ended up being an internship at Columbia Records.  And my internship at the time consisted of doing whatever needed to be done.  It was whatever needed to be done.  This is pre-hip hop records.  So at the time hip hop records were only played on college radio.  And so my job was actually calling college radio stations every day encouraging them to play hip hop records.  And so each of these--the challenge with that is each of these college music directors and program directors only worked like certain hours.  So when I was working, you know Public Enemy, Nice and Smooth, all the big Def Jam records because those were all Columbia records.  And I basically created my own division, my own job.  And then really I would do it in between bathroom breaks at my law firm sometimes.  I would tell people I'm going to the bathroom and I would leave for like an hour and a half and then come back and then go, I hustled, I hustled.  I was the, I was the biggest hustler.  You know my wife had a scooter, like a little moped.  I used to moped all over L.A. [Los Angeles] to like get things done.  You know I actually had a little job working for Ms. Dionne Warwick in the, in the studio.  You know being like a, a whatever, a gofer.  You know I did everything, I did everything, I worked at a record store.  So I hustled.  My internship was, yes it was Columbia Records, but it was all of L.A.  L.A. was my internship.  But interning, I did whatever, you know whatever needed to be done.
Story_ID: 40060
Speaker 1: Okay so then now I'm back to your--before you got married your wife kind of polishes you up to make a bigger move and that's when you get with the Immortal [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean it was one job before that, I probably don't even have it on my resume, it was Wild West Records.  It was a two man shop, me and the owner.  He was a lawyer who started a record label.  Learned a lot about deal structure there, learned about you know, cause like not only did we make the lacquer, we promoted the bands.  The bands came, asked for their money.  I mean it was like you saw the entire record function in one office.  So I learned a lot about record business at Wild West Records from a guy named Morris Taft.  And then I went to Immortal and worked for Happy Walters and learned a lot.  It was probably more of a 25 person shop there, and learned a lot about you know they had a big record deal with Sony.  So they were under Sony's distribution.  So very, very different infrastructure and Happy Walters was definitely one of the--you know there was sort of a, an emergence of at this time period, you know the White Jewish kids who kind of ran hip hop.  So you had Steve Rifkind who had Loud Records and you had Wu-Tang Clan, you had Happy Walters, you know you had Leo Cohen who was Russell Simmons' right hand guy.  This was the emergence of like that sort of fixture, that player, right.  So we, we, we--Immortal Records was one of the first kind of like non-color, you know colorless kind of record labels.  We managed Cypress Hill, Latino group from East L.A.  We had House of Pain, hip hop group from L.A. who projected Boston to the world as hip hop.  We, we did tours of Rage Against the Machine, a rock band.  We were in the middle of this sort of like Black/White/Green/Yellow, Orange County sort of thing right there in Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 40061
Speaker 1: Okay what you were saying about the White Jewish kids running hip hop reminded me of a movie I saw called Fear of a Black Hat.  You ever seen that, where they shoot and a shoot out in the record office.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was definitely -- but you know Immortal Records for me was like an after school program for some of the most creative kids.  We didn't occupy a normal office, we had like a really beautiful office and Happy [Walters] believed in working out, so we do work outs.  He was making a ton of money, so we did these fabulous vacations in like Palm Springs [Florida] and he took some people to Hawaii and we lived really well.  It was my first taste of like really like working somewhere where they really treated employees like family and it was really, really fun.
Speaker 1: And what artists did you all handle?
Speaker 2: Yeah so the ones you would know would be Cypress Hill, House of Pain, we had all hip hop groups mainly for the most part, and then we did some sound tracks, 'Judgment Night' movie.
Speaker 1: [Unclear].  Soundtracks for 'Blade' I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did the Blade soundtrack.  Maybe Kanye West was--no I think we were pre-Kanye West, Kanye West was really younger.
Speaker 1: Rage Against the Machine.
Speaker 2: Yeah Rage Against the Machine, Cypress Hill, we had a management company.  It was, you know, the most important thing was that Happy was part of the Sony system and I got to really know the Sony system.  Each of the record labels operates in their own systems and I got--this was my first taste of the Sony system.
Story_ID: 40062
Speaker 1: So this--
Speaker 2: Something pivotal happened at this moment.  I got, I had this idea.  I kept going back to the Bay area.  I kept bumping into people I knew, Jason Kidd and guys I played basketball with and Shaq had just released his first record.  And I had this idea, I said you know all these guys I know that were playing ball and making to the NBA, they really wanted to be rappers and the rappers want to be ball players.  So I said what if I actually came up with an album where I paired NBA players and my favorite hip hop producers?  And I was so nervous.  I took it to my boss, Happy Walters and I said what if we did this album, let's put this record out.  And he's like sounds good, here's $300,000, go make the record.  Gave me 300 grand and said go make the album, which was my budget.  And so I said oh my gosh, he funded this.  I said how do I actually get access to the NBA players?  So I knew a guy who was what you would call a hustler or a runner for Jerry Buss, owner of the Lakers.  And his job as Jerry Buss liked Black girls, was to get Black girls for Jerry Buss.  And I knew secretly this guy really wanted to work in the record business.  So I said I'll tell you what, here's my proposition. You help me get into the Forum, which is where the Lakers play, I'll make you a co-executive producer on this album.  And so I did, and I went to him and we worked out a deal.  And we went and took our budget and we basically chased NBA players for about eight months of my life.  And we basically had this budget and we went into the locker room or wherever we could find these players, and we literally, you know didn't know if these players could rap, but we just watched them on the court.  We were like I bet he could rap, bet you he's a rapper.  And we made our wish list of rappers players.  And we basically chased NBA players around for an entire summer.  We actually--cause it's one thing to get these players to commit to you, then you have to actually these millionaire NBA players with time off.  So we literally ran around the country and chased NBA players and paired them with hip hop producers.  So I had Cedric Ceballos and Warren G, I had Jason Kidd and [unclear].  I had Malik Sealy, God rest his soul, and I had, I had all these NBA players and I paired them, it was the most phenomenal project of my life, it was so fun.  I got to mix basketball, music, I wasn't--I didn't know New York all that well.  It was my first trips to New York doing sessions with some of the, you know, like the core hip hop producers and artists of our time.  And it was phenomenal, I was just like renting these cars.  You know you basically have a, an all-in budget and I would go around and like rent these guys because these guys want to drive Porches and Mercedes.  They would dump the car or keep it for an extra week.  It was a phenomenal period.  The [unclear] record, it was called 'B Ball's Best Kept Secret'.  And I actually--in addition to actually putting the record, I had to negotiate all the deals with all of their agents.  So I was 20, I don't know, I was 22 I guess, 23 at the time, and I made this album, negotiated the record with all these, with all these agents and it was a phenomenal period.  I also met with the NBA and negotiated a deal for this record to be called NBA's Best Kept Secret.  So at a very young age I got to learn negotiation skills and, you know, celebrity and it was pretty interesting.  Now the amazing thing about this record is we sold five records, I bought three of them myself personally.  It was a dud.
Speaker 1: Who was the most successful of the--I guess no one.
Speaker 2: Dana Barrows was a phenomenal rapper, he played for the Sixers and the Celtics.  He's now a Celtics on-air personality.  And then Cedric Ceballos, we did a video for--we paired him with Warren G.  It wasn't successful, it was the first time for me that I got to really make a record, and it really helped my personal brand a lot.  You know people started to know me.
Story_ID: 40063
Speaker 1: One person I did not ask you about and I guess now is the time cause this is at the height of his fame, while making that '92 [1992], is MC Hammer.  Now I know you didn't represent him, but he's from the Bay area.  Do you have a story about MC Hammer?
Speaker 2: I don't, only that I used to go to Oakland--he used to be a ball boy and I think he was--I used to go to Oakland A's games religiously and I knew all the ball boys.  And I feel like--I'm so excited to talk to him at some point.  I feel like he was one of the ball boys I used to run around it, cause I really ran around--don't recall seeing him but I think for him he gave us a lot of pride for Oakland.  You know he really put Oakland on the map, you know in his music and it was the first--you know he was the first rapper that really for me made me want to go out and buy an Oakland t-shirt and really represent Oakland.  Even though I grew up in Palo Alto, I still feel Oakland in my roots.  You know so he really put Oakland on the map for us and made us, gave us a lot of pride in being from there.
Speaker 1: Yeah he kind of provided a flavor of Oakland for the whole country.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: When that other group, Oakland--
Speaker 2: Oaktown 357, yeah, Oaktown 357, yeah, 2 Bigg MC, yeah.  Wearing Oakland A's jerseys, shooting in Oakland and I knew all the locations he shot, you know, Lake Merrick, Grand Lake Theater, like all those places were all my childhood.  So to see that on MTV was like whoa, it was crazy.  I knew I wouldn't see Palo Alto on MTV, so I was like, you know I really identified with that.
Speaker 1: And he seemed to really--he was so big at one point.
Speaker 2: So big.
Speaker 1: That in one video he's crowned king by James Brown.  And then all of that, it's like right to the bottom.  What happened, do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't.  No I mean I think like all artists, listen I've had a bird's eye view into many careers and you know, the thing about the record business is you know you're living off advances and you don't own your own fans, you don't own your eyeballs, and it just, it goes quick, you know.  If you don't watch it, you don't manage, it can go very, very fast.  And you can making a dollar and living off a $1.10 and it just goes really, really quickly.  It's a sad thing to watch.
Story_ID: 40064
Speaker 1: I have a question, since I'm an older person and watching this and through the eyes of a kid [unclear] and I'm looking at them.  It seems as though the era where Tupac [Shakur] emerges and Biggie [Smalls] and the rest of them, the music and the lyrics are a lot more severe than say with MC Hammer.  He was just fun.
Speaker 2: He, Will Smith and Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince, were in the fun, you know Houdini, they're still fun.  It was party, it was party.  NWA [Niggas Wit Attitudes] you know really started, you know, this era of you know, telling real stories.  And arguably you know that stuff is hard on the ears, right, for the older generation.  It's like all this is really harsh, but also part of it was that the scene then.  You know as Chuck D likes to say, that was our CNN, that was our bird's eye view into what was really happening, police brutality, you know it was, it was you know for us it was a voice.  You know it was an opportunity to tell a story.  Tupac was a complex individual.  You know he too grew up with the Panthers, he too went to Marin [City], went to high school in Marin [City] [California], his version of Palo Alto.  And I really identified with Tupac in everything that he kind of went through.  But that period where things were happening was also the period when I left L.A. and moved to New York.  And it was '95 [1995] and '93 [1993] and '95 [1995] is sort of the, the period in which you know, you start to have you know, east coast versus west coast you know and, you know it was really, really--'95 [1995] was a pivotal year, pivotal year in our culture and in our music, especially hip hop.
Story_ID: 40065
Speaker 1: Okay so it's in 1994 that you become Senior Director of Marketing for Columbia.  Now is this in--
Speaker 2: Yeah that title is legit.  Yeah I started off as Director I think of Marketing and I got a promotion or something.  That's in New York [City], so the big moment is--
Speaker 1: You're 24 years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So the big moment is you know, I am married and I have a baby Elijah, Elijah's six weeks old and I'm negotiating a contract to take a big job.  And you know the guy who I interned for in college takes a huge position and he's going to New York to work at Columbia Records with Michael Mauldin, another one of your HistoryMakers.  And he's going to work for Michael Mauldin, and Michael Mauldin is Jermaine Dupri's father and Michael Mauldin takes over the Columbia Records.  And Demette wants to hire me and says hey man, Demette who's also an L.A. guy, he says let's move.  Let's move to L.A.  Let's move our families to New York, let's get out of here.  You know and I decided to do it.  And it was a scary move for my wife.  I was 24, I tripled my income, which was pretty amazing you know, I made more money than I, than I, you know, had ever seen in my life.  And it was a pretty big jump, pretty big jump.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were working with artists, with Destiny's Child, the Fugees, Maxwell, these are big names.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a big, it was, it was up from the NBA.  You know it was definitely my--coming into my own.  At the time none of those acts were famous, though, so they sound famous now, right.  When I got there, we were actually a Black division that was in shambles.  We had a bunch of baby acts, some of those were baby acts.  We had an artist named Maxwell that didn't really knew who he was.  We had Nas that was in trouble, we had the Fugees that no one knew.  We really worked hard to bring them to who they are today.  So while it sounds impressive, at the time it was--I feel like our division was the division that they were ready to give up on.  And they were kind of pressing reset by hiring Michael Mauldin, but they hadn't really paid a lot of attention to the Black Music Division.  And it was time when Columbia Records needed to have their seat at the table of Black music.  Black music was becoming popular, hip hop was becoming popular.  And they didn't have a seat at the table.  And they were looking for their seat at the table.  So I was part of a, a new division, a new group that was--it was, it was a startup company really.  My first start up company experience I feel like in many ways.
Story_ID: 40066
Speaker 1: Okay now I do actually remember the marketing, some of the marketing for these.
Speaker 2: Yeah we worked, we really worked--
Speaker 1: --all memorable.
Speaker 2: --very strategically, very--we really plotted our artists on the board, and we really thought about who the competition was and we were very thoughtful about the imaging.  At this point actually a man named LeBaron Taylor who may be a HistoryMaker, if he isn't he should have been, became my mentor.  And because I was a history major I was fascinated by the history of Black music and the history of Columbia Records, Black music stories, right.  And I met LeBaron, had known about LeBaron through Dionne Warwick.  And so I sought him out at Columbia Records, I, I knew that I wanted, you know meet with LeBaron Taylor.  LeBaron Taylor's history is that he was the first ever head of Black music at a record label.  There was a very famous research paper out of Harvard [University] that Clive Davis actually went and financed, which was a study of Black music.  And out of that Clive Davis study, which is this is when Clive was at CBS Records, the birth of the Black music division was born and LeBaron Taylor got his first gig.  LeBaron Taylor, which was unheard of at the time, you know had Michael Jackson, Earth, Wind and Fire, a bunch of really big Columbia acts and CBS acts, and you know, wrote his own check, I mean which was a big, big deal for a Black music executive.  He didn't have to have approval on his budgets, you know he was, he was running the show.  And so at the time, he had gone off and had a corporate affairs gig, he was Senior Director, or he was Senior Vice President of Corporate Affairs, which basically meant that he was an ombudsman between Sony music and External Affairs.  But his thing actually, his big mark was the Congressional Black Caucus.  And we had a very famous Sony Music Congressional Black Caucus party that happened in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].  He was also one of the formation and foundation of BESLA, which is Black Entertainment Sports Lawyers Association.  Actually he was a part of the foundation of that.  So I got to learn about Black music history.  It all came full circle working at Columbia Records.  And even though I was working the Black Music Division, which was different than working with Immortal where I was with, you know, kind of like black, white, green, yellow.  I worked in the Black Music Division between Michael Mauldin, I've got to give him a lot of credit, and LeBaron Taylor, they really emphasized the importance of being in the Black Music Division.  In fact Michael Mauldin called his division 'the black out' at one point.  We had a Black light bulb and you know we really, we really put the Black back in that building.
Story_ID: 40067
Speaker 1: Now tell us about how you marketed the Destiny Child.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in all of our acts, you know we had to you know, get these acts on the road.  We had to get exposure.  We had to, you know, no one cared about these Black acts initially.  You know no one really, you know, you know no one really you know was putting a lot of emphasis on the Fugees, you know.  So what was the change, I mean at this time because it's also the beginning of the Internet.  This is the beginning of forums, right.  This is the beginning of AOL coming into emergence.  And one thing I didn't share about my background in Palo Alto is I grew up writing code.  Like I programmed in Basic.  The only thing is about living in Palo Alto is we learned how to write to code, you know, in eighth grade.  I was normal.  I had friends who were thugs who were writing code.  You know whose, whose parents worked at Hewlard Packard.  So I was always technology, technology is my bones.  I mean technology--Palo Alto shaped me.  So when I got to Columbia Records you know as an executive, I realized that you know, this thing called the Internet was going to be extremely important.  And that we were not paying enough attention in the Black Music Division to our artists' Web presence.  And yet the White acts were writing them into their contracts.  They were actually a big part of their deal.  And our Black acts actually didn't even know about it.  I mean they weren't really thinking about it.  So I would sit down with, you know a then 15 year old Beyonce, which sounds crazy today, you know and her father Mathew Knowles and the group and I would tell them about how important the Web is and how important the Internet is.  And I was the first to really educate our artists about you know, the Web and, and what it was about to become.  So we did lots of things.  You know we did college tours, we did a college tour that started here in Atlanta and went all the way up to Howard where we actually talked to kids during the day in like panel style format, then we had concerts at night.  And these were relatively unknown acts that we actually broke with the help of local radio stations, WPGC in D.C. and you know, a local station here and we broke a lot of acts just by putting them on the road, you know and getting out there in the streets.  You know Maxwell was a live act, you know that had to see him live.  There's no dat [ph.] tape.  You've got to see Maxwell live.  You know we, and I worked directly with Maxwell to help, you know, shape his vision.  To help get his vision out to the world.
Speaker 1: It seems as though these acts are typified, at least the ones you've named here, are typified by actual music, you know [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Not just rapping and beats.
Speaker 2: That's right, absolutely.  Yeah Fugees and Lauryn Hill, that was a very special moment.  You got to, you know the beauty of those groups are they really needed a live show.  They thrived off a live show.  And so we as a group really pushed getting out there and getting on the road and we didn't just rely on radio.  So much of the business at that time was like if you didn't have a radio, you didn't have a record.  We were like forget it, we're going to make radio play these records.  And we really [unclear].  There weren't a lot of record labels doing this type of approach at this time period.  We were very much, we were doing real marketing, it wasn't just relying on radio.
Story_ID: 40068
Speaker 1: Okay, what about now video was very important.
Speaker 2: Very important, yeah.
Speaker 1: If you didn't have a music video [unclear] pretty much cause people were watching that all day as opposed to the radio.
Speaker 2: Yeah absolutely.  It was important, you know I, I became friends with a lot of video directors and we were part--in my role at Columbia Records at this point, it's a big part of my job.  My job is the quarterback.  I was basically the Director of, you know Senior Director of Marketing, but I was actually a product manager which essentially means that you actually are the quarterback in between the manager and the record label.  So you meet with all the divisions.  So my role was also shaping the creative vision.  What are we saying to the public?  What does it look like?  In addition to managing the budgets and financial, you know it was also like, basically each, each act was like my own little business.  And so I had to really care about how these acts were portrayed visually.  And it was a fascinating period.  We had the Fugees at one point spending a million dollars on a music video.  I mean basically the equivalent of a movie budget they put into a music video.  And videos were really, really important you know.  But they didn't become important until you hit a certain point.  So the first part of my career at Columbia Records is getting them to that point, getting them ready, you know to where music videos really, really, really, really were, were--had a big impact.
Speaker 1: Now these acts also I think from what I could see, you know, I mean their image was one of dignity and somewhat.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You would have--I remember a poster of Nas as a pharaoh.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: And you know [unclear].  And these were images that young people were looking at, they were maybe [unclear].
Speaker 2: That's right, absolutely.  Yeah and essentially I learned so much from each of my artists.  You know Maxwell taught me a lot about you know, just New York [City] and you know his growing up Latino and African American.  And Nas's father was Olu Dara, you know he learned a lot about, you know--he brought more than just being a rapper to the table.  You know he really was an activist, you know.  He didn't have the opportunity to really put that out there all the time, but he really was an activist.
Speaker 1: Did you help in the preparation of the video that featured Olu Dara and Nas?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I think I was--might have been gone by then.  But, but I spent many a day and night with, with Nas, you know talking about, you know some pretty deep stuff, and the Fugees as well.  Fugees had a, had a--they had a mission.  I mean Lauryn Hill and I had many, many deep conversations.  She's a very, very wise soul.  You know she went to Columbia, she was--for the timing she ended up full circle.  My assistant at Columbia Records was Malik Sealy's sister.  Her name is Rakibah actually, Rakibah's father was--Malik Sealy's father, was a bodyguard for Malcolm X.  And so we had a cool little collective, that kind of gathered in my office, you know, talking about our culture and, and it was pretty fascinating, pretty fascinating time to be doing what we're doing.  And to see the global impact of our music, you know to see what our music was doing around the world was pretty breathtaking, yeah.
Story_ID: 40069
Speaker 1: Now this is big, this is a big thing.  So, so you were at Columbia for how long?
Speaker 2: I was at Columbia for I guess, I don't know, three years, four years, I don't know.  Three years I believe it is.  And went through a lot.  You know it was hit after hit after hit.  You know we had, we just kept pushing out hits, pushing out hits, pushing out hits.  And I also had a, I had a bit of a, what I would call a music industry side hustle.  And my side hustle was managing DJ Jazzy Jeff and I became friends with Jeff and Will in the early '90s [1990s] playing video games on the set of the Fresh Prince.  And so Jeff was a struggling producer who had a bunch of beats that he wanted to shop.  And no one took him seriously because he was Jazzy Jeff's, you know he was Will Smith's DJ [disc jockey], so he wasn't credible cause he didn't work for the hard core hip hop, you know, rapper.  But I knew that Jeff had something really special in Philadelphia.  I knew he was taking his money from that TV show and going back to Philly and an building amazing thing.  So part of my experience actually being at Columbia Records, I had boundless energy.  And I would literally leave my job and drive to Philly and go to the studio where he had three rooms.  And he was basically creating this amazing Philly sound where he had took kids from church who had regular jobs, and he'd give them rooms and they would just play.  And it would be like--he had these jam sessions I remember on Sundays where like you would sign up for the jam session, and it would be like cats on bass, cats on drums, keys, someone's uncle you know, playing on bass.  And he'd go switch, cat on bass go to keys, cat on keys go to drums, and it was like whoa, it was like really amazing musicians.  And it was kind of like how he sourced his musicians when he was cutting records, cause he started cutting a bunch of records.  And that was my side job basically is I managed DJ Jazzy Jeff and his production company and got to really learn Philadelphia and the Philadelphia music scene.  And you know, met Gamble and Huff a couple of times, and you know the, the Roots were around the corner from us in another studio and it was just a great time, to really get that.  It was sort of the emergence of what we call neo soul.  So Jeff had Floetry and Jill Scott as a poet he discovered her.  He turned her into an artist.  And one of my acts at Columbia that I actually introduced him to was Kenny Lattimore and Kenny actually--he produced a bunch of Kenny's records.  And so I actually was there for the beginning and the emergence of what you would call neo soul.  And I was a part of it and I benefitted from it.
Speaker 1: Okay, well these are all important--Jill Scott, Lattimore.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no D'Angelo so much but the Philly sound.  Philly, Philly was creating a little movement right there, it was--and all these guys had worked for Gamble and Huff.  So a lot of them had been in the studio and had been like studio rats for Gamble and Huff, so there was a, there was a Philly pride, there was a Black pride, there was a, there was an extension of what I was getting from Lauryn Hill and the Fugees.  It was kind of happening in Philadelphia, you know with that whole--these young babies that were coming up.  And, and Jeff was very much in the center of all of this.
Story_ID: 40070
Speaker 1: So now what happened that you left Columbia?
Speaker 2: My contract ran up, and you know I actually got to the point in the record business, honestly, where I just wasn't into it anymore.  It wasn't that interesting to me.  I really felt like the music industry was missing the boat on technology.  Black music was--being a Black Music Division as much as I loved Black pride, was becoming very uninteresting to me.  It wasn't fulfilling.  And I really, honestly I was driven by technology, I was driven by other things.  I created a newsletter called Soul Purpose while I was at Columbia Records, and it was a, it was an undercover newsletter that I only sent out through email.  No one knew it was me.  I created a fictitious character that was named, name was Andy Platinum.  Andy Platinum would read the trades, Billboard, Variety, and he would extract his own point of view around the news.  So you read the news about Will Smith, Will Smith has a deal with Universal Records.  But because I knew Will Smith and the whole crew, I would say Will Smith dealing with Universal Records, but what does this mean for Charlie Mack and Omar and James Lassiter, the whole crew?  I actually put a whole context around the players, around the deal, and I became very popular.  Three hundred email addresses became 8,000, 9,000 email addresses.
Speaker 1: What's the name again?
Speaker 2: It was called Soul Purpose.
Speaker 1: Soul Purpose, okay.
Speaker 2: It was a news, it was the first--it was what you would call a blog today.  And this newsletter became very popular.  And I left Columbia because there was a guy named Mark Ecko who was a reader of Soul Purpose, and he became a fan.  And Mark Ecko was a famous fashion designer, he was becoming a very popular fashion designer.  And he said hey man, would you, would you want to come work for me at Ecko?  And I was like this could be interesting, you know, see what happens, you know he'd pay me a great salary.  You know at the time my salary had gone, you know, I mean I went from you know, $30,000 you know working at Immortal Records to you know, $200,000, you know it was crazy.  I was like--wasn't even 30 yet and I was, you know, making great money.  And you know it was the time when the music industry was popping and culture was, urban culture was very popular.  And Mark Ecko, his name was Mark Milecofsky, he's really a Jewish kid who started the Urban fashion brand, asked me to join his fashion brand.  I was like wow, this could be really interesting.  It could be a really nice segue out of my career.  And my newsletter was really popular at the time, and so I had this kind of popular newsletter, and I had Mark Ecko who was, you know a forward thinker.
Speaker 1: I remember the Ecko clothes.
Speaker 2: Exactly, damn you know a lot of stuff, man.  Yeah the Ecko Clothes.
Speaker 1: I don't know enough.
Speaker 2: Yeah, man you have a lot.  So the Ecko clothes were very popular and he, the way he marketed those clothes was fascinating to me, and so he wanted me to use some of the same techniques I used at Columbia Records to, to break clothes, to break clothes like bands, you know.  And so we did.  I was there probably a year.  But during that year my newsletter became very popular and I had to go join .com, I had to sell it.
Speaker 1: Ecko had raised letters and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, great, so fun.  Mark Ecko was so fun to work with, I just saw him last week for the first time in a long time.  He's so fun to work with.
Speaker 1: Okay so you were there about a year.
Speaker 2: Yeah I was there for about a year.
Story_ID: 40071
Speaker 1: Is there anything, particular thing you were really the proudest of?
Speaker 2: Yeah so one of the deals I did while I was at Ecko was we--I was really into the video game world and Ecko had, or EA Sports, I became very close to EA Sports.  Very good friend of mine there named Glen Chen and I became very friendly and there was a property at EA Sports called Knockout Kings.
Speaker 1: That's a, is that part of Ecko, EA Sports?
Speaker 2: No, I'm going to tell you, I helped bridge this relationship.  So, so EA Sports had this thing called Knockout Kings, which is one of their boxing titles.  And Glen Chen and I were always scheming ways to, to do projects together so we could hang out together because we both loved basketball, we both were from the Bay area.  And he connected me to Jazzy Jeff, that's how I knew Jeff.  And so the Knockout Kings property didn't have any ties.  So we knew that we could maybe do a partnership between Ecko and Knockout Kings that wouldn't have any stickiness to it.  So we actually did this partnership between Ecko and Knockout Kings, where you could actually fight in an Ecko ring.  You could actually customize your shorts and they would be Ecko shorts.  And then--well there's a big conference called E3 and, and Muhammad Ali was the face of Knockout Kings.  And we actually made an Ecko jacket for Muhammad Ali.  And there was this great partnership we did.  No money exchanged hands and we did these really interesting kind of deals.  And then Ecko, and then EA Sports sponsored an AAU basketball team, a pretty popular AAU basketball team, they were doing really well.  And we designed their jerseys.  They were the EA Sports Ecko team.  And they went and played.  And then one of the kids on the teams who's actually DeShawn Stevenson today, he's an NBA player.  I had him model in the EA, in the Ecko Magic Fashion Show, which was pretty cool.  Like it was sort of that, and then he actually--we were almost like managing him, DeShawn Stevenson.  And I actually called up Matthew Knowles and tried to get him to take his daughter to the prom, it was so funny, who was then Beyonce, but wasn't the Beyonce we know today.  So yeah we did some really interesting things.  Tried to do some deals and it was just a fun, freewheeling party.  And now Ecko went on to actually make a couple of video games and a game with Atari.  He really pushed the whole video game thing.
Story_ID: 40072
Speaker 1: All right after Ecko, now what did you do?
Speaker 2: So I went to, after Ecko I--this little newsletter that I created became extremely popular, it was called Soul Purpose.  And I had the opportunity to sell Soul Purpose to a dot com.  And I literally got into a bidding war with about three different dot coms for my newsletter.  And it was kind of fascinating to me.  That people wanted to buy this newsletter that I was--like created from nothing.  And one of the bids for this newsletter was from a company called Urban Box Office, which Clarence Avant, full circle, Clarence Avant was actually my friend's Elliott's godfather.  So I got to know him in my, in my younger years.  He was the Chairman of the Board of this company.  One of the founders of this company was a man named George Jackson who had--was from Harlem, went to Harvard, was Chairman, was President of Motown Records, and had done a bunch of films, Crushed Groove, Jason's Lyric, Thin Line Between Love and Hate.  And there was a cast of characters that you could not turn down.  Frank Cooper was the third partner, who's one of the most senior African Americans at Pepsi today.  And it was a cast of characters I couldn't turn down and I ended up selling my property to, to UBO [Urban Box Office], for a sum of money, pretty big sum of money.  And also a job.  And I joined Urban Box Office and, and left Ecko.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're at Urban Box Office for a year.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: These are fast jobs.  You--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah fast jobs.  Yeah I mean you know, I'm very entrepreneurial at this point and at the time we had 20 employees.  We had raised about a million dollars.  The first investor was Nicholas, Nick Aponte, Chairman of the MIT New Media Lab, and the story was MIT and George Jackson coming together to build this dot com.  We went from 20 employees to 320 employees in about 15 months.  We bought a building in Harlem.  We had a coming out party on Ellis Island.  We went from $1 million in funding to $12 million to $25 million to $40 million.  I hired one person, 12 people, 50 people on my own.  It was pretty amazing.  New York City, you know, dot com, '99 [1999].  All my friends are saying why did you leave the record business?  Like what are you doing, dot com?  What's going on?  And it was the most fascinating of all of my jobs.  I feel like because I literally went into a building every day with 320 of the most amazing people in the world who were all working on the same mission.  It was a mission led by George Jackson.  A guy who, you know mentored me.  He really at this point, you know shaped and helped me understand, you know, relationships.  You know George was Harvard, George was Harlem and we raised a lot of that money on George's back.  He was an extreme, big thinker, a visionary.  He died in the middle of us building this, of a heart attack and stroke.  Very, very difficult time for me.  You know I really loved the guy like a brother and we--he died and he was really pushing me to push Soul Purpose out and make it big.  You know then he died and about a month later I was on the cover of the Wall Street Journal, I was B1, I had the dot matrix photo.  I was keynoting and speaking around the country, if not the world, about the digital divide.  I spoke on Jesse Jackson's Digital Divide series and I was speaking around the world about technology.  I became in a small market, you know of Black people who talk about technology, and you know it was myself, Omar Wasow, Darien Dash, there were a few of us who were out there talking about technology in '99 [1999], and I became one of those faces.
Story_ID: 40073
Speaker 1: Explain to us, now I first ever heard the term Silicon Alley.
Speaker 2: Yeah so it was Silicone Alley is the New York equivalent of Silicone Valley.  And so you know it was pretty interesting that I grew up in Silicon Valley.  A lot of my high school friends had become millionaires in Silicon Valley and here I was full circle building a business in Silicon Alley.  And I was part of this movement that was New York [City], that was a different thing.  You know it was a different scene.  It was, you know it was, it was shaped by New York City, but we were--there were a lot of us raising a lot of the money in this time period.  There were a lot of interesting startups.  There were a lot of fascinating characters around New York City.  And we were just one--we were, we were talked about in the media all the time.  New York Post, Daily News, all the trades, all the business publications cause we were raising a bunch of money.  Clarence Avant would literally sit in our office, and it was a who's who would come in my office.  So we had the rights to Venus and Serena Williams, Muhammad Ali.  So Muhammad Ali would walk in my office and we would just shut down, standing ovation.  Like bow down to Muhammad Ali.  But, but you know Clarence would call and you know I've had Puffy, Russell coming through, you know, Al Sharpton.  I mean all of the big dogs in Clarence Avant's life I got to see, you know, how you raise money sitting in an office right there.
Story_ID: 40074
Speaker 1: Tell us about Brand Influence.
Speaker 2: Yeah so anyway we, we actually went bankrupt, UBO goes bankrupt.  And we go through the $40 million and you know, I was --
Speaker 1: Were you still there when it went bankrupt?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Were you there when it went bankrupt?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I was there when it went bankrupt, doors closed.  I lost my, my Soul Purpose name in bankruptcy court.  You know and, and I was kind of, you know, I turned 30 you know, was trying to figure out what I was going to do.  I started managing--Brand Influence is really a company I set up to manage and to consult.  I didn't really know what I was doing.  I just knew that I had a lot of relationships.  I knew I didn't want to go back in the record business.  I knew I could consult.  I'm a great networker, so I knew a bunch of people in New York City.  And I started managing Jeff kind of full time, traveled Europe with Jeff and went to, you know got DJ Jazzy Jeff--helped him get a record deal in London and traveled London [England] and Germany and Paris [France] and I used Brand Influence as a, as a catchall for all of my consulting projects, which were varied.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so you're doing this for seven years.
Speaker 2: Yeah so I--I mean one of the things that pivotal at this moment is I, I almost you know, went through a divorce.  And then my marriage really suffered during this time period and I separated from my wife for a period of nine months.  It was very, very difficult and it was very, very hard.  I separated because I was--not cause it was difficult, I separated because I had this idea in my mind that I wasn't--I didn't want to be married.  And it was the dumbest decision I made in my life and the most idiotic decision I made in my life.  So I left my family for nine months and it was, it was--when I look back on it, it was just, you know, the biggest mistake I made in my life.
Speaker 1: Did you just kind of become more and more alienated from home?
Speaker 2: Yeah and lived the fast life, you know, and alienated from my family, from my wife, from my kids.  And to be honest with you, on the drive down from, you know, we actually went through financially, tanked, went through our money, about to foreclose on our house.  Didn't have much, you know, I had this career.  I had a couple of cars, about to repossess my cars and you know, while I was separated, almost foreclosed.  My wife said I'm, you know, I'm going to move to Atlanta with my parents.  And so I drove her down.  And on that drive God spoke to me and it was like, this is not the life I had for you.  It's not the--and you know I had this relationship with God, it was relation--you know I had gone to church.  But, but you know I knew that there was the spirit talking to me, but you know identify it.  When we got here my wife found a Christian counselor and I went, went into Christian counseling and met those women who changed my life and you know, really helped me like pick out a Bible and read the Bible and gave my life to Christ seven years, basically.  When we moved to Atlanta, we gave our lives to Christ.  And it changed my whole life completely, completely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is religious institution did you become a member of?
Speaker 2: So we're, you know, my wife's family are AME [African Methodist Episcopal] and Baptist.  We became a member of the Christian faith.  I mean not necessarily--we went to-- my church experience here has been amazing.  But we went to a church that was very nontraditional.  It comes out of the Baptist church but very much--it's a purpose driven church started by a guy who ran a college ministry.  And it really helped shaped, you know my walk as a Christian, as a believer.  I thought Christians were corny growing up, hypocritical and corny.  So I needed, I needed to have my own Jesus moment and did and my marriage almost coming to its end really helped shaped me.  And when I got here, I came here with nothing.  Came here with in-laws who didn't want me to live there.  Came here with no job, came here with my stuff in storage.  Came here with nothing.  You know and had to start over.  And to be honest with you, jobs that aren't even reflected on there.  I worked at Crunch Fitness you know for three months, you know, signing people up for the gym.  In front of people who I knew in the music industry, who would walk by and go is that James Andrews working at Crunch Fitness and I go yeah, taking care of my family.  You got to do what you got to do.  I made--we had one car.  My son is brilliant, he's a really smart kid and we had to shuttle him around in this one car.  My boss ironically at Columbia Records, moved here, lived in a big, palatial house, 10,000 square feet.  And when my in-laws didn't want me at their--he said hey, you know, we'll take you in.  So my whole family moved into one room in his house.  Started over and we started from scratch, you know.  It was, it was, you know a very humbling experience.  I came here and humbled myself.  You know, just detached myself from you know, the things that I thought made me.  You know which were material things.  And so I, I came here with nothing and worked and worked my way up, you know, to where I am today.
Story_ID: 40075
Speaker 1: So what was the, what was your first I guess kind of [unclear] in terms of--
Speaker 2: You know I got a job at a, at a, at a, you know I guess the first break, real one was I got a job at an African American advertising company called Images USA.  Worked there for a little bit and then I worked at--really the big one is I worked for an ad agency called Isobar, which is based in London.  I worked on the Coke business.  So I sat between Coke and London and traveled between the two and worked on digital strategy for them.  I kind of got back into my digital mojo.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right so-- [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: So this is 2007 I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah this is where it gets fuzzy in years.  You got to help me out, I know 2008 pretty much, but--I did, you know it was a, it was a re-growth time for me.  It was a rebranding time for me.  So I get really fuzzy on what's happening there.  I mean I, I worked, you know, we scrapped, we scraped, you know, we scraped here and really, really--I hustled.  So I did a lot of other things that were odd jobs that were consulting things, so--
Speaker 2: I guess in 2007 then is when you started with Ketchum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so I went to Ketchum.  I was at Isobar for a couple of years and I started getting back into the, into the dot com.  I had to take a diet from technology cause you know, UBO, Urban Box Office was a lot.  You know it was a heavy thing to go to a company and lose your founder and you know I was really in it.  You know a lot of it, you know raising $40 million and making a bunch of money and losing a bunch of money, you know, it took me out of the game.  So when I went to, when I went to Ketchum I really decided that I would work in a traditional, digital practice and, and I started blogging in for fast company.  I started getting my mojo back at Ketchum.  And I went there really to run the digital group, but I convinced them that this thing called social media was starting to emerge.  And I actually built my own social media practice there.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay now social media, Facebook was founded I think in 2006 or five or something--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so this is--
Speaker 2: Started hitting big in 2006.
Speaker 1: This is, yeah in fact I helped bring Facebook to Coca Cola, is one of the deals I did when I was at Isobar.  So yeah Facebook is coming into its own, bloggers are becoming important, information out there on the Web and companies trying to organize their, their websites and engage in the public was sort of, you know 2007/2008.  The challenge is that this time period, you know a lot of corporations that are giving that responsibility to college interns.  So we would go in with real sound, business strategy and say hey, a college intern probably is not the right person for this job, and we really went in and helped really big clients understand sound strategy and sound principals behind the business philosophies.
Story_ID: 40076
Speaker 1: So now in 2009, we talked about this before we started.  You got, you got in trouble for--kind of turned into something valuable--
Speaker 2: Yeah I don't know if trouble is the right word.  When I look back on it, you know I, I had a day, you know I had a day where you know being African American, being African American male, living in the south, had kind of built up steam for me.  Living in Atlanta has had its pros and cons.  Living in the south has had its pros and cons.  And I had a moment going to San Francisco which is where I grew up, where I started to see where I grew up, Berkeley and Palo Alto and all these places, right.  And then I came and my first trip was to Memphis after this sort of epiphany I had going back to the Bay area where like everything is, you know--and we were just about to, to nominate Barack Obama as our first African American President.  And I had this moment where I was just like frustrated.  I'd gone on a family trip, taken the kids to Charleston or something like that, a guy in a Confederate uniform who was kind of doing the reenactment was like really locked into character and kept using the word colored, despite me looking at him like I'm gone punch him in front of my kids.  You know it was just us, colored, colored and colored and it was like all right it just was really uncomfortable.  And I just, I began to realize I live in the south and it just, it was a really awkward moment for me.  So I go to Memphis and I land on the plane, I had rented a--they gave me a Mercedes, I was like ooh, cool, I'm driving a Mercedes.  I'm driving through Collierville, I'm driving to Collierville to meet with FedEx who's our biggest client.  I get to Collierville and it's one of these, you know, it's a town where probably not, you know, I don't know, sensitivities with Black males with dreadlocks.  I walk in and the white woman are kind of, you know, grabbing their kids, a little nervous.  You know as a Black male, I feel this nervousness, felt it my whole life, not new, okay.  But it was just like oh, this again, you know.  We're about to nominate Obama, that's all I'm hearing in the media and I'm like I got to go to Collierville, Tennessee where the White women are grabbing their purses and the kids.  Then I go to a hotel, you know, and guy is giving me a hard time with my credit card.  And I'm an executive, I'm, you know I'm the top ranked African American executive at Ketchum, you know what I mean?  I'm a pioneer in technology and I got to deal with this stuff?  Yeah you do got to deal with this stuff, right.  So I get, and I'm just frustrated.  And I go to my room and Twitter has just emerged, right.  I go to my room and I say on Twitter true confession.  I'm in a town that I'd die if had to live here.  Now usually what that does is that starts a banter with my followers.  What town are you in, James?  Right?  But me, I'm in Memphis, so I go and get some barbecue from Quarky's and I eat this barbecue and go fast asleep.  I forgot I'd even sent the tweet.  And it's that time honestly where you don't even--I mean even, I even forgot people even read my tweets cause it's sort of new.  The next morning they pick me up and I go and I'm giving a speech in front of 200 FedEx employees.  And a guy in the audience, the economy's in the tank, reads my profile, reads my twitter and goes, ah, you're bashing Memphis, huh?  And so he writes me this long letter.  I know it's unsightly by the airport.  I know you're a big New York City slicker, whatever, whatever.  But you know we love Memphis, a lot of pride.  And so I don't see this letter, but I do two smaller workshops.  In the middle of the workshops, guys are like we saw what you wrote on Twitter last night.  I forgot, pulled it up on the screen I was like, I had to defend myself.  Well I was in your town, Collierville, and it was a very uncomfortable situation, and so I shared about it.  And they basically liked shooed me out of there.
Story_ID: 40077
Speaker 1: I'm on my way to the airport and my boss is screaming at me, what the hell is going on?  What did you do?  I'm like just relax, as he's talking to me the letter that the guy wrote to me leaks to a blog, and then it goes to another blog, then it becomes full-on news media.  So when I land in New York the next morning, I had to actually spend about six hours of message prepping.  So I was blogging about this experience because I felt like as a social media expert, I had to contextualize why I made this comment, right.  So I started to blog about it and Ketchum was like please, James, do not use the word racism.  And I got a kid in school, I got my child, I'm like fine, I won't use--cause what they really were saying is we will fire you if you use the word racism.  So--but they can't say that because [unclear] Ketchum.  So I--they were handling it very awkward.  They were the company with the social media expert who's giving them social media advice like in my Black face giving them social media advice about race and social media.  It was a very complex time for them.  They were like oh, my God.  So, so I acquiesced and I wrote this patty cake blog post.  This insensitive individual, because they edited my copy.  I said look, I'll write this one, my wife is a blogger.  I can't say she's not going to say something about it.  So they think it's going to go away, Obama is elected that Tuesday and it doesn't go away.  And it just flares up again and it goes on and on and on and on, months and months and months and became a full on story.  And it actually has shaped me, it really has helped me from a social media perspective.  It could have happened and does happen every day since then, to everybody.  You know and the moral of the story is, yeah I'm an activist, you know I believe in, in calling out something when it's wrong.  And I just respect my platforms a lot more.  I know not to be as snarky and as vague about what I'm saying.  Probably the biggest problem in that is that I was vague.  If I'd come out and said this white guy was a racist and he really pissed me off, we wouldn't even be having this conversation today.  But I said oh, I'm in a town that ruffled my feathers.  That's the biggest problem, because I didn't play the rules of the game in social media, which is to be transparent.  I wasn't transparent.  I was being snarky.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So that didn't hurt you--
Speaker 1: No, it didn't get me fired.  I think that they, you know, they, they had a full-on brand on their hands.  I became famous for a lot of reasons at that point.  I mean I got like death threats, it was pretty bad.  I mean it was like people were emailing me like you fucking nigger, dah, dah, dah.  Like you know--and interestingly enough, this is actually the moment in which I made, I made Jane Fonda.  Right at this moment I made Jane Fonda.  And literally the night, the irony of the story is the night that I wrote this blog post in New York City, I had to go do a thing with Jane Fonda that night at her apartment in New York City.  And it was the first time we ever met in New York, we had met here in Atlanta.  And she goes what's going on, like why are you so stressed?  I was like I went to Memphis last week, remember that, there was a thing happened.  And she was like--wait till you hear my life.  You know, actually working on her--launching janefonda.com and managing the thousands of death threats that she got on her site when we first launched, actually made my situation very small.  It actually made me cope with this situation in a way that was actually beautiful.  You know it was the beginning of our relationship and it really helped me you know, look at my problems as not that big at all.  Because the stuff that she gets on her blog, you wouldn't walk outside if you had security.
Story_ID: 40078
Speaker 1: This is a reaction to something she did back in 1970 or '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: She was in North Vietnam I think.
Speaker 2: Absolutely yeah, Hanoi Jane is still her, you know is what she's known by and she still, you know has to go through this every day.  So when we launched her on the Web, it was just crossing of like oh my God, I'm watching your thing and then I'm going through this thing.  Exact same night, it was very fascinating.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell how that relationship developed and what you, what you now do for Jane Fonda.
Speaker 2: Yeah so that relationship started because honestly, I was nominated for a Leadership Atlanta and I wanted to be on her Board.  And her grandkids go to school with my kids, and I had a chance meeting to meet Jane Fonda for breakfast.  And during breakfast when I was hoping to talk about her Board, we began to talk about her life.  And we began to talk about all the things she had been through and I began to talk about social media and how I felt that she--her not using social media was a, was a problem.  And that for the first time in her career, she can actually shape the media, shape the conversation.  And my wife is there with me--my wife is a blogger.  And my wife and I convinced her over breakfast to become a blogger.  And that day Jane Fonda wrote 12 blog posts.  She's the hardest working individual I've ever met.  And when I taught her about becoming a blogger, she completely got it.  And we had a--I had a run where I basically taught her how to leverage the social Web to tell stories, to have a voice, to develop a voice and not be controlled by the media.  So we built janefonda.com, we got Jane Fonda on Twitter, got her on Facebook.  And we really helped shape, you know an icon's image using digital media.  I then got elected to her Board, which is where I serve now, I'm a Board member at GCAP [Global Call to Action], and we no longer work on her social media but we still remain friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well tell us about, now she's a family friend.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, she's a family friends, kids--you know I've been to her ranch, I went to her ranch in New Mexico.  Amazing, took long walks with Jane.  Jane was really important I think in my career because she helped me really respect the idea of lifelong learning.  I mean I was here, you know teaching her about social media and she was teaching me about why it's special to be taught.  And you know, brought my family out to New Mexico, to the ranch where she has, you know 3,000 acres.  And you know learned a lot about where she finds peace and solitude, and just about working, about work ethic.  I learned so much from her, her work ethic.  She works really hard and she's a fast learner.
Story_ID: 40079
Speaker 1: Okay now in 2011 just last year you founded Everywhere a social media strategy, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah so I found--when I left Ketchum I founded a company with two partners.  The idea was the market's ripe.  I was making a lot of money for Ketchum and felt like I could do something on my own.  And so I launched a company called Everywhere with two partners.  And we, we're digital strategists and social medial strategists, and we did some amazing things very early on, and we were the first ever, we actually set the first ever Guinness World Record for social media.  We created something called Hogshead Beat Cancer.  We raised $70,000 for cancer research in 24 hours, all through Twitter.  And we're featured on CNN, a 45 minute special.  We landed clients like CNN, Macy's, Lexus.  But after a year I realized that I didn't want to be in a partnership with these two and left and formed a new company called Social People, which is where I am today.
Speaker 1: Okay and Social People is basically the same concept.
Speaker 2: Social People is a, is a lot of focus on content, a lot of focus on analytics and social data.  And we've been playing pretty big in the TV space.  So we are the agency of record for the Grammys, we've done two seasons of the Grammys.  Turner has been a client.  It's a, it's a company where I have ten amazing employees and we're based in Los Angeles, which is the other big difference.  I split time between Atlanta and Los Angeles.  And we are able to, you know, bring a team together of amazing digital thinkers.  And I'm able to really become an entrepreneur and, and build other businesses.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay now and even focusing on celebrity businesses--
Speaker 2: Not really.  Well yeah okay.  So yes, so the new business that I started is called Famous People, and we're actually managing online talent the same way CAA [Creative Artist Agency], ICM [International Creative Management], William Morris manage celebrities.  So while we have Jane Fonda we worked with and Chaka Khan, we are extremely passionate about the new famous, and where fame has become, and where it's going.
Story_ID: 40080
Speaker 1: Now do you have a--any big plans for the future beyond what you're doing right now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I am a--I've been so blessed to you know, become a part of some amazing business forums and kind of groups.  I just got back from Ted.  I was at something else called the Summit Series.  And these entrepreneurial forums have really begun to expand my thinking around who I am as an entrepreneur.  One of the things I was able to do at Ketchum is open their office in Sao Paulo, in Rio and in Brazil.  So I've been going to Brazil for the last, you know, several years.  And I see you know in my future, I'm involved in it right now.  We're actually looking at opening up an office in, in Rio.  So I see an opportunity to take these, these learnings in digital and social media and help create change somewhere around the world.  To help do something, you know maybe in a non-profit space.  Maybe develop some technologies, but to help people in other parts of the world.  And I'm extremely passionate about--not just helping big brands.  We work with Nike right now, you know I love working with Nike, it's awesome.  But I want to help people.  I want to help, you know, individuals.  The same way I helped Jane Fonda get her voice, I want to help people in whatever that means.  It could be an election, could be people who are--don't have a voice in another part of the world.  So I'm doing a lot of exploring right now.  Doing a lot of traveling outside of America to kind of figure out where I'm going to have the greatest impact.  And I'm also doing a lot here in my country.  I've been doing some lecturing at Morehouse College, I have an internship program at Spelman [College].  I groom two Spelman women a year to become social media strategists.  And I want to do a lot in the land of Georgia.  I really, I really have turned the corner on my relationship with Atlanta [Georgia], and I want to make a huge impact here in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 40081
Speaker 1: So you're in the thick of things in this world we're in and what are some of your hopes and concerns for the Black community today?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my hopes and concerns are--one major one.  I've thought about this a lot recently, is that we become more curious.  I feel like we suffer from a lack of curiosity and it holds us back socially, business, the world that I work in which is digital technology that, you know we play with some of the toys but we're not as curious around how to make some of the toys, how to make some of these technologies.  And my hope and my gift to my community, African American community is that I help our communities, you know, become more passionate around curiosity.  That we don't fall prey to this system of education that just churns out widgets.  Is that we instill passionate, curious young Black boys and young Black girls.  That we put back into our parents, you know parents who are working jobs, single parents, that we help them inspire curiosity.  And that we as leaders, you know I consider myself part of this community of leaders who are shaping the faces and digital technologies, that we give back and we give back to our community fire and desire, you know.  Because that's actually what I see on the other side.  You know when I'm going through Silicone Valley I see they're very curious.  They really are curious in terms of people, they're curious in terms of trying things out.  There's nothing that holds them back, right, they're uninhibited because they feel like they can do anything.  And I feel like we need that.  We need, we need a dose of curiosity, of not just I have an African American President, but I can do anything.  Because when we put our heads to it, we can do anything.  And that's what I'm doing.  I'm living a very global, curious life right now.  I'm living a life where I have the fear--I don't fear failure, you know cause I've been through so many things, right.  So I don't feel failure, check, done, right.  I've been to the bottom.  You know what I mean, you can't take me any lower.  I'm a hustler, I get it, I've taken my family down to the lowest point they will ever be.  So you can't take anything from me right now.  I've done, I've been to the bottom and I've lived the high life.  So for me I'm trying to instill and pass that along to my community.  It's like don't be afraid to fail.  Don't be afraid to try things.  Fear that holds us back.  Don't be afraid of that room full of White people and be the only Black person in that room.  And sometimes we--I talk to my peers, African American and like ooh, there's a White Boy.  I go in a meeting, yeah I didn't graduate from Harvard but people assume I have a Harvard business degree.  I'll be at Yale next week.  You know I'm lecturing at places, you know, and I didn't go to those institutions, but I know fear.  I know fear of being in a room of the smartest people in the room and not knowing I am one of you.  I'm supposed to be here.  And that's really what I want to give back to our community, is you know, for both people who are going through the institutional process of education, going through this rote process of having a degree and thinking you're going to make it in the world.  Yeah you know what?  You're going to make it, but you're going to make it because you hustle and because you don't, you don't fear failure.  You're going to make it cause you're not afraid to go in that room and actually be the smartest guy or gal in the room and take a chance.  Yeah you went into this career where you're supposed to go into law, you're supposed to do this.  And then you diverted and you became incredibly on fire and passionate around this cause or this industry, and you diverted, you went left when your parents thought you were crazy and your friends thought you were crazy.  That's what my life is all about, it's about making those left turns where people thought I was absolutely fricking crazy and I did it, and I want to pass that along to the next--to my kids and to the generations behind me.
Story_ID: 40082
Speaker 1: Talk about the area we're in.  You were talking about--
Speaker 2: Yeah this is entrepreneurial zone.  We're right next door to Dr. [Martin Luther] King's house.  So when you talk about dreaming, you talk about dreaming big, you talk about bringing cultures together.  Atlanta's going through this amazing time period where black, white, green, yellow people are coming together and they're building technology right here, coming from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology], coming from Morehouse [College], coming from Emory [University], solving problems, CDC is right here.  So it's a very special moment in time right here in Atlanta, Georgia.  But I happen to work a bike ride away from this office.  I could actually walk to my office probably from here.  And there's just a revolution happening that's really fascinating in Georgia and it's great to be a part of it.  It's something I took for granted and I'm now like yes, thank you, I'm glad you have me here at this moment.  Cause I'm trying to do big things, and I got to come back to Atlanta [Georgia].  Atlanta is where I have a Black mayor, I have Black doctors, I have Black, Black, Black around me.  And it's great to be able to come back and make this my home base.  Like it's funny, people go you guys got it good there in Atlanta and we do.  There's a reason why Obama was here, and there's a reason why a thousand people, largely African American, were seeing him the other night.  And there's a reason why there's a line of people that want to just see the thousand people going into this event.  You know I wasn't there personally, but my friends that went there felt very special cause they make up a very unique part of America.  We're here in Atlanta for a reason.  The entertainment business is going through such an amazing time period here in Atlanta.  It's going through such a revolution.  We are becoming a little Hollywood, Black Hollywood.  I have friends here who are starting coffee shops and people writing scripts in there and they're doing acting workshops and it's all right here in Atlanta, we control it.  And then with Tyler Perry, you know with the success of what he's doing--
Speaker 1: His films--
Speaker 2: His films.  I mean it's--this is a very interesting time period for Atlanta.  It is all coming together for Atlanta.  So I'm so fortunate to, you know to have--I serve on the Maynard Jackson Youth Foundation, I'm friends with Brooke Jackson and to get that historical context for me at this point in my career, it means so much for me.
Story_ID: 40083
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us a little bit about your family.  We haven't talked about your kids.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure, sure, sure.  I have two amazing kids.  My son Elijah is 16 and a half.  He is a violinist, he is a chef, he is a worldly kid.  He's a kid who reads Monocle and Fast Company for fun.  He rewrites his school's Wikipedia page when he was younger.  He's a very fascinating kid, he's a musician, plays, been playing violin since he was four.  And he'll go on to play violin and do something in music, but he's just a really worldly kid.  My daughter Skye is a creative dynamo, an artist, very funny, very witty.  And they are just very, very special kids.  I'm very lucky.  They travel with us everywhere.  They're kids you can have in the finest restaurants and they know how to behave themselves.  They can have a conversation with adults.  They always have.  Skye is just a beautiful, beautiful girl.  My wife is, is amazing.  She's also a blogger.  She's become a blogger and a writer.  I married a beautiful woman.  She was Miss Teen Minnesota.  She probably doesn't want me to tell you that.  She actually lost in the Miss America, in the Teen Miss America pageant.  There were only three Black girls in the whole pageant and she lost to the one Black girl who was Halle Berry.  I thought that was very funny, who was Miss Ohio.  So my wife is gorgeous, I mean beautiful, just you know, very smart.  Runs an amazing house.  She's a stay-at-home mother, so she's home with the kids.  But we live a very rich and educational lifestyle.  We travel--we went to London and Paris this summer for our first trip.  My wife and I went back to Paris in December and my wife is now teaching herself French, learning French.  You know my kids obviously because of the worlds I've worked in, our household is full of people from the White House, Ludacris, I mean it's like a tapestry of interesting people that come through our doors.  So they really benefit from very interesting people.  They go to a phenomenal school here in Atlanta, started by hippies in the '70s [1970s].  You know so it's been--they live a good life.  You know my son crowning achievement, goal--something happened to him recently.  We went to Jane Fonda's ranch, my son who loves Broadway, was singing Broadway tunes with Jane Fonda late at night one night.  It's like oh my gosh, it's like how awesome is that.  So I try to give my kids everything in relationships and exposure and my wife really is the backbone of our family.
Story_ID: 40084
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  When you look back at everything you've done to this point, I mean what today would you say is your legacy?  You know you still got a lot to do.
Speaker 2: Yeah which is weird about this, right.  I'm sitting here, I feel like one of the younger people who sit in this chair.  I feel like I'm just getting started.  So I mean it's like the--this first--Jane Fonda wrote a book, her memoirs actually, they're written in acts, right.  And I feel like I'm, I'm only in the second, like I'm just about to go into the second act.  And so the first act was about you know, who am I as a man, who am I as a father, as a teacher, as a community member, you know and who are the types of people that I want to surround myself around.  And you know I think that I've given--I feel like I've given the world, you know I'm a connector, a networker and a creative thinker.  That's what I do for a living, that's what I do when I'm not at work.  There's no separation between my work and my career, and I've always been able to work in careers like that where there's no lines.  Like it's all connected.  I don't have a nine to five, I've never had a nine to five.  It's your lifestyle, I've worked in lifestyle industries.  And I would hope that moving forward that I can figure out how to shape all of these experiences and people into you know, a moment, into a real message, a page in a history book, you know, another page.  I mean although I've done things that are history, like I really want to affect people that aren't here.  I want to affect people that don't have a voice, that don't have the curiosity that I have, that don't have the, you know the, the courage to walk into a room and hold your head up high.  I want to, I want to, I want to help people who don't have that and I recognize that I'm part of a very small group of people who are creating technologies, who are shaping technologies that are affecting the world.  They're overthrowing governments, they're getting presidents elected.  And I want to be a part of the future of that, the future of like giving that power of technology and people and communities to the underserved, whatever that means.  Whatever the definition of that is.  Both here in the states and around the world.  And I want my kids to benefit from a life that I've set up for them, both in business and culture.  And I want them to shape their own path.  And I want them to be the best musician, to have, you know the biggest fire when they walk in the room, to be the biggest artist, to be the on fire artist, to be on fire for whatever it is they do the same way I am.  My wife and I, you know give them the freedom to just dream big, dream big.
Story_ID: 40085
Speaker 1: Okay now this is seems like an odd question after that, but if you could go back and change something that you've done.  I mean what would you change, or is there anything that you would change?
Speaker 2: Only my--mistakes in my marriage.  That's it.  Everything else you know, cocaine in high school, you know dropping out of college, it all shaped me.  I mean it's all, you know, there's nothing about any of those experiences that I would, that I would change except for my marriage.  You know I would be a better husband all throughout the marriage.  But other than that, I'm who I am and I'm quite pleased with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well is there anything that we need to cover before I ask my last question?  Something we haven't mentioned or--
Speaker 2: No I think we, you know--
Speaker 1: We'll be back in 20 years.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  No I mean I'm very--I feel--one thing about this new, this new restart on life I got is I just became very humbled by this.  Like that you're even talking to me, it's crazy.  You know what I mean?  It's like I'm humbled, I'm humbled by the recognition, the fame.  In the new famous, whatever that is today.  I mean I'm humbled, I'm humbled that I'm sitting right here.  I should be dead, could have been dead.  I could have been, you know, like so I mean like when you guys called me, I put it on Facebook, like I'm sitting with the HistoryMakers, like this is huge.  I'm humbled I was on Fox last week.  I'm humbled like by one person that follows me on Twitter.  One person, like you follow what I have to say?  So I mean I think for me what, what pressing restart on my life gave me was like humility.  I mean like I thought at 24, 25, 26 I'm making money.  Hanging out with these famous people.  I'm drinking the best champagne, I thought that was it.  Like it's nothing, like these are the years.  These are like--this is my, my--the prime, you know when I'm, I'm someone that you can actually stand to be around.  I'm like someone that has something to contribute to culture, to the world.  I'm excited about this new me, you know this, this re-branded, you know gutted out, you know, person who's been humbled.  And just had to, you know, spend a lot of time on his knees praying for, you know my family and for my community.  So hopefully the world is getting a, you know, the $6 Million Man, you know.  I've been rebuilt for, you know, to make an impact.
Story_ID: 40086
Speaker 1: And the last question is similar to legacy, but we always ask it anyway.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered for being someone who takes chances.  You know someone who is not afraid of a lot of things.  You know, not afraid to die.  Not afraid of business moves, you know not afraid to embrace people that are different.  To be a Christian who, you know, has Jesus at his core but is completely relational and open to you know, everybody, right.  And loves my way into a relationship with people and love people into a relationship with my Jesus, right.  I'd like to be remembered by, you know someone who you know, just made a lot of money, but like did things that were, you know important and important that may not even be famous.  You know that, you know like there are a lot of people I help every day.  Ten percent of my day goes to helping people.  And I want to be known for those small things I do.  That lady down the street, wrote her social media plan because she has a small business, or you know I want to be remembered for the small, little moments in time where I can really just affect people's life.  Yeah the stuff on TV is cool, but I want to--there's so many things I do on the small end.  I want to be remembered for just helping out the guy who's you know, taking out the trash or who cleans your room at the hotel.  You know that's what I want to be remembered for.
