Story_ID: 21736
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Lilia Ann Abron, L-I-L-I-A  A-N-N  A-B-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story behind your last name? I really never, I never heard of Abron before.
Speaker 2: Well there are quite a few Abrons really. Believe it or not, there is an Abron tribe in Ghana. We don't know what that means because you know we don't know--we're a descendant of slave, of African slaves who were enslaved when they were brought to the U.S. So you know they wiped all our culture out so we don't really know where, you know if we're any kin to Ghana. Of course I don't think so. But we think that somewhere along the way somebody misspelled the name. We think at one point the name of the slave owner was Abram, A-B-R-A-M and then somewhere along the way it was misspelled because most of the blacks that you will meet in the U.S. now with that last name, we are relatives from some form or fashion. They're all from Columbus, Alabama, Phoenix City, somewhere down there, yeah, and have migrated everywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 8th, 1945, Memphis, Tennessee, two months early. I was a preemie.
Speaker 1: Alright. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an entrepreneur and an engineer. I own a business and operate an environmental engineering consulting firm.
Speaker 1: It's called Peer--?
Speaker 2: Peer, Peer Consultants, P-E-E-R and we have a design build firm in South Africa called Peer Africa. And in Peer Africa we do sustainable and economic development in the built environment and I'm president of the company and half owner. My partner, Douglas Guy, runs the operation in South Africa so there are two of us who are owners of Peer Africa. I'm the owner of Peer Consultants, 100% owner and then we operate a foundation called Peer Global Environment Foundation which is a 501(c)(3).
Speaker 1: Peer Global--
Speaker 2: --Environment Foundation.
Speaker 1: Alright. And ma'am, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, June 17th, 2012 I believe.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: In your home?
Speaker 2: In my home in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21737
Speaker 1: Alright. Now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer. They're kind of a warm up. The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Paris [France].
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I won't worry about that today I'll worry about it tomorrow.
Speaker 1: Okay. So we'll come back tomorrow and give the--
Speaker 2: Okay. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: -- the interview. No.
Speaker 2: That was, you know that was from, that was Scarlett O'Hara's favorite expression in Gone with the Wind whenever things got to her. And I just said you know what, just like Scarlett, not today, tomorrow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21738
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Maiden and married?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay, Bernice, B-E-R-N-I-C-E Kathleen, K-A-T-H-L-E-E-N Wise, W-I-S-E Abron, A-B-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: I know she was, I believe she was born in Arkansas, probably in Claybrook, Arkansas and I think she was born--I should know that. I have it written down. I mean I can provide that with--I can provide you that information. I have that information.
Speaker 1: And what year would you think--?
Speaker 2: And she was born August 7th, I know that but it's just the date, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Around 1920 or so?
Speaker 2: It's 1917, 1919 makes more sense to me cause she graduated from college in 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I want to say 1919, something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what do you know about your mother's side of the family, the Wises? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well my mom's name, her family name was not Wise and she never really talked much about how she got the name Wise. But from what she told me and I think everybody else sort of has a different story here, that this was the family that she was sent away to live with when she was young. She is from the--the family name is Rozelle, R-O-Z-E-L-L-E and they were born in Arkansas. Rozelle was a French, Frenchman from France, white, and my grandmother's mother, Aunt Biddy, was a freed woman and they called her Aunt Biddy but she was really my grandmother's mother. And she married Rozelle and then they had I know at least three children, Milton Rozelle, Annie and my Grandmamma Lillie, so Roz--so Milton, Lillie and Annie. And by the way, that's my name, is Lilia Ann, the combination of the two. My mom said she could--she was not going to have a Lillie Annie so she kind of changed it around to Lilia Ann. So Uncle Milton really was like the patriarch of the family. He ran the family and Annie did not have any children. Milton had children and Lillie had children. And my grandmother had three children, Aunt Thelma, mama and Uncle Herman.
Speaker 1: And what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Lillie.
Speaker 1: Lillie?
Speaker 2: Lillie. And the last name that I--the name that I knew about, the last name that I knew about was Tarpley so she was Lillie Rozelle Tarpley. And my aunt who's my mom's oldest sister--no, Uncle Milton--no. My mom's sister, Aunt Thelma is the oldest and Aunt Thelma was a Tarpley, then my mom and I don't really think they know who my mom's dad was. And I think when my mom was born, I think she was sent away and--cause she was raised by these people who were Wise, but she never really talked about it much. But it's, it's almost like they sent her away and she must have worked for this family and not quite sure why because they had the wherewithal, they lived well. I mean you know for black people they lived well.
Speaker 1: The Rozelles that--?
Speaker 2: The Rozelles, yeah and they had a compound down where we still live. There were about six or seven sisters and brothers and cousins who all went together when they were selling the land you know in the forty parcels. So they bought eight or nine of those parcels right together so they had land. They were farming, they had a house so relatively speaking they lived okay. But I--so I don't know why my mom was sent away and when you're growing up you never really think to ask that until it's too late. But--and then her brother, Uncle Herman was a Claybrook so at some point I guess my grandmamma married a Claybrook or whatever. But she always used the name Tarpley. She never dropped that name so she was always Lillie Rozelle Tarpley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then Uncle Milton, that was sort of the patriarch. He was the brother, Milton, Annie, Lillie. He was the brother and he sort of ran everything and he had about five children but all of those kids went to Chicago [Illinois] and you know grew up in--they were young men and young women, went to Chicago, got married, had their children and everything. So Uncle Milton's kids all went to Chicago. Annie and Ma Dear--Ma Dear is my grandmamma, stayed in Arkansas and operated the farm.
Story_ID: 21739
Speaker 1: Well what did your mother [Bernice Kathleen Wise] say about growing up? She grew up with the Wise, right?
Speaker 2: Well see she--she grew up with the Wises and we think she was sent there to work for them. And she would talk about coming back home in the summer and she would go back in the summer to the country where the rest of them were but she would only just say for the summer and then she would go back. And she would--you know she never really talked about it too much but at one point you know she was like she was the darkest one in the family so I don't know if it was some disgrace at that point to you know have this dark child around or whatever. I don't know. But she said she would come in the summers but then she would go back during the school year to that family.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother, now she had a chance to finish high school and go to college, right?
Speaker 2: Well you know she said--she doesn't really remember when she talks about it a little bit. She said she doesn't ever really remember graduating from high school. But she said strange things. But she--I remember one summer when she had come back and I think she had come back to finally live with her family and she was working she said for some white lady and she said it was hot and they just had these irons that you would just heat up but they weren't steam irons. And nylon had just come out and she said this lady was sitting on the porch and mamma said she was out on the porch ironing and swatting flies. And she said this lady said, Bernice would you bring me a glass of lemonade? And mama said she said, nope, not going to bring you the lemonade, not ironing another one of these dresses. And she said she just walked away and went back home and told them and said, I quit that job. I don't want that job. I want to go to college and that's what I intend to do. And she was also aside from that job, she said she was teaching cause she could read and right write and she was teaching in a little one room school house back home and she was teaching people older than she was how to read and how to write and everything. So she could read, she could write, she could do all of that. And she had just decided she wanted to go to college but nobody could figure out why she wanted to go to college. That just didn't make any sense to them. So my aunt heard, my mom's sister heard that Bernice wanted to go to college so she asked, said Bernice what is this thing about you wanting to go to college? She said yeah I want to go to college. I can't live like this. I don't want to do this. So she said well where is a college? She said well there's one over in Memphis [Tennessee] called Lemoyne [Lemoyne-Owen College]. Oh okay, well you go over there and see if you can get in that college and if you can get in that college I'll try to keep you there. And my aunt was blonde, blue eyes. I mean you know what the people looked like during that time down in Arkansas. They were all very light skinned.
Story_ID: 21740
Speaker 1: No, I never heard that now. But you're saying where she was in that town--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and remember my grand, my grandmother's daddy was white.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that--
Speaker 2: Okay. And the Tarpleys are from Chicago [Illinois] and there is a group of them in Memphis [Tennessee] and I have met the Tarpleys and the Tarpleys are black because they say they are black. They are very fair skinned. So my mom's, many of them, her ancestors, her relatives and all during that period were all very fair skinned. So this is the reason why we think maybe mama was sent away cause she was not the same color as the rest of them I don't know. Uncle Milton was dark skinned, but again he was a man. He wasn't a woman. So the women were all very pretty, light skinned women, my aunt--my grandmother and my aunt. You know I mean they were what is it, the Mulattos or whatever they were. They were very pretty, fair skinned black women. So at any rate--so my aunt passed for white. She went to Memphis, got a job and my mom went to school I think, it was '37 [1937], '38 [1938], something like that. She got in, she enrolled, she got accepted at Lemoyne and Aunt Thelma passed for white. And if they had found out she was passing of course that would have been disastrous for her and everything else. But mom tells the story one day they were standing on the bus stop talking to each other and there was a white man standing at the bus stop. This was in Memphis and the bus pulled up. And the white man jumped in front of my mama and behind Aunt Thelma to let Aunt Thelma on the bus first. And then he got on and then mom got on. And then mama said she and Aunt Thelma just went to laughing cause they were teenagers. You know they were young and then the white man evidently realized cause they said he turned beet red, realized you know that this was just a very, fair skinned black lady. But any rate that's how my mom went to school. She and my aunt were very, very close and my mom always told us growing up, we have a cousin, my aunt had one daughter and she didn't have her till she was fifty.  So Sandra is really younger than my youngest sister but we were raised in essence really like sisters. And my mom always told us, the older ones that Sandra, if anything ever happened to Aunt Thelma, Sandra was our responsibility cause it had--had it not been, she said had it not been for Thelma, you would not be where you are today. She's the one that understood what I wanted to do and sacrificed to get me through college.
Story_ID: 21741
Speaker 1: So--now once mom [Bernice Kathleen Wise] went to college, graduated from college, there was nothing--they called her Bunche. Her name was Bernice, they called her Bunche. There was nothing that Bunche couldn't do after that. I mean all of a sudden she became the matriarch because she was the one with the college degree so she was the one then that had the responsibility of taking care of all of the papers, all of the taxes, all of everything. Then she became the one that everybody looked to. And she had no grudges or anything like that. I mean it was only in probing as we got older that we could get some information. And now we talk about it and say gees, you know we should have had some sense to get more information. But during that time and I've found it's very common among black families and even maybe white families but there were just things they didn't talk about, you know, and there are things that we laugh about it now, my friends our age group and say you know, should have asked that question, but you know there were things that they wouldn't talk about couldn't hear it and when they were talking about it they were whispering and everything. So a lot of black families it was just information that you just didn't get. Or if you did get it, you got what they wanted you to have because again there was this whole thing of, you know what, Jim Crow and descendants of slavery, not knowing this, not knowing that, having to live, having to live hand to mouth.
Story_ID: 21742
Speaker 1: I remember my mom [Bernice Kathleen Wise] even said when she was a little girl you know, we had the land, we had the farm and when you put all of the pieces together it could very well have been what fifteen-40s by the time you got them cause that's the way they counted the property. And I think we still have four of the five 40s still. We have something like that cause a lot of them lost their land in taxes and people didn't know that they weren't paying them and all this kind of stuff. But mom said during World War I, the United States Government brought German prisoners down to their farm and made them keep those prisoners and didn't give them money. And they had to feed them and didn't give them money to take care of them. But the German prisoners that they would bring to the U.S., then they'd parcel them out and they were good for giving them to black folk to make them take care of them. And momma said they just set their in pens, they didn't do anything but they had to feed them. And they didn't get paid for that.
Speaker 2: Oh, they had them actually locked up and stuff?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she said in a pen. It--they could've gotten out and then she said why would they want to get out? Where were they going to go? And they were getting fed three meals a day and all they did was sit around. She said it was very cozy life but at any rate so she talked about that which I thought was so interesting. And I said I'm going to find some more in--and going to look up and get some more information about that but she said they had to keep them. And she also talked about during the depression because see they were farmers they got paid once a year. So you had to learn how to live out of what you got once a year. But farmers during that time they were poor but they were self--they took care of themselves. They raised their food. They had their animals. They killed their animals. They would smoke the animals once a year. You'd do this big thing you smoke the meat for the rest of the year which by the way is a lost art. Nobody really knows how they did that anymore, the smokehouse and everything. And you smoked cured, you sugar cured so they fed themselves. And they you know--then you would get sugar and flour and meal in these big cotton sacks and then that's what the ladies used to make curtains, to make their dresses. In fact, we have some quilts, blankets that my grandmamma, great-grandmamma made that were made from the scraps. And I remember growing up we used to be so shamed of those quits. People would come to our house--put those things away. And now you know we treat them cause they're so fragile and everything but may said she remembers when she was a little girls these white people started coming around knocking on the door asking--and this is out--they lived out in Arkansas, you know if you had any extra eggs or any milk, any butter, anything like that. And she said one day somebody said where all these white people come from asking for food and everything? What's--and somebody said oh, there's a depression going on in town. They were so poor the depression just wouldn't past them, you know. They just kind of--it was no different. It was just, you know they were just, they had you know they learned how to--they were so poor that they were under the radar--
Speaker 2: So what was--what I've heard I guess you say that black folks were money poor for a long time but during the depression people that were dependent on money to get food couldn't get fed?
Speaker 1: Couldn't get--that's right so they were out begging and they were trying to figure out what was going on. So those are two things I remember and I'm sure others will come. But when she talked about the German prisoners she would mention that ad then the depression that they survived just fine. And then yeah, so those are some of the things that she talked about. But so many other things they just, they didn't tell us.
Story_ID: 21743
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ernest, E-R-N-E-S-T Buford, B-U-F-O-R-D Abron, A-B-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I believe daddy was born in Birmingham, Alabama and September the 9th but I don't remember the date either. But I would say 20-somethings cause he graduated from Lemoyne [Owen College] in '42 [1942], yeah. I'll have to send you that date. I don't have that with me either but I have it, yeah.
Speaker 1: And was he--
Speaker 2: He was the youngest--?
Speaker 1: He was younger than your mother [Bernice Kathleen Wise]?
Speaker 2: He was younger than my mother about two or three years, yeah. Now he's the young, he's the youngest of I think five--Uncle James, Aunt Liz, Aunt Dot, Daddy, Aunt Hazel--five. He's the youngest of five kids, yeah. His story is totally different.
Speaker 1: Alright, so well what do you know about the ancestors on his side? How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: He can go back and I have it in a book. They can go back to slavery with their family because they have--they've done somewhat genealogy on their side of the family. And before they became free however way it was set up, my daddy's people--oh, and I have a picture. I do have that picture of my granddaddy's daddy. I do have that picture. That whole group traveled as a fam--well not traveled as a family. You could not break them up and sell them off one at a time. If you had to--if you were going to buy that Abron and they were Abrons then, you had to buy the whole group.
Speaker 1: Now this is during slavery?
Speaker 2: This is during slavery and this is right before they came, became free. But on my daddy's side, his daddy's people, you had to take the whole family. You could not break them up and I have a picture of the whole family and they have the deed or whatever that says that. And then right after that they were all freed.
Speaker 1: So this is something that was signed by the slave master?
Speaker 2: The own--the slave master.
Speaker 1: He stipulated that they shouldn't never--?
Speaker 2: They could not be broken up if you bought them. And I think he eventually freed them. I think he must have been getting ready to die or something like that and wanted to make sure that his children understood that they were not to be broken up, that they had to move as a family. And then right--shortly afterwards, they were freed. So they've been--I'm sure my mom's people are the same way but they were freed, very much a family. Like I say Columbus, Alabama, Fort Mitchell, Alabama, that whole area down there they are all Abrons, A-B-R-O-N. Everybody in the cemetery, they are all Abrons. It's--they've been there generations even before slavery and they stayed there after slavery and this is where they grew and they multiplied and that's their--Fort Mitchell, Alabama. That's where they are from, Fort Mitchell, Alabama. That's my daddy's--that's the Abron stronghold. And in fact my sister, my sister under me when she married a military man and they were stationed at Fort Benning, that was their first assignment. He was a little second lieutenant. And she said she was sitting in the cafeteria. She had gone over on the base for something and somebody walked up to her, say a young man walked up to her and said, oh you don't know me but I'm your cousin. And we knew you were coming and so you'll have to meet everybody and she looked at him and his name had Abron on it and she said everybody at the base who was pushing a broom, cooking, doing all of this, all of the jobs, she said half of their name tag was Abron so that's, that's where they--(laughter). She said they ran the base. They controlled the base, all Abrons so that's where he's from. And their children were all educated. My granddaddy, my daddy's daddy was a Pullman Porter and my grandmother, my daddy's mother never ever worked a day in her life. She got married to my daddy's daddy, we called him Pa-Pa and she had five children and she just raised the children. She was a homemaker and they lived--I mean I remember Birmingham, that's when I remember going to Birmingham in the summers and they lived very well like the people lived in Alex Haley, how those black families, that's how my daddy's people lived.
Story_ID: 21744
Speaker 1: We were talking about your father's [Ernest Buford Abron] side of the family and all the Abron's down in Fort Mitchell [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: --Alabama, okay. And so did your--now your father was born in Birmingham [Alabama] though, right?
Speaker 2: I believe he was born in Birmingham, yes. Yes. I can check that to make sure but I believe he was born in Birmingham. He was the last of the kids so I think by that time they were all living in Birmingham, yes.
Speaker 1: His father as a Pullman Porter?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So was his father one of the first Pullman Porters?
Speaker 2: I would think so. He was the original. He was one of the originals, yes. Yes. He was the, one of the original people who put the union together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well what was his father's name, I mean your grandfather?
Speaker 2: James A. Abron, I want to say he's a junior, yeah.
Speaker 1: Junior?
Speaker 2: He's a Junior, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. He, was he born in Fort Mitchell [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so he was born around the turn of the century?
Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, I have a picture of my daddy's daddy when he was about sixteen, and it's with his mamma and daddy and sisters and brothers. And his mother is in a long skirt and one of my daddy's uncles, Uncle Pell who's ninety now was in a dress sitting on my great-grand mamma's lap. I'll give you that picture, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright. So now what about your grandmother (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Cora. Cora Lee Johnson Abron, don't know much about Cora Mamma. We called her the Cora Mamma, but I think she was from Detroit [Michigan] cause I know she would go to Detroit every summer to visit her sister when I was a little girl cause I would go and visit in the summers. I would go and visit Cora Mamma and then every--she would always go to Detroit to visit her sister. So I think she was from Detroit. How they met, I don't know.
Speaker 1: I'm just, I'm tempted to think that it had something to do with the railroad.
Speaker 2: I'm sure.
Speaker 1: Because there are so many people from Alabama in Detroit. I walk down two blocks and almost everybody is from Alabama on both sides the street.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I mean it's a well-known fact that Detroit-- Alabama predominates.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And is there--you think it has something to do with the train maybe?
Speaker 2: Probably the train, yeah.
Speaker 1: Train route going right to Detroit?
Speaker 2: Going right up to Detroit and Pa-Pa working the trains, yeah. I had--I never met Pa-Pa. He died I believe before I was born. And my daddy's sister also died so I just knew my grandmother and my aunts and uncles. But the one, the oldest sister Hazel had also died, Aunt Hazel. And they say that they died of tuberculosis. Uncle James--Papa supposedly died of tuberculosis and also Aunt Hazel. But you know this whole thing of people dying of tuberculosis really doesn't make much sense because they weren't exposed to drafts and this kind of stuff. And the same is--my mind, with Doc Holiday from the Wyatt Earp days or whatever. You know it was cancer. I really think it was cancer at that point in time we just weren't sophisticated enough to make the distinction even though you know we were all exposed to tuberculosis. I have a spot on my chest right now that basically says that I've been exposed to it but anybody being raised in big cities, you're going to be positive to the time and all. So there was some exposure there, maybe it was I don't know. But after my education and what I've learned about tuberculosis, I just, I don't accept that but that's what they said it is. It's neither here nor there but they supposedly both of them died of tuberculosis.
Story_ID: 21745
Speaker 1: Now your father [Ernest Buford Abron], now he attended college too. He got a chance to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they say he went to two or three of them before his oldest brother, Uncle James put his foot down when he got to Memphis [Tennessee], said you're going to stay in Lemoyne [Owen College] or I'm not paying out any more money for you. So I think at one point he went to Wilberforce [University] because Uncle James went to Wilberforce, Aunt Dot and Aunt Liz went to--so three of them went to Wilberforce and daddy I think he went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University] and that didn't work. And then he went to Miles [College] in Birmingham [Alabama] and that didn't work. And some kind of way he ended up at Lemoyne in Memphis and I think Uncle James just--and I know I heard Uncle James say you will finish there or it's over. So being the youngest he took a little bit longer and he maybe wasn't as serious as the others. Didn't have to be I guess, even in that day and age, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now he was, he played football you said.
Speaker 2: At Lemoyne.
Speaker 1: At Lemoyne?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a football team then. I think that was the only time they had a football team cause when I went to Lemoyne, didn't have football.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, but he eventually followed his father's footsteps and became a porter?
Speaker 2: Well after the--when he graduated he had had a football injury and he had a steel spike from the cleat, a steel cleat in his ankle and was still there. So he was classified then an F4 or whatever, they wouldn't take him because of that injury. So what do you do? He worked on the railroad. So since he couldn't go to the war, he worked the railroad. So he worked as a Pullman Porter up until I think, till after the war was over, '51 [1951], '52 [1952] something like that. And I think that's when mamma and daddy then they both started teaching school. But for a while, neither one of them taught during the war, they didn't teach. Daddy worked on the railroad and mamma worked for--she was a secretary to Bishop McYunen who was the beginning founder of COGIC, Church of God in Christ here in Memphis. She worked directly for the old man.
Speaker 1: Now was this before she got married or afterwards?
Speaker 2: They were married. This was--they got married right out of college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is there a story about how they first fell in love?
Speaker 2: No, we never--you know children, we never asked that question but they met at Lemoyne. But you never ask those questions. Mamma and daddy, they just married. You know you didn't--and girls, wouldn't you think, there were all girls and don't you think we would have thought about that? Just some things you just didn't ask or think about, yeah. But I would--they were at Lemoyne, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we assume they met on campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: Got married after they graduated?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think mom graduated I believe a year before daddy.
Story_ID: 21746
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have? Can you name them and put yourself where they--in the order that you come?
Speaker 2: My sisters?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have sisters, no brothers. My oldest sister is Hazel. Hazel was born '42 [1942], I was born in '45 [1945], Erness was born in '49 [1949] and Carolyn was born in '50 [1950].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got four siblings--okay, there's four of you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their talents, their habits, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Wow. Probably my daddy [Ernest Buford Abron], yeah. But you know there is always that oddball and sometimes I really think that I'm the oddball. But they, you know they raised us such that you could be the odd, oddball, but I was always the oddball. I was the dreamer, always a dreamer and always a little bit more radical. I'm not--my sisters tend to be a little reserved, little conservative, not me. I was the hippie. I was just the different, sort of the oddball one. Very outgoing, very loquacious, run my mouth all the time, very, very verbal, yep.
Story_ID: 21747
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple and in fact I have a chair in there, my first chair after the high chair that my mom bought me. And I remember we were living at 499 Vance, Apartment 4D and this box came and I was four, five, something like that and ma said, this is your chair. My chair, what is that? And she took this chair out. So it's the first high chair with nothing across it. And I still have that chair. Every sister used it, all the grandchildren used it and then I got it back and all my children used it and now my grandchildren. So I remember that box and that chair coming out of that box. And I also remember you know then everybody just kind of lived together and we were living in a rooming house at that time in Apartment 4D. But there were other people on the side we lived in. There was a kitchen and a bath, about five or six bedrooms and a living room and we had--I just remember that there were some roomers and I never really thought about it but there were one or two roomers on the side that we lived in. But I remember one day--and then next door to us was Dr. Johnson and he had a daughter, Linda. Linda was about my age and he was a physician and his practice was in the house where they lived again you know, could have been a rooming house. I don't know. But any rate, I looked out the window one day and they had just bought Linda a little wading pool and she was in that pool and I like to have had a fit. I had to get down there and get in that pool. So my mamma solved that problem very quickly. She drew some water in the tub and put me in the tub with one of my fish and that used--that was my routine after that and it just made me happy. I said isn't that interesting how just something so simple like that will solve the problem. So you know they had money or whatever or they could buy the wading pool, little blow up thing but she's just get in the tub. So I remember that and still remember that how she solved that problem so that's earliest I think of kind of what I remember cause I was still four, five, something like that. I also remember kindergarten, again five, something like that, my first prom in kindergarten. Went to Ms. Ishmael's kindergarten in Foot Holmes, and that's a, that was a housing project and we lived right in front of the housing project so we went to the kindergarten. And I remember my mamma telling me that Booker T. Jones had called and asked her if he could take me to the prom and we were five, four or five, something like that, and I like to have had a fit. I could not stand him. I didn't like him. I said he gets on my nerves all the time. His nose runs and I don't want to go with, anywhere with him. This is Booker T. of the MGs. We grew up together. We laugh about that now. So he was my first date. I remember his daddy drove him over and he came up the steps and got me and gave me my little corsage and we went to the prom and I was just not happy. But--so those are some early remembrances, yes.
Speaker 1: I have to ask you what was--well you said what he was like, his nose ran, he got on your nerve. Did he play the piano in those days or the organ?
Speaker 2: No. No, we were little. We were little kids, four years old, five years old something like that.
Speaker 1: Now I heard him in Detroit about three years ago and I was surprised that he was as young as he was. I always assumed he was older.
Speaker 2: We're the same age.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I assumed he was much older. He, he's a young looking man. He's only you know, he's about sixty--
Speaker 2: We're sixty-seven.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sixty-seven but for some reason I had always pictured him much older than me.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: I heard him when I was in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He actually was younger than I was I think in--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or not younger but he was almost my age, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. But we went to kindergarten together and then maybe first grade. But then after that then people started moving away and everything so we were together really in kindergarten.
Story_ID: 21748
Speaker 1: Now you lived in the--when you were born you all lived where?
Speaker 2: In Memphis [Tennessee], always lived in Memphis.
Speaker 1: No, in the neighborhood I meant (unclear).
Speaker 2: Down on Vance Avenue. I don't know what part of Memphis that is but that's near, that's the--near the downtown area where Booker T. Washington High School is. That's that whole area, we lived down there.
Speaker 1: And what--did you say you lived in a project over there?
Speaker 2: Well we lived right in front of the projects. Might as well been a project but we lived in a rooming house. There was an upstairs and a downstairs, an apartment on each side with rooms and everything. And we lived up on the second floor in Apartment 4D, I remember that. My mom by the time I went to first grade, even in kindergarten, my mom made sure that we could read, we knew our telephone number, we knew our addresses. So some of these things is just imprinted in your brain and you'll never forget them, yeah. But that's downtown. Most of that is all gone now but that area is a Qual--Quarles Funeral Home was down there. I even think the lady whose shop was burned down, Ida B. Wells, her place was not far from that area. So it could have been that's where blacks lived. Like I told you, Dr. Johnson was right next door to us and Dr. Witherspoon who was the black pharmacist was right down the street. He lived upstairs over his pharmacy shop. So Quarles Funeral Home like I said, so that was maybe where that area at that time was where blacks congregated, you know where you could live.
Speaker 1: Okay. So how long did you all live there?
Speaker 2: We lived there till maybe like I said first grade. And then we moved to South Memphis on Utah Street. I want to say that was 352 W. Utah is what I think that is. Mamma couldn't stand it. We didn't stay there a year. And then we moved to where we really grew up, Fay, Fay Avenue, 348 Fay. That's in South Memphis and we grew up there. I mean they added on to the house twice, you know and that--at that time you didn't move. You weren't mobile like we are now. So what you did was you just added on to the house and added on to the house you know. So you know at first there were--it was two bedrooms, then it became three and then you added another bathroom and then you added a den, you know. You know how that, how black people had to live, yeah.
Story_ID: 21749
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well Memphis is, was very quiet. You couldn't blow your horns. I don't, I still don't think you're allowed to blow your horn, your car horns in Memphis. So it was always very clean and very quiet. And my mom and dad, dad, they were both very good cooks. My mom used to always do the barbecue and the smell of mother's barbecue was always great. And the sounds hmm, you know cause we would go to the--oh, another smell was when I would go to Birmingham [Alabama]. The bulking process, the steel mills, ugh, awful. That was just the way Birmingham smelled, you'd always--that smell. You would only smell it in Birmingham and that was from the steel mills there. The bulking you know bulking stood up on the mountain and everything so that--the balkanization process, a just terrible odor. But that's eh way Birmingham smelled. And the pumping station before Memphis got the wastewater treatment plant they had the pumping station which basically just pumped the sewage. Sewage would flow down to a low point and then they'd pump it out to the river and it would flow to an area called Non-Cana Bottom which is the name of a creek. That's where the pumping station was to pump it out. And when the pumping station wasn't working, well you could always smell it cause of course they're going to have the pumping station in the black neighborhood of course. Wasn't that close to us but it was still close enough to smell. So early on I knew that smell and it's interesting that I end up being a sanitary engineer and I can always remember that smell and that was the pumping station is having a bad day. So I remember that.
Speaker 1: So the sewage was basically pumping to the Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hmm. It was you know and it was a long time before Memphis got a waste, wastewater treatment plant. Some people just didn't believe in the environment. But those were, I mean my mom's barbecue, the way Birmingham smelled, the way the pump station smelled when it wasn't working right. And the sounds, I guess it was the absence of sound because Memphis, you couldn't blow your horn. And so then when I'd go to other places and hear people blowing horns it was kind of jarring because you never heard horns blow in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay. My experience it was quiet you know, it was quiet.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So any other sights, sounds or smells that--?
Speaker 2: The Mississippi River, the widest point and the prettiest point of the Mississippi is in Memphis. Every other place I go you say that's the Mississippi River? It's just a little narrow thing. But the widest piece is in Memphis so the Mississippi River, yeah very pretty.
Speaker 1: Anything else that you would see as a little child that you can't see now if you go back to Memphis or--?
Speaker 2: Oh Memphis has very much changed. Very--I mean it's awful in my mind the way it has gone down in some places because you know children don't keep the old places up or you sell them and then people who buy them can't keep them up. They're old anyway so I mean the area, neighborhood I grew up in, in my mind is almost ready for redevelopment and it's really, looks terrible. You know but people you know have moved out to the suburbs and all of that. I'm a city dweller but--so that's really, Memphis has changed a lot.
Story_ID: 21750
Speaker 1: Now what did you like to do from growing up? I mean you said you liked to talk and you were kind of like an oddball. But what did you do?
Speaker 2: Well you know I grew up in segregation so it was different from what it is now. We weren't middle class but we thought we were middle class. Our parents were school teachers and it was until we got grown that we realized they didn't--you wonder how they made it off of the little money they made. But we were comfortable, so we thought. And they shield you from the horrors in as much as possible of segregation and the black communities, black families were all very tight knit in communities like that. So they, you know you had to ride the bus and sit in the back but they'd try to make sure that other than that you know, I mean we weren't really allowed to go to the movies cause you had to sit upstairs. So everything was done in the family, in the communities, house parties, everything was done at other peoples' homes and so far as I'm concerned I had a nice childhood. I had a good childhood. I enjoyed everything. You know we all lived together then. You had the postman and the cafeteria worker and the doctor and the preacher and the schoolteachers, we all lived on the same street. We all went, children all went to the same school so this thing of division and all like you see now you didn't have it. And again at that time we were all Protestant and all the Catholic kids went to the Catholic school. And everybody else was in the regular school so we prayed in school and you know it was just--we were all homogenous. It wasn't like it is now so it was fun. I was a Girl--I was a Brownie and a Girl Scout, went to church every Sunday, vacation bible school. I thought I had a nice life, went to Girl Scout camp. Me and my parents did in my mind, everything they could do for us. We had, we would go to the country in the summer time and stay with that grandmamma, go down to Birmingham, stay with that grandmamma, go up to Chicago.
Story_ID: 21751
Speaker 1: Now did you, were you interested in science when you were growing up at all?
Speaker 2: Well, see now that's interesting. When I was in I believe second grade, the Russians sent Sputnik to the moon. Scared the United States to death and they started tracking kids, everybody, black, white, purple green. You were tracked in school because they were trying to catch up and they realized that they were kind of behind in science and all of this. So based on aptitude and what we were doing and everything, kids were tracked. So I was tracked into the science curriculum from second grade and I tell people sometimes now I say you know it's a shame, I never heard about business, I never heard about television or radio or anything like that. And I think that I probably would have much more enjoyed being a TV commentator or something like that. But all I ever knew was science, was math and science because that's the track that I was put in. So third grade, fourth grade, fifth grade all the way, it was always advanced math, advanced science, this, this. I loved to read. I really had wanted to get an MFA you know and my mom said no, you--
Speaker 1: In what?
Speaker 2: Oh, literature. Yeah, literature, I wanted to open up a little curio shop and sell art, pottery. That's what I wanted to do and my mom said you need to get a job because it's going to be highly unlikely that you're going to be able to marry somebody who's going to be able to support your lifestyle. So I suggest that you put yourself in a position where you can support your lifestyle. So of course that meant going into sciences. I never wanted to be a school teacher. I ended up teaching but my parents were school teachers. I never wanted to do that. And at one point I thought I wanted to be a pediatrician and all of this but science was all I knew. But I loved reading, I loved acting in plays. I even remember once in Girl Scouts I even wrote a little play and we acted it out and did the whole thing and like I said I'm a dreamer. I was always that day dreamer, I was always that person that wanted to do other things. If I had even known about acting or whatever, probably would have--
Speaker 1: You didn't know of any black actors growing up or--?
Speaker 2: We weren't exposed to it, you know. We were exposed--I was exposed to doctors and dentists and lawyers and--but this was the south. You know I was raised in the south and it was still closed if you know what I mean. People who wanted to do things other than traditional, they left.
Story_ID: 21752
Speaker 1: Where did you start grade school?
Speaker 2: First grade, Porter Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, in elementary school? I remember first grade you know I was also sort of a sickly child. Think I finally quit being sick around 5th or 6th grade so I would spend a lot of time at home sick. I mean you name the disease, I had the childhood disease. I had mumps, measles, whooping cough, I had everything. My first grade teacher, Ms. Mary Neely and I think mom [Bernice Kathleen Wise] and all them went to Lemoyne [Owen College] together. And I think around February, something like that she sent me home with a note that said Lilia Ann has been promoted to the second grade. Please keep her at home so I can get the other kids ready. Yeah, I read--I, I could read, I could write and you know I was in the way really. And I remember one time I was so bored and you know we sat at the little student desk and some kind of way I maneuvered and got my head stuck through the back part of the desk and decided that I couldn't get out. I couldn't get myself out of that. And the teacher Ms. Neely, I remember her saying oh my god. And they kept working with me and trying to get me out. And I think I could get out. I would--I liked the attention and so the janitor after a while he couldn't get me out. So he went and got a saw cause he was going to have to saw me out of that chair. I saw that saw and I said oh no. I got out of that chair. I got my head out and everything and they talked, they talked about that until the time Ms. Neely passed. Every time she would see me, Lilia Ann, you remember--she'd say you had me so upset. But after that they just said don't send her back. So I don't know if I didn't go back cause I was sick. I don't quite remember of if I was just, I was a nuisance I know that much cause I talked all the time and I could do everything. So I remember that and I remember just really staying at home the rest of the time and then going to second grade. By that time at the end of that year we moved from Vance and mamma [Bernice Kathleen Wise] was teaching at Manassas. So we went to--I went to second, third and fourth grade at Manassas so we all went to school with mamma. The kids were, the younger, my younger sisters were in nursery school but my older sister and I, we went to Manassas for about three years. And so that was the second, third and fourth grade and that was all the way on the other side of town. That was North Memphis. And in order to really get there we rode the bus. It would take an hour on the bus to get there and that was fun. I remember my second grade teacher, third grade teacher, fourth grade teacher. My second grade teacher was Ms. Helen Shelby and her--she went to again Lemoyne with mamma and daddy [Ernes Buford Abron]. They were all at Lemoyne together. All of the Memphis school teachers at that point, the majority of them went to Lemoyne College, okay. So I remember, I still remember this, I was telling somebody this on the spelling test I had in second grade, I did not make a hundred and I knew how to spell that word and I still remember it and I don't know why I messed it up. It was too, t-o-o and I wrote t-o and that thing hurt my--I still remember that cause I should have had a perfect score and how I made that mistake I'll never know. But we were in concerts, little dance concerts. In second grade I lost my two front teeth so in the Christmas play I had the honor of singing "All I Want for Christmas is my Two Front Teeth". Gee if I could--I still remember that. And third grade, I had this strange teacher who thought that peanuts were bad luck, never heard of such, peanuts in a shell. I had some peanuts one day and that was bad luck. She threw them out the window and she didn't like dill pickles. I don't understand what that was all about. But she was also the teacher who said, she told me that my mamma didn't know how to spell my name. My name is Lilia. And so one day my mom saw me and I was writing my name L-E-L-I-A and mamma said what is that? I said oh, Ms. Briggs said you don't know how to spell my name. So of course the next day it was back to L, it was L-I-L-I-A. But for about two weeks it was L-E, because the teacher said it's no such name as Lilia, it's Lelia, so I remember that. And I remember learning multiplication tables and time tables and all of that memory work, I remember all of that. Fourth grade, I remember geography. That was really exciting. Dates, always we were studying Egypt and the fruit was dates and this is--could not imagine you know a delicacy and a fruit being called a date. So I went home and I said oh, I got this--so mamma went and bought me some dates and I took them to school the next day. Here are dates and that's when I got familiar with dates and learned about the world and that's when I really got excited about traveling cause geography, I was pretty good in geography. And I remember that from the fourth grade and that was really, that really kind of set me in motion for wanting to do other things but it was still the time tables and the division tables and all of that. I remember all of that. But again it was you know I mean life was okay you know. I had parents who looked after us and we had our share of getting in trouble and had our share of getting our butt beat cause during those times you know kids got paddled. But that was just a part of growing up. Taking piano lessons, I took piano lessons every week, hated the piano but I took piano lessons for twelve years, girl scouts, church, that was, that was just what you did.
Story_ID: 21753
Speaker 1: Okay. So you were in a--you guys had an 8th grade, you graduated from--now you went from--did you change schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah I changed schools at 5th grade.
Speaker 1: From Parker to--I mean from Porter to what?
Speaker 2: Manassas.
Speaker 1: Manassas, okay.
Speaker 2: And then from Manassas to Hamilton. And when I got to the 5th grade then mom [Bernice Kathleen Wise] decided that we were going to all go to school with daddy [Ernest Buford Abron] and so daddy drove. So we, we quit riding the bus then, we just rode with daddy everyday. So we were--all went to Hamilton, all of us. At that time we were all in school, the two younger girls and my older sister and I, so we all went to Hamilton with daddy. So I went to Hamilton at 4th--at 5th grade.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you went all the way through to, through high school right?
Speaker 2: At Hamilton yes, 5th--5 through 12, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. Okay.
Speaker 2: Cause, you know at that time all of our schools were 1 through 12. There was no such thing as K then, I mean K didn't start till my kids were going to school so I think. But they didn't have K then. We had nursery schools for most of us. You know we had kindergarten but it wasn't a part of the public school system cause I went to kindergarten. It was a lot of nursery schools and the churches had daycare centers and this kind of stuff cause my younger sisters went to daycare centers, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now was that 1960, you came out of I guess grade school I mean you finished 8th grade around 1960--
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, I graduated from high school in 1962.
Speaker 1: Oh okay so it must have been '58 [1958] when you came out of grade school right? Is that true?
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: I mean you already completed 8th grade though you went straight through (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. But was there any, any ceremony when you finished 8th grade?
Speaker 2: No, cause remember, it was 1 through 12. So we weren't elementary, junior high and high, we didn't have any of that. Porter, Porter was an elementary school, Porter Elementary which was a feeder to Booker Washington. But we, the schools we went to after Porter weren't feeders. They were the--you know other schools fed in to them but we were the 1 through 12. Manassas was 1 through 12, Hamilton was 1 through 12.
Story_ID: 21754
Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you were growing up were--did your family discuss the civil rights--?
Speaker 2: Oh they were very, very staunchly pro-civil rights, anti-segregation. I mean that's the way we were raised very politically aware, politically astute. My daddy [Ernest Buford Abron] was a history professor in high school, very well read. And they were very much into the civil rights movement. We were very much a part of voters registration and all of that, yeah.
Speaker 1: You said I think early on I think before we got started with the interview you said your mother actually typed some of the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: She typed the briefs--
Speaker 1: --for Wiley [Austin] Branton [Civil Rights Leader].
Speaker 2: Right, for the Little Rock Twelve.
Speaker 1: Nine.
Speaker 2: Nine, Little Rock Nine, yeah because he was handling that case. He was one of the lawyers, Wiley Branton. And Wiley's wife Lucille and mamma were good friends. They went to Lemoyne. And I think Wiley was working as a lawyer or something, he was doing something in Memphis and I think that's how he and Ms. Lucille met. And then, then they moved back to Arkansas. That's where he lived. They lived in Arkansas. And so he was the lawyer on that case handling that case. So they would come to Memphis sometimes just to get away from the mess and be able to think and all. And they would sit, mamma and Ms. Lucille would sit in our den with two typewriters and they would sit in there working while Attorney Branton was working on the briefs and all they would sit in there doing the typing, I remember into the night sitting, not electric. These were the old fashioned typewriters where you erased and all of that. You know they didn't even have white out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were in, I guess--
Speaker 2: I was a little girl. I was in elementary school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah and things didn't really start really heating up until after you came out of high school I think in Memphis in terms of--?
Speaker 2: In Memphis when I was in high school I remember they were beginning to start inter--the sit-ins and the Woolworths and all. And--
Speaker 1: Are these students from--were these students (unclear)?
Speaker 2: These were students in Memphis and they had--the sit-ins had started. They had gotten over to Memphis. And I remember pictures in the paper of friends of ours who you know were being beat up and taken to jail and this kind of stuff. So it was beginning to heat up with my sister. My sister graduated in 1959 and this is just when it was getting started. And they were beginning to also integrate the universities when I went to college. I think Memphis State which is now University of Memphis, they were beginning to try to integrate Memphis State then but I went to Lemoyne. I really wasn't interested. But they were beginning--we, we kept, we kept a lot of the kids. I mean you know there was a list of places where people could go when they were riding the buses during the sit-ins when they'd start you know in the north or wherever and going south. And there were places and we were one of those places, my house, my parents' house.
Story_ID: 21755
Speaker 1: Some of the civil rights volunteers would stay at your parents' house?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were part of that because our church, we went to Metropolitan Baptist Church in Memphis, Tennessee and a lot of the rallies and everything--cause it was a--it could accommodate the crowd at a larger church. And some of the giants, Shuttlesworth and all of them I remember meeting all of those men because they came to our church to speak and everything. So I remember those people from being a little girl.
Speaker 1: Okay. Who was the pastor at Metropolitan?
Speaker 2: It was Reverend S.A. Owen when I was growing up and I think he was a, I think a Morehouse graduate.
Speaker 1: S.A. Owen?
Speaker 2: S.A. Owen, O-W-E-N. He was there for a long time. And then when, I believe when Reverend Owen retired, Fred Lofton came and Fred was there for another long time and I think he was also a Morehouse [College] graduate. And now it's a young man that grew up with us, Reginald Porter, Dr. Porter. He grew up with us, he's my contemporary. He's younger, he's along with my sisters, he's the minister there now. But Metropolitan was one of the big Baptist churches in Memphis where a lot of the Baptists, a lot of the blacks went there so I knew a lot of the "prominent" blacks in Memphis from going to church in Metropolitan.
Speaker 1: So is it Fred (unclear) come in and--?
Speaker 2: To speak and many of the others, yeah. Oh, it will come to me after a while, I just hit a blank. But some of the really very famous Baptist preachers have--went--all have come through Metropolitan and I've met many of them.
Speaker 1: So did Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] speak there?
Speaker 2: Dr. King spoke there on several occasions. We were very much a part of the civil rights movement. We had several boycotts in Memphis. We participated in all of the boycotts and in fact I tell people we would not--we were not allowed to call the garbage men, garbage men in my house and the only people who collected the garbage of course were the black men. But we could not call them garbage men, that's not a man. Man's not garbage. So they were, we called them for the sake of anything else, we called them the sanitary engineers. Little did I know twenty years later I'd get a masters degree in sanitary engineering. But, but we called them the sanitary engineers. There were just things that our parents did not allow. And we were, we boycotted, we sat in, we did everything. We were absolutely in tune with what was going on.
Speaker 1: Okay. So were you ever at a sit in?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, but your parents did that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but not me. I did participate quite a bit with voter registration.
Story_ID: 21756
Speaker 1: When you're in high, I, I'm thinking that you're in high school when you saw 'Silent Spring' or read the book.
Speaker 2: Read the book, that was in '65 [1965] so that's right.
Speaker 1: That was '65 [1965], wait (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was college, yeah.
Speaker 1: I thought it came on, I think--I thought PBS--CBS reports had--
Speaker 2: It was written some time between '63 [1963] and '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, that was the beginning of the environmental movement. When I was in high school that was--the civil rights movement was just coming into being and they were having all of the sit-ins and all of the strife and everything. But I was a little bit behind that but that was my high school. I was--that was more my sister who is two and a half years older than I am. She was more in the middle of that, more so than I was.
Speaker 1: Okay. So as you're going through high school, so are you a--now you were an honor student in high school right? And I saw your certificate--
Speaker 2: Barely made it, but yeah. (Laughter). I--of the Top 10--
Speaker 1: You say that now--
Speaker 2: --of the Top 10 you know I was always like number nine or ten. You know I get frustrated with myself sometimes now to say you know if, I guess if I had really known then what I know now I would have applied myself much better. But we didn't have the exposure to the need to get these very high grades like kids in these white schools. I mean we just, it wasn't--we weren't raised or whatever like that. I mean you were going to go to Lemoyne or you were going to go to Tennessee State [University] or Fisk [University]. I mean it was never any impetus to say oh--I mean we never even heard of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], never even heard of Harvard [Harvard University], you know. We didn't hear of those places. So you didn't hear of those places, there wasn't that need to say oh, if you know if I'm not a straight A student I can't get into MIT. You know, we just knew that we had to have grades well enough to get a scholarship cause you had to get a scholarship. Because even though you know I thought we lived comfortably there were other kids in the family. Like I really went to Lemoyne because I had a sister who was already in college and she was at Bennett. And aside from getting a four year scholarship to Lemoyne, my parents just said we can't afford to have two of you all in college, can't afford to do it. So if you let her finish, then we'll let you go wherever you want to go. So yeah I was on the honor roll and all but again like I said, I was a dreamer. I was just doing other things. I was in the band and really I was--we were talking about this not too long ago. I said I'm not a musician. The only thing that, reason why I was in the band is cause I like music and I can read music and that, therefore I could play an instrument because I could read music. But if I depended on my ears and all to play music, it would never happen. But I liked music and I was into everything. I mean I was running this, running that and it was just you know just a part of growing up. I enjoyed growing up.
Story_ID: 21757
Speaker 1: Did you run for class office?
Speaker 2: Sometimes.  Sometimes I didn't, didn't have the confidence in myself to run for office but I would help you run and I'd make sure you won. I was always that instigator behind the scene causing all the problems. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you get in trouble in--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I was in trouble all the time, all the time, all the time. I remember 9th grade my daddy [Ernest Buford Abron] was my homeroom teacher. And you know you had a homeroom teacher, that's where you met in the morning and where you came in the evening before you left, but you took your classes by the time you got to 9th grade then we were changing classes, not same class all day long, same teacher so we had different teachers. So we got conduct, homeroom conduct as well so I remember--and you know your homeroom teacher is who passed out your cards. Then they passed out the cards and you had to take them home and get the parents to sign and bring them back. That doesn't happen anymore. But I remember my daddy was passing out the cards and he says oh, Ms. Abron, hmm, oh you got a pretty good report card. But Ms. Abron, you got a C in homeroom conduct. You know your daddy told me to tell you when, when he gets home he's going to beat your butt. He says this in front of the whole class and when I got home I got my butt beat for you know--and got a C cause I'm running my mouth all the time. Oh yeah you could, oh yeah I was--
Speaker 1: I mean did other teachers, were they as sensitive as your father was?
Speaker 2: Well you know you had this group, again remember we were all in school together so you had this whole group of teacher's kids who you know you went to school with your parents and everything. And most of them would go out of their way to make sure that it was obvious to other kids that you weren't treated special. So teachers' kids always got the worst part of it from all the other teachers. So what you gonna do but stay in trouble all the time? I mean the whole trick was which they didn't have, I'm sure they did but to see how much you could get into without getting caught.
Speaker 1: Okay. So now what about your social life in high school? You, well I guess you were very social cause you talked a lot and--?
Speaker 2: Well social and everything but you know we couldn't date or anything like that. And you know when at that age, in that era, you were still receiving company. So if a young man was going to come see you, you were receiving company. And so, and you couldn't receive company until you were in the 11th grade and then you could only receive company on Sunday night and your mamma or daddy had to sit in the living room. So I decided--I had lots of friends, went to the junior prom, the senior prom and all of that kind of stuff but I never dealt with that receiving company. That was just something that you know--so I had a lot of girlfriends and all. And we'd go to sock hops and I'd have my share of running around the corner and sneaking this kiss and everything and getting back into whatever it was. But no, I didn't, I wasn't going through that. But I had a lot of friends, lot, a lot of friends. I was--a lot of male friends because I was in the band and took classes and I was--I competed more cause you know after a while men then become, males become smarter than the girls at some point. So I was always competing with the fellows in the class mentally on who's going to get the better grades and this kind of stuff. And then what I could do that I made sure I kept up with them and all so, but it was just all friends, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So when you're on the verge of graduation now you were, you were an honor student but you weren't the valedictorian or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No. I wasn't one and two, I was ten. When I graduated, I was number ten.
Story_ID: 21758
Speaker 1: Okay. So you knew you were going to Lemoyne [Owen College], right or did you?
Speaker 2: I had wanted to go like I said to other places but then it finally, mamma and daddy just finally--cause I mean I had colleges I had applied to. I had applied to schools I had never heard of in life cause I wanted to get out of Memphis, out of Memphis. And everybody, all of my friends, those who could afford to go away--most of us went to Lemoyne but those of us who could afford to go away they went to Howard [Howard University], Fisk [Fisk University], a couple went down to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University]. I had been to Tuskegee. Tuskegee, I just, oh god that, it's too far in the country for me. I, so I had applied to these strange schools like Upsala in Upsala, Minnesota and I would go through, oh I, oh I'd like to live in Wisconsin and I'd pick out some strange, like Antioch was one of the schools I looked at and all. Somewhere, I wanted to just leave and of course it didn't work so I had to go to Lemoyne. So that's how I went to Lemoyne. But once I had to go to Lemoyne I was fine. I mean I wasn't depressed. I mean I could understand so I got to Lemoyne and I had a good time you know. But I mean I knew I was going to college. That much I knew. There was no discussion about that. So I graduated knowing that I'm going to college. And even then it wasn't any big thing about being accepted. You know like my son, my oldest son when he got accepted to college in October, October--he was the first at his school to get his letter and he put it on his locker and he was through. I mean we didn't do any of that when I was growing up. You knew you were going to college. You knew you were going to get accepted wherever you--you knew you were going to get accepted at Lemoyne if you went to Lemoyne. You knew you were going to get accepted at Tennessee State if you went to--you know. So I knew I was going to college and I never, there was never ever any consideration that I wouldn't get in. Even to some of those white colleges that I wanted to apply to. There was never ever anything in my mind that said I might not get in them, that was never ever--never ever crossed my mind.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what did you do the summer after graduation from high school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember. Probably--
Speaker 1: This is '62 [1962] I think?
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably just sat at home. No, '62 [1962]--yeah, probably just spent a summer at home maybe went to visit relatives or something like that.
Story_ID: 21759
Speaker 1: Okay. So tell us about Lemoyne [Owen College]. What was it like? What--after you got in there, you said it was alright. It wasn't so (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was fine.
Speaker 1: But isn't Lemoyne a commuter atmosphere?
Speaker 2: It was commuter, yeah. We did have people from out of state and all but they lived in rooming houses and stuff like that. But it was mostly, it was 99% local, we were commuter. It was fun I mean you know I pledged first time out, first semester I pledged Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. I was a pyramid. I knew I was going to pledge Delta, never ever any consideration that I wouldn't be accepted. Come on, and I--we had a drill team cause I had been on the drill team in high school. So I stared the drill team at Lemoyne so we did the entertainment during halftime at the basketball games.
Speaker 1: So you started that yourself?
Speaker 2: I started that myself, yeah. Yeah, I called the cadences and all. I have a picture of me in you know in our little white skirts and all. I did that and--
Speaker 1: What did you call yourselves?
Speaker 2: We were just the Lemoyne drill team.
Speaker 1: What's Lemoyne's mascot?
Speaker 2: Who were we; Magicians.
Speaker 1: So you weren't the Little Magicians or something?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't do anything like the Tiger Bells or anything. We were just the drill team and in fact when I graduated from Lemoyne I graduated with distinction and this was an honor that was bestowed upon a graduate by the faculty. You didn't know or whatever but I kind of decided that I wanted to get that but I didn't know how you politicked to get it or whatever. But at any rate in the write up they said Ms. Abron was the unofficial hostess of the campus. Anybody who came on campus, hello, how are you? What are you doing here today? I'm so--I was the official greeter you know and they tell me and I'll finish it. In high school we had our reunion and last week, our 50th reunion. And we were talking about the fact that some of the people who are still in Memphis but would not participate. And what they said was I didn't like you all now and I still--I don't like--didn't like you all then and don't like you now, 50 years. And you know we were sitting one night talking about what were they talking about? And we know part of it was these "teachers' kids" and all this kind of stuff. And I said you know in high school I really wasn't I don't think that bad. I said now Lemoyne, yes I ran Lemoyne. So I enjoyed Lemoyne.
Story_ID: 21760
Speaker 1: Ma'am, tell us about some of the people who came to Lemoyne [Owen College] when you were a student?
Speaker 2: Going to Metropolitan Baptist Church which was right next door to Lemoyne College and Lemoyne was a United Churches of Christ School. And right across the street was Second Congregation which was really the church associated with Lemoyne. And, but growing up, Morehouse College came every year but the Whalum's are from Memphis [Tennessee]. So Wendell Whalum [Dr. Wendell Phillips Whalum, Sr., composer, author and educator], I think it's Wendell who was the director of the Morehouse choir for so many years. And it's his nephew or something who's the young man that plays the saxophone now, the jazz saxophonist, Whalum. He does a lot of cool jazz and all, that's in that family. But Wendell was the famous choir director of Morehouse. But the Whalum's are from Memphis, Tennessee so of course they would have to come to Morehouse every year and of course like I said I think both of my ministers and all went to Morehouse for undergraduate school. So I got exposed to the Morehouse culture through Lemoyne I mean through Metropolitan but at Lemoyne, I can't remember her name but she was one of the first black harp, she played the harp. She did a concert there. Leontyne Price [born Mary Violet Leontine Price, American soprano] sang there. All of the--any of the concerts, the classical concerts and all, Lemoyne was it! I mean that's because there was, that was the only black college. So whenever any of the black performing art, artists were coming through they always did their concerts at Lemoyne. I remember some singers, I'm sure it will come to me--and we always went cause my mom just participated in all of the musical series that went on at Lemoyne. She'd buy a block of tickets so we'd go for all of that. I think, let's see Ruby Dee [born Ruby Ann Wallace, actress, poet, playwright, screenwriter, journalist, and activist] and them I saw them at one point do a production at Lemoyne. Who's the man in Atlanta [Georgia] who just retired from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] after a hundred years?
Speaker 1: Julian Bond?
Speaker 2: Julian Bond. Julian Bond, saw him at Lemoyne. I mean you name them and they were there. I'm sure more are going to come but there was no other place to go. They couldn't go to Memphis State so they would always come through Lemoyne. I remember this lady, a Ms. Kelso, I think she went to Lemoyne. She was like the first black to get a meaningful position with the supermarket chains. She had an office job with one of them and she came and spoke and--
Speaker 1: Which supermarket there?
Speaker 2: The Kroger.
Speaker 1: Is it Piggly Wiggly or--?
Speaker 2: Kroger. Kroger.
Speaker 1: Oh Kroger?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember, wasn't it Piggly or--?
Speaker 2: Piggly Wiggly is more over around Virginia, Tidewater area.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And you know Gaines--
Speaker 1: So Kroger was what she--?
Speaker 2: Yeah. What was Gaines' name? His last name was Gaines. [David "Smokey" Gaines]. He was a very good basketball player in Lemoyne and at that time Lemoyne, the Lemoyne Magicians outstanding basketball playing.
Speaker 1: Big House Gaines. You talking about Big House Gaines, became the coach at Winston Salem or--?
Speaker 2: Well, no he went to Harlem Globetrotters [exhibition basketball team]. He could have left the Globetrotters and gone to Winston Salem but this particular Gaines went to the Globetrotters which was really, oh my goodness!, for Lemoyne. That was because we weren't feeder schools to any of the national basketball teams like the schools are now. But we had an outstanding basketball team. The Magicians were great. I mean we had winning records every year in everything. But Gaines went to the Harlem Globetrotters. So then we used--the Globetrotters would come to Lemoyne and give exhibitions so that was always exciting. So I mean we had our share of very famous people who came through and they would spend time with us. We'd have lunch with them and get to meet them and sit around in the student center and be able to network and all and you know help expand your horizon for me, to want to leave Memphis.
Story_ID: 21761
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you know any of the musicians you know that--in the?
Speaker 2: No, I had classmates who played with the musicians.
Speaker 1: The Mar-keys, the Bar-Kays--?
Speaker 2: There were several of my classmates I wish I could think of their names. It's going to come to me cause they're still there. But they, one of them played the bass and they would play at night. They worked--they'd go to school during the day and they'd play with these musicians at night doing gigs around the city. So they played--I lived at home and this was still in the 60s [1960s] so I still was very much restricted on what I could do. So I wasn't like a college student who could go to class and then hang out. If I was going to hang out, I had to hang out during the day cause when class was over then I had to go home. So I still didn't get out a lot like everybody else. I mean I was still, it was almost like I was still in high school if you want to know the truth about it.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of the music that was being produced in Memphis? I mean--
Speaker 2: Not--
Speaker 1: --by the Memphis groups, I mean (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I mean I knew the Memphis people. I knew B.B. King [Riley B. King, American songwriter, vocalist, and famed blues guitarist]. I knew him.
Speaker 1: So you actually knew him?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I mean we met. I mean you know like not--but we knew him and I knew--I knew of some of the other musicians. The pianist Finest, Finest--what was Phineas, Finest--what was his, Newborn [Phineas Newborn, Jr., American jazz pianist] or something like that. He was the cousin to a very good friend of my mom's. And on Sunday evening sometimes we would go over to her house cause Memphis was still very much a bedroom community where you went to peoples' homes for your social entertainment. And we'd go over to Aunt Sarah's sometimes. She wasn't an aunt, we called her that and Phineas was her nephew and he'd be over there sometime and he'd play cause she had a piano and he was a pianist. And we knew some of the other musicians like that because we knew their relatives and family and this kind of stuff. My president was, at Lemoyne was Dr. Price, Hollis Price so I knew Dr. Price very well, his wife Althea was a Delta. So mom--my mom's a Delta, was a Delta so I knew many of the Deltas in the city. Geraldine Woods who is a Delta, Dr. Geraldine Woods from--I'm sure The HistoryMakers has interviewed her. She's from California and the man she married is a dentist from Memphis, Dr. Woods, and he and mother--they were all at Lemoyne together. So I remember--and she was also a Dr. Woods, Dr. Geri Woods. She came to Lemoyne at some point so a lot of these people you met when they'd come through and give talks and this kind of stuff, Gloster, Gloster [B.] Current came through.
Speaker 1: Yeah, from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and like I said C. Eric Lincoln [scholar and author]. Eric of course went to Lemoyne.
Speaker 1: And he was the head of the National--the Black Academy of (unclear) [Black Academy of Letters].
Speaker 2: Something like that. And he was there when my mom was there but he came through. And John Hope Franklin [U.S. historian] I think at some point he came through Lemoyne, I met him there.
Story_ID: 21762
Speaker 1: Okay. So now in 1963, did you know or did you participate in the March on Washington or did you--?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no. I was--
Speaker 1: Did you know anyone who--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, you know I'm not even--I think about that sometimes. I'm not even sure if I knew the march was going on. If you remember during that time that was the Vietnam War and I think between the civil rights movement and the--the war was just beginning to build up at that time but I think we were more focused on Memphis [Tennessee] than what was going on in other places. So I don't even--I learned more about the March on Washington after the March on Washington than during, when it was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay. I think around the mid-60s [1960s] is when Judd Sugarman and attorney Willis and--well he was an attorney who Sugarman, Willis and all of them started--
Speaker 2: And I know all of them. Yeah, Willis and his brothers were Kappas and my daddy [Ernest Buford Abron] was a Kappa. And during that time you had sorority and fraternity meetings in your home. You didn't have hotels and stuff that you could go to. So a lot of the Kappas, all of them I met in my house at fraternity meetings. So I knew the Willis' through being Kappas. Sugarman, they lived right across the street from Lemoyne so I knew his first wife, Annie Laurie who is know a DaCosta. I remember when they got married and Ms. Olive, I think that's his mamma. She went to Metropolitan so I knew her and she lived right across the street from Metropolitan. So we knew of knew all of those people. Attorney Lockhart went to Lemoyne--I mean went to Metropolitan so I knew Lockhart from Metropolitan, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, so many of those people I know, I grew up with them because they either went to my church or they were in a sorority with mamma, the fraternity with daddy you know.
Speaker 1: Did Mr. Withers shoot the graduation photo of some people?
Speaker 2: Mis--it was either Withers or Hooks. We tended to use Hooks a lot more than Withers. We used Hooks cause Hooks' children, all of the Hooks children were at Hamilton cause that was that part of town. So we knew, we went to school with all of the nieces and nephews and all from there. And the minister, the one who was head of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Benjamin Hooks.
Speaker 2: Benjamin, his wife Frances is a Delta so I knew her through the Deltas from my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. So I knew them and I went to school with one of the nieces, in fact that they raised, Patricia. We were all in school together. And another one of the Hooks boys and all in class with my sister so we all knew each other, Marvell Thomas, Carla Thomas, they all went to Hamilton. So we knew Rufus, but mamma and daddy had known Rufus for the longest, but they went to Hamilton. We all grew up together.
Speaker 1: Rufus Thomas of the Funky Chicken. That's--
Speaker 2: That's right. And Carla Thomas of Gee Whizz It's Christmas, yes.
Speaker 1: And a beautiful voice.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Beautiful voice.
Story_ID: 21763
Speaker 1: Wait, oh I forgot an important thing. What was your major at Lemoyne [Owen College]?
Speaker 2: Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Chemistry, okay. So and I read that you chose chemistry because you didn't like the animals in biology.
Speaker 2: Well I was going to be a biology major but when I, again when I got to Lemoyne they were still tracking so based on entrance scores and all this kind of stuff, they had put me in the chemistry curriculum. But I wanted to be if you look at everything when I graduated, I wanted to be a pediatrician so biology is what I should have been majoring in. And my first biology class I figured that was not going to work. My major professor, chemistry professor looked at my biology grade and said well you have As in lecture and Ds and Fs in lab. What's going on? I said I just can't kill any animals. He said well if you can't pith a frog and everything you better find something else to do. So that's when I just stayed in chemistry instead of switching over to biology.
Speaker 1: Speaking of frogs, this is about the time that you read 'Silent Spring,' (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, that was '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. But you're talking about when I first came in to college.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, so I mean I came in chemistry, I was going to switch but I stayed chemistry. So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't, around my--I wasn't quite sure what I really wanted to do cause I knew I wasn't going to go to med school. That was, I was just not cut out for med school. And chemists work in labs and I decided that I didn't like working in labs either. So I wanted quite sure what I was going to do with myself. And in fact during that time also they were doing what they call 5th years where these white schools were coming to black schools and offering you a 5th year at their school you know then to get you ready to go on to graduate school cause still in their brains our schools were substandard and all of this kind of stuff. And cause you're not thinking about stuff like that, you know. You're just trying to get out of Memphis. So I saw University of Michigan had some programs and I thought huh, might be a good idea. So I thought about doing a 5th year and I thought about joining the Peace Corps. I was going to join the Peace Corps. They had just come into life and I want, always wanted to travel. I was always fascinated with the world outside of me and everything so I said--and that was my personality. My personality was absolutely Peace Corps. I mean that just would have been great. So I applied for the Peace Corps, got accepted in the Peace Corps, and I applied for one of these 5th years. And my English professor stopped it which upset me so badly. I just, she said you don't need any of that. You're just going to go straight to graduate school. Get sick of these people thinking that we aren't training our kids properly and everything. This is an insult, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. So, all right Dr. Williamson, fine.
Story_ID: 21764
Speaker 1: So then I saw these signs on the bulletin board one day for fellowships in sanitary engineering. What is that? And then about that time I, I had read Silent Spring and trying to figure out you know what to do. And the thing with Silent Spring just kind of upset me as to what we were doing. But then I, I hadn't connected the two and then I saw this. So I said well hmm, interesting. So I wrote and asked them what it was all about and they were recruiting. They were out looking for minority students cause this was beginning to be the heyday when white schools were going after black students and all. So they sent a group down to recruit me and that was so funny. My mom had to make sure that they were going to look after me. I mean I am grown, graduating from college and she still wants to know if I'm going to be safe on campus and are they going to look after me, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah. But at any rate, so I got the full fellowship, full ride at Washington University. And I had read up about the curriculum and what they did and then I was beginning to put the Silent Spring together with what they did and oh!, so that's how that happened.
Speaker 2: Okay. All right, so Washington University in St. Louis, this is 1966. You start--now oh, before we leave Lemoyne, were there any special teachers that, like that you remember there that were either a mentor to you or really impressed you there?
Speaker 1: My chemistry professor, Dr. Buehler.
Speaker 2: Doctor what?
Speaker 1: Dr. Buehler, B-U-E-H-L-E-R, pushed me, kept me going, kept me moving. Dr. Williamson, she was the English professor and a linguist, probably the first black to get a Ph.D. in linguistics. She and my mom by the way were at Lemoyne together. She was younger than my mother. So I think when my mom was graduating she was just coming in and she was a Delta also. But she was really four years, I was there, fantastic. And she was doing a book on black speech and one of my jobs is I transcribed a lot of her tapes. So that was really fascinating watching her write a book. She wrote a book, never met anybody who wrote a book. And Mr. Whittaker he was, who was a music professor but he had taught me piano lessons for whole--all twelve years. So those are the people that really stand out. Professor Gibson who was the biology professor got really upset when I got the fellowship from Washington University and he just frankly told me to my face that I would never make it. But that's you know you had, still had stuff like that at Lemoyne even though you wouldn't know it. But you, you know--I wasn't--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: I wasn't a biology major. I wasn't--he just said you won't make it. You won't, you know. I don't know some people are like that. Only his students were the best and his students all went to Meharry [Medical College] and he handpicked who he considered were the best students. I wasn't one of his handpicked--I never wanted to be cause I didn't want to major in biology. And I think those are the ones that really stand out.
Story_ID: 21765
Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about Washington [University] and you being rescued in '66 [1966], fall of '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Totally different place. I remember when I enrolled I went to you know first day I signed up for--got my classes, sixteen credit hours. And I mean I had a fellowship so it was all paid for. But when I saw the lady fill out the registration form with the classes and I think at that point Washington University was maybe $65.00, $75.00 an hour, something like that and Lemoyne was $250.00 for the whole semester. When I saw this lady add up this $65.00 or $75.00 x 16, I was--I screamed. I had never seen a number that large. I said, oh my god! What is this? She looked at (unclear) you know and I knew I had a--I said oh my lord! You know I just wasn't prepared, wasn't prepared for anything like Washington University. It was just totally different. It was a different culture, very white, never gone to school with so many white kids before, very middle class. Very middle class so children with money, money, money. In the graduate dorm right at the beginning of the year they had, the undergraduate dorm had an overflow so they had put some of the kids in the graduate dorm until they could get it settled. So I ended up having in the suite that I lived in, I had about four undergraduates in my suite for a while and one of the young ladies from Texas, her dad came oh, a couple of weeks after school started to visit and just you know took everybody to dinner. Well I you know, about twenty of us he took to dinner and we went to some big, fancy hotel up on the top floor. And I just, I had never--said oh my god, how much is this costing and all of this? You know you just never seen anything, been exposed to anything like that before. So that was interesting. And just, just the way the students and it was set up. We didn't have a student center that big at Lemoyne, our little--we called it the Commons, just little small area with food service. And they had this big, huge student union. And you know with students, I was the only female and the only black in my undergraduate pro--in my, in the MS program. That was different. But the professors were wonderful and they kept, they kept us going, kept us up, kept everybody motivated. I enjoyed the subject, enjoyed my classmates. It was tough. It was very difficult because I had never been what taught at that level. I'd never been in something so competitive. So competitive but you know you just don't sleep. And my sister, older, older sister went to Purdue [University] for her master's degree and I had gone to visit her so I had had a chance to see what you do in graduate school and how you don't sleep and how tough it is and how you're in the lab all night and everything so that didn't bother me and I just got used to it you know. And you get into your routine. You go to bed at 2, you're up at 6 and that's the way you operate for a year and a half. So we were pushed but I enjoyed it and I, I--you know they took us everywhere.  We got to go to conferences and they made sure that we were exposed and we met everybody and we called ourselves the MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] of the Midwest cause all of my professors tell everybody they all had the ring with the rat on it so they were all-except for one, he had a his Ph.D. from Harvard [University]. The others all had their Ph.D.s from MIT. So it was a great program.
Speaker 1: The ring with the rat on it. What's the--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they have a muskrat for their, what's that, mascot and so everybody from MIT, all the people you know their ring and they have it. When they say they're from MIT, say let me see the ring. And they all have it. They all have their rings.
Speaker 1: So it was a muskrat (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah. And we call it the ring with the rat on it.
Story_ID: 21766
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did you learn in terms of sanitary engineering? Now you have to explain it to the general public who does not know necessarily understand what sanitary (unclear)?
Speaker 2: At that point in time it was called sanitary engineering. Civil engineers are really your municipal engineers and civil engineer--the civil engineers are the ones who build the bridges. They're the ones that you know do the, the buildings. Those, they become structural engineers. The one who build the bridges and the highways and the roads, they're civil engineers who become transportation engineers. Civil engineers are also the ones that handle the water treatment and the wastewater treatment and the garbage collection and the disposal, it's all a part of running a city. It's what civil engineers did. And then those that specialized in water treatment, wastewater treatment, garbage collection and disposal, they became the sanitary engineers cause that was the sanitary part of it. And then at some point right after we started having issues with contamination of our waterways and with sewage and with garbage and all of this, they started getting more and more involved in how to do this properly. So it became a specialty just like transportation is a specialty, structural is a specialty. So sanitary engineering became that specialty of the civil engineers that paid attention to and focused on not only distribution of water but water treatment, proper water treatment and then distribution. Proper collection and handling of waste water, proper handling, treatment of sewage before it gets disposed or released to the river, dealing with air pollution, dealing with garbage. So the waste, that's what sanitary engineering is. We have now grown and you don't hear that term anymore because then we became environmental engineers and we're the ones that pay attention to the maintenance and enhancement of the environment but we started as sanitary engineers.
Speaker 1: Now was Washington University thinking, were they thinking about this in an ecologically sound way?
Speaker 2: They were one of the first programs, graduate programs in the Midwest. And all of our old sanitary engineers and old environmental engineering consulting firms many of them were trained in that graduate program at Washington University. Washington University was forward thinking at the time and knew that they needed a program that offered masters and Ph.D. degrees and that's how they went out and collected the professors that we had in our program who stood the program up.
Story_ID: 21767
Speaker 1: So Washington University [St. Louis, Missouri], I was asking you about environmental justice I think, yeah. And were you thinking, was that something you were thinking about in school?
Speaker 2: Well see we didn't call it EJ [environmental justice]. EJ is new. That didn't start until I would say late 70s [1970s], early 80s [1980s]. We looked at it as just a part of environmental engineering. Now at that time sanitary engineering and the things that we needed to prevent. During that time is when we started doing the environmental impact statements. And the environmental impact statements, you had to do that before you did a project or before you ever started a project because you had to document what the impacts would be of any project and in a way it sort of got out of hand, but the positive and negative impacts. And then if there were negative impacts then you had to say what the mitigative measures were going to be and if the mitigative measures were unacceptable you either had to change the project or you couldn't do it. And really the way this started was when they were building the interstate highway on the Nixon, they started it on the Nixon and I even remember they were destroying black neighborhoods because--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Eisenhower I think.
Speaker 2: Eisenhower, yeah that's what I mean to say if I didn't, Eisenhower. They were destroying black neighborhoods because they were taking the interstate--city highway when it came to cities, they would go through the black part of town which "was what needed to be rebuilt" and they were having urban renewal and all that kind of stuff then. But they were you know moving us out and not moving us back in. And when people would hear that the highway was coming, they started boarding up their business and all this kind of stuff. And then by the time 40 [Highway 40] got halfway near Watts, this is how Watts was destroyed. It was destroyed by Interstate 40. The area became blighted. We call it blight when businesses get boarded up, people start anticipating and they delayed and they delayed and by the time they got to that area that whole part of Watts had just gone down, completely downhill. And that was caused by the Interstate Highway System and taking so long for 40 to get there. But then in the process also of building the highway system people weren't stopping anymore. So all of the businesses and everything that depended on what, Highway 40 or Route 66, they all went out of business. They all got wiped out because the Interstate you just drive and drive and drive. You get off, you go to a filling station and then you keep moving. So we wiped out so many businesses along the way with the highway that we learned. So we started doing environmental impact statements and environmental impact statements then started picking up and pointing out what we were doing to minority neighborhoods. And in fact what we were doing to black neighborhoods in the name of progress. So that was the precursor then to what is now called environmental justice and basically we did a lot of work in social impact assessment and from social impact assessment then it became EJ. The people who lived closest to the project were the ones that bared the greatest burden but they were the least compensated. So how do you compensate the people who are going to get hurt the most by a project that's going to serve a lot of people? So then we had to really start paying more and more--and then that's how we got into this whole thing of EJ. You have jobs, you're building let's say a large water treatment plant or a wastewater treatment plant. Who gets the jobs? People who live a hundred miles away, 200 miles away. What about the people right there in the community? You have a factory that's like Velsicol or whatever, they're making pesticides. They are putting out toxic and hazardous materials. Who's hurting? The people who live right where the factory is, they're inhaling the toxic fumes, they're dealing with that. But you're making a product that's serving a wider community. And you always locate these undesirables in our neighborhoods. So then you got this whole little specialty. Remember I told you how we started sanitary engineering which became environmental. Then you have this whole specialty then that has now evolved into what they call EJ of people who are looking at the impacts past, present and future of environmental type projects that are projects that serve a wider good but it's the people right there who are suffering the greatest harm. So we do work in EJ, but I prefer--I think I'm pretty good at EJ and I tell people that environmental engineers are the best people in the world when it comes to getting people to accept projects because it's only an environmental engineer that knows how to convince someone to let them build a water treatment plant, a wastewater treatment plant in their backyard. I mean we learn, we've learned how to get along with people. We learn how to hear code. We learn how to hear what they aren't saying so that we can do things in such a way where it's going to be accepted because it's only until we hear the community say my project, do we know that we can then get started. But that's--environmental engineers we are more of taking care of the environment and doing things in such a way that we have a win-win.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now well who are some of your outstanding professors in Washington (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, they were all outstanding, Dr. Rackman who was chairman of the program, Dr. Buzzel who was my major professor, Dr. Tomlinson who was from Tennessee, Dr. Yoder. We had five or six in our program, they were all outstanding, all of them. All of them were very kind to me, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you graduated I guess in '68 [1968] right from Washington University (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well I finished in '67 [1967] but they only give degrees once a year. It's really a twelve month program. I finished in thirteen months so I went in September, came out the following October and then I went--worked in Kansas City, Missouri for about six months at the Kansas City Water Department. And then I got a job with the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Chicago.
Story_ID: 21768
Speaker 1: Now were you there when Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] was here?
Speaker 2: I was in Kansas City [Missouri]--
Speaker 1: Kansas City.
Speaker 2: --and I drove, I tell everybody. I'll never forget this. I drove from Kansas City to Chicago [Illinois] and it was a national guard with a huge rifle standing on every corner cause this was the riots.
Speaker 1: This was in April right after Dr. King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yep. And I said oh my goodness! In fact when I was moving cause I was still at that point in my life where everything I owned I could get in a car. So I got this car packed to the hilt driving out of Kansas City. And I said oh my goodness I wonder how many times I'm going to get stopped for being one of the rioters and looters? I didn't but I thought about that. That's when I drove out of Kansas City, the stores were boarded up, National Guard everywhere, yeah I remember.
Speaker 1: In Kansas City too?
Speaker 2: [Shaking head, yeah]. Kansas City, Missouri yeah. Yeah, they had gotten their share of it also.
Speaker 1: Okay. So and this is, you know his--he was there because of the garbage worker--
Speaker 2: He was in Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: The sanitational workers strike?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Memphis, yeah. And I knew that was going on from what my parents had been telling me about you know it's getting pretty bad in Memphis. So I--and we had had some other pretty bad incidences in Memphis as well. I mean Memphis was really a hot bed, should have been hotter but it was really heating up in Memphis. It was a southern town, almost like Mississippi really.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you did get settled in, in Chicago (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Lived with my aunt, yeah and worked for the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Chicago. And I only intended to work there until September because I knew I was going back to graduate school. At that point I had decided that I was going back to graduate school to get my Ph.D. So I just worked for that year or whatever just to make a little money and to rest my brain for a minute and then go on back to school.
Story_ID: 21769
Speaker 1: Now you decided to go to graduate school, to get your--well to go on up to Ph.D. Was that in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay. So you went to University of Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: Yep, and I studied under, I went to study under a professor who had been a professor at Washington University who left to set up the environmental engineering program at the SEATO [Southeast Asia Treaty Organization] School in Bangkok. So I waited for him to get back and then I went to Massachusetts where he started teaching to study under him. And he was at U-Mass for a year and then he went out to Iowa. So he packed up his family and his lab and graduate students are part of the lab so that's how I got out to Iowa.
Speaker 1: Okay. As part of the lab, test tubes and the other things went (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Graduate students, we're just part of the lab.
Speaker 1: Packed you up and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. So this is a--you're a teacher's--is this Dr. Rolfe Skrimbee?
Speaker 2: Dr. Rolfe Skrimbee, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And then all the way through this is a mental--Dr. Cecil Lue-Hing. Cecil was a graduate student at Washington University and he's one of the group that came down to recruit me. So he really is my mentor. He satisfied my mamma. He was a graduate student at the time. Then after I got there a year later, he graduate and got his Ph.D. in environment--sanitary engineering. But all along the way, he--he's kind of, he still is, kept up with me to make sure that my career was progressing and all of this. And when I did my dissertation for my graduate committee, he served on my graduate committee and he's still promoting my career. He's retired and everything now but Dr. Cecil Lue-Hing's still promoting my career. Cecil's--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: L-U-E - H-I-N-G. He's in--a very distinguished environmental engineer, very prestigious man, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. So, and what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: Some very brand new things coming in called reverse osmosis which was a new technology we were using to effect separations. And my dissertation was on using reverse osmosis to remove trace organics from water. We were beginning to find--because you know our analytical procedures were becoming so much better and so precise we were beginning to find chemicals and organ--well chemicals in drinking water that were beginning to be quite disturbing. Some of them are teratogenic compounds which cause tumors and cancers. I mean we--so I was looking at ways of getting these things out of water. I mean we have a lot of stuff in water still till this day.
Speaker 1: In regular drinking water--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --that comes out of the tap. So--
Speaker 2: Well we get a lot of it out cause we know how to do it. We get a lot of--trace organics as we call them we get a lot of it out with technology that we use now, the reverse osmosis or organic carbon. We can remove a lot of the stuff now. And then we disinfect. So--
Speaker 1: In those days people didn't know that they were--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it still wasn't necessarily harmful but we were picking them up. We didn't know if it was harmful or not we were just beginning to see them. We didn't know what level it was harmful, not harmful. I mean that's why you do research and all of this. Wasn't like you know tobacco smoke, we knew about that even though we were--the tobacco lobby was killing us but we knew that was harmful.
Story_ID: 21770
Speaker 1: Are you a person who would recommend drinking bottled water today?
Speaker 2: No. No.
Speaker 1: I had to ask.
Speaker 2: No. Drinking water must meet a certain level of standard. It must be bacterialogically safe and pleasant to taste with very little odor. We have standards. There's a whole list of standards, chemical, biological criteria that the water must meet, public health service, drinking water quality standards that all municipalities must meet. Bottled water does not conform. They don't have any standards that they have to meet. And if you know from time to time Perrier has had to pull their product because when they do their own testing they found some problems bacterialogically. Lot of people who sell bottled water, it comes straight from the tap and they put it in a bottle and sell it. So no, safest water you can drink comes out of that tap. Now you say, well I don't like the way it smells. Okay, so then you want to use a Brit or something like that with the organic carbon in it just to take the odor away. But if you just let it sit out on the counter the odor will go away. You know the problems we've had here in [Washington] DC, it wasn't, it didn't have anything to do with the water leaving the plant, it's when the water got in the pipe and the pipe was corrosive and it was asbestos pipe. Why you're going to have lead pipe, asbestos pipe? Come on. So this was after the fact, it was not due to the quality of the water. I drink tap water any time before bottled water. But like I said if you really look at, if you read a lot of the bottled water, you find, you'll find it's tap water. They bottled it right there at the site. They just, it's just a bottling operation and they're using tap water.
Speaker 1: It's not from Poland Springs?
Speaker 2: No, well Poland Spring now it's probably tap water also.
Speaker 1: Right. So I thought I'd ask. So--
Speaker 2: I believe in our product.
Story_ID: 21771
Speaker 1: When I finished University of Iowa, I--my first job was teaching at Tennessee State University. And I taught in the undergraduate program at Tennessee State University, undergraduate civil engineering. And I taught in the masters program, water resources engineering at Vanderbilt [University]. So I did undergraduate--cause Tennessee State didn't have a graduate program and so I, I had taught at Tennessee State and Vanderbilt. And I did that for what, four years, five years, three really '72 [1972], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], '75 [1975]. And then in '75 [1975], I moved to [Washington] D.C. and got a job at Washington Tech [Technical Institute], which was a precursor to the University of District of Columbia [UDC] and Howard [University]. And I stayed at Washington Tech for about a year. I just couldn't split my time between the two and just decided to concentrate on Howard.
Speaker 2: Okay. It says here in '76 [1976] that you participated in a Double Bind study--
Speaker 1: Yeah. That was the first--
Speaker 2: --with the American Association of (unclear).
Speaker 1: American--AAAS, American Association for the Advancement of Science did the first study on minority women and STEM and I was a part of the first thirty that they looked at. And we did a weekend together at Arley House where we talked about you know they just brought us together for a weekend and we talked about same thing we're talking about now but more of you know how we ended up getting in the sciences, what our barriers were, what our positive points were, what was necessary to get us there, keep us there, what was the influence and what could we do to help motivate other women to go into stem and to remain in stem? It was--I learned a lot. Again, in many ways I think I was sheltered but to listen to what some of these women had to do to even go to school and stay in school and then go to graduate school. I mean they didn't have their parents in their corner. A lot of them their parents couldn't understand why they wanted to go to school, anything like that. Whereas black parents full well understand why their girls want to go to school and in fact black parents tend to push their girls more than their boys because there's this whole thing always from the 20s [1920s] and the 30s [1930s], educating the black women when you wouldn't educate the men. Well you couldn't afford to. If you had the money you would educate your daughters but that whole deal was so that they wouldn't have to do domestic work. If they had to do domestic work then they were subject to the whims of the white man of the house. So you want to get your daughters out of that environment whereas men, it was okay. They could dig ditches. They'd be fine. It was alright. It was more of their daughters, protecting their daughters. And then you know when we started being able to go to school and all they could full well understand and they pushed, they still do, push their daughters to do science and engineering and math and all because the perception still is that it's a secure profession. That you can get a job and you'll stay working and you're less subject to layoffs and turnovers like the other professions.
Story_ID: 21772
Speaker 1: Okay. So in the field that you're in I imagine it's, you got like two different things going on. Most of the scientists I've talked to be they black, be they women, they tend to say that once they get involved in the science part of it, then who they are doesn't matter as much as the work they're doing?
Speaker 2: I don't know who--(laughter).
Speaker 1: They were (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's somebody who's fooling themselves cause you're always black and that's always as they say the elephant in the room. And if you're black and female I mean you have two elephants in the room regardless of what these people tell you. When I, you know I was in environmental engineering and then when my major professor left the University of Iowa to go to another job, I did not go because I had already taken my preliminary exams. So I didn't have anywhere to go because the people in civil didn't want his students and I don't think it had anything at that point to do with color, I think it was more that they didn't want his students. So chemical engineering picked me up and that's how I got into Chem-E and completed the degree in chemical engineering, even though my specialty is still environmental. And Chem-Es have sort of taken over a lot of environmental. That's how I got into chemical. But at any rate when I was teaching at Tennessee State [University] and Vanderbilt [University], I was fine. And in fact if I had desired to stay, if I had said okay I'm going to stay in academia, I should have stayed at Vanderbilt because you know white men they are just choice. There's nothing any better than a white man. He has the most amazing sense of self. Anything else is, he's helping you. I would have done just fine at Vanderbilt. I would have gone all the way to full professor because those men over there were going to do whatever they could to help me cause I wasn't a threat. A black woman is not a threat to a white man. I don't care how good you are. So I would have progressed. No, I'm going to go to Howard University. Even if I had stayed at Tennessee State University I would have been fine because the majority of the professors over there were black men who have--they don't have, especially in the sciences you don't--then. You may have it now but you didn't have that friction between males and females so I wouldn't have had any problems. I was beginning when I got there I was having problems with the foreign professors but I wasn't having any problems with the black professors. And at Vanderbilt, I just would have gone all the way because I was not a threat to them at all and they could walk around and say, see we have this wonderful black professor and she is so great and she's doing this and doing that. No, I went to Howard. Oh, it was terrible. I'd run into, I get into a situation where I have over half of the professors are foreign. Well they, half of them didn't even want to be at Howard in the first place. If they had gotten a position at a white university instead of Howard, they would have been much more happy. But they were at this black university cause there wasn't a white university that would pick them up. So they--and then they looked down on women so I got these Indian professors and Chinese professors and then I have these young, African American professors who are now beginning to--you're beginning to see this friction set up between males and females because of this competitiveness. But the biggest problem I had, I guess came from all of them really. And after a while it became very obvious that I wasn't going to get promoted. And I, I even remember one day in faculty meeting cause we had, Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays we had our classes. Tuesdays and Thursdays we had hour and a half, 90 minute classes. So we were having this discussion about grants and whether or not the professors could be classified as nine month employees instead of ten month employees. Okay, what did that mean? That means that you could charge three months on your grant instead of two. So they were going on and on and on and I was the only female professor and I had a class coming. And I said finally, I raised my hand and I said you know what thing? If one month of salary is going to make a difference in your life, all I can say is you're a piss pool planner and I guess I shouldn't have said that but I was really getting frustrated. I said, and I really have class you know can we finish this conversation cause it's not going anywhere cause we're going to be classified as ten month employees and that's it. So my dean, my dean well Dr. Abron, I mean you know, you have a husband. The rest of us, we have our families to take care of so we have to consider these things. I turned around, I looked at him, I said what did you say? And he repeated this. And at that point the red light district was at Howard. You know they pushed it all over the city but at that point that's where all the prostitutes hung out right around Howard University. And I looked at him, I said you know one thing, you don't know how money comes into my household. And you don't know what else I do. For all you know when walk out of this building I could walk right out there on the street and line up with the rest of the ladies and shake my legs and get money coming in that way. You don't know how we make money. But regardless, I still say that if one month makes a difference, you're a piss pool planner and I walked out. And I said when I walked out, guess you better go find another job. (Laughter). So you know we kind of calmed that over but I was also consulting with other firms and all of the other male professors had little consulting businesses going on, on the side. But I was the one where they--I had to make a choice. You're going to either do consulting or you're going to teach. You can't do both. But the men could but I couldn't you know and I had gone up for promotion, hadn't gotten it and it was obvious I wasn't going to get it. So I said you know what, it's time for me to get out of here and do something else with my life. So I left and I went into, I started the business. I mean I had already started the business so then I just went out oh I think in 1980, went out full time with the company you know. And then I had a couple of people say, oh Dr. Abron, I wish you the best of luck and you know well how, you know you never can tell. One day I may have to come and ask you for a job. And so, yeah sure, but again, this was another instance like where profess--Dr. Gibson told me when I was at Lemoyne [Owen College], you'll never make it. You know they were essentially saying you're not going to make it in your business. It's going to fold you know and 35 years later I sit here and talk to you and still got it. But yeah, so that was, it was terrible. I should have stayed at Vanderbilt if I wanted to stay in academia. And originally my plan was to be you know university professor, full professor, become dean, provost and then find me a college cause I really wanted to be a college president. That's really what I wanted to do but I ended up going into consulting.
Story_ID: 21773
Speaker 1: Let's back track a little bit and talk about how you met your husband and then when you started your business?
Speaker 2: I met my husband when I started teaching at Tennessee State University. I think I got my Ph.D. at twenty four, twenty five, something like that. I was young cause I essentially went just straight through. And so I found out after the fact that when I got there that just rumor went through the entire college of engineering, have you seen this little young professor that's in civil? Have you seen, you know? So supposedly there was a bet that was made as to who was going to get her and so my husband, you know guess he won the bet. He worked on it for a couple of years you know but he eventually--I ended up dating a student and then we ended up--we dated for two or three years and then got married. But he won the bet and I found that out after the fact. And I guess I really shouldn't have done that but you know it's the things you do when you're young. And it was I guess so nice because remember when I left Lemoyne [Owen College] I was in an all white environment for the next what, five to seven years. Masters degree, every--all white, very few and there was really very little social life cause you, you're studying all the time. So by the time you know I got to Tennessee State University it's like, oh my goodness! You know where did all these black people come from? What's going on? So it's like you know you have to reset, recalibrate. Everything was fun, everything was wonderful and so I just guess I got hung up and caught up. But it's okay. So that's how I met him.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And then we got married oh, '74 [1974], in '74 [1974] and then moved to Tennessee State--moved to D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] And he was--and he is an electrical engineer so he got a job with the power company here, Pepco and I got a job like I said Washington Tech [Washington Technical Institute] and Howard [University], teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21774
Speaker 1: Now you started a (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I started my business, PEER, PEER Consultants in 1978. I started teaching at Tennessee State, I mean at Howard in '75 [1975] and I was working for the consulting firms on the side for a couple of years. And then in '78 [1978] I started PEER cause I wanted to do straight, environmental engineering. I didn't want to work for a civil engineering firm where environmental was just a piece of it. I wanted, that's all I wanted to do was environmental. So I started PEER Consultants to deal with issues of the environment, nothing else. No transportation, no structures, none of--just the environment. So that's--I started PEER in '78 [1978] with Dr. Weinberger, Leon Weinberger who is a very, again prestigious environmental engineer and Dr. Lue-Hing who was my mentor recommended that I meet Dr. Weinberger and ask him for help in getting my business started and I did. And Dr. Weinberger worked with me for about 15 years before he passed.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well some of your--what was your first contract? Or what was your first significant contract?
Speaker 2: Well my first contract was a little tiny contract with the, with an environmental engineering firm, Dennis Camber (ph). We laugh about this all the time, they gave me a little $2,000 contract, subcontract on something they were doing on a small wastewater treatment plant that they were designing and I don't know what we did. Something, we did some calculations or something. But then, I think my first significant contract with the yes, the United--USEPA, got my first contract with them and it was looking at, dealing with how to treat chemical waste in wastewater treatment plants (unclear) different types of chemical ways and how we could treat those wastes to the point that we could then discharge to wastewater treatment plants. So I did quite a bit of work and in fact EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] was a very big client of ours and then we started working for the Department of Defense, DOD and DOE [Department of Energy]. Well DOD and DOE are what you call regulated federal agencies because their operations are regulated by EPA in terms of discharge cause they operate plants, chemical plants, all this kind of stuff. So finally EPA came out and said you cannot work for the regulator and the regulated. Many of the large engineering firms are able to put up a firewall and say well these people are only going to wok for DOD and DOE. They're not going to do any EPA work which is a lie. But they were able to do it. We were too small, we couldn't do it. So we had to come out of EPA and then just work for DOD and DOE. So that's, those are--I still work now for DOD but very little for DOE. But my first big contract was with EPA. I was a big EPA contractor for about 10 years.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you all were dealing with you said the treatment of the water or--
Speaker 2: Waste, chemical waste.
Speaker 1: --waste, chemical waste.
Speaker 2: We call it hazardous waste, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright. And so what did you do at DOD and DOE?
Speaker 2: DOD was clean up of hazardous waste and same with DOE, dealing with DOE a lot of the problems that they were having down in Oak Ridge at that facility down there, yeah. Still doing hazardous waste work, EPA, we were also doing some sludge disposal work on how to deal with sludges coming from wastewater treatment plants. Then I started working at the, doing work at the wastewater treatment plant in D.C., Blue Plains and now we've been working for them almost 30 years, starting picking up municipal contracts. But initially we were a federal contractor.
Story_ID: 21775
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us now what is, there's a term about now called environmental racism, what is that?
Speaker 2: I think that must be the same as environmental justice where plants and facilities are located in minority communities. So they'll put the wastewater treatment plant, they'll put the landfill and everything in minority communities. Also when they're hiring, let's just take a look at Savannah River, at some of the DOE [Department of Energy] facilities where--that they're still operating. And when they hire people they'll hire people in from a hundred miles away and you have all of this unemployment of black people all around them and they don't hire them. So that's also a form of environmental racism where you don't hire the people closest to you but you'll bring people in a hundred miles, 200 miles away and you have different hiring practices. You won't hire again the black people around you but you'll hire white people who you bring them in. But you won't hire the people who are right there. That's also another form of I'm assuming environmental racism.
Speaker 1: Okay. And like you said that's a, I guess a subset of environmental justice. So I guess most of (unclear).
Speaker 2: And environmental engineers, I mean we still, we can still see hiring, unfair hiring. We can still see it, you know in water plants, wastewater treatment plants, in consulting firms, even in federal agencies to work in the environmental fields. We can see it, we still do. You know people say why didn't I get that job? Well--and this is a reason why people in my company get upset with me when we do proposals and resumes and all. I don't like to put pictures on them and people will put pictures on their resumes and pictures of people on their projects if it's a wastewater treatment plant I'll show a picture of the plant but I really don't want to show a picture of any employees or anything like that. And people say why you know people can make a personal connection. I said that's the very reason why. Because you know they show all of these white people and I show all these black people. Well if you got a bureaucrat sitting there, who is he going to pick? He's going to pick the company with more white people. With me, I just leave it up to their imagination.
Story_ID: 21776
Speaker 1: Okay. Now in 1986, you received a contract from the U.S. Department of Energy to oversee the clean up of a low level radioactive waste site outside of St. Louis which--
Speaker 2: Weldon Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Weldon Spring was a, I think a site where they were doing some radioactive waste processing. It was a plant and if I can remember I think they may have been processing material that was then sent over to Oak Ridge, because if I remember correctly the bomb, wasn't the bomb assembled at Oak Ridge. But they were processing material at various places. And Weldon Springs was one of those facilities I believe where they were processing so they were closing the site. And when you have contaminated material like that, what they do is take everything down and put everything in the ground and close it over. And so we managed the clean up and close down at that site. (BRIEF INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Alright, Weldon Spring was a place like that. It was just a, it had been a DOE [Department of Energy] facility and we were closing it down which means all of the buildings had to be decontaminated and then torn down and everything was buried in place onsite. So we supervised the decontamination and closure of that facility. That was about I would say a three year, five year job, something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay. What have been some of the other more interesting jobs?
Speaker 1: Well, I think cause the work we did for about a five year period with EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] on the remediation of hazard waste sites, super fun sites all over the south. And we did about ten sites we cleaned up for them with various types of waste. These were super fun sites in Region 4, which is Florida, Tennessee, Alabama, that was really very interesting, very interesting. And we did a lot of community outreach and community interaction because you have to inform the community what's going on, get their input, work with them, figure out what you're going to do that's going to do that's going to satisfy them and also meet rules, regulations and requirements. It's very intense, sometimes could be very volatile but we got an award from EPA for our work, quality of our work so we really did a good job. And to be able to say that you know what you go to school for is to clean up hazardous waste sites and to really clean them up, that's a feather in your cap. And we did a very similar project for the United States Air Force, we had a clean up contract with them. And one of the big bases we did was Griffiths Air Force Base up in Rome, New York and we were at that air force base for about five years and it was a lot of work but we cleaned it up all and turned it over to Rome. So it's now a muni--industrial park, municipal facility, something like that but completely cleaned up. And it was, I mean it was JP4 fuel oil. Oil all over the place from you know the planes and they had a--two firing ranges there so we had one place, we had lead shot six feet, eight feet deep so we had to dig all of that up and then take that to a secure landfill. And then there were other chemical operations going on so it was a big clean, very big clean up job. And we were there for about five years.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) about that before, the remains of bullets you know I mean in the environment.
Speaker 1: In the firing ranges, yes.
Speaker 2: Well I don't know if it's a problem anymore but the old civil war battle sites, you know the place--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --(unclear) old armor of so many (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right. Right, but remember most of the battle fields are not--they're still what, historical places where you aren't going to do any building. But if you go to--one project we went after in Florida not too long ago was a ski lodge, you know where they--where you got lead shot all over the place and it had to all be cleaned up because then we were getting leachate going down into the ground water table from that lead shot all over the place. Yeah, I mean in firing ranges you really I mean those things are really bad. They are just building them better now so we can contain the lead and get rid of it and you aren't necessarily using lead shot when you go in now but at first you were and it was awful, um-hmm.
Speaker 2: So what else? What else? Did you do any work overseas?
Speaker 1: Didn't start doing--well un--for the air national guard, we've been doing their environmental work for about twenty five years. We support them worldwide and this is really on air guard facilities. So we have done some clean up work for the air guard in Puerto Rico did some asbestos work at the air guard facility there. We did an embassy in Bermuda under that contract. We just did the asbestos work, identified the asbestos in the embassy and then supervised getting it removed. And then we got some work with World Bank and did some environmental management. We prepared an environmental management system for this country of Grenada under a World Bank contract but our, most of our overseas work has been in the PEER Africa company where we work in South Africa doing sustainable development.
Story_ID: 21777
Speaker 1: Now you started PEER Africa in 1995, right?
Speaker 2: Well '94 [1994] and we incorporated in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay. Tell us how that got started.
Speaker 2: Well I had wanted to go international started around 1990 and I had looked at going into Liberia because we thought the war would be over. Didn't know that it's still not over but at any rate a friend of mine, I was on the advisory board for the business school at Langston University and 1993 he called up one day and said oh, I'm going to have our next board meeting in South Africa. And I said you're going to have your next board meeting from Langston University B School in South Africa? Yes! I said, okay I guess we'll go. And I had already kind of started thinking about this was '93 [1993], ninety--this was '94 [1994], '94 [1994] and Nelson Mandela was president so I had kind of started thinking about umm, wonder if there is the opportunity that I might be able to do something in South Africa. So I said okay. So I went to the board meeting and while I was there for those two weeks for the board meeting I started looking around on the possibly of working, doing, see how we could do working. I wanted to do classical environmental engineering cause South Africa had said they wanted tourism to be one of their number one attractions and the country is very contaminated from all of the mining they do over there. They--it's a very rich country and they have--you name it, the minerals they have. They have--they're the fifth largest export of coal in the world, they have diamonds, they have gold, they have platinum, they have everything. So we had started talking to the Chamber of Mines about doing clean up work for them and President Mandela had instituted this housing program where he had set aside 5 percent of their GDP to get his homeless families into formal housing. So you had all of these housing projects going on and I'd ride up and down the street and see all of these and I kept wondering why they weren't doing them correctly with so many houses they had to build, why weren't they taking sustainable design into consideration and passive solar. And now this was before it became the buzz word that it is now, this is in '94 [1994], '95 [1995]. But I still felt with 5 million home, come on, or 5 million homeless families, surely you got to do this thing right and they weren't. So I went to Secretary O'Leary who was head of Energy under bill Clinton and they had this--
Speaker 1: It was Hazel O'Leary.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Hazel O'Leary.
Speaker 2: Hazel, yeah. And they had this program that they had set up called Gore-Mbeki Bi-National Commission and six months, every six months they would either come to the U.S. or the U.S. would go to South Africa and this was a cooperation between the two vice presidents which they thought were going to become the presidents and to help them get up on their feet after apartheid. So I went to her and said you know one thing, sure would like to demonstrate passive solar and all this building they're doing. So she said well I'll give you a little money. I said what's little? Why don't you build one? So we became part of what they call the housing program under the Gore-Mbeki Bi-National Commission. So we were able to put up a couple of pallet houses and so that's how we got started in South Africa was through--we had already you know made some inroads and everything but that relationship really helped to push us over the top and to help us get solidified.
Story_ID: 21778
Speaker 1: Okay. What were the houses made up before you all--?
Speaker 2: Oh, well I mean they were using concrete block. We used brick. But they weren't, I mean basically the issue was that they were building concrete shacks, I mean that's basically--people were trying to make money off subsidized housing. I mean it's not enough money to do that and they weren't taking into consideration you know the son, that people were spending most of their money on trying to keep the houses warm in the winter time cause South Africa has four seasons. They weren't putting in ceilings, they weren't putting in insulation. It was in fact--the EPA a couple of years later after we got started gave us some money to write a book that was a little pamphlet that was issued at Comp 14 in Kyoto and the title of the report was 'Housing As If People Mattered', because they weren't--they were just throwing up stuff. I mean to them these still weren't people. And again this is my environmental engineering training in me because when I started going to meetings and we were talking about houses and people say well why are you going to put ceilings in the houses? They never had ceilings before. Because they're people, that's why. And trying to figure out what kind of floors. Well why you going to get floors? I mean it was just awful, it was still this apartheid mentality. And so you had all of this money now to build formal homes but they were still doing apartheid--the shacks were 20 square meters and so they were building 30 square meter concrete shacks is what I called it instead of trying to build a home. There was no concept of appreciation of a home, no concept of pulling people together, letting them plan their own communities and all. And that's the way I operated and that's how we started PEER Africa which is a sustainable--we implement sustainable human settlements.
Speaker 1: Okay. It says here that PEER Africa houses are 40-50 --
Speaker 2: Square meters.
Speaker 1: --I guess percent more energy efficient than the traditional homes of--
Speaker 2: Eighty percent.
Speaker 1: Eighty percent.
Speaker 2: Eight to ninety percent more efficient. Passive solar, insulated, ceilings, proper windows, proper doors, energy efficient appliances, compact florescent bulbs now but the people can't afford it, energy star appliances for those who can afford it, but safe cook stoves for those who can't--who aren't able to afford electric stoves. Low flow shower heads, faucet aerators in the faucets. I mean the new technology. New technology we're now putting in wind and solar power generating stations for producing electricity in the homes for those homes that are not on the grid. State of the art, there's no reason why developing countries have to go through what the developed world did in terms of contaminating the environment, generating greenhouse gases. Technology is available today where they can leap frog all of that and start up, up here no extra money, no extra cost. I mean look at cell phones. Look at the way cell phones have taken off. I mean you don't even worry about stringing telephone line anymore. Everything is bouncing off of a satellite. We have that ability in housing now to do the same thing with power generation, can use a lot more renewable energy. We know how to make houses much more energy efficient and we can reduce your energy usage, we can reduce your energy bill and it's done very easily. And that's what we do and it can be done at an affordable price because most of it is taken advantage of the sun that the good lord gave you.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now PEER has also worked in Mali, Uganda, Nigeria and in the Caribbean, right?
Speaker 2: Well the Caribbean, Grenada and we've tried to--we've been working with some people and trying to get projects off of the ground in Uganda and in Mali. We've done some proposals and I haven't gotten any word but worked with engineers who were trying to do what we do, take our housing process and move it there but we haven't been successful yet. But we have met with the people, submitted proposals the whole bit. I mean I know Mali very well and I know Uganda very well but we just haven't won any work yet but we've submitted proposals and met with people and everything, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. I remember years ago in the 70s [1970s] when a friend of mine was part of a family with a group called Africare.
Speaker 2: Yes, I know that's oh, what is his name? We worked with Africare on a major agricultural project in KwaZulu-Natal, C. Payne, what's C. Payne--
Speaker 1: Lucas.
Speaker 2: Lucas, C. Payne Lucas, yes.
Speaker 1: C. Payne Lucas, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were planting trees in the (Unclear) back in the 70s [1970s], that's how they got started.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, they do a lot of work--
Speaker 1: Try to keep the soil from (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yep. Yep, they--we've worked with them and had a good relationship with them when C. Payne was there.
Speaker 1: Okay. What about Wangari Maathai [Kenyan environmental and political activist] and Kenya, did you have any association with her when she was--?
Speaker 2: No, when she--
Speaker 1: She passed last year.
Speaker 2: Right. But we--I know of her work but no. So we haven't done anything in Kenya. We do a lot of work through the United Nations framework convention on climate change. We're very active with that and I go to all of the meetings and I speak at the meetings. This last one that was in Durban, we got an award by the South African government for having a flagship in sustainable design and we're always doing workshops and seminars at those meetings. So I know the people. I know the actors on the world stage and the climate community and they know us.
Story_ID: 21779
Speaker 1: Okay. Now in '96 [1996] you received the Department of Defense Small Business--
Speaker 2: Oh goodness.
Speaker 1: --Environmental Restoration Excellence Award. And there have been other awards and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so what are you planning now? I mean--
Speaker 2: Retirement. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Retirement?
Speaker 2: We--the work in Africa has just been outstanding. We just won back in April from the American Academy of Environmental Engineers, a superior achievement award for excellence in engineering design. As I said the work in South African, the South African Government Department of Energy selected our process for building communities as a flagship and one that they intend to use in meeting their climate mandate in communities. And over the next five years we intend to touch in some manner 5 million--a million, a million homes in South Africa, either upgrading them to increase their energy efficiency or to build new ones and to deliver basic services, electricity and water to people who ordinarily would not do it. We know how to do that. We know how to do that very well with the poor. We work in poor and indigent communities in Africa. So I want to get that program moving, I want to get PEER Africa--we work in the U.S. on the physical environment, couple of really nice projects. I mean we're doing some sustainability work in Washington, D.C. We are a part of ht team that's operating the sustainable energy utility which is a major program in the district to reduce energy consumption in the district by one percent per year, major. Trying to learn how to do that, do that and then take that program to a couple of other cities. So I'm trying to position PEER to really be on the forefront and then let somebody come in, run it. I don't want to do that anymore. I can still go out and write the proposals and get the word and keep us moving forward but I don't want the day to day headache of running a business. So that's my next plan is to--the man that runs the South African operation, Douglas Guy, my business partner, what we're really talking about doing is getting both of the companies to a point where we can go to work for the foundation and we'll raise money and write proposals and then direct that money to projects, humanitarian projects that PEER Africa is doing to help them work more in the developing world. And then to get larger projects but environmental type for people who want to work with PEER in the U.S. We'd like for PEER to remain a minority owned company and we would like not to sell, but we have to solidify us as a very good niche company that can survive. Many of the environmental engineering firms, the economy has killed us. I mean we suffered but we're coming back but many of them are just selling. It's, it's a tough market, tough market now.
Story_ID: 21780
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your business partner, Douglas Guy?
Speaker 2: Douglas Guy. Douglas used to work for a fairly large environmental engineering company called Environmental Resource Management and back in the early 90s [1990s] we had a lot of contracts. PEER had a lot of contracts with DOD [Department of Defense], DOE [Department of Energy]. And you know when companies buy you, they don't really care about you, they want your contracts. So they wanted our contracts and they wanted me because I'm extremely effective on the street in terms of selling work. I mean I like to talk and I have a pretty good idea of what I'm talking about so I can sell work. So they sent him, he was the only black vice president they had and he ran their IT shop. So they sent him to convince me to sell and I told him I didn't want to sell and why I didn't want to sell. And he, at first he said I don't understand. I mean you're going to make a lot of money. And I said yeah, but I really want to go to South Africa and really want to get involved with helping to rebuild and doing some interesting things and sustainability. Sustainability's coming, it's new. This is my opportunity to get out on front instead of always here in the U.S. paying catch up and hoping that these white firms will put you on their team or hoping that there is some crumbs that will fall from the table so you can get a little tiny contract. And as it turns out while his masters, he has an MBA with a concentration in IT, his undergrad degree was in black studies and he knew--what's the young man, Stokely Carmichael, he knew Stokely. And he was very much a part of--he's about ten years younger than I am. He was very much a part of the black movement during that time and he went to Pitt, University of Pittsburgh and he was very active in their black student union and all of that kind of stuff. So he told me one day, he said well I'll tell you what, he said I keep hearing you talk about South Africa. He said if you open up a company in South Africa, I'll operate it. I said you're going to leave your six figure job over here and do that? He said, yeah. I said well look, wait. You need to go over here and take a look at what's going on over there before you make a--he said well oh, okay fine but I would--I want to do that. He said I've always wanted to do something like that from the time I--I said okay. So we went to South Africa and we spent six weeks in South Africa. We went all over the country and really trying to get a sense of how we could work over there. I mean and we were ahead of our time. Went ten years ahead of our time and we're still Americans and that has really been a problem, doesn't have anything to do with the color of your skin over there. Nowhere in Africa like that, but in South Africa, nothing, you're not a South African. You may be black and when you open your mouth they don't even see black anymore, they don't see color, they see American. And I mean that is just a fact of life and I have to keep telling people that when you start working in other countries it's a totally different dynamic, ethic and the whole bit. And we didn't get any--we got very little support from the U.S. government cause we're not a USAID [United States Agency for International Development] contractor. But anyway, he said yeah I'll do it so he went and I mean we've been over there. And we have at this point about 10,000 houses up, but it has not been easy, not at all. We can't get American contracts because like I said we're not a USAID contractor. We know how to work in the country, we know the people at the top. We know how to organize. We work with the people at the bottom, the beneficiaries of the projects and we demonstrated that we can do it. And whenever we get work from other countries it's because they've sent their people over to do something, they screwed it up and they had to come to us to straighten it out. And we're just beginning now to come into our own. We've sacrificed. We spent a lot of money. I would say we have close to five million dollars invested in that South African operation. And now, and then we've got to figure out how to get that investment to pay off. That's another thing we want to concentrate on now. But he, if it had not been for Douglas we would not have been able to stay there and remain there. You cannot work in a foreign country from here. You have to be there. And he sacrificed tremendously to go to live and have bad days and good days, but he's excellent at what he does. He's a very good organizer. He knows how to work with the people, he knows how--he's a manager, knows how to get these projects done and he knows how to get it, the South Africans to do it. We work only with black South African--we have white South Africans we work with as well but the majority of the people in the communities that we work in, they are from the community and we organize them and train them and we are basically the wind beneath their wings. So when people come to our projects, they see the black South Africans doing their work. When we go to--and we take them all over the country, all over the world. When we went to Denmark for the Climate Change meeting, we took some of our community workers with us. We take them everywhere that we go because it's their work and that's the way we operate. But we would not have been able to have the lasting power, the staying power, that big award that we just won in April, we wouldn't have done any of that had it not been for Douglas.
Speaker 1: What was this big award?
Speaker 2: That we just won from the American Academy of Environmental Engineers for Superior Achievement for Excellence in Engineering for the work in South Africa.
Story_ID: 21781
Speaker 1: Okay. That's in--have you--what are some of the dynamics from working in South Africa? I think you should probably explain that you know. I've heard different things you know but what are some of the dynamics of working in South--?
Speaker 2: Well we're not South African but we work on the South African economy. So we get paid in Rand and South Africans are going to get the contracts before we do. We're not going to get--the project we're doing right now in Cape Town, rare we got appointed sole source on that and we got that about ten years ago and we kept that project alive. That's the one we got the award for and it's a beautiful community, almost 3,000 homes, all passive solar. But about two years ago, three years ago we started getting these splinter groups coming in. You get new leadership coming in from the city and so now they decide that they're going to split the project up and all of this and be fair and, to all of these groups who now want to build 500 homes, 300 homes. But from 19--from 2001 to 2008, had it not been for Douglas and me and our money, that project would not be where it is because they are slow in paying and then they delay and it's just a mess. I mean we've had to get bridge financed and everything to keep this project going until it has now finally taken off and it's a beautiful community. But there are about a thousand homes left to build and now people have different ideas about what they can do and there's very little that we can say. I mean we're the implementing agent but it's the city that's putting the money out so we have to listen to what the city says. So that's one of the problems. And we see all of these other projects going on that we can do but we have to do them as sub because we are not going to win a contract from any South African government or agency. I mean our houses, we work for Eskom, we get paid a little bit for every house we build because they're out of power and our houses have almost zero energy footprint. So we get paid a little for that but that just goes to the project to keep the project moving. It's tough, I mean most of those Americans who are doing very well, they're getting paid by American companies or they're working for American agencies. They're working for DOE [Department of Energy] or they're working for USAID [United States Agency for International Development] or they're working for DOD [Department of Defense]. We're not. So we've had lasting power only because we, it's just the way we operate. We put our money into it. We didn't put our money into big houses and cars and all of this kind of stuff and we stuck it out. We don't--Douglas is not very social. He works, he works all the time so you don't--you're not going to see us at these big functions with Americans and all but when the South Africans have big functions you're going to see us there because we need them to keep our projects going. So I mean yeah, I know President Zuma [Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma]. I've met him. But more importantly, I know the lady who's in charge of housing. I know the lady who's head of the Department of Energy. I know these people who impact directly the work that we do. We know the people at the power company, Eskom. They impact directly and we have to stay on their good terms but we spend time with the people that we work with so we've learned how to work that. But we're definitely on the ground. We're different from a lot of the other Americans who are over there. I mean a lot of them, they don't even know we're there but the South Africans know we're there.
Story_ID: 21782
Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I guess the young people that I've trained in the environmental field to be environmental engineers, the company and to show that a minority company can do good work and have staying power without having a bank. I mean we--trying to get financing is very difficult with small businesses so we you know we do as they call it asset based lending where you sell your invoices and all. It's still tough to get a bank. I mean white companies with nothing can go and get one but we won these small businesses where financing is really difficult so it's always hand to mouth but you work through it some kind of way. And then I work in South Africa. I mean we have 10,000 families that we put in houses, people that we put to work. I mean when I first started working with those people in 1995, our first group they were emaciated. They were living in shacks and you look at them now they're in formal houses, they have cars. Many of them have gained a lot of weight and they've traveled all over the world and they come back and forth to the U.S. like it's nothing and they've been to Germany and they've been to Bangkok and you know cause every time we get invited to go some place we take some of our community members with them. And these were people who used to live in shacks and now they have passports you know. So just in the fifteen, twenty years it, almost twenty we've been working there just the changes. And every time I go it's a thrill to see how, in twenty years how these people have changed and sending their children, you know some of them, some of the young ones I started working with that we got out of shacks, trained them, one of our young men just graduated from college. And some of the older people now are sending their kids to college because we've started close to thirty construction companies that now know how to build the energy efficient houses and have gone off on their own businesses. And we have several east goals who are just going around doing energy efficient improvements and all and these are people that we've helped get on their feet so just to see that. And then when I ride around the country now and see our projects it's like wow. So yeah I guess that's a legacy. It doesn't seem like it because you know I can't--you know I said what do I have to show from living? But when you think about it, I guess so. I mean here in the U.S., I have projects that people talk about. I go places and people say, "Oh you're Dr. Abron. I've been wanting to meet you and everything." I said me, I'm barely making it cause you know I sent my kids to college on credit cards cause I was so busy trying to get South Africa up and running and maintain a business over here. I mean we've had rough times. We've had two recessions but we didn't go out of business. I never closed my doors and I never missed a payroll. Now we've gone up, we've gone down but you know but I don't have a big house or a big car. We, you know we're an engineering consulting firm and so we're small and we just try to make it as best we can and pray and hope that we can keep our doors open. And, but the key is always being able to do quality work. We do quality work. I mean everybody's messed up. We've had some mistakes that we've had to correct, we're not perfect. But for the most part, being able to do quality work and being able to get along with people, you know. And that's one of the things we try our best to do is to get along with our clients, to get along with our employees and for our employees to know that they are valued. Were it not for them we couldn't have our company. And I have to tell some of my engineers from time to time when I hear them say "I", "I", "I", I say wait, wait, wait, engineering is a "we". We are a "we" profession, there's nothing that you can do in engineering that you can do by yourself. So just keep that--and, no you're right Dr. Abron. I didn't mean it like that. I say oh that's okay but just remember, we are a "we".
Story_ID: 21783
Speaker 1: How many staff do you employ?
Speaker 2: Oh, it goes up and down. At this point we are at ninety, five offices and ninety full time staff. But I would say access to another twenty to twenty five on an as-needed part time basis. We have been up to about 120 and go back down depending on the contracts. And I can tell you truthfully, truthfully, truthfully there is a glass ceiling. There is a glass ceiling and just about the time you think that you are there where you can crack it, they have a way of bringing you right on back down. You can't get that contract or who is going to help you get that contract and they retire and you start all over again and you don't have enough money so you can't hire the secretary that's retiring from this agency or the person that ran that program. You can't compete with the salaries that these larger firms are paying. So just about the time you think you got a breakthrough, then you don't get that contract or a contract ends and you don't get another one and then your income goes back down so you have to layoff again. So trying to get to that critical mass to break that ceiling, it's still there. There is and I tell people I said I have realized that with the thirty five years of having PEER that there is definitely a glass ceiling. They have this program now that they've been trying to get for about twenty years called Woman Owned Business Set Asides. I mean they have set asides for minority businesses. They got the Alaskan companies they, I mean they had the biggest minority companies going with all kinds of set asides. You be sure to show me the Alaskan native when you go to any of their companies, just find one. But at any rate they--billions, veterans, service disabled veterans. Everybody has a set aside. We finally under the Obama [President Barack Obama] administration got a woman owned business set aside program but we still can't get programs in there so that we can take advantage of being able to get some sizeable contracts to take off. So I mean it's just you know yeah, we were in the 8A [business development program] program but you can only stay in the 8A program for so long. And when you come out of the 8A program then you basically start all over again. But it's okay. We do--we are engineers. We do municipal work and we do federal work so for about the past ten years with the economy being the way it is our municipal work has kept us afloat. But municipal work is not as large as federal work so we got down to about fifty people. But the economy is turning around and I do see light at the end of the tunnel and we're growing. For the past year we, I think last year we had gotten down to about fifty people. We're up to ninety full time people.
Speaker 1: Okay. In what cities are you in like --?
Speaker 2: We're in Burlington, Massachusetts, Baltimore, Maryland, Beltsville, Maryland, Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], Detroit, Michigan, Knoxville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think I said Washington, D.C., I think I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The not-for-profit work is in South Africa?
Speaker 2: The not-for-profit--no. The not-for-profit is anywhere. The not-for-profit, PEER Global is based in Washington, D.C. Most of the work--money that we've gotten cause what we do is we raise money. The money that we've gotten, we we've given most of the money to work that PEER Africa is doing. But we did get $50,000 to Haiti right after the earthquake and bought tents, tents that you can stand up in, not pup tents. We did about $15,000 in medicine and the rest in tents. The tents got over there but once they landed we couldn't find them. Now you figure that out. You do know about the medicine. The medicine cause we put the money in the bank here for the medicine and the people did use it to buy medicine and everything. But we bought the tents. We had them shipped down and some kind of way between the boat docketing and opening the container so they say, that there were no tents in the container. Now we now that's a lie but I mean that's Haiti. That's, you know and it was so chaotic during that time that we just hoped that somebody was able to use them and that they didn't sell them again.
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you what PEER stood for. Is that--?
Speaker 2: It doesn't stand for anything but I tell everybody the first six months that I started the company that was the first and last time that I had time to be creative cause I didn't have any, didn't have much to do. So PEER of course means people. Your peer group so being a black female owned engineering company means I'm equal to all of these other engineering companies around here. But it also happens to have the letters of the work that we do which is pollution, energy, environment and resources. So it does not mean that, it is registered as PEER, but it has a double meaning.
Story_ID: 21784
Speaker 1: So tell me now you, when you look back at everything you've done at this point again is there any major thing that you would do differently or if you had to do it again or--?
Speaker 2: I would stick to my knitting. Every time we've tried to do something outside of what it is we do like at one point we started a construction company you know because we have to--we hire people who remove asbestos. We do the identification and everything but we hire people who actually do the construction and removal. We actually hire people that do the remediation. We say what the problem is and identify how to clean it up and everything but we hire other people who know what they're doing to actually do that. So we decided that we would form a construction company. Well that was a bad mistake so we lost a lot of money there and rebuilt. And then also because the kind of work my people do they have to have physicals every year. I call them occupational physicals. So we said why don't we just--there are a lot of other people that have to have them also so why don't we start an occupational medicine business? So we did that and our doctor then decided to start his own business and took all of my (laughter)--so that was again money that I lost. But every time we just do environmental engineering, we're okay. And South Africa is a stretch and I wish we could have done it differently but I don't know how we could have done it differently. What we needed was money and I don't know how we would have found the money. PEER Consultants financed PEER Africa and PEER Consultants is, we're suffering. We're still suffering because like I said we have about 5 million dollars invested in PEER Africa and that debt is on my books. It's down now because they paid but still you know banks have certain things that they want to look at to determine whether or not they're going to give you a line of credit and so we still you know we had a line of credit and then the bank we had they decided they didn't want to deal with federal contractors anymore and we lost them. Then we got another one and then this one, you know so for about the past five, seven years now, we've been doing what they call asset based lending. And so instead of paying 8 percent interest or 9 percent interest on money, I'm paying 16 percent on money. Now I mean how much sense does that make, you know? But oh, you're risky so you can pay 16 percent money. But once I become stable then I can pay 8 percent money and Wells Fargo told us a long time ago well when you look a little better and everything then we're going to take you over to the Wachovia, the bank inside of our house. But of course you know we've been paying them 150, 180 thousand dollars a year in fees, now what do they have impetus to take us over on the other side where they're only going to get 70 thousand dollars a year in fees? Since--I'm really pissed with them right now. Upset, I can't say that on the movie. I'm upset with them because I told them not too long ago I said had it not been for me and people like me, you'd be in the same shape I'm in. You got a bailout, you got a bailout of my money so that you could keep on holding me under your thumb and I really resent it. And I, I--you need to do something because I helped you out. You need to do something. And said, oh well that, you know you they have no intention. So one of the things I'm looking for now is to see again it's running a business. Who do I know in all these things that I'm doing where somebody can yank their chain to say you got bailed out. You need to have some consciousness along the way and do something, not only PEER, but for some of these other companies that look like me that you have on this side of the house when you need to pull them over to the other. You need--I mean that's what Occupy Wall Street is all about. It's what it's all about. And you hear this mess that all of these Republicans and all are talking about oh, we got to help small businesses. Yeah, we need banks. We pay--I would never ever not pay benefits to my employees. How could I hire people with families and not give them health insurance? What kind of business would I have. They're not going to work for me. And I believe that I should be able to give them the best health insurance possible. You give me decent contracts, I take care of my employees. You're not doing me any favors by saying, oh you don't have to give your people health insurance. How much sense does that make? I'm a professional. Oh, you don't have to give your people 401(k)s. How--small businesses operate like big businesses. We want to do the best for our employees. Best thing you can do for me, get out of my face about healthcare, get out of my face about benefits and 401(k). It's make it possible for us to get treated fairly at the banks. We can handle everything else. But they don't talk about that. Oh, we're helping small businesses. How? So that's my, that's the other thing as a small business we deal with. Yeah, we have all of this wonderful, technical training but the secret is staying in business. And you got to learn how to run a business. We can be smart, smart, smart but the other key is you either go to a university or a research institution and let them take care of that. Or if you're going to be an entrepreneur then you've got to be able to write proposals, you've got to be able to do good work but you've also got to figure out how to maintain your business, how to stay in business and how to take care of your employees. I think that's the biggest challenge that most of us have is that business side.
Story_ID: 21785
Speaker 1: Well we were just talking about the, I mean your children were coming up you know having to do all this plus raise your children you know.  So tell us something about your family, your family life and your children are grown now?
Speaker 2: My children are grown.  I'm a grandmother. I have eight grandchildren and growing up with the kids--I got divorced relatively speaking, early.  My kids were still in elementary school so I basically raised the kids by myself.  And they'll basically tell you that they were raised in the office.  I mean they just--PEER was just a part of their life.  But at that point I mean business was good, contracts were going well and so I was able to you know meet the financial needs of the company and raise the kids and get them up and out.  But they lived with a mamma who was rarely around.  And my neighbors knew that a lot of times I was not at home but I just raised my children and the piano teacher used to say all the time, she was always amazed how she could come to my house every week and have an hour lesson with each of the kids and it as nobody in my house but my children.  She was always amazed.  And I said no, that's the way I raised them.  I had to, you know.  I guess in a way I was a heavy.  They tell me now you weren't a heavy, you were a pushover.  You thought you were so much, you weren't anything is what they tell me now.  But I raised them to be by themselves and to learn how to take care of themselves.  I remember one time we had a terrible wind here in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia], that's when I lived in northwest in a neighborhood with a lot of trees and all the trees were uprooted and we were without power for about three days and my kids were there.  And I was someplace and I couldn't get home.  So one of the neighbors called, she said she was thinking oh who do I need to take care of on the street to figure out what's going on cause we didn't have any power, no nothing.  So she called, she--you know our phones were working.  How are you all doing?  Oh, we're fine.  Can I speak to your mother?  Oh, she can't come to the phone right now so and so and so.  And she said, she said look this is Ms. Watkins.  I have to know cause we're out of power.  We don't know when power is coming on.  Is your mother there?  Have you all eaten?  What's going on?  No, mamma's out of town and she can't get in.  She said okay.  She says I'm going to try to maneuver getting around these fallen wires and lines and I'm going to bring you all something to eat and she kind of just looked at them for about three days cause I couldn't get home and they were without power.  But neighbors kind of know you know and everybody knew I traveled but they knew the way I ran my household too and the kids knew.  So we just made it somehow together but a lot of times I was not at home cause I had to do a lot of traveling with the job.  But they knew everybody at the company.  They hung out at the company so raising them, I would get off the plane.  I had three boys.  I get off the plane going to Boy Scout overnights, camp outs, cook outs.  I didn't miss--I tried not to miss anything with the kids.  I did the PTA, boy scouts, hand bells, we played bells together in the hand bell choir church.  So I tried to make sure that I did everything but it was constant.  But like I said I'm really kind of happy that they're grown now because we've had a couple of really bad economic slumps and I just don't know if I would have had the capacity to deal with that and to deal with them, but you get used to it and I learned how to do it.  But I look at people with kids now and I just say umm, I don't think I want to do that again.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: I have three boys, Freddy is the oldest.  He's a pilot.  He went to Daniel Webster in Nashville, New Hampshire.  Always, since he was two years old wanted to fly but didn't necessarily want to do military but he always wanted to fly.  So he is a major with the DC Air Guard, flies fighters, F-16.  And he works for, he's a heavy 767, 757 pilot with Continental.  So that's what he does and he's been to Afghanistan and Iraq.  So--and that worried me each time he went but that's part of serving in the Air Guard.  Ernest is, my middle son is a fill in video person who wants to make movies.  So he's starving to death, having a ball in New York and to hold life and limb together, he's a master barber.  So he has a chair in one of the salons there in the Bronx and so that's how he affords to do all of his other stuff and getting his name out there for his movies and everything.  And David, the youngest is an elementary school teacher in Tampa, Florida.  And you know we have these extended families and everything else so Freddy, the oldest boy, his wife had a son when they got married and then they had two children so that's three.  And then Ernest, Ernest is--the mother of his child, she had a daughter, then she had Joshua.  And then she went and adopted another child so that's three, so that's six.  And then the mother of David's child, Elijah, Elijah is eleven and last year his mamma decided that she was going to have another baby so that is, not by my son, another man so that's two.  So that's how I got my eight.  So four of them, one, two--four of them are mine and the other four are part of the extended family.  But you can't make distinctions in children.  So they all call me grandmamma and everything and you know you have to, you can't do that.  So that's how I got eight and so that's what my children do.
Story_ID: 21786
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: She did the best she could with what she had.  She helped to improve our environment and make a better way for mankind.
Story_ID: 21787
Speaker 1: Well that's me, Lilia Abron in Washington, D.C. at my other house up in Northwest.  And I was getting ready to go I think to South Africa and had, somebody had brought me this African outfit which I had one and asked me to try it on and would I be interested in wearing that and I said yeah.  So that's what that is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's another dress that they bought me to wear when I went to South Africa not knowing that South Africans don't necessarily dress like that and there I am, and another outfit just getting ready to go to South Africa for the first time in 1994.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: That's what we need the person, year, the occasion.  Okay.
Speaker 1: That's, I think maybe I was a year old, maybe not quite a year.  That's me, Lilia Abron in Memphis, Tennessee at 499 Vance Avenue, Apartment 4D with my favorite fish.  They tell me--that's a fish.  They tell me I couldn't, I wouldn't go anywhere without that fish.
Speaker 2: This is 1940--?
Speaker 1: That's '46 [1946].  I was born in '45 [1945], March of '45 [1945] so I think that's '46 [1946].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My debutant ball, 1962, senior in high school in Memphis, Tennessee and that's my daddy who introduced me to society.  And the Kappas, Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity does the debutant ball in Memphis, Tennessee and my daddy is a Kappa so I was the last debutant to be introduced because I was the, the daughter of a Kappa.
Speaker 2: And his, your daddy's name?
Speaker 1: Ernest Abron.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Those are my children.  Oh my goodness!  How old?  Hmm, Freddy, the oldest at the top, Ernest in the middle and David.  And I would say that Freddy was about 14 or 15 at the time, goodness.  And he was born in '74 [1974] so maybe that was '84 [1984], about '92 [1992], something like that, 1992.  Oh my goodness that was even before.  That's us Easter Sunday, let's see David was born in 1980 so that picture was in 1982 cause he was two years old.  So the young man in the plaid jacket--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Young man in the plaid jacket is Freddy, the oldest boy.  David's the youngest, he's two in that picture and Ernest is in the, is standing in front of his daddy and then his daddy, Frederick Robinson and then that's me, the mamma, Lilia Abron.  And that's Lilia Abron, I got to change the frame on that.  That's Lilia Abron graduating from high--from kindergarten.  I was five years old so that must be 1950 cause I was born in '45 [1945].  Okay, that's in '49 [1949], there is a picture that's a prom, Foot Holm Kindergarten and Lilia is over on the left with the person who's head is turned cause I'm being usual Lilia, talking while everybody else is paying attention.  And one of the questions you asked was Mr. Withers took that photograph, E.W., Ernest Withers.  Well this is Earl Williams or maybe that wasn't.  That's Mr. Williams in Memphis, Tennessee.  That is and let me find Lilia.  Oh, if you see the young man with the sombrero up at the top, come right down in front of him with the lady with the tutu with the belly showing, that's me.  And that's probably about 1949 as well.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: That's a whole kindergarten class with the summer you know you do--they do concerts every year.  That's the summer concert, the spring concert.  Oh, again it's Williams again, photo by Mr. Williams.  That is, let me see.  I was a girl scout on the front row.  If you go all the way over on the right in the jumper with the blouse with the ribbon in the hair, that's me and '45 [1945], that's probably 1955, something like that.  And that's my family, my mamma and daddy.  My daddy, Ernest Abron, my mother Bernice Wise Abron, sitting next, I'm sitting next to my mother in the taffeta black and white jumper and that's my sister Hazel to my right.  Hazel Abron Smith.  In front of my mother sitting on the floor is Erness Abron Hill, my sister and next to her is my other sister, youngest sister, Carolyn Abron McCadden.  And I would say that that photo was probably taken maybe I was 10, 11 so '55 [1955], about 1955.  Something like that.  Okay, that picture was taken for my mother's seventieth birthday and we presented that picture to her for her birthday present.  I would say that I was about 45, 50 on that picture.  So that was taken about 1990, 1987, something like that.
Speaker 2: Did you name them?
Speaker 1: Okay.  In the green dress sitting in the chair to my right is my sister Erness Abron Hill.  I'm in the pink dress and then to my left is my oldest sister Hazel Abron Smith and sitting next to Hazel is my youngest sister, Carolyn Abron McCadden.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Anything else you want to put on here?  And you're going to send us some others, right?
Speaker 1: I'll send you some.  I even have one with me and Gus Hawkins.  You'll get a kick out of that.
Speaker 2: Oh (unclear).
Speaker 1: Tell us what we're looking at here.
Speaker 2: That's my grandmother's mother's sister sitting in the dress and those--that's her family all boys and one little girl.  And the little girl is to the left of my great-great aunt with a hat on her head.  And those are Blues.  Their last name is Blue.  I think everybody on there is dead now.  And the way they got that name huh, they had another name and I'll have to remember.  I'll send in to you.  But the way they got that name of Blue was the man sitting down with the crooked bow tie, he worked for a white man who was named Blue.  And he was referred to as Blue's nigger.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So that's how they got the name of Blue so they're all Blues.  She was a Roselle if you remember I told you they were Roselles.  But they carried the name of Blue cause he was Blue's nigger so that's how that came about.  But I can send you the rest of that.  That's probably at the turn of the century.  You can look at the way they're dressed.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's my mom's side of the family.  Now this is my dad's picture.  Okay.  Now these are the Abrons that I was telling you about that had to be moved as a family.  My daddy's daddy, he was 16 on that picture so they told me.  He's standing in the middle at the top and daddy has written on it, daddy.  That's his daddy.  His granddaddy is the man sitting with the bow tie holding the bible.  The lady is his grandmamma holding the baby.  That's Uncle Pell, that's a little boy but they wore dresses then when they were little.  And then those are my, all of his brothers and one girl, Aunt Inell.  Aunt Inell is still living but that's my daddy's family.  And the thing that's so interesting, the young man to the left of my great-granddaddy's head that they say you have baby--my youngest son looks just like that.  You--everybody that looks at that picture they say, where was David that they were dressed up in old clothes to take the picture?  So I don't know when do you--is that the turn of the century--
Speaker 1: Sure looks like it.
Speaker 2: --at the way they're dressed?  But that's my daddy's daddy when he was sixteen and I would say that my daddy if he were still living would probably be about eighty.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So that's their family picture.  And this is just another one when my boys were little.  And so that's me in the white dress, Freddy Robinson, Ernest Robinson the top of Freddy and then David Robinson.  And David was probably one on that picture or maybe two.  No, he was one.  No, maybe three.  He's probably three with that Easter outfit on and then that's the other boys.  I'm not quite sure when it was but that's the other picture so you can see the progression of the boys.  And there is one picture over there-- VIDEOGRAPHER:  Larry?
Speaker 1: Larry?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: --with the kids almost grown.
Speaker 2: It's a--
Speaker 1: You see one--uh-uh.
Speaker 2: Oh, with--this one?
Speaker 1: That one.  Is that it?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And it needs to be wiped off.
Speaker 2: So that's your father's father at age 16?  Your daddy was born when (unclear)?
Speaker 1: We said about '19 [1919].
Speaker 2: 1920?
Speaker 1: About 1919, 1920.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that--
Speaker 1: And I know he said daddy was 16 on that picture that's why I remember him saying daddy was 16.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this about 1890s or something, yeah.  Wow.  Okay tell us--
Speaker 1: Okay, this I think my children--Freddy was, had just earned his wings so he's the fellow with the military suit on.  That's in Columbus, Mississippi, '95 [1995].  That was about 1990, about 2000 maybe something like that he had just earned his wings.  And next to him to his right is my middle son Ernest.  Ernest Abron Robinson and then sitting down is my youngest son David Randolph Robinson and myself so that's the boys grown.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay?
Speaker 2: Nice looking family there.
