Story_ID: 31155
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today for the History Makers Archive.  Our Videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Certainly.  My name is Wanda, W-A-N-D-A, Murry, M-U-R-R-Y, Austin, A-U-S-T-I-N, and my maiden name is Pompey, P as in Peter, O-M as in Mary, P as in Peter, E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind your maiden name?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Thought there may be a story.  I hadn't heard that name before.  Okay now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born September 8th, 1954 in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your present title?
Speaker 2: My present title is Chief Executive Officer and President of the Aerospace Corporation.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is--now that's a tough question.  Today is April 25th, 2011.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're sitting in El Segundo, California in the headquarters building of the Aerospace Corporation.
Story_ID: 31156
Speaker 1: Okay now, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They're kind of like a warm up.  The first one is ma'am; do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: All.  Probably sweet potato pie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's great, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Teal blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall on the East Coast.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation, what's that?  (Laughs).  I enjoy lots of places, I enjoy Hawaii, I enjoy north, really the East Coast, going back to New York [New York] which is where I grew up.  I enjoy spending time there.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite, favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Continued success, which is a focus that we have right now on the space mission area is trying to make sure that we're successful in putting assets in orbit.  So you know I'm, you know always wishing people continued success because they work very hard, and it's hard fought.
Story_ID: 31157
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gone ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is Helen McCallum, M-C-C-A-L-L-U-M, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S, Pompey, P-O-M-P-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So McCallum is her maiden name, Lewis was her first husband and Pompey was my father.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born December 4, 1927, and she was born in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you know where in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: I'd have to look up the city for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how much do you know about your mother's ancestors on that side?  How, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can tell you about my mother's mother, I knew her.  I did not know my mother's father, although I know--have met many of his family members.  And that's probably as far back as I can go.  I can tell you my mother's mother's mother's name, but that's about as far as I can go.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Well my mother, my grandmother's name was Leaner Rivers.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: L-E-A-N-E-R, Rivers, R-I-V-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And her [Rivers's] husband's name was Jefferson McCallum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is--do you know what they did for a living?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, my grandfather was a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you know what denomination?
Speaker 2: United Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And are there are any stories from South Carolina that have passed on in the family about what they [Austin's maternal grandparents, Leaner Rivers and Jefferson McCallum] were doing for a living or what, why the--
Speaker 1: Not really, not really about you know, how they survived or--they moved to Newark, New Jersey, which is where my mother [Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey] was raised.  But not a lot of stories about--before that time.
Speaker 2: Okay, well it's a usual path to go from South Carolina to New York City.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And most people that, you know go to Harlem know.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: But is there any particular story about why your family came, came up from South Carolina to New York?
Speaker 1: Nothing other than looking for opportunity.  My mother, my grandmother worked for the International Ladies' Garments Workers Union, so you know she did piecework for as long as I can remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you think that she was doing the same kind of thing in South Carolina?
Speaker 1: I don't know how old she was when she came up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I think for them it was the opportunity for work.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So your, your mother was born in South Carolina, but she was raised in--
Speaker 1: She was raised in Newark, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: Newark, New Jersey, okay, Newark.  Did she--what did she tell you about growing up in New York, in Newark?
Speaker 1: I think the traditional stories of a young girl, you know, dating and dancing and having a great time.  Although there were also tough times.  I mean one of the things I always learned from my grandmother was, you know when you hear a commotion, you know don't go running toward the commotion.  You go run in the other direction because you know, you don't want to be the innocent bystander that happens to get there just in time to get shot or cut or any of those kinds of things.  But it was always positive, fond memories.
Speaker 2: Okay now, now did your mother talk about what her aspirations were growing up?
Speaker 1: Her aspirations you know, continued to evolve throughout her life.  She ultimately became a registered nurse.  But she started off in nursing, went back to college, got an Associate Degree and continued in the nursing field.  Then went back to college and got her bachelor's degree, became an RN [Registered Nurse], and then went back to college and got her master's degree in public health--epidemiology.  She went back to college after her kids were grown.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right now, now she went--did she go to school in Newark or in--I mean in Brooklyn, or--
Speaker 1: She did her high school education in, in Newark.  She went to college in New York City, Bronx Community College and then City College [The City College of New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.  She got her master's [degree] from City College in New York?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 31158
Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His full name is Murry, M-U-R-R-Y, Pompey, P-O-M-P-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born August 9, 1924.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: Wysacky, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: W-Y-S-A-C-K-Y.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Surprising not very far.  He had nine sisters and brothers.  I never met my grandfather.  I met all of my, all of his sisters and brothers and most of them also moved to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay so did your, did your father move to New York as a, as a--
Speaker 2: Sixteen, fifteen.
Speaker 1: Fifteen, fifteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, round in there, I know before he finished school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did he do in New York?
Speaker 2: He became a barber and had his own business.
Speaker 1: What was the name of his barbershop?
Speaker 2: It wasn't his name.  It was, it'll take me a minute.  We'll come back to it, but his father's name was Johnny Pompey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was some--everybody in the neighborhood, you know, called him a different name.  I'm trying to think what it was.  But that was the name of the shop.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he had a shop in--
Speaker 2: New York City in the Bronx.
Speaker 1: In Bronx, okay.
Speaker 2: Jimmy's Barbershop.
Speaker 1: Okay so people call him Jimmy.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  Used to say, "You Mr. Jimmy's daughter?"  Yeah, that was the time when neighborhoods took care of kids.  And you know if somebody down the street saw you doing something, you knew you were, you were a goner because they were going to go right back and tell your parents.  "I saw your daughter down there.  I don't know what she was doing, but--"
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us, now did your father have any aspirations other than being a barber or did he--was that pretty much what he wanted to do?
Speaker 2: For him, I think it was he wanted to get away from the south and he needed a way to support himself and then ultimately his family.  He never talked about being anything other than a barber.  He was fortunate that he had his own business, he had two other barbers working for him.  It was a tough neighborhood, so it wasn't always easy.  He was robbed and broken into and all those kinds of things over time.  But that was his business, it's something he did with pride.  He did it very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's a good living then.
Story_ID: 31159
Speaker 1: But now is there a story about how your parents [Murry and Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey] met?
Speaker 2: What I remember about how my parents met was the fact that my father was one of the groomsmen in my mother's first wedding.  So they all grew up together, they all knew each other.  And they all hung out together.
Speaker 1: Okay so he knew her from the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's got lots of old photos of them going to parties and dances or house parties, or celebrations, family get-togethers, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell us about your mother's first marriage.  Now did she have children by the first marriage?
Speaker 2: My older sister by her ex-husband.
Speaker 1: Okay and how long did they stayed married?
Speaker 2: Not long, not long.  My oldest sister was probably about four when they broke up.
Speaker 1: So your parents get married right--I mean soon thereafter?
Speaker 2: Soon thereafter.
Story_ID: 31160
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay so and so you, you grew up in Bronx [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I grew up in the Bronx, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And what was--do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well probably one of the earliest childhood memories was my sister being born.  I remember my dad taking me in the car and my oldest sister to sit outside the hospital.  We could see my mother in the window when my sister was born and she's six years older than I am.  Other than that, the earliest memories is just being in the shop with my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay in the barbershop?
Speaker 2: We lived on the sixth floor of the building and the barbershop was on the first floor.
Speaker 1: So you all--did you spend a lot of time in the barbershop?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  You know, filling talcum powder jars and sweeping up hair and you know, things that you did to help out.  More like dad keeping you busy so that you could stay out of his hair, but wiping down the shelves and refilling the soda machine.  Those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now who all were there?  You have like two sisters and--
Speaker 2: There's three of us.
Speaker 1: Okay and, and your mother and father?
Speaker 2: And my mother and father.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now can you describe the neighborhood for us and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I grew up in the projects.  So I mean you're surrounded by, as my husband [Wade Austin] calls it, sprawling cement.  You know, tall buildings, twenty, thirty story buildings, apartments.  Nobody had a lot of money, but you had the neighborhood stores.  You had families living together.  I mean, you knew everybody on the block.  Everybody knew everybody in the neighborhood.  The church was four blocks away, school was across the street.  Pretty close knit neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of the projects?
Speaker 2: Claremont Projects [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: You're digging up cobwebs here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was now--there are--images of the projects--in a lot of people's minds today is like a horrible place and gangs ruling.  But what was the project like when you were growing up?  I know they all didn't start off the way they are now.
Speaker 2: Well when the projects first were built, it was great, because I lived in a, where I first lived was in a tenement building, you know, the six story building with the barbershop on the first floor.  And it was dilapidated, it was not well maintained.  Really, it was home but it left a lot to be desired.  So when the projects were built, this was the great, you know shift for nice residential units for people to live in.  So we had a three bedroom apartment.  Had room for a washing machine and it was, you know, intended to be an improvement.  But over time, it then became dilapidated and not well maintained and frequently the elevators didn't work, and frequently the water didn't work.  Streets weren't cleaned, it was trash in what should have been playgrounds.  So over time it, you know degenerated into something that is I think synonymous with what you think of when you think of projects.
Speaker 1: So did you basically see that kind of transition when you were growing up, or did it start making a transition from good to bad?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it made the transition from good to bad in the short time, from the time we moved across the street into them, to the time that I left.  You know, with graffiti and people just not having pride where they lived and sufficient pride to take care of it.
Story_ID: 31161
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you didn't really answer this question the way I asked it, so I'll ask it again.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: You might be able to--hope--Well, the question was what were some of the sights and sounds and smells when growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the smell of the pizza joint, you know down the street.  That was a good smell.  There's also alcohol and urine that would be in the hallways or in the elevators.  Always activities going on, always sound of kids outside.  The Third Avenue El [Interborough Rapid Transit Third Avenue Line, New York, New York] went right outside our building, so you know twenty four hours a day you could hear the trains coming and going.  Public transportation is what you lived by.  So the trains and buses, twenty four hours a day going by.  Usually you know, people being happy, having fun, kids outside playing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now when you were little, what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: Books, books.  I--my mom [Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey] worked really hard to get us involved in different activities, to basically get us off the block.  Because there were a lot of kids I grew up with, you know, that square block was all that they knew, and that's as far as they ever went.  Here you are in a, you know vibrant city like New York City [New York] and they'd never been on a train to go downtown to do anything.  So we were involved in Girl Scouting, involved in the church, took bus outings to different places, out to [Brighton] Beach or to Coney Island or downtown to see a show or to go to a restaurant.  Ultimately, to take music lessons.  So you know there was always lots of activity, but it was always structured activity.  It was very rare that I was just outside playing.  You know it was--that was something that our parents, you know just felt with--you know you need to make good use of your time.  And the one thing you had to do was you had to do well in school.  Anything less than that was just not acceptable.  So, you know, the first question was have, you know, have you done your homework, and what else are you supposed to do, and then have you done your chores, and then you know if there was any time left over, then you can do other things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you got a chance to, to you said see a lot of things outside of the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the neighborhood, was there a name for it?
Speaker 2: Claremont Village [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay this was the name of the neighborhood was basically the name of the projects?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 169th Street and Washington Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Project is still there today.
Speaker 1: Are people still living in them today?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now so you liked books, liked to read.
Speaker 2: Liked to read.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were your favorite books?
Speaker 2: Just about anything.  Most of the, you know, sort of the sequence of stories that young girls read.  Sort of--I don't want to say escapism, but it was always the lighthearted, happy ending, maybe the mystery story.  I'm trying to think of some of the characters back then.  But, you know, they were the small paper weight, paperback books that the kids read back then.
Speaker 1: Those (unclear) juvenile readers and that--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 31162
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well I started at the neighborhood school and my mother [Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey] was fortunate enough to get me into a school off of Fordham Road, so it meant taking a bus to school.  Still in the Bronx, but still a pretty good distance away.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the one you started at, first?
Speaker 2: It would have been IS, it would have been PS 132 [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And then the name of the one you transferred to?
Speaker 2: That would have been PS 46.
Speaker 1: And it was a--like a magnet school or something?
Speaker 2: No, it was a school in the white neighborhood, a Jewish neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I took a school bus to get to it.  Bussed kids out of our neighborhood to that school.
Speaker 1: Okay so this was like beginning of bussing in New York?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: This would be like 1961?
Speaker 2: That's just about exactly right, mm-hmm, '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay so was there--how did, how did you perceive the difference then, as a, as a kid going to another school?
Speaker 2: Well as I said, my parents put high value on education, and the thought was you'll get a better education going to this school.  And it was isolated in the sense that you went from an all black neighborhood, all black neighborhood school to predominantly a white school.  I mean there, maybe there was one or two other black kids.  It was not a lot of other black faces in this school for the entire time that I was there.  A lot of the kids made efforts to make friends.  I mean kids are kids.  They just see another kid to play with.  There was obviously tension with a lot of the adults, you know, is this the right thing or do I want my kid playing with you, or those kinds of things.  Some people worked hard, bent over backwards to make it, make it work.  A lot of the teachers were obviously very invested in the success of the program and the success of the students.  You saw that.  Certain teachers, you know left an impression of someone who was really, if you will, in your corner to help you be successful.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now were you--was your social life primarily in the neighborhood or in the school or both or what?
Speaker 2: Because the school was so far, you really could not participate--elementary school, there wasn't much after school activity.  But maybe on the weekends, you know kids would get together and do things.  And so your opportunity to do that was pretty limited.  But most of our social activity was focused in the neighborhood, mm-hmm.  Again, church activities, Girl Scouting, we met at the church [Trinity United Methodist Church], active in the choir, you're doing those sorts of things within the neighborhood.
Story_ID: 31163
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Trinity United Methodist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I was wondering if you all stayed United Methodist, but that's okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So was church a--well, you said, it was a big part of growing up.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.  It was a place where you met kids of the same values.  You know most of the parents there were focused on them keeping track of their kids, they were watching what they were doing and who they were with and where they were going.  They organized trips, you know we'd get on the bus as a church and go out for picnics or go to Connecticut, Danbury Fair [Danbury, Connecticut, the last fair was held in 1981], or you know there were certain things that were sort of annual rituals that were organized through the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now did you--were you in the choir or anything?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah.  So you know a lot of friendships there.  People that I'm still in touch with today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right now Girl Scouts, did you get a chance to go to any of the big statewide girl scout camps?
Speaker 2: Sold enough cookies to win a trip to Florida.  And was very involved in national Girl Scouting 'cause the Girl Scout Headquarters was downtown on 46th Street across from the UN [United Nations] Building [New York, New York].  And so you know, you got to see the organization from a different perspective.  It's not just someplace you go and work on your badges, it's now--it's okay what are we doing as a Girl Scouting organization?  What do we need to change?  What's the future, what new badges need to be developed?  Got to meet Mrs. Irving Berlin [Ellin Mackay, wife of Irving Berlin, American composer], who was very involved with Girl Scouting at that time.  So yeah, it was I think an extension of the scouting experience, but also a door that showed, you know that there were lots of other dimensions to being involved in organizations.
Story_ID: 31164
Speaker 1: Okay.  At a predominantly Jewish school, did you--had you ever thought about--because obviously in a black neighborhood in those days you would think black people and white people.  But had you thought about the different ethnicities of white people in terms of who was Jewish and who was Italian, who was--
Speaker 2: It was all Jewish, you know.  The school closed for Jewish holidays.  You know you knew all the Jewish holidays and the Dreidel Song.  I mean that was just, that was the predominant majority group.  And you know, you knew where the deli was and--I mean it was just you acclimated to the environment that you were in.  And you know, you ate matzos at Passover and I mean that, that was sort of another dimension to life.
Speaker 1: So did you feel like you were, you added a new dimension to what you, your cultural knowledge I guess by being there?
Speaker 2: I did.  I mean that was, that was the resultant of that.  That you're very comfortable in different culture, you understand it and you get to see what their value system was.  You get to see, you know what they emphasized in life.  So it was a great learning experience.  But it was not something that my friends at church [Trinity United Methodist Church, New York, New York] could relate to because they weren't having that experience.  And so you might reference something that was going at school with respect to the cultural difference, but it didn't really connect for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything surprising about Jewish culture that you found out?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say surprising, it was just different.  But there was a clear, strong sense of family.  And there was a clear value of education.  And you know the kids knew that they had to do well in school.  Whereas a lot of kids in my home neighborhood you know, if they went to school fine, if they didn't go to school, fine.  People didn't value it the same way.
Story_ID: 31165
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so now, now what were you primarily interested in at school in terms of subject matter?
Speaker 2: I pretty quickly, certainly by high school, was interested in math.  Really I would say in junior high school was when it clicked for me.  I had a junior high school teacher [Gary Cohen] who recognized that I had an ability in mathematics and he gave me extra homework, extra assignments.  He let me mark papers, he'd give me extra puzzles, he'd give me extra math puzzle books to read.  And he was just encouraging.  And I remember one day him saying to me, "You can do anything that anybody else in here can do, and don't forget it."  You know it was just that vote of confidence to say, you know don't be discouraged.  Don't, don't set your sights anything lower than you know, the highest heights here because you can do it.  I was in what was called then a special program, so I did junior high school in two years.  Never did the eighth grade, seventh and ninth grade, and then went to high school.
Story_ID: 31166
Speaker 1: Okay so as you said you were, you were in a special program that allowed you to skip a couple of--
Speaker 2: Skip one grade, skip the eighth grade it was--out of this school in the Jewish neighborhood you were tested and that was the decision about you know, sort of where you went to high--junior high school and what program you were put in.  So I tested well in math and English, and so they talked to my parents [Murry and Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey] about being in this special program, which would allow me to do my three years of junior high school in two years.  So I did seventh grade and I did ninth grade.  And it was a class of students.  So we were together for those two years.  You didn't, you know change any students, you didn't--you had all of your classes with that group of about twenty-five people for two years.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Hoffman, Paul Hoffman Junior High School [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay Paul Hoffman, H-O-F-F-M-A-N?
Speaker 2: M-A-N, correct.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Also in another white neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, was this a Jewish white neighborhood as well?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if you know anything about New York, you know there's a Glen Concourse, there's Fordham Road and the elementary school was at one end of Fordham Road, junior high school was the other end.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now so when you started high school--we have a note here that you were thirteen when you started high school, or was it that young?
Speaker 2: Well I graduated high school--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah you would have started high school (unclear).
Speaker 2: --before I was sixteen, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be thirteen, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's why I'm twenty-nine now.
Speaker 1: (Laughs).  Right.  So you started high school in 1967, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Okay, I graduated from high school in '71 [1971], after--
Speaker 1: Yeah that sounds about right.
Speaker 2: So that sounds about right, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Right, okay now you went to Bronx High School of Science [New York, New York].  Now what is, is that a special high school?
Speaker 2: So that was a special high school.  So you're on the special program in getting in high school, accelerated program.  But very solid in math and science.  Then, in New York City they have two schools which are competitive across the entire city.  You take an exam.  But it was public and it was free.  If you got in, you got to go.  So I took the exam and got to go to Bronx Science.
Speaker 1: Okay now we--I read a story when I was reading this material--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: About an argument you had with a literature teacher.
Speaker 2: I don't know how you knew that, but okay, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and well I don't know, somebody in the office is really sharp and they put it in the folder so I read it.  It was about the--some literary story where she told you your interpretation was wrong?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But it's a matter of opinion, so--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So go on and tell us--so tell us what happened.
Speaker 2: Well it was a English Literature class.  And I remember the teacher, I mean I can see her as clearly as I can see you.  And she had a, a rather large sense of self, you know.  She knew everything, you know nothing was kind of the message I got.  I don't know--I don't know if all the students had that sense.  But I certainly had that sense from her.  And so it was a book that we'd read and she said well what do you think that means?  And I told her what I thought it meant.  She says, oh no that, you know that's wrong.  You know obviously this foreshadows this, and you know the trees mean life and you know the water means this, and you know and I looked at her and I said, how do you know?  You know, that didn't go over so well.  But it was a defining moment in my life because it caused me to say you know, math is not easy for me.  But I know that when I you know study hard and I work the problem and I can show my work, that without any question, people will say okay you got that right.  It's not open for debate.  So either I earned it or I didn't. And it is what caused me to pursue mathematics in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So had you considered pursuing some other--
Speaker 2: I didn't know at that point.  I took French and I enjoyed that.  I, you know I was obviously you know pretty well read because as I said, I enjoyed reading.  But that experience taught me something, or did something to me on the inside to say, you know, I need to be on firm ground.  So when I say I know something, that no kidding, I know it.
Speaker 1: So this is an advanced literature class I imagine by the kind of discussion going on
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 31167
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so Bronx High School of Science [New York, New York].  Now did, did everybody there is you know, is smart.  They can do math and hard science and--
Speaker 2: They had beautiful labs.  You know you had biology labs, chemistry--like I'd never in a school before.  I mean so the resources were there.  They were talking about computers before anybody you know, else had ever brought up the idea of computers.  And you're surrounded by other students that are just as capable as you are.  You know so it isn't a case like you know, you're unique, you stand out.  Everybody there is, is capable of you know thinking through hard problems and working their way through it.  I think they have a history of having the largest number of Nobel Prize winners from a single school.  So you know for people who are from New York, or know of the school, if you say yeah I went to Bronx Science, you get the oh, you're one of those kind of response.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have any class clowns or anybody trying to distract, or--
Speaker 2: I didn't say that, I didn't say that.  (Laughs).  You always have students who are maybe not as focused, obviously have talent cause otherwise they wouldn't be there.  But just maybe not as focused as they should be in school.  So you know during lunch time, they were pinochle games and bid whist and spades and you know there were people who were cutting class and hanging out and all those kinds of things.  But for the most part, the students there were very serious about studying and what they wanted to do.
Speaker 1: It was the kind of high school where the expectation is most of them would go to college?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  The assumption is this is not, it's not a question of if you're going to go, it's just where you're going to go.  And I think most of the kids did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, so did you do well in Bronx--?
Speaker 2: I did reasonably well.  I thought I did--I would probably go back and find report cards that probably weren't straight A's, but for the most part, did very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you involved in high school activities, like the--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, All City Volleyball Team and did gymnastics and other sports and activities.  Granted you know, this is an hour away from home now.  So at the end of the night when you're leaving school at six or 6:30 [P.M.], I still had the commute.  Now the long walk first of all, to get to the train station, and then the commute.
Speaker 1: Now how long a commute?
Speaker 2: Probably you know, forty-five minutes to an hour.
Story_ID: 31168
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So now when you were in school, well the year you started, I guess the Civil Rights Movement was kind of tailing off.  Now when you were in, in I guess in middle school and grade school, Civil Rights activities were really heated up.  A lot of things were going on in the summer, Freedom Summer of '64 [1964] and the March on Washington and all that stuff.  Did your family pay attention to all of that?
Speaker 2: They did.  I remember Malcolm X died [1965], you know was killed.  And you know that was sort of a bell ringer for--well Martin Luther King [1968] as well and, and John Kennedy [1963].  You know, I was still in the neighborhood school when Kennedy died.  I hadn't started bus, being bused yet.  And I mean everybody was distraught, you know with what that would mean, what the implications of that were.  So yeah, people were very much aware, very much aware.
Speaker 1: Did your parents have like literature in the house about, you know, keep newspapers and--
Speaker 2: I still have them all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, they kept them and I still have them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now did the barbershop environment inform you about some things that were going on in life too?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I mean you know that was the interesting thing about the way that I grew up.  Is you, you had snaps, you know snippets of different worlds as you travel.  I mean cause the conversation inside the barbershop now is very, is very different.  I mean if you've seen the movie "Barbershop" you know I could just sit and laugh all the way through that because that was the way it was.  And you know you always people coming in selling stuff and you had people who were, you know, con artists and all kinds of things going on in the, in the neighborhood.  And so you had to learn you know which things, you know you could hear and, and not hear, or see and not see, and you know that was part of the survival training.  But yeah, crossed a lot of different worlds.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah I thought it would be a different world.  So you got a lot of different worlds at this time.  Now were you--
Speaker 2: But you had Dad and Mom who set some pretty strict boundaries too.  So as I say, there's a lot of times you might see something, but you were smart enough to you know, act like you didn't see it and keep on going, so--
Speaker 1: Okay is that the recipe for, for staying focused in that kind of situation where a lot of things are coming at you?
Speaker 2: I think the recipe is to recognize that there are all kinds of people in the world and you have to choose your own path.  You know, there's going to be a lot of options, lots of opportunities.  Some of those opportunities are opportunities that, you know the consequences are way too high.  So there were people, you know with drug overdose issues and problems.  Young women who were pregnant in the neighborhood.  All kinds of things that were you know within reach.  You just had to decide is that where you wanted to go.
Story_ID: 31169
Speaker 1: So now were you, were you thinking of yourself in those days primarily a mathematician or, or did you think of yourself as going into some aspect of science?
Speaker 2: I thought of myself as going to college.  I don't think mathematician per se.  But again because to me that was just normal.  It was sort of like well of course I can do those math problems, that's no big deal.  You know my mother [Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey] would take me to the grocery store and I could tell her to within five cents what the grocery bill would be.  Because it was just something, again that I had an affinity for.  Didn't seem strange to me, it's just one of those things where you say of course everybody can do that, right?  But I didn't think, I don't think it was formalized in my mind as being a mathematician 'til I was in college.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a favorite teacher in Bronx [High School of Science, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I had a--this black man who was a French teacher.  And that was, you know sort of a, a strange thing to me to see you know, this black gentleman speaking fluent French and you know insisting that we speak French fluently and correctly, and so he was a role model and a, and a sign of light if you will.  I had a math teacher in junior high school that I said was instrumental, Gary Cohen.  Just kind of as I said, whispered one day don't ever let anybody tell you that you can't do anything you want to do.  In college I had a math professor who was very instrumental.  He was one of those people who took time to notice how you're doing and took time to demonstrate that he cared that you be successful.  And if that meant, you know inviting you over to have cookies with him and his family on a Sunday afternoon, or stopping for conversation, those are the things that I think really made a difference.  And it was because of him that I went on to graduate school in mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as a--now in high school then, when you're on the verge of graduation, did you know where you wanted to go to college?
Speaker 2: That was an easy thing to figure out, Larry.  You filled out all the applications.  Not like the kids today, you didn't go on the college tour and check everything out.  It was you filled out the application and you hoped that you'd get an offer from a school that you could afford to go to.  You know I got an offer from a school that had an excellent math program in Pennsylvania [Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania].  And that was where I went because they offered a financial aid package that closed.
Story_ID: 31170
Speaker 1: Now this was Franklin and Marshall College, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay and where is it in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Off Route 30 in Pennsylvania Dutch Land.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's the heart of it, Lancaster.  All right now, well how did you like Franklin--Marshall?
Speaker 2: I had a great experience at F&M [Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania].  I had a great experience at F&M.  But you know, it was a college of about two thousand students.  There were twenty black students on campus my first year there, five of them were women.  So again, it was a experience that was culturally different for me.  But had an excellent reputation for the academic experience that you would have.
Speaker 1: Okay now was there a black student organization on campus?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: It was the Black Student Union.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you a member?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were all the twenty black students members?
Speaker 2: It was probably one or two that you know, said I'm not really black, so you guys go ahead.  (Laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now did they have a fraternity, sororities on campus or anything?
Speaker 2: They didn't have sororities back then because the school was just barely coed.  I think the first class of women graduated, I want to say 1973 and I graduated in '75 [1975], so there weren't a lot of women on campus.  There was no sororities.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so was it--so I guess you weren't tempted to, to do a lot of partying in college.
Speaker 2: I wasn't tempted to, there were a lot of parties going on, as there always are.  And there are some people that specialized in it, you know and then struggled academically.  But the school was pretty strict about, you know you flunk out, you flunk out. You got to pack your bags--go on academic probation for one semester, but then if you don't get straightened out, you were out.  There were--in the summers I usually stayed at F&M and worked.  One summer I worked with a program to attract young black high school students to go to college.  So it was to help them with their--become more proficient in their math and science.
Speaker 1: Kind of like an Upward Bound program?
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.  And so that was a great way to give back.  That was a great thing to, you know be there on campus with kids and try to be a mentor for them as well as to tutor them in some of the core subjects.
Speaker 1: Now was there a name for that program.  It wasn't Upward Bound?
Speaker 2: It was an Upward Bound Program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It was.  Some of them have different names, creative names.  That's good, okay.
Story_ID: 31171
Speaker 1: So in college now did you, did you come to the conclusion that you were going to go into science in college, or--
Speaker 2: In math.  I came to the conclusion I was going to major in math.  And again that was that experience in junior high--in high school with the literature teacher that sort of said now you know, I may have to work hard.  And I did, I struggled.  I mean I wasn't a straight A student at first in college.  But I knew that, you know in time I would get it.  And my professors would give me credit for what I'd done, for what I accomplished.  It wouldn't be a debate about whether I'd hit the mark or not.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so did you start off as a math major?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay.  And you said there was a, a math teacher that really encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I remember one day, you know I--math classes were always at 8:00 o'clock in the morning.  And one day I decided I'd sleep in.  And then I went to the coffee shop later and was sitting at a table with some friends and the math professor came over to me, behind me and tapped me on the shoulder and said, you weren't in my 8:00 o'clock class today.  And of course I was somewhat embarrassed, but said yeah, you're right.  He says don't ever let that happen again.  So you know it's sort of when you have somebody paying attention to you, saying you know, don't waste the talent you've got.  It made a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so now any other activities in college?  Did you get a chance to travel abroad or anything?
Speaker 2: I did.  I spent my junior year in England and studied in math, majoring in math again.  That was a great experience.  Got a chance to travel all across Europe and met lots of interesting people.  But again, all positive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there, was there a special program that, that--
Speaker 2: It's called the Junior Year Abroad Program.  So you flew over in September, you had about three weeks of sort of a cultural adjustment.  You know, they taught you about the laws and taught you about the governance for the country.  Then they did a sort of quick bus tour to take you to some of the major sites in the country as a group of students.  And then the students separated and all went to the different schools that they were assigned to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Franklin and Marshall, now they--here's a list of alumnus, of alumni of Franklin and Marshall.  Tell me do you know any of them?
Speaker 2: William Gray, William Gray.
Speaker 1: William Gray, the Pennsylvania Congressman.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay so William Gray is one.  (Unclear) Treat Williams went to Franklin and Marshall, did you know him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He's an actor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Anybody else but William Gray.  Well William Gray, so he was in class with you?
Speaker 2: No, he was ahead of me.
Speaker 1: Ahead of you.
Speaker 2: He was ahead of me.  He was on the Board by the time I--but clearly an outstanding alum.
Speaker 1: Okay let's see.  Well I don't know--the times here, I don't think you would know any other, Treat Williams.  He came out in '73 [1973].
Speaker 2: You know, so '73 [1973] was the year that I was gone.  But it could well be that we crossed paths.  But as I said, it doesn't ring a bell.
Speaker 1: So you primarily take math and science courses?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, absolutely, labs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were in, you were in high school, when they, when the Apollo moon landing took place.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In 1969.  Were you, did you follow that at the time closely?
Speaker 2: I didn't, you know.  A lot of people talk about that as being a defining moment in American history.  One of those things you'll remember forever and it, it didn't have that impact in my life.  But yeah that was very much in my lifetime.
Speaker 1: Okay I just wondered.  Okay, so you got your bachelor of science degree in 1975.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Is there anything we need to say about Franklin and Marshall before--
Speaker 2: Just it was a great liberal arts college.  Produced well-rounded individuals.  Focused on--it was small enough that you know you couldn't get lost in the numbers.  It has a fine tradition of providing a great education which continues today.
Story_ID: 31172
Speaker 1: Okay and now, now where did you--you went on to graduate school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Got a Master's degree.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And where did you decide to go?
Speaker 2: University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  And that was because the math professor and F&M [Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania] was just on sabbatical there.  And when I was debating about what to do, I did my teaching certificate and you know I had a wonderful experience and I thought I can do this for about six weeks before I will be stir crazy.  And he said to me well why don't you think about graduate school?  And honestly hadn't considered it.  Until he said that.
Speaker 1: Did you think you were, you were going to be a math teacher in public school?
Speaker 2: Thought I was going to be a math teacher in public school.  I mean, you know, my parents [Murry and Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey], you know were wonderful, very supportive.  But no kidding, you've got to get a job.  You know, let's be serious here.  You've got to figure out how you're going to support yourself and take care of yourselF&Move on.  So that was what I was focused on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So then your parents had like big--they had like big dreams for you, you know in terms of a lot of things.  But they, they didn't see graduate school as a step--I mean they saw college graduation as being the end of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean well for a family where no one had ever been to college, you know getting through college was a pretty big deal and so you know, there must be a pot of gold at the end of that rainbow.  But no kidding.  I mean I worked since I was sixteen.  Every summer, you know, you always worked and you saved some of what you made.  You contributed to the house with whatever you made.  And so it was always the expectation that you know when you graduate from college, you, you need to be self-supporting, be well on your way to being self-supporting.
Speaker 1: Okay we have a note here that at the University of Pittsburgh you discovered that you could use your interest in applied mathematics to address real world problems.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Well tell us what, what happened.
Speaker 2: Okay so being a person who was always working extra jobs, I was tutoring engineering students in mathematics.  They were struggling with math and you know, I took a job as a math tutor.  And so one day I went down to the Career Center to start to think about okay, when I get this master's in math what am I going to be able to do?  And lo and behold it turned out that those guys that I was tutoring in math would make more money when they graduated because they had a degree in engineering than I would with a degree in mathematics.  So it didn't take a rocket scientist to figure out that I needed to understand what this engineering stuff was all about.  And so I went over to the engineering school and met a professor, Professor Bowen.  And you know just talk to me about engineering.  What is this, what is--how does this work, what's going on?  And I really for the first time felt like I could really get excited about doing this.  This is you know, the thing I've been looking for.  And so he worked with me to develop a program that would allow me to really leverage the mathematics that I had to get involved in the engineering curriculum and graduate with a master's in engineering.  And so that is what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah you got two, two master's degrees, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--okay so 1977, now was it difficult to do the engineering at all?
Speaker 2: It was fascinating.  It was absolutely fascinating.  Because you had all manner of problems that people were working on and you know there was labs.  I mean it was, it was sort of the integration of a lot of bits and pieces that you had in life sort of coming together and creating something that was really phenomenal.  So I don't remember it being hard, you know, it was just a lot of learning, but it was a lot of excitement about that and what doors it would open going forward.
Story_ID: 31173
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there any particular phase of engineering you focused on for your Master's degree [from University of Pittsburgh in 1977]?
Speaker 2: It was--the actual area of study was environmental systems engineering, so it was traffic flow modeling.  You know it was a lot of mathematics.  You know how do you design (unclear) cities and traffic models that accurately reflected what you would naturally experience in the highways and you know, did you need to do lane metering.  Things we take for granted today of having traffic lights when you come up the ramp to get on the freeway.  It assesses what the density of the traffic is.  And what you want to do is allow people to come on at a rate that doesn't cause a traffic jam, you know so they can merge smoothly and proceed.  So that was a big study at the time was, you know, does it really help?  How do you know at what rate to do it, what do you need to sense, what data do you need to factor in, how far back do you need to look, how far forward do you need to look to know when you need to stop letting people on?  And so it was, it was the eureka of my gosh, I can take this math and really, you know, help people make their decisions about designing systems.  So it was terrific.
Speaker 1: So every time we cheat when we get on the ramp and--
Speaker 2: Just skip on through, yeah.  Yeah, that's not the model.  We probably should have had a factor in there for--and there will be some percentage of cheaters (laughs).  People that don't think the rules apply to them.  But carpool lanes, all of those things to say okay, what do you need in order to ensure that you can maximize the efficient use of the four or five lanes of traffic that you've got there, how do you do that?
Speaker 1: Alright, that makes sense, that's a practical application.  So in '77 [1977] you started work with--in missile systems.  Now how did you make the transition from that kind of engineering to missile systems as a--someone who is completely outside of engineering.
Speaker 2: It's about the modeling.  It's you know how do you--I mean the traffic was fluid flow.  It's like water in a pipe.  You know at some point if you put too much water in the pipe, you get the black flow which is the traffic jam.  So missile systems is very much, you know, taking the same kinds of skill sets and applying them to a different application.  And the reason to be truthful that I got into that was when I was in graduate school the first year I'd met a woman who had left and gone to work for a company in southern California.  And she says well you can come out and take an interview, spend the week and then we can hang out.  And I said that sounds like a good deal.  So I went to southern California and I went horseback riding and did Disneyland [Anaheim, California] and Universal Studios [Universal City, California] and spent time on the beach and so on and so forth, and it, remember I just left Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] where it was still ice on the windows.
Speaker 1: So are you saying that southern California is more attractive than Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: A little, a little bit.  You know for a young woman, you know very impressionable, it may have had an impact in, in the decision making process there, but--so I interviewed with the company and they you know, talked about different things that the modeling skills that I had could be used for.  They seemed happy to have me and so that worked out.
Story_ID: 31174
Speaker 1: Okay, all right Rockwell International, tell us now what is Rockwell International?  I've heard the name, well what do they actually do?
Speaker 2: Well they don't exist anymore.  They've been merged and acquired with other companies.  But Rockwell International was a large aerospace company.  The facility that I was at was in Anaheim, California and they had a missile systems division, which focused on development of missiles.  They also were involved in actually production of some of the parts for the GPS [Global Positioning System], and it was a huge company but it went through a very, very tough time.
Speaker 1: Now, now what did you work on at Rockwell?
Speaker 2: Synthetic aperture radar modeling, and it was a concept that you could use for change detection.  So let's suppose you flew over a scene and you captured the data of that scene and you come by an hour later and you fly over that scene and you subtract those two scenes.  You figure out what's changed.  'Cause everything that stayed the same is going to get subtracted out, it's going to cancel each other out.  So if suddenly an, an airplane is there that hadn't been there before, it would, it would jump out at you.  So there were some, you know modeling techniques that were needed to--for edge detection and for being able to, you know easily make sure you could co-registrate and identify things and line them up.  And that was part of what I was involved in.
Speaker 1: Okay and that's called synthetic--
Speaker 2: Aperture radar.
Speaker 1: Aperture radar?  Okay.  Okay so now this is something that they marketed it to the Air Force?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were looking to sell to the Air Force and it's a well known technique that's used today.
Speaker 1: Okay something like the--reminds me, would you say it reminds me of the puzzle in the newspaper sometimes in the comics section.  They have a drawing, two drawings side-by-side and ask you what the difference is.  And it be--they look the same at a glance, but if you look closely, there's something different.
Speaker 2: And so you want to be able to do that in an automated process.  Because you know if you're looking at lots and lots of scenes, you want to be--or looking at over an extended period of time, so you know you look at it every day for a week, or you look at it every month for a year.  You'd like to have a mechanism that would allow you to quickly do that cancelation and see if anything's changed.
Speaker 1: Because from the comic page puzzle, human beings aren't that good at necessarily seeing the difference.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And that's where computers are great, is doing things that human beings could find tedious or would easily make a mistake, you know.  So you blink, you miss one thing, and now you've got a different impression of what's different.
Speaker 1: All right so did you work on anything else at Rockwell?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I was there for about eighteen months and--
Speaker 1: Just a year and a half?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31175
Speaker 1: Now in--okay, okay well what happened that you left Rockwell [International, Anaheim, California]?
Speaker 2: Well, I interviewed with them in April of '77 [1977] for a job that I was supposed to show up for in August of '77 [1977].  By the time I arrived in August of '77 [1977], the department that had hired me didn't exist anymore.  So they were going through a very serious downturn in the business.  It was a very tough time.  For a new young engineer coming into the business, most of the people that I worked with were worrying about keeping their job.  They were literally worried about the next layoff.  And so it wasn't what I would call a learning environment.  It wasn't an environment that was set up to introduce you to the, to the profession or to excite you about the future, or to get you involved with the growth end of the business because none of that was happening.  They were really worried about survival.  And so it caused me to really question whether or not I had selected the right discipline.  You know, goes back to, you know, oh my gosh, maybe I went to college and did all this stuff, you know, and this was the wrong choice.  But fortunately one of my office mates said to me, well, don't judge every book by this one.  You know it's important that you go and try another company--says every company has their own culture and different environment, you have a very different experience.  And so that's what I did.  Put my resume out to see what else I might go do.  And I had an offer from Hughes Fullerton [Hughes Aircraft Company, Fullerton, California] to go work ground systems.  And I hoped to interview with some company called the Aerospace Corporation [El Segundo, California], they sounded like we're a pretty fascinating place to work.  But as it turned out the person who was supposed to interview me got into a car accident or something and so the interview was postponed.  So in the meantime I had continued talking with Hughes, and I was just about to start working for Hughes when Aerospace called and said no, no, we really are interested in having you come join us.  You know we'd like to talk to you.  So it worked out that they came up with an offer you know in pretty short, a very short timeline and I ended up going to work for Aerospace.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1979.
Speaker 2: Nine.
Speaker 1: '79 [1979], okay.  You're twenty-five years old, right out of Ph.D. program, no a Master's program, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And okay and you're at Aerospace Corporation.  Now, now what does Aerospace Corporation do?
Speaker 2: Aerospace operates a federally funded research and development center to help the government in the acquisition of our nation's space systems.  We work for the [United States] Air Force primarily, but also for commercial entities and for intelligence organizations to help them be smarter buyers and to make sure that they get the system that meets the requirements that they--the unique requirements that they have for space.
Story_ID: 31176
Speaker 1: Okay now I remember--this must relate to it in some way.  I remember an episode of "60 Minutes" back in--around the same era, around '77 [1977], '78 [1978].  Where Mike Wallace and Morley Safer and the rest of them, they, they talked about government spending and military spending and they, they showed a number of items that just where the price--had a ridiculous price.  The contractors were selling the government things that were just--they seemed to be overpriced to just the general view.  Some of these things I realize are engineered in a way that other--that normal objects aren't to work in different environments.  But, but I think it made a big impression on the public that you know, perhaps the government needs help in trying to figure out what is proper spending and what isn't.  So did Aerospace Corporation sort of develop with that sort of thing in mind?
Speaker 2: We were established in 1960 to be independent technical advisors to the government in the acquisition of space.  The Air Force Space Program really started here in Englewood, California not too far from where we're sitting today.  And what they determined was that you needed to be able to talk with someone who was knowledgeable about the technical challenges, but who would not be competing to deliver those products because it gave them an unfair advantage when the contracts would finally be allocated.  And so in 1960 what was Space Techniques Laboratory broke into two entities, the TRW, Thompson Ramo Wooldridge [Inc.] which was--has been a very big manufacturer of space systems, and the Aerospace Corporation, which became the (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's very much to address the issue of concern that you have, which is how do you know whether you're getting good value?  And how do you know whether what the sales person is telling you has some modicum of a chance of success?
Speaker 1: Okay so in essence our Air Force colonel who is acquiring something, you know needs help in determining what--
Speaker 2: He needs the help and the experience of you know, what have we built before, how well were we able to do it, how long did it take, what did we need to do to test it?  Which requirements may be too hard, may be something that we need to postpone 'til a later development.  And it's, you know our program managers are usually with the program for two or three years.  And so it's unreasonable to expect that they're going to have a level of expertise across all of the different domains that are required in space.
Story_ID: 31177
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did you do initially for Aerospace Corporation [El Segundo, California]?
Speaker 2: I hired into what was called the Information Processing Division.  And I used those same modeling skills to look at how we schedule the contacts with our satellites.  So if you have a satellite orbiting in low-earth orbit, it's not always in view of the ground station.  And so an area what was called the Blue Cue [Sacramento, California] up in northern California was where a lot of those contacts were controlled from, ground control facility.  But it was a real operational research problem of how do you know which contacts to schedule, how long should the contacts be, when is your next contact going to happen, when do you need to upload what information?  So it was a very interesting problem, but it was a modeling problem.  So I got the opportunity to work on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Okay so I think it was about this time that, that I got an early article about--from Black Collegian Magazine [Black Collegian, January 1994, 66-70, "Space is our Business"] with you being featured in the magazine.  They were--there's another article--there were like four other black people here in Aerospace [Corporation] at least doing engineering work.  So was it a, a friendly place for black engineers?
Speaker 2: There were not a lot of black engineers, as there were not a lot of women.  And when I arrived here, we had a new President, Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, and one of his objectives was to create an environment where everyone would feel they could reach their potential, and that everyone had an opportunity to apply for any opening that was available.  So basically what he was doing was saying you know we need to break down the "old boys' network" and make sure that we're being more inclusive of all the talent and capabilities that are here at Aerospace.  And in attracting talent from outside.   So one of his stated objectives was to pay attention to the progression of women and minorities at Aerospace.  And in doing that I think he created a culture where people felt they had an opportunity to excel.
Story_ID: 31178
Speaker 1: Okay. So, well, you've been here your entire career, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Can, can you kind of walk us through the different positions you've held and--
Speaker 2: I think so.  One of the nice things about the environment that [Eberhardt] "Eb" Rechtin created was this open posting.  So, you know, most companies you went to, you walk in the door, they stamped your forehead and said okay this is what you do.  You know, you were an IC [integrated circuits] person and that's all you're doing.  Don't think about doing anything else, don't look left, don't look right, you know just do this.  And Aerospace was an environment that says you know take each job that you get, do, you know do well at that and then look for other opportunities where you can contribute the skills and the experience that you had.  So I started in IPD [Information Processing Division], I left what was then ETG, part of the Engineering and Technology Group Program, and went over to a program office.  And the exciting part of this is you get to see the application of the engineering discipline that you may have been working in.  So in this case it was the Defense Dissemination Program, and they had ground stations all around the world.  And part of my job was to be responsible for the upgrades of the software to those ground stations, and to get to go out and see people who actually, you know, airmen who were depending on these systems to work in order to get their jobs done.  And I tell you, I think I would have continued to work without a paycheck after having that experience because there are not very many people that can say, you know, I did something today that really made a difference to our national security.  And that was the experience that I had in that role.  I learned a lot.
Speaker 1: Did you have a good story about something that you can, that you can tell us?
Speaker 2: Well I can tell you about one time I messed up (laughs).  We had a major test, worldwide test and we had an element--I was actually in Hawaii.  And we have detailed test procedures that we follow.  And so there was something that was a subtle change that we needed to make, and so we realized that and we made the change.  And so then it was time for the major, you know, worldwide test and our system didn't' work.  And we could not figure out why, couldn't figure out why.  And so we said well let's hurry up and re-start, do it all over again.  System didn't work again.  So in the meantime you know you've got people all around the world watching this saying well, you know, when you guys figure out what you're doing out there, would you let us know?  After about two days of this, we finally figured out that we had fixed the problem with the first fix, but that we hadn't followed the test procedure precisely to make sure that we got each step.  And we--there was one step that said remove a jumper wire and we'd missed that step and that cost three days of a nation-wide test.  But it taught me a lesson about paying attention to detail and not skipping steps, and the time that you invest before a major event to make sure you've thought about all the possibilities and all of the outcomes and what the expected responses were.  So it taught me about you know when you're working in an operational environment, how careful you have to be when you change something to really document it and fully understand the implications of the change that you've made.  So it was a great learning tool for me.  But it was, you know working on that program was also a great opportunity because no kidding as I said, you've got people all around the world who're depending on it working and working right.  So it's a good, good experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now all right so keep going now we were--
Speaker 2: So that was the next job.  And then I had a conversation with Dr. Rechtin about my future and he said, you know, there's no limit to what you can do here.  He says but to be honest, you need to get a Ph.D.  He says, you know, it's sort of like a union card.  It is important to gain entry into different forms that you have a Ph.D.  So he encouraged me to go back to school.  I transferred back into engineering, I went back to school at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and started working on my doctorate.  And I finished that in 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay so how long did--so you were working all along, right, same time?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, I was working, I got married [to Wade Austin], I had two children by the time I went back to school.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did--when did you start [at University of Southern California]?
Speaker 2: 1984.
Speaker 1: Okay so four years.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31179
Speaker 1: Now, you didn't tell us how you met your husband [Wade Austin] and got married.  Since you raised it, we'll have to--
Speaker 2: Okay.  When I was at Franklin and Marshall [College, Lancaster, Pennsylvania], after I came back from my year abroad, that summer I decided to get involved in an actuarial science program.  Actuaries are the people, are the mathematicians that work behind closed doors to figure out mortality tables and those sorts of things.  So again people that you'd put in the category of you know, very, very bright with respect to math.  And Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], which is a historically black college, had a program to attract women and minorities into the actuarial science field.  And my husband was going to school at Lincoln, and he was working that summer with Dr. Frankowksi (ph.) as a math aide and assistant on this program.  So I went there for the summer and considered actuarial science for a profession.  Decided that wasn't what I wanted, but I did like the guy that I'd met as a result of this process.  And he and I got married in 1977.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, and you have two children?
Speaker 2: I have two children, two sons.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so that was a pretty busy period I guess, working on a Ph.D.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: and raising two little, little guys.
Story_ID: 31180
Speaker 1: So 1988 you achieved your Ph.D., and what--at the University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  Now what was your dissertation?
Speaker 2: My dissertation was "Understanding Natural Language in the Application of System Dynamics Modeling."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well can you explain to the layman, like me, what that means?
Speaker 2: Okay so it goes back to the modeling, remember?  But it's about the fact that when you're describing a problem that there are just a few words that you normally use with respect to rates or initial conditions or describing the functional relationship between the elements.  And if you can figure out a natural language processor that would allow you to parse someone's verbal description of a problem and out of that create a model that simulated that activity, that that would be a very effective tool to have.  And systems dynamics is one of the modeling tools that lends itself to that kind of a real world analysis with feedback loops and you can, you know, birth and date rates are one of the things that they're historically well known for.  And so that was what I worked on was, you know trying to say could you really quantify fairly specifically the number of relationships that might be used to describe different sort of life cycles that would be captured in a systems dynamics model.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did, did you publish this?
Speaker 2: I did, I published it, published several papers out of it.  Wrote software to actually do the processing and other people have used that work subsequent to this.
Story_ID: 31181
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now I have a note here that Allyson Yarbrough was one of the key people that, in '89 [1989] was one of the people that appeared in the magazine article, another engineer who was here [Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, California].  And I note that--so at--after you earned your PhD, what did you, what did--did your position change or did you move up?
Speaker 2: My position changed.  I came back, I was still in the Engineering Group when I first returned from getting my Ph.D., working under Dr. Alex Liang (ph.), again still in the modeling arena.  And then I had an opportunity to go to work in what was called the MILSAC, Military Satellite Communications Program Office under Al [T.] Finney.  And the program that he was asking for my help on was the Defense Satellite Communications System, the DSCS Program.  It's a well known military communications satellite program.  And so here's where I learned more about the payload side as opposed to the data side and the ground side of the satellite business.  And worked on different payload packages, some that were flown in geosynchronous orbit, some that were flown in polar orbit.  And so really as just having a great time working that program and having some launches and having launch success in that process.  When Al one day came to me says well there's a new program that's getting started and you know I think you ought to go work on that program.  And I talked to people a lot of times about mentoring.  I say sometimes you know when your mentor comes and tells you something, you may not want to hear it but it's good advice.  And so about two weeks later he came back, he said, "Well did you apply for that job over there?"  And I said "Well no, Al I'm having a great time right where I'm at.  I'm, you know, I have no interest in going over there."  And so he talked to me again and you know explained to me all the reasons why this was a good opportunity for me.  And so I finally listened and went and applied for the job and was selected as a principal director.  Now this is a Level Four job over for this new program called MILSTAR [Military Strategic and Tactical Relay].  You know most people, you know, don't know much about our business, but Milstar was the poster child for cost too much and takes too long.  And you talk about, earlier about you know the impression from the John Q. Public ["common man"] that our government was spending a lot of money.  And this was a program that was canceled several times because it just looked like it was unobtainable, and it just would be too hard to do.  So I went to the Milstar Program, it was revamped and we took a different tact.  And it ended up being a very successful program.  We built and launched the vehicle and it's operated very well and today it's one of our great legacy programs in that we use it and we're now looking to the future for what the next military satellite communications systems will look like.
Speaker 1: Okay, Milstar is a play on the words military and star I guess.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And it's a constellation of communication satellites in geostationary orbit.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: It's protected communications, which means it's what the President uses, it's what we use if you're at war.  It has the ability--it makes it very difficult for the communications to be jammed or intercepted.  So it has very specific functions, but it is a worldwide communications system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So six of these were launched between '94 [1994] and 2003.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, are they, are they still in operation?
Speaker 2: Very much so, very much so.  As I say, we've just launched the first of the follow-on satellite capability that eventually will replace the Milstar Program.  But right now it is the backbone of our protected communication system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about--I have a note here about the--something called MILSATCOM [Military Satellite Communications], what is that?
Speaker 2: So MILSATCOM stands for Military Satellite Communications, and it includes the class of communication satellites.  We have what we call wide band communications as well as tactical and strategic communications, protected communications.  And so after working on the Milstar Program which was one of the programs that was in MILSATCOM umbrella.  DSCS, I talked to you about earlier, the Defense Satellite Communication System is one of those programs.  FLEETSAT [Fleet Communication Satellite] is one of the early [United States] Navy programs that was used for satellite communications.  And there are other programs that are all included under military satellite communications, MUOS [Military Use Objective System] is another one.  What we call Wide Band Global SATCOM [Satellite Communication], WGS [Wideband Global SATCOM] is another program.  So there's a number of programs which provide communications for the nation, and they all are included in what's called MILSATCOM.
Story_ID: 31182
Speaker 1: Now is there ever--can you just give me an idea of how many satellites are in orbit around earth at the present time?
Speaker 2: We can get you that number.  I wouldn't want to hazard a guess.  But you know there's military communications, there's civilian satellites like NOAA for weather, NASA.  There's all the commercial satellites, some for communication.  You've got Digital Globe, you've got GOI for imaging, you've got international satellites, all of them up in pretty much the same space.
Speaker 1: I mean is it in the thousands or what--
Speaker 2: Hundreds.
Speaker 1: Hundreds.
Speaker 2: Yeah, let us like get you a number.
Speaker 1: In the hundreds, not hundreds of thousands, but hundreds.
Speaker 2: Hundreds.  Not hundreds of thousands, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think I saw something once, there was some concern about all of them being up there and what happens when they--if the orbit decays or--
Speaker 2: That's one of the things that we worry about, space debris.  You can get all kinds of debris.  You can have debris from launches, you have upper stages that, you know, don't immediately return to earth.  You have debris just because things fail and you know, degrade.  You have debris because things go bump in the night, they bump into each other and have damage.  You have debris from meteors where they get hit by something or where they run out fuel and they, the orbit decays.  So one of the things that Aerospace [Corporation, El Segundo, California] has been very helpful with is in the study of space debris and also in the study of how we design our systems so that they don't create debris in the future.  So this is a very big area of study today.
Speaker 1: Okay, now does Aerospace [Corporation, El Segundo, California] have like a, a--does Aerospace track any devices physically and electronically?
Speaker 2: The government is tracking them.  The [United States] Air Force has a mission responsible for space operations.  And so you know, they are tracking lots of objects and one of the challenges that you have when you have an orbiting laboratory like an International Space Station, is you'd like to know if something were, you know, going to get close to the space station or if two satellites--I just remember we had the Russian satellite [Kosmos-2251] and the Iridium satellite [Iridium 33] that went bump in I think that was 2009 [February 10, 2009].  So there are lots of concerns there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But Aerospace basically advises the Air Force on how to--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 31183
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now in--it says at some point now you become, well how did--let me ask you this before move on to the rest of your career.  How did the end of the Cold War change what you, or has it changed what, what you all are doing?
Speaker 2: I think it has had a significant impact on our business.  During the Cold War we had you know one major enemy [Soviet Union] if you will, adversary that was competitive with the U.S. [United States] in terms of capability.  And so all of the systems were designed to provide insight into what was going on in Russia.  After the end of the Cold War, you know people talk about the peace dividend and that we ought to be able to eliminate a lot of the costs associated with the military.  But what I think we've failed to recognize is that there are a lot of other nations that were working very hard to become competitive and capable in space as well.  And so what has happened over time is that instead of having a single country or target that you were focused on, now there are lots of actors that have some capability in space, or who have an opportunity to disrupt our capability in space.  So we've gone through a period where there was a fairly significant reduction in budgets for defense and space.  And now we're recognizing that the challenge of how do you continue to provide the capability that we're so dependent on.  We're really proud of the fact that when we go to war, there's rarely little loss of life because of the precision that's allowed by GPS [Global Positioning System].  You know today you say I want to put a bomb in that window on that building, you know on the other side of the world.  And our military is able to do that to a great extent because of space capability.  (Coughs).  Excuse me.  So there was the Cold War benefit if you will, where we were able to have a decline in spending.  But then today is the struggle of you know you've got Afghanistan [War in Afghanistan], you've got Iraq [Iraq War], you've got Libya, you've got a tsunami in Japan [2001], you've got all kinds of things going on that you'd like to have visibility on.
Story_ID: 31184
Speaker 1: I was asking you about the Cold War and the end of that and how it may affected things and you were talking about all the different forces now.  How easy is it, how easy is it today for a country to launch a satellite, and is there a clearage stamp to get from anybody to do it?  I mean if I have a--if I'm in a country, say I'm in Togo and I want to put a satellite up.  Can I just shoot one up there?
Speaker 2: Well what I would say is that there are a lot of countries that are very interested in developing that capability, and obviously some countries have been successful, others are trying as we speak.  And you know the process is not perfect in the sense that you know you don't--they don't have to say Mother may I?  You can get permission from people to do this.  But obviously there's interest as that capability is developed because you'd like to know whether it's a satellite or is it a missile or you know exactly what is it that you're putting up in space and what's its function and what's its purpose and are you doing with respect to space debris.  So there are a lot of countries, I mean there are a lot of countries that are developing satellite capability that they want to put on someone else's launch vehicle.  So that they can have space capabilities in their country for the things that they need.  So we in the U.S. [United States] are becoming very dependent on space.  In many ways, you know, people don't realize how dependent they are on space.  A lot of people say well you know we don't really need a weather satellite.  I can just get my weather from the Weather Channel on TV, I don't need a satellite to do that.  And you say well where do you think the Weather Channel is getting this, that information from?  It's from a satellite up in space.  When cell phones go out, you see people you know really panicked because we so much depend on the capability.  GPS [Global Positioning System] in the car.  The kids, you know all of them have cell phones.  If they want to find the nearest Starbucks [coffee shop] they, they use their cell phones to do it.  But this is all based on technology from space.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There is no, there's no regulatory process for determining--I mean just other than just observation as to what's up there?
Speaker 2: There's--you know you file for frequency if you're going to irradiate on a particular frequency, you have to not interfere with other people who have filed and protected those frequencies.  But there isn't a single organization that you go through for a clearance for launch.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering, I mean I, I, I know in the--when the--some of the stuff you hear on the news today, you hear people concerned about Al-Qaeda and other groups, and I wonder sometimes if, if so many people are depending on the same satellite.  Now say I'm an Al-Qaeda and I got a cell phone.  I'm depending upon the same satellites that somebody who's not, or the U.S. government depends on, right in a lot of ways.  Is the world just, just going to--I mean I don't even know what the question is.  I guess but I'm, I'm trying to say that it seems like the--that--do you see that, do you see or do you foresee maybe an--it being necessarily--I mean harder and harder for anyone to actually use this stuff to do--or, or does anybody have any control over?  I mean is it hard to do the wrong thing with this, this information?  Or is it easier or is it, or is it, is it because it all has, depends on the same source.
Speaker 2: You know I understand your question, and the answer is we're probably not at the point where everybody's equally vested and dependent on space.  I think the U.S. is probably far more dependent on space than other nations.  For example, if for some reason we had to go a day without GPS, people, you know, in Iraq or Afghanistan are less likely to have their lives disrupted by it than people in the U.S.  'Cause as we talked a minute ago, you know look at all the applications that it's built into: air traffic control, banking, you know, these are things that would bring our economy to its knees if for some reason we didn't have that capability.  Many other nations would also be impacted.  But I think there will come a time when it is less attractive for someone to disrupt our space capabilities because they can't disrupt our space capabilities without disrupting their own space capabilities.  So I think that's the point in the future that you're getting to which is, you know why would you shoot yourself in the foot?  Well, today everybody's not on the same footing with respect to the dependence on space.
Story_ID: 31185
Speaker 1: I know I thought that during 9-1-1 [September 11, 2001] that the banking system, all the, the communications and the banking aspects of the World Trade Center being disrupted, it disrupted money all over the world.  In Arab countries as well as the European countries.  So it was almost like you're shooting yourself in the foot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, and you look at the people who were--lost their lives.  You know there are people who in almost every country.  And you'd say well no, no, I hit downtown Manhattan [New York, New York].  I was just trying to hit Americans.  But it affects everybody, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Some of the conspiracy theories about 9/11, you know, seemed to pit one group definitely against another Arab, Muslims are against Christians.  But it, but everybody using the same thing it doesn't kind of--(laughs) seems to bring, bring the world a little bit closer together.
Speaker 2: As we were talking earlier about six degrees of freedom, or three degrees of freedom.  I mean, it's all about humanity and, and you know being civil to one another.  You can disagree without being disagreeable and you know that's what we have to strive for.
Story_ID: 31186
Speaker 1: Okay now, all right, now well--now you became at some point, I don't have the year, so give me the year--senior vice president of the Engineering and Technology Group.
Speaker 2: So that would have been July of 2001.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what does, what does this really mean?
Speaker 2: It's when I became a corporate officer of the company [Aerospace Corporation].  Fifty percent of our population is in the Engineering and Technology Group, so we have almost two thousand engineers and scientists, two thirds of which have advanced degrees, who really are the critical underpinning, the technical underpinning of the company.  So if you have a problem with a solar ray on a particular satellite, we'll have experts who understand how it was built, what the technology is, what the challenges are with it.  Other satellite programs that may be using the same solar ray, we have our laboratories, we have about eighty different labs in our El Segundo [California] facility that can be used to troubleshoot if you will, investigate and assess what the implications are of a failure on that solar ray.  And so those people all reside inside the Engineering and Technology Group that I headed up.
Speaker 1: Okay now that--I think we got things maybe out of order.  Our timeline we have that this position before the position as General Manager of Electronic Systems Division.
Speaker 2: No that was--
Speaker 1: You had already done that before.
Speaker 2: Did that before.  I did the General Manager of MILSATCOM [Military Satellite Communications] (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And okay, now at--once again, we don't have the date here, but you're named a Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronauts.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Before--what year was that?
Speaker 2: I can get that year for you by ducking in my office and looking at the certificate that's on the wall.  But I wouldn't want to give you a guess on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, 2001 William Ballhaus, Jr. is named CEO of Aerospace Corporation and--I don't know, did, did things change at all or, or take another direction?
Speaker 2: It--things changed.  I think each CEO, you know, brings their own leadership style and a sense of the challenges.  Pete Aldridge, who was a former Secretary of the Air Force was here during the end of the Cold War and the, you know, reduction in spending that we talked about earlier, and he brought tremendous leadership and connection and insights with the DOD [Department of Defense] that I think was helpful to the company.  When Bill Ballhaus arrived in 2001, the word that he introduced into our vocabulary was "accountability."  What are you accountable for?  And he raised the level of understanding inside and outside the company that, you know aerospace is really accountable for mission assurance.  For you know, making sure that our customers are successful in the endeavors that they take on.  And so we really spend a lot of time, you know, making sure that people understood what they were accountable for and primarily it was for, you know, identifying risk and making the customer understood what that risk was.
Story_ID: 31187
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  In--I just wanted to make that note that Mr., or Dr. [Edward] Aldridge , [served as president and CEO of Aerospace Corporation] was interviewed by "Black Leader Magazine." [sic, Black Collegian, Jan. 1994, 66-70 "Space is Our Business"]  I saw an interview with him about you know, future for black engineers.  I thought that was interesting, you know (unclear) about that.  So aerospace seems to be a--seen as a, a place as a friendly place for minorities.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I think that the nice thing about Aerospace is that it's always been about your capabilities, your technical contribution.  It was never about you know, how you looked or where you went to school, it's can you help us with the hard problems that we're looking at?  And if you can, we welcome you and want to see you be successful going forward.
Speaker 1: You think that that's common in scientific circles?  I mean we've interviewed a lot of scientists over the past year and they--most of them say that basically, that once they get to a certain level, nobody really cares what they look like.
Speaker 2: It gets back to my English lit[erature] teacher issue.  Where scientists are, you know either you did or you didn't, you know.  And if you did and you did it right, we're ecstatic, you know.  Like let's go off and talk about some other things that we can do.  It's not judgmental, it's not subjective.  It is about you know, help me understand or help me learn or I can learn new things from you because you've obviously done some serious thinking about it.  And I think scientists and engineers respect that.
Story_ID: 31188
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now I have a question here that came from the office [The HistoryMakers].  In 2001 the U.S. [United States] launched military campaigns in Afghanistan and later Iraq following the September 11th attacks [September 11, 2011].  How have the operations at the Aerospace Corporation changed to address security needs in the 21st Century?
Speaker 2: I would say that what changed is the time to market.  That there was a tremendous emphasis on you know most of our big satellite systems, we spend ten to fifteen years from development to launch.  It's not at all unusual.  After 9/11 [September 11, 2011], there were some new, hard problems that needed to be solved right away because we had people in harm's way.  So you want to say is there some way in which we can detect IEDs [Improvised Explosive Devices] from space so that you don't have a soldier, you know, lose a leg.  Or is there some way to detect where there are caves so that you know where people are hiding.  And so I think for us the emphasis has been on the time that it takes to develop these systems and what can we do to shorten that time and still make sure that they actually operate, function and deliver the capabilities that our customers need.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31189
Speaker 1: Now in 2004 you were named the Senior Vice President of Special Studies for three months.  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: This was an assignment from [William] "Bill" Ballhaus, and it was also a transition from the West Coast to the East Coast where I was about to get engaged with the intelligence community.  And so we used that three month period for me to look at, you know, are there some changes or different opportunities at the company needs to be pursuing with respect to the support to the National Reconnaissance Office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But then after that you're promoted to Senior Vice President of the company's National Systems Group.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay and now what is the National Systems Group [NSG]?
Speaker 2: The National Systems Group is the organization that supports the National Reconnaissance Office and in fact all of our intelligence community customers.  So as you know there are about ten different organizations in the intelligence community.  The National Reconnaissance Office is primarily responsible for the acquisition and development of the intelligence community space systems.  So it's very much in line with what we do for the [United States] Air Force, but just different applications of space.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And if I tell you anymore, I have to shoot you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's all right, that's enough (laughter).  Okay.  Now, now we've got a gap here from 2004 to 2008, so--
Speaker 2: That was when I was head of NSG.
Speaker 1: So you can't tell me anymore about that, right?
Speaker 2: It's as you might imagine, you know, intelligence, reconnaissance and surveillance.  You know different applications from the Air Force applications, but still very important applications from space.  So one of the programs we can talk about is something called Corona, which was started back in the '60s [1960's].  And it was about being able to take pictures from space.  And this is you know again, one of those capabilities that is really groundbreaking in terms of knowing what you know.  And in almost any instance having good information that you can rely on is really key to how--what decisions you can subsequently make.  So we've had a long relationship with that organization and as I said, it leverages exactly the same technical experts that we use in support of the Air Force.
Speaker 1: I know some of have been able to see our rooftop, you know on Google Maps.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Is that part of the technology we're talking about?
Speaker 2: That's a commercial venture.  But same concept, same technology that says that you know if you want to see what a house looks like on the other side of the country, you just go on Google and look it up, put in the address and boom, it's just like you're standing on the sidewalk in front of the house.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the street view.
Speaker 2: Street view, satellite imagery view.  It's amazing.  So it's the same technology that's applied.
Story_ID: 31190
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right now you became Aerospace Corporation's [El Segundo, California] President and CEO in 2008.  Now was there a path to the--well you followed, you've been there your whole career.  But, but what were the--were there any particular obstacles in the way or how did it, how did that happen?
Speaker 2: I think I wouldn't say obstacles.  What I'd say is opportunities to you know work with different customers, work different sides of the business, to learn you know which are the problems that are really attractable and how do you break them into pieces that allow you to get your arms around laying out a path forward.  You work with lots of different with lots of different people, you also learn about the business side of the business.  I mean there is the you know actually running of the corporation, setting budgets, setting targets, having plans for investments and developments that are key to your future.  You know you've got to not just look at what you have to deliver next week, but from a science and technology perspective, you have to look at what investments do we need to be making in our laboratories so we can answer the hard problems that are going to come up five years from now.  A good example of that is electric propulsion.  You know we studied and examined electric propulsion for years in space and now we have a system that uses electric propulsion in space.  So this is the advantage I think of working with Aerospace [Corporation] is that you have a team of people that are looking at the technologies that are coming, as well as the technologies that we're applying today.
Speaker 1: Electric propulsion, that would actually mean not using the fuel, or, or what?
Speaker 2: You know it is more--you can use a combination of electric propulsion and fuel propulsion.  We have a system today that we're flying that has both.  And it turns out that we had a problem with the fuel and oxidizer and so we're actually using the electric propulsion to get us all the way up into orbit.  And so it's one of those things where you have a new technology.  It means you don't have to fly all the fuel that you need, and so it then doesn't constrain how much time you can be in orbit.  But it, it does you know, it's a fuel base but it still is much easier to work with than the traditional fuel and oxidizer.
Speaker 1: This is basically a space version of a hybrid car?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, that's a good way of thinking of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's interesting.  So okay what are, what are your hopes for the future of Aerospace Corporation, or what kinds of things do you see Aerospace doing in the future?  Maybe not to--the stuff that I don't have to be shot to hear about.
Speaker 2: I, I think that in the future, there's several things that Aerospace can do.  One is to communicate the best practices.  I mean there are, there's a right way to do things and there's other ways to do things.  The other ways may be more expensive and less effective and one of the things that Aerospace has been very successful in is in documenting and sharing the knowledge of lessons learned across communities of what's the right thing to design and develop and launch space systems so that they're successful.  I think Aerospace will continue to have a significant role in that because we are free of conflict of interest.  We are the organization that is really committed to saying what's real and what's [mimic] if you will.  What's achievable, what's maybe too far over reach in terms of technical capability.  At the same time, I think in the future the laboratory expertise that Aerospace has will become more and more important because as companies streamline to try to save costs, there are fewer opportunities for them to invest in long range technologies that may have a payoff in the future.  But in order to get those really significant breakthroughs, you have to have someone who's looking for a whole new way of doing business, and I think Aerospace has a unique opportunity to do that.  So I, I see us playing that role as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You hear people criticize and you know, expenditures on space programs and is wasted money and that sort of thing.  Is that--basically what you're saying is that a lot of new technologies that are developed through--
Speaker 2: Well I think that space is expensive in the sense that you've got the development of a rocket, you've got a development of a payload.  You don't have you know, tens of these laying on the ground.  They're one of a kind.  And so if for some reason you lose an asset, you lose a capability for years that it would take if you can recreate it.  So we, I think of Aerospace [Corporation, El Segundo, California] as being a tremendous value to the nation because if you look in the last twelve months the number of launches that we've had, and if you just assume that each one is rounder order--you know a billion dollars of effort.  The cost of Aerospace to ensure mission success is miniscule compared to the loss of any one of those assets.  So it's, it's a good, good value, it's a good investment.
Story_ID: 31191
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now you're now a CEO.  You're the only black woman who's a CEO of a defense related business in the U.S.  What do you think you want to do next, or are you going to do this until you retire or what?
Speaker 2: I'm having a great time doing what I'm doing.  I think that this is a business where you have an opportunity to learn something new every day.  It's a very exciting business.  It's an area where you know we talk to children about what we do and you see their eyes get big and their minds racing about, you know, that's what I want to be involved in and that's what I want to do, I want to go to space or be involved in space or go to Mars.  There's just so many different applications and so much that we still have to learn about space capabilities.  So I'm, you know I would tell you, having a great experience every day with working with you know, tremendous customers and with some of the brightest people on the planet.  At the same time I get a chance to interact with educators and academics and scientists really internationally.  And so you know the, the learning piece, the part that I think is exciting for all of us is still very, very much there for me as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you've won a number of awards, National Intelligence Medallion for Meritorious Service, the Air Force Scroll of Achievement, National Reconnaissance Office Gold Medal, the U.S. Air Force Meritorious Civilian Service Medal, and there's a lot of them, 2009 Black Engineer of the Year Award, 2008 Special Achievement Award from 100 Black Men of Los Angeles even.  When you look back on everything you've done at this point, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think the legacy is you can, you can reach as far as you can aim.  Many times people have excuses for why they can't do or didn't do, or why they gave up.  And I would tell you that if you look from where I started, you know, a little black girl in the Bronx in the tenement building that, you know, if someone had said okay you, you're going to be a CEO.  No one would have believed it.  But hopefully, there are people who say gosh, if you can do that from where you started, you know there's no limit to what I can do.  And that would be I hope the legacy that I'll leave for others.
Story_ID: 31192
Speaker 1: Now in 2009, you served on President Obama's review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee.  Can you, can you share some of the findings of that committee with us?
Speaker 2: This was referred to as the Augustine Commission.  And it was commissioned by President Obama to not make recommendations, to provide options, alternatives for what might be the future of human space flight for the U.S. [United States]  One of the big findings of the commission was the fact that the program as it currently stood, was underfunded for the things that were expected to come from the program.  The decision had already been made to cancel the Shuttle Program which we used to ferry our astronauts to the space station today.  But we didn't have an executable, affordable program for the future.  The decision was also clear that the International Space Station had, had finally been fully integrated and developed and delivered on orbit.  And shortly after we complete the development, the plan was to not use the station.  And so one of the findings was, you know you've spent years getting to the point of developing this wonderful laboratory in space.  Now you ought to invest some time in actually  doing the experiments and doing the work that could only be done in space.  And so that was another significant finding from the Augustine Commission.  Now the third finding was that if we continue to task NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] with the responsibility of flying too low earth orbit, that they would not have the resources to do the great you know, next big thing of going to Mars or going to asteroids, or doing other kinds of investigation.  So that it was important to try to commercialize the flights to low earth orbit, and that we have an industrial base that was capable of doing that.  So I would say those were, you know three of the major findings out of the Augustine Commission that formed the President's decisions about human space flight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you, do you think that we ought to--I mean you personally, do you think that, what do you think we ought to do, you know next in terms of aerospace?
Speaker 2: In terms of Aerospace?
Speaker 1: Yeah in terms of you know those, some of the things you mentioned just now.
Speaker 2: Human space flight for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think, you know NASA has always been a pride and joy for the United States.  Not only in what it has achieved in human space flight, but the promise that it offered for the future, for inspiring our young kids, and for providing the opportunity for people to dream about you know, what might be or where else there might be life.  And I think it's important that as we go forward, that we have a human space flight program that continues to do that, that you know is more about exploration and is more about inspiring the youth of tomorrow, and that would make all Americans feel proud about what we're doing and that we're continuing the quest for space.  So, you know, I don't have a solution about a specific program that I would say that would do that, but I think it's important for us to have a plan that we stick to and execute that allows us to be successful in that vein.
Story_ID: 31193
Speaker 1: Similar to legacy, but in another vein--when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?  If you could do it again.
Speaker 2: If I could do it again, what would I do differently?  I think really going back it, if I could have enjoyed learning about space, you know back in the '60's [1960's].  You know that was an opportunity that I missed, to be able to watch that in real time.  You know everything that I learned about the space, the beginning days of space, even though I lived through it, I wasn't aware of it at the time.  So I would loved to have had someone in my life who could have said you know, hey I'm excited about space, you know here's some things that are going on.  You ought to pay attention to this.  This is going to be change--this is going to change the world.  You know think about what the possibilities are.  I would loved to have had that kind of a role model or mentor early on that could have shared their excitement for the development space in the early days.  That would have been terrific.
Speaker 1: Do you think, from what it sounded, well from what I heard when you were describing growing up, it was probably very little time spent watching television or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Listening to the radio, that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You think that might have contributed to you not kind of missing these things as they were going on?
Speaker 2: No, I think it really is about the mentoring.  That you know what gets you excited is seeing someone else excited about a subject matter.  It's having a math teacher that says here's some puzzle books, you know on math.  You really want these, this is exciting and here's a new story I read about a mathematician, or did you see this joke, you know that Solomon Golomb [mathematician and engineer] write that really is a math puzzle.  You know I mean when you have someone that is talking passionately about something they love, it's hard not to get caught up in that.  I don't think television could do that.  Television was at that point much more, you know, factual--you know this happened.  It wasn't a lot of news stories, you know, evaluating what the implications are and the ramifications of these things were.  But, you know, if you had someone in your life who, you know, even if they hadn't been personally involved, but who had an excitement or interest in the area, I think that that is a wonderful experience to share.
Speaker 1: I just thought of that because I just thought about like watching the moon landing in 1969 on a black and white TV, and even that, you know it was fascinating to see and to think that we were there.  I know my grandmother looked outside and said there's nobody up there.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: But you know it made people stir up--probably barbershop conversation even, you know.  I was just thinking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would imagine there was conversation.  I missed it somehow.  But it was you know, I think that there's a lot to be said for mentors and people taking young people their wing and sharing their passions with them.  Because you never know where the spark is going to come that sets their course for the future.  And it's great when you can you know, hear from someone firsthand about you know, why this is exciting, or why it's important, or what they learned and that is something that you carry with you for the rest of your life.
Story_ID: 31194
Speaker 1: Now your--you had parents that really were focused on education.  They may not have known all of the places it was gone take you, but, but they were really focused on it.  Now did they get a chance to see you earn a PhD?
Speaker 2: They did and my mother [Helen McCallum Lewis Pompey] passed away a few months after I became CEO [of Aerospace Corporation in 2008].  My dad [Murry Pompey] died some years back, but he did get to see me get a Ph.D. [in 1988 from University of Southern California]
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what did they think about you getting a Ph.D.?  You know--
Speaker 2: Phenomenal.  I mean as I said, the whole idea of going to college was a major accomplishment.  My dad never finished high school.  So the idea of getting a college education and being one of the first in the family to do that, was a huge accomplishment.  I mean he had tremendous pride in what I was doing.  In fact I'll tell you a funny story.  When my husband [Wade Austin] and I came out to California and someone from home advised us, well as soon as you get there, buy a house.  And we got here and, you know, all the houses were very, very close.  They didn't have yards, you know, nothing like what we'd been accustomed to seeing.  And so we said oh no, she must have been confused about what part of California we were going to be in.  Well then the house prices went up by ten or fifteen percent in a year.  And then we said, ah, that's what she meant, you know about buying a house.  So we did, we bought a house and my dad was amazed because he'd never owned a house in his life.  He was in awe and he was pleased, but he was amazed that we had done that.  And then after a few years, we decided to buy another house because we wanted to move up to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], closer to work.  And my dad was panic stricken.  What are you doing?  You know, you already have a house.  I mean he just couldn't fathom buying another house and turning the first house into a rental.  This was a, you know a good investment for us.  And so you know, this was something that clearly you know, just never entered his mind as in the realm of the possible for his daughter, you know, to be a college graduate, to own her own home, to, you know, go on and be in real estate.  This was something that was not something that he envisioned I think starting out.  He was always very encouraging.  You know, you can do whatever you want to do, baby, you know just go for it.  And lots of support, but you know clearly something that he was not able to accomplish in his life.
Story_ID: 31195
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the challenges for you raising a family, you know and being an achiever and in aerospace.  It has to be time consuming.  How did you and your husband [Wade Austin] manage to raise your boys?
Speaker 2: Well I think the first thing is it was--my husband and I, it was a joint venture, you know.  Because there were times when he was going to school and there were times when I was going to school and you have to have that support at home in order to be successful.  And with the boys, with children, you know, whatever you tell them is normal, you know, they accept that as long as they're fed and they have a clean place to sleep, they're pretty happy.  And so we just, you know, it was part of our life that, you know, maybe Mom would be studying or Dad would be studying and, you know, the other one, the other parent would take you out to the park or whatever during that time.  And so that was the way that it was in our house.  And our kids have done very, very well.  They both have finished college.  We've got one who's working as an accountant and one who's in law enforcement.  But, you know, again, that expectation that well yes you, you have to do well in school.  You know, that is the thing that provides you opportunity in the future.  And stressing that, and being the role model to them about--and it's continuous learning.  You don't get to say hey, I'm done, I got my college degree.  I don't ever want to see a school again.  That you have to be--you know keep your skills up, keep yourself current and continue to take that challenge.  So now we hope that our grandkids will have that same passion for education.
Story_ID: 31196
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now here's a question we always ask.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think the concern I have for the African American community is that you see a tremendous breakdown of the family.  You know I think that a lot of what a child learns that's important in life, they learn at home.  And they learn through the models of mom and dad and the fact that grandma and grandpa are watching, and aunties and everybody else is vested in what you're doing and paying attention to what you're doing.  And so I think that that's something that I don't see as much.  Some of it's because of geographical dispersion of families.  That you've got, you know, part of the family on the East Coast, part of the family on the West Coast.  Part of it's the fact that you don't have you know, a mom and dad at home in many of the homes.  You know that's getting to be the exception rather than the norm.  I mean I knew on Sunday afternoons where I was going to be.  I was going to either be at mother's mother's house, at grandma's house, or my father's sister's house.  I mean that was how the weekends were spent.  You were with the family as a whole.  So I think that as I look forward, that's a concern that the foundation of a young person's life and the values that get formed and set need to come from mom and dad.  And I don't see that in a lot of our young people today.  Some of it's simple courtesy, some of it's self-respect, some of it's confidence.  These are things, these are lessons that kids can't get from a book.  They need someone to teach them.
Story_ID: 31197
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything I haven't asked that I need to ask before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything that we haven't covered.  You've forced me to remember some things that I haven't thought of in fifty years, so this is good.
Speaker 1: All right well our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as fully enjoying life.  And I would say to not technically competent, but technically engaged and fair in her assessments, you know, of what's the right way to go from a technology perspective.  I'd like to think that people that she interacted with were better off after that interaction.  You know, that she gave something to everybody that she interacted with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much, Larry.  Good to meet you.
Speaker 1: All right.
