Story_ID: 520615
Speaker 1: So we're gonna slate now and I'll start by saying that my name is [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole, I will be the interviewer today, Matthew Hickey is our videographer, our observer is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Mick Lewis.
Speaker 1: Our observer is Mick Lewis.  We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] office in New York City [New York, New York], and today is July 15, 2016.  And I'd love for you to tell us your name and spell it please.
Speaker 2: My name on my birth certificate is Josephine Armstead, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, last name, Armstead, A-R-M-S-T-E-A-D.  But I also am professionally known as [HistoryMaker] Joshie Jo Armstead, Joshie spelled J-O-S-H-I-E, J-O, A-R-M-S-T-E-A-D.
Speaker 1: Excellent and what is your profession?
Speaker 2: I am a member of the performing arts.  I started as a singer, dancer with Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner in 1961 at nineteen.
Story_ID: 520616
Speaker 1: So I wanna start with some People magazine type questions. Some easy quick questions, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What is Joshie Jo's [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead] favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would say turnip greens, fried chicken, which I haven't had in ages, hot water cornbread and sliced tomatoes.
Speaker 1: You're making me hungry (laughter).  What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: During the time that I was born around October, the fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: That's quite obvious green (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like the islands, the Caribbean and Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, never let them see you sweat.
Story_ID: 520617
Speaker 1: Now we'd like to talk about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And let's start with your mother, if you would tell us your mother's name, or where she's from, tell us about her when she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother the Reverend, Evangelist Rosie Armstead [Rosie Johnson Armstead] was born on Pluto Plantation, they said around Bee Lake, Mississippi [Holmes County, Mississippi] in 1907.
Speaker 1: And was she enslaved?
Speaker 2: No she wasn't, but her father, my grandfather [Lucius Johnson] and I think my great-grandfather were all slaves.
Speaker 1: On that plantation?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily, I found out that my great-grandfather came from Georgia; it's not very much that the family knows about him.  But he had seven daughters and four sons.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Augustus Johnson [August Johnson].
Speaker 1: Seven daughters and four sons (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four sons.
Speaker 1: And do you know about his wife?
Speaker 2: His wife I think died and we know very little about her except her name was Julia [Julia Johnson].
Speaker 1: And about their eleven children, what do you know about them?
Speaker 2: Well my great aunts, I knew most of them, Aunt Mandy [Amanda Johnson], Aunt Gussie [ph.], Aunt Fletcha [ph.], they were characters.  They were strong black women, I think Aunt Mandy had, she owned her house, most of the women did.  And it was known that Aunt Mandy had a hefty bank account when she passed away, which I think was in the 1950s.
Speaker 1: And where was she in the birth order do you know?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: But she stood out as one with the hefty bank account?
Speaker 2: Yes, my great Aunt Mandy and then my mother's sister who migrated to Brooklyn [New York], which is why I'm in New York [New York] today, left a sizeable estate.  With a beautiful brownstone and quite a hefty sum in the bank for her immediate family, her son and grandsons and, and children.
Speaker 1: And did that include you?
Speaker 2: You know for, before she passed away, she gave a nice chunk of change; I could put it a little better to, my two sisters and myself.  Before she passed she said her lawyers told her to do what she wanted to do at that time so she gave us a nice check.  I was going to school, I was back in school, this is in my sixties, so the money was very useful.
Speaker 1: And what was her name again?
Speaker 2: This is my Aunt Ethel [Lee Ethel Whitney] who we call Aunt Sang.
Speaker 1: And how old was she when she passed?
Speaker 2: A hundred and two.
Speaker 1: Fantastic, and she lived in Brooklyn?
Speaker 2: In Brooklyn in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] yeah.
Story_ID: 520618
Speaker 1: Going back to your mom [Rosie Johnson Armstead], so you know her, it was her great-grandfather or grandfather who was the one with the eleven children?
Speaker 2: It was my mother's grandfather [August Johnson].
Speaker 1: Her grandfather.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and which child was, was it, which was her parent?
Speaker 2: One of my great-grandfather's sons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lucius Johnson was my mother's father, out of that clan, that those eleven children.
Speaker 1: And do, what do you know about Lucius?
Speaker 2: He was quite a character, he was a bootlegger and a gambler, womanizer and the whole bit, but he loved his children.  My mother told me the story that her mother [Dora Johnson], which would be my grandmother died when she was seven years old.  So she had her father who stole she and my Aunt Sang off the plantation where they were living.  And she told the story about they had to go through a window and wade in the water to get to a boat to escape that plantation.
Speaker 1: Now escape the plantation, so they were not enslaved, so why was the need to escape?
Speaker 2: Well I guess when you are, how can I say, when you are part of a system it's very difficult to leave that system, I would think.  His children were there, he was not there, and we went and got his children, but it wasn't like you know walking up to where they were and just saying come on let's go.
Speaker 1: Do you know around what, what year this was?
Speaker 2: No, I have no idea, they were small children.  So maybe eight, nine or ten and my mother was born in 1907, so I don't have those dates, I could figure it out.
Speaker 1: Sure but essentially, so obviously they weren't enslaved 'cause this is way past the official end of slavery (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --but when slavery ended, people stayed on the plantations and then worked for nominal--
Speaker 2: As sharecroppers and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and so forth and so on.
Speaker 1: And that is what your, your family did?
Speaker 2: I guess so, but my grandfather was a rebel, he would not you know confirm to that, that style of living.  And, but his children were there, what can I say; his children were maybe being taken care of by people there.  But when he got the opportunity, he went and got his children.
Speaker 1: And he had made money as a bootlegger so he had money to be able to move.
Speaker 2: I guess so, it's inconsistent income (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay and where did he take his children?
Speaker 2: Where I was born Yazoo City, Mississippi, this is where most of his sisters lived, the seven sisters.  And between those seven sisters, they took care of my mother and my aunt until finally he found a home with his brother and his brother's wife, who nurtured those kids. Being a bootlegger and a gambler and a womanizing stuff he was worldly you know, he had a baldhead, they called him Shine [ph.].  And his sh-, you know he was flamboyant I guess.
Speaker 1: But he took care of his children.
Speaker 2: He wanted his children, he loved his children.
Speaker 1: And how many children did he have?
Speaker 2: I understand that they had a brother, but the brother was taken away, my mother said when they buried their mother.  She used to say that, "They took my brother away at the grave."
Speaker 1: Oh wow, wow.
Speaker 2: They never saw him again either.
Speaker 1: And she was very young, so she didn't know who took him?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So then it was your mother and who else who escaped out of the window?
Speaker 2: And my aunt.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?
Speaker 2: Ethel, Lee Ethel Curry [Lee Ethel Whitney], 365A Hancock Street, Brooklyn, New York who died at 102.
Story_ID: 520619
Speaker 1: So you move, they move to Yazoo City, Mississippi, how far away is that from the plantation [Pluto Plantation, Holmes County, Mississippi] where they were living?
Speaker 2: I haven't a clue.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they moved there with the seven sisters until your, until their father [Lucius Johnson] found a home, did he ever marry?
Speaker 2: He married several times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But by this time his brother and his wife were taking care of the two girls, so they never actually lived with him.  His lifestyle was you know as a bootlegger, as a gambler, as a, he was in and out of town, and--
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did know him, he passed away when I was about seven years old, but by that time he was an old man.  But I don't have many memories of him, except he used to tell who I call my grandmother, the lady that raised my mother that she was spoiling me.
Speaker 1: Was that true?
Speaker 2: That was true (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so where you all, where they were living in Yazoo City, what, what were they doing there, what was, what was, we know that Shine [ph.] was a bootlegger.  But what were the aunts do, what was their work?
Speaker 2: Actually I don't know but I understand that my uncle, great-uncle who raised my mother was a fiddle player.  And he met the lady that he married, Mae [Marg Johnson] who we all call Ma Mae dancing on a set.  Now they tell me that a set was square dancing, so I don't know what my Uncle Cicero [Cicero Johnson] did for a living.  We were not, they were not educated people, so I think they made it by their wits.  I do know growing up around my cousins and things, they had cafes and were good time people.  They lived across the tracks, so to speak.
Speaker 1: And Yazoo City was this rural was it like were there a lot of farms there, plantations there?
Speaker 2: Actually they thought it was a city, I don't know what the population was (laughter) but there were quite a few churches.  There was a little downtown area which you could go through now in, it'll take you five minutes to drive through Main Street.  Stores and you know commerce going on and there was a bus station, I remember that.  So lots of people, it was a hub let me say that for Mississippi.  Mississippi basically still is very country; it's a lot of land.
Story_ID: 520620
Speaker 1: So you said the, that, that it was a city, that they considered--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yazoo City, Mississippi
Speaker 2: A city.
Speaker 1: It was a city and a hub.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In Mi-, in Mississippi, what else did your mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] tell you about her growing up like in Yazoo City did she share any stories with you about growing up there?
Speaker 2: Not really, I, I can imagine that those two little girls had felt a little displaced from time to time.  Because their father [Lucius Johnson] was in- come in and out of their lives, and I do believe that Ma Mae [Marg Johnson] who raised them was kind to them.  But my mother never gave me any a specifics about her childhood, except the traumatic event of their father taking them from that plantation.
Speaker 1: When, where, where did your mother go to school, do you know that?
Speaker 2: My mother had a third grade education so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And was it, it was a local some kind of local school in Yazoo City?
Speaker 2: Yes, I would imagine.
Speaker 1: And do you know why the education ended there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You don't know what, what she did during the day, did she have to work?
Speaker 2: Yes she did, she had, she had a skill, she was a skilled seamstress and tailor where she learned that, I, I don't know.
Speaker 1: But that was her work?
Speaker 2: That was her work until she was ordained as a minister then her work was in the community.
Speaker 1: At what age was she ordained do you know?
Speaker 2: I hmm, I think she was in her thirties.
Speaker 1: And this was in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church?
Speaker 2: Yes, now in her thirties this is still pretty early in the church, how, how common was it for a woman to be ordained?
Speaker 1: I think in the A.M.E. church it was pretty standard that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the only church that would ordain women.
Speaker 2: And her--is it after she was ordained did she stop being a seamstress and a tailor and really focus on the church?
Speaker 1: She still you know worked but not full-time doing that.
Story_ID: 520621
Speaker 1: Did she [Armstead's mother, Rosie Johnson Armstead] marry?
Speaker 2: Yes my mother married several times (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell us about her marriages (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well to my father it didn't last long, he was a--
Speaker 1: What's your father's name?
Speaker 2: Wilton Armstead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From what I understand about him he was from Louisiana and he worked on the highway, and they only lived together occasionally whenever he was working near Yazoo City [Mississippi].  And my mother refused to move to Louisiana, she named me after his mother, however, and so I have very few memories of my father.
Speaker 1: Do you know how he came about the name Armstead?
Speaker 2: You know I'd like to think from slave ship Amistad [La Amistad], Amistad (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Amistad, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes the, where the slaves broke their shackles and took over the ship.  Because my mother used to pronounce his name as (pronunciation) Armstead, but that's how it's spelled, so many errors were made and the documentation of black lives in Mississippi was horrendous.  So we don't know much and I, I think that they didn't talk much about it because it was very, very painful.  So I have very few memories of my mother telling me about growing up.
Speaker 1: But it's possible that his name came from Amistad slave ship?
Speaker 2: It's possible.
Speaker 1: From your father is it just you, one child from him?
Speaker 2: No my baby sister.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Odell [Odell Brent].
Speaker 1: Odell, and then your mother remarried?
Speaker 2: No that was her last husband.
Story_ID: 520622
Speaker 1: So tell me about her--
Speaker 2: Prior marriages?
Speaker 1: Yes and, and other children.
Speaker 2: Okay I, my mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] had five girls, the oldest three well actually old enough to be my mother.  The one that I, I am next to is thirteen years older than I am, so she's somewhat had two sets of children.  So my oldest sister Dora Lee [Dora Harris Zeno], I cannot tell you much about, Dora left Mississippi I understand when she was thirteen years old on a truck.  And ended up in Oakland, California, where she raised her family, I saw my sister exactly once, and she passed away in the '70s [1970s].  The sister next to her Leola [Leola Taylor Willis], my biggest fan, Leola and Dora had the same father, however, Leola how can I say, was to me brilliant.  And she actually was she was valedictorian of her class and she went to Parochial school, and she could do anything.  She could sew, she could cook, she had a flair so, I think my sister influenced me a lot.
Story_ID: 520623
Speaker 1: And next sister was Velma [Velma Davis Turner]; through Velma I met Ike Turner.  My sister Velma was, Velma was very beautiful, her father was an Italian, also I think Ike had an eye for eye candy back then, 'cause she's very beautiful (laughter).  Velma is thirteen years older than I am, and we found out from a gentleman doing Ike Turner's biography that she was his second wife.  We actually thought she was his first wife, because when they married, she was nineteen and he was seventeen, so my sister married Ike Turner long before Tina [Tina Turner].  And that was my introduction into my professional life.
Speaker 2: And so she was nineteen, he was seventeen and that was his second wife?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Ike Turner admitted to being married at least twenty times, but he could only remember the name of twelve women (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, all right.  And do, how long was he married to your sister?
Speaker 1: They have one daughter tog-, but it didn't last long.  Ike Turner was the Ike Turner that was portrayed as an abuser and he abused my sister, so I think that that was in his character.  I really believe that Ike Turner was bipolar undiagnosed, because he's a very charming person and very nice, and generous one moment.  And then the next he'd be filled with rage, so the marriage didn't last long.
Speaker 2: And she, Velma performed with Ike did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No she was not a performer.
Speaker 2: She wasn't, oh so she, it's just that she married him?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Do you know how long they stayed together?
Speaker 1: I would say off and on maybe five, six years.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and did she travel with him when he was on the road?
Speaker 1: No, she lived with his mother [Beatrice Cushenberry].
Speaker 2: Okay, and what was, what's their child's name?
Speaker 1: Linda, Linda Jean Turner [Linda Turner Trippeter].
Speaker 2: And, are Velma and Linda still living?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Where are they?
Speaker 1: My sister Velma is eighty-six years old, she is in Yazoo City, Mississippi, her daughter Linda was raised by my Aunt Ethel [Lee Ethel Whitney] in Brooklyn [New York] until she was an adult and decided to go back home to Mississippi with her mother.  So she's in Yazoo City, Mississippi today.
Speaker 2: So Yazoo City has remained homestead for at least part of your family?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Who all is there now?
Speaker 1: My sister and her children and their children, I'm not sure if I have cousins or anybody left.
Speaker 2: So you mentioned that your introduction to Ike was through your sister Velma?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: How, how old were you when you met Ike?
Speaker 1: When I first met Ike I was a little girl, I remember him being married to her when they were married.  And of course he left Mississippi; Ike Turner's from Clarksdale, Mississippi and moved to St. Louis [Missouri].  And I think that's when it, their marriage was really officially over.
Story_ID: 520624
Speaker 1: In the meantime, I was going to school; we didn't get into my mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] taking me to church with her.
Speaker 2: Please do.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) As a little girl singing in the church, I used to think between the two of us we could really get the congregation going.  And in school, in high school I was a featured soloist in the glee club, so singing was a part of my life.  Begin to be a part of my life from an early age.
Speaker 2: When you were, I, I wanna go back even further, so when you were, where you born in what town?
Speaker 1: I was born in Yazoo City, Mississippi in 1942, I am seventy four years old.
Speaker 2: Wonderful, and tell me I, I want you to go back to Yazoo City when you were a little girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What is your earliest memory?
Speaker 1: I thought about that question and it's very difficult, my earliest memory and I wrote about this.  My earliest recollection of Yazoo City which was rich and dusty and wide open and it was a lazy place.  And grass would grow tall but it would cut you like a machete that it was a dangerous place, and it was.  The rough terrain or the rough how can I put it, surroundings, country surroundings could be about as dangerous to you as not saying yes sir, or no sir to the white folks.  Those are my earliest recollections being somewhat helpless and never hopeless, but helpless and that it was not a friendly place.
Story_ID: 520625
Speaker 1: Can you describe for me the house that you grew up in, in Yazoo City?
Speaker 2: Oh, I could've brought pictures.  It was a shack.  My aunt [Lee Ethel Whitney] in Brooklyn [New York] owned that house and we lived rent-free but it needed work, and so my mother's [Rosie Johnson Armstead] income was not much.  Ma Mae [Marg Johnson] at that time was an old lady and didn't work at all, and so the house was, was really in bad shape.  But it looked like the others houses down the street (laughter) except across the street Aunt Sister [ph.] had a very decent house.  And I remember Howlin' Wolf used to stay with her whenever he was in town.
Speaker 1: And who's he?
Speaker 2: Howlin' Wolf is an iconic blues man, blues singer, musician.
Speaker 1: In, in that area Yazoo City had a number of musicians who were in that area is that true?
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: Who, who else?
Speaker 2: Well a little group that I started with was called Little Melvin and The Downbeats, and we weren't that good.  But the father of the blues W.C. Handy wrote about Yazoo City, Mississippi stopping through there.  And I think he documented that the first time he heard the cadence of the blues and the way that was done was in that area.  That is the, called the heart of the Delta [Mississippi Delta], so all of the, the old originators of that music came in and out of Yazoo City.  So right now a lot of the names estate, escape me.
Speaker 1: That's all right.
Speaker 2: One I'm really trying to think of and it'll come to me, I'll mention his name.
Story_ID: 520626
Speaker 1: So you say you, you grew up in a shack, was it a wood building what like how many bedrooms, what, what's inside of this building?
Speaker 2: It was a three-room house with a kitchen, a front porch, a back porch; the front steps were always broken.
Speaker 1: Was it wood?
Speaker 2: It was wood, it was a wooden house.
Speaker 1: And did you have electricity?
Speaker 2: I remember when we didn't, but we eventually got electricity (laughter) yes.
Speaker 1: So what kind of stove did you have?
Speaker 2: I remember when there was a wood stove, a big black wood stove, and then we got gas and electricity, so.
Speaker 1: And did you have a yard, like what, what was around your house?
Speaker 2: No front yard, there was a back yard with a tree, a big; I think it was a chinaberry tree.  I remember Ma Mae [Marg Johnson] taking me out one night because I was a sickly child, I had asthma.  And I was having a bad attack, and she took me out one night which later I'd call an exorcism.  She had a hammer and a huge nail and she marched me in that yard and pushed my back up against that tree, and she nailed that nail directly over my head.  And she hammered hard and she kept saying, "When you outgrow this spot where I done marked in this tree, you will have outgrown your asthma."
Speaker 1: And how old were you at this point?
Speaker 2: I would say about eight, seven, eight.
Speaker 1: That must've been pretty scary.
Speaker 2: It was, it's frightening, but (laughter) in my twenties my asthma disappeared, maybe that was because I left Mississippi, I don't know.  Because Mississippi is a wide-open dusty, very dusty place at that time, there were dirt roads.  They've since been paved, but it was, it was not really rural like the country-country, but it was still rural Mississippi in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 520627
Speaker 1: What do you remember it smelling like, what are the, the smells and sights and sounds that you remember of your home and neighborhood when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not much, not much at all except maybe Ma Mae [Marg Johnson] making coffee or the smell of grass, but the feeling of being in a beautiful wide open space with the blue sky and, and white clouds that were so low you felt you could touch them.  It was a dreamy place for me as a child, I would go out and sit on the back steps and, and just fantasize, dream.
Speaker 1: About what?
Speaker 2: Of getting away from Mississippi (laughter), of getting out of there.  But because I had taken to music and music became an escape for me, and of course I knew about Josephine Baker and Josephine Premice and, and the stars you know.  I would dream about being a star, you know and getting out of Mississippi.  It was not a loving place it was very strict, we were taught to really be on your Ps and Qs, especially around white people.  And that we had to educate ourselves so that I guess our teachers wanted us to do better really to improve our lot in life.  So I got a pretty decent education in school from kindergarten on through high school.
Story_ID: 520628
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to school in Yazoo City [Mississippi] and the name of the school was Yazoo City Training [Yazoo City High School No. 2, Yazoo City, Mississippi], this is how they thought of us.  Training School or Number Two, meaning that the white school was Number One [Yazoo City High School, Yazoo City, Mississippi] and this was Number Two.
Speaker 1: And at your school about how many students were there?
Speaker 2: Oh I can't imagine, I would think there would, it was a small school, three hundred at the most.
Speaker 1: So it was divided up in grades?
Speaker 2: In grades, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were your teachers black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did you have, what, what--describe for me what kind of books did you have, what was, what were the learning tools?
Speaker 2: I guess we had the standard issued Mississippi textbooks, we had a library but it wasn't much in it, I remember the library.  But our teachers were excellent, that's the only extraordinary thing I can say about it.  Is that they wanted us to be a prim, proper; they wanted us to represent ourselves in the best possible way we could.  Because of segregation and because of racism, you had to act a certain way, and they taught us that.
Story_ID: 520629
Speaker 1: As a young child do you remember seeing the signs for colored bathroom and white bathroom and were, were the, what did segregation look like in your town?
Speaker 2: Yeah there were the white and colored signs especially in the post office, not the post office, the bus station.  You somewhat had to step aside if you were walking down the street and whites were coming down the street.  And again you had to say (pronunciation) yes sir, and no sir, I think it was even frowned upon to say yes, sir or no, sir.  It had to be subservient in a way, very demeaning and difficult and the black community stayed mostly in our own area.  You had to venture out and most people worked, and they worked in the houses the women did as maids.  And the men as chauffeurs and gardeners and so forth and so on, but we basically stayed in our own community.
Speaker 1: Were you able to shop in the local stores or, were you not allowed to, to--
Speaker 2: No you could shop, you could spend your money, yeah but again you were gonna be treated less than and the white people were hostile in Mississippi.  They probably still are, so it was, it was an environment that was disturbing.
Speaker 1: Did you have any direct experience with whites in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yes I did, I remember my baby sister [Odell Brent] once wanting to go to the midnight movie.  And so she wanted to pay half fare, I think she was underage, and the, the ticket agent selling the tickets, a white woman told her that she had to pay full fare to see the movie.  And she said, "But I'm not but twelve years old, and I'm with my big sister."  And the woman was very, very nasty, "I don't care who you are with and I said you gotta pay full fare," and my sister talked back to her.  This is my baby sister.  She sent someone around to hold the door and call the police on my baby sister, and the police came and took her away.  She was twelve years old, and they put her in jail.  And I'm feeling helpless and I run home and I tell Mama [Rosie Johnson Armstead] and we both go down to the jail and they kept her there all night for talking back to a white woman.  So these are the kind of experiences and I tell you I'm sitting here, I, I, I really don't wanna recall them.  You know you sort of bury them and, but that was the experience back in the late '50s [1950s].  And my experience in Mississippi, and before that, my mother's experience and my [maternal] grandfather [Lucius Johnson] and the rest of my family.  I, I'm afraid to say, I'm pretty sure it was horrible, but you live, you learn to live, you learn to be happy.  And as I said my family we're like happy people, good time people.
Story_ID: 520630
Speaker 1: You saw these things and, and you described that that music was your escape.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And from a very young age you began to sing, what age do you think that was, how early were you singing in church with your mom [Rosie Johnson Armstead]?
Speaker 2: About five, five or six.
Speaker 1: And, and it was clear that you could sing early on?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes very clear I've had an uncanny ability to, to touch emotions since I was, yeah very small.
Speaker 1: And did were you taught at all, like were you taught in a church choir, did you have any formal training in singing?
Speaker 2: Not really, Miss Lucille Stewart [ph.] who played piano for our church took me under her wing and my cousins Teecie [ph.] had a beautiful little cafe.  And it was a juke box there and I used to love that juke box with the red and green and yellow lights going around and round.  And I would hug it and press my ear against it and listen to, to the records and the music.  And I learned that I could do that, I could imitate it, if I heard a sound I could make that sound.  And I incorporated that into singing, so I could sing along with anything, practically in any key.  Because I, in the beginning I trained my ear to do that, but later on I did have instructors when I was in high school [Yazoo City High School No. 2, Yazoo City, Mississippi], and private lessons during my professional life.
Speaker 1: So did in, did you attend high school still in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So there at your school there, there were music teachers?
Speaker 2: Yes there was a music department, Mrs. Wevonne McCoy [Jevonne McCoy] the director of the choir and her husband Mr. McCoy [Willie R. McCoy] was the director of the band.  So I was in the band briefly but of course I took my music lessons and joined the choir with Mrs. McCoy who featured me as a soloist.
Speaker 1: In high school?
Speaker 2: In high school.
Story_ID: 520631
Speaker 1: Now at the time, this is, this is about what year are we talking about?
Speaker 2: From '57 [1957], 1957, '56 [1956], '57 [1957], I should've graduated which I did not with the class of '59 [1959] and '60 [1960].
Speaker 1: And you did not why?
Speaker 2: I had a baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a child and to, and by today's rule, the gentleman would have been incarcerated.
Speaker 1: But by those rules he was not.
Speaker 2: He was not (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is he involved at all?
Speaker 2: In her life, no.
Speaker 1: So you were what age when you had your daughter?
Speaker 2: I had just turned seventeen.
Speaker 1: And this is Chandra [Chandra Armstead]?
Speaker 2: This is my daughter Chandra.
Speaker 1: Chandra.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so did you raise her or how was she, how did she grow up?
Speaker 2: My mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] actually raised her because when she was, I think about two is when I left Yazoo City [Mississippi] with Ike Turner, Ike and Tina Turner's revue [Ike and Tina Turner Revue].
Speaker 1: So before we leave, see you were seventeen, you're in high school is that the eleventh grade I guess?
Speaker 2: I would've graduated at seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're about to graduate and this person who would have been arrested was he part of your community that, her father?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So were you dating him, were you was he in your life or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was an older man, he was an older man that how can I say, I--that controlled me that's all I can say.  I found myself in a situation that I was not even aware of and I became pregnant, it was not an ongoing relationship that we can say, no.  No it was an encounter.
Speaker 1: And did he ever accept any responsibility?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But your mom took over.
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Story_ID: 520632
Speaker 1: When did you start singing with Ike and Tina Turner Revue?
Speaker 2: That was 1961.
Speaker 1: So leading up to that because obviously you were singing in church, you're singing in school [at Yazoo City High School No. 2, Yazoo City, Mississippi], you're singing at this juke joint that you described.  How were you building your name, as a singer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was a small town so everybody knew you, so I had been singing since I was a child you know very, very young.  So and (laughter) the little group I was with, Little Melvin and The Downbeats we had started doing little gigs, little three piece band in the real low country areas.  I guess trying to get some experience, however nobody turned professional except me.
Speaker 1: And you, you didn't, you describe that group as not being very good.
Speaker 2: I didn't think we were that good (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you performed?
Speaker 2: We performed and the people loved it, I guess listen on Saturday night after you have gone through, how can I describe it?  Mississippi week, I don't wanna say scrapping and bowing but tense, working hard, barely being paid, you're happy to get some of my [maternal] grandfather's [Lucius Johnson] bootleg whiskey.  And hear any kind of music, and, and let go.  So I like that as well as I like you know going to church.  And seeing people, how can I say, relieve their tension and frustrations you know at the altar with the Lord.
Story_ID: 520633
Speaker 1: Your mom [Rosie Johnson Armstead] is a minister.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did she feel about you performing secular music?
Speaker 2: Well she was not the condemning type, her message was universal, the Lord loves you.  She loved her family and most of the family; she was the only one with the Bible.  The rest of them were having a wonderful time as, at, to best of their ability (laughter).  There were some beautiful women in my family, mixed blood and oh they were, they had the furs, they had the cars, they had the jewelry, they had decent housing and stuff.  And, and but my mother was right there with the Bible, enjoying herself and her family.  She was not the hell and brimstone, you gonna die and go to hell and fire and brimstone type of minister.
Speaker 1: Did she have anything to say to the man who with whom you had the baby [Chandra Armstead]?
Speaker 2: If they had a conversation, I'm not aware of it, I'm pretty sure they did.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, did you all ever move out of the shack into a different home?
Speaker 2: Into another shack (laughter)?  No, we never did, I went back home as an adult and got my mother out of that shack.  But oh did I have a horrible time trying to buy her a house, I could not get it done, and so I was determined before I left there to put her in some dwelling that was better than she was in.  Because she had my daughter, so I got her an apartment, we never got Mama into a house.
Speaker 1: But you got her into a better, better (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --accommodation?  Was there plumbing in the shack?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah we had plumbing, but I do remember outhouses, I was very small then.
Story_ID: 520634
Speaker 1: So when did Ike Turner discover you?
Speaker 2: Well Ike Turner had a hit, he and Tina [Tina Turner], 'A Fool in Love,' and they were on the road.  So they were playing Jackson, Mississippi which is forty-two miles away from Yazoo City [Mississippi].  And it is the capitol of Mississippi.  He would always, I mean even during the years that they were separated, from time to time contact my sister [Velma Davis Turner].  And he called her and she told him that I was singing with a little band around town.  And he needed one more girl to complete his group that he had named The Ikettes, which he later told me was because Ray Charles had Raelettes [The Raelettes].  So he would, he decided he would have him three girls and call them Ikettes.
Speaker 1: And back at that time Ray Charles and he were building names for themselves kind of simultaneously, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that, there was competition going on?
Speaker 2: Yes but I never saw Ray as being in the same category as an Ike and Tina Turner show, which by the way was Ike's creation.  I asked him questions about his vision of putting this together and he, he gave me some keys.  He, he, he told me that he envisioned high-powered upbeat, very energetic band and singers and the energy was incredible.  Ray was a little more how can I say artistic than the Ike and Tina Turner which I would call you know sensational.  You know Ray's was not a visual like the Ike and Tina Turner show, but around the same time.
Speaker 1: This time blues was popular, rhythm and blues was gaining in popularity like music was changing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At this moment in history.
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: And you were a part of that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 520635
Speaker 1: So Ike [Ike Turner] got in touch with Velma [Velma Davis Turner] and, and invited you to complete this group of The Ikettes is that--
Speaker 2: Yes, I forgot to mention that he drove from Jackson, Mississippi to Yazoo City [Mississippi] to hear me sing and I auditioned early in the morning for me, for him after they had completed their show in Jackson.  The local club owner, Mr. Dunbar, Dunbar Coleman [ph.], my mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] called him and he opened up the club, the Silver Slipper [Yazoo City, Mississippi].  Which held all the big dances with Bobby "Blue" Bland and [HistoryMaker] B.B. King and everybody traveling through Mississippi at the time would stop in Yazoo City for a show.  Because of that facility and he opened it up that morning and I sang for Ike, Ike played piano and I sang.  He then took me back home and told my mother that he wanted to take me on the road with him.
Speaker 1: And you were what age?
Speaker 2: I was nineteen.
Speaker 1: And your mama said?
Speaker 2: My mama gave me two dollars and told me (laughter) to keep the Lord in mind and in my heart and with me wherever I would go.  And I got in the car and my little baby [Chandra Armstead] was reaching out to me and it was heartbreaking, but that was my opportunity to leave Mississippi where I saw no opportunities.
Speaker 1: So there you go where, where was the first stop?
Speaker 2: Vicksburg, Mississippi I think we, he was on, we were on our way to Texas or something.  I can't remember it was vague, and my first professional showing on stage I came in on a song that he wanted me to sing in the wrong key (laughter).  And Tina [Tina Turner] jumped up and came to the mic [microphone] with me and put her arms around me begin singing and brought me up to pitch.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: It was one of the most frightening things that I've ever done was to try and, I mean to go from the level where I was joining Ike and Tina Turner.  I was not ready; I was not prepared with all the other singing.  I had the voice but not the experience at that level, and Ike Turner at that time was forming this, this unit.  I eventually came up to par, but in the beginning it was, it was pretty rough (laughter).
Story_ID: 520636
Speaker 1: We're talking about the early days of being an Ikette [The Ikettes], and I've looked at some of the videos and you know you had your dance moves.  You had your singing and your dance moves that were all coordinated.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Tell, tell us about the, your rehearsals and getting ready for that.
Speaker 2: Ah it was grueling, first of all the road during those formative years was very, very tough.  A lot of times we had to sleep on the bus, because the hotels were not integrated.  And then some of those gigs were like back road gigs you know.
Speaker 1: What's a back road gig?
Speaker 2: Oh where there are no bathrooms, hardly out- outhouses, there's a scene in the Dorothy Dandrick, Dandridge [Dorothy Dandridge].  Forgive me for messing up her name, beautiful woman, movie ['Introducing Dorothy Dandridge'] where she was in a club, but was a high-class club.  But she was a black woman and she had to go to the bathroom, and her manager passed her a Coca-Cola bottle.  We were in many places where we had Coca-Cola bottles to use for the bathrooms.
Speaker 1: You literally did that?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter) you had to be quite practiced too (laughter) yes, so the road was, was pretty rough, we were all young.  And Ike Turner was forming this unit and everywhere we went we had to stop and rehearse, and I remember the rules started changing.  You couldn't sit on stage, you couldn't have a, a run in your stockings and you couldn't smoke.  At that time we was smoking and drinking and doing whatever (laughter) you know as young people do.  You could not talk when another performer or, you couldn't be seen interacting or anything.  The focus had to be on that, that person and, so it was grueling.  And I mean he would rehearse us all day long, whenever we got there, and then we do the show at night.  And you back on the bus and you're sleeping while the driver drives you to another gig.  You know having hotels and room service, oh please, I don't even think I, at, at that point I knew that that existed.  Just the way it was, we were on the road when we did sometimes have to stop, I remember staying in people's houses, you know.
Speaker 1: You were traveling through the South?
Speaker 2: Through the South especially, when we got to Phoenix [Arizona] and Los Angeles [California] and places like that, there were accommodations, but in the South, no.
Speaker 1: Did Ike own his own bus?
Speaker 2: Yes he did.
Speaker 1: And, and there were sleeping accommodations in the bus or you all just slept on the seats?
Speaker 2: Oh no sleep (laughter) sleeping, sleeping accommodations in the bus? No, we slept in our seats, you know sitting up.  And sometimes we had to dress on the bus, so you're talking about a crew bumpity, bumpity bus you know.  Not a (laughter) what are they using today?
Speaker 1: It wasn't a Greyhound bus?
Speaker 2: No, no not even Greyhound, not even close (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was it like a school bus?
Speaker 2: Something like that yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And who was teaching the dance moves, was there a choreographer?
Speaker 2: Tina [Tina Turner] did a lot, Ike did a lot.
Story_ID: 520637
Speaker 1: And at this point, there, he's calling this the Ike and Tina Turner Revue--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --correct?  He had changed Tina's [Tina Turner] name to Tina Tu-, well Anna's [Anna Mae Bullock] name to Tina Turner.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were they married at this point?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He just given her the name Tina Turner?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So can you describe how they worked, how, how did Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina work with the group?
Speaker 2: Well their personal time, I can't give you much information, 'cause he really kept that private, I never saw him strike her.  But I did see the aftermaths of him having abused her, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Meaning what you saw bruises, you saw?
Speaker 2: I saw bruises, I saw black eyes, I saw busted lips, and she sang through it all.
Speaker 1: She never talked about it?
Speaker 2: No we never talked about it, but we were all so happy to see her and we were you know the girls, the women together.  And when we got together we'd snicker and stuff, but we, I guess it's you know, we didn't talk about the rough times.  We didn't really share that, it was just that this is the life that we, we have to do this, we are doing this and we have to do it to the best of our ability.  And that's what we were striving to do and trying to do, so I think her outlet was performing, that was her freedom.  She, you know, worked within the confines of what Ike wanted her to do, but once she was out front, that's her.  So that's how we worked together, when we get together and rehearse, she'd have a step.  Or he'd say do this or this is what you're singing and we'd interact like that, we didn't eat together.  Usually they traveled in his car; he had always have, had a luxury automobile mo- at that time, mostly Cadillacs.  So they were separate from the band, they did not ride the bus, and other than that, we'd see them at the gig.  No interaction during the time of travelling or something like that, only when we're working.
Speaker 1: Who was on the bus?
Speaker 2: The band and the girls and when I was there Alline [Ruby Alline Selico], I mean Tina's sister, Alline was how can I say, almost like road manager.  She would clock the door, she would collect the money, Ike had nothing but women working for him.  He was a lady's man.  And, so it was Alline, the three Ikettes, and the rest of the guys, the band.
Speaker 1: Who drove the bus?
Speaker 2: Oh what was his name, and I used to wonder when did he sleep, I'm sorry I can't remember his name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But there was a separate person--
Speaker 2: But he had a driver.
Speaker 1: --who was a driver?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How much money did you make?
Speaker 2: Well when I started it was twenty dollars a night that was more money that I had seen at one time ever (laughter).  And because my mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] only had two dollars to give me, at the end of the week when it was time to get paid, I had drawn more money than I had coming.  To eat and to do whatever I had to do, so it was almost I started thinking like (unclear), like sharecropping in a way too.  Because I was always in arrears and I had to begin to draw on next week's salary.  So I never really got paid (laughter) much at all, I did get out of the hole when The Ikettes had a hit record.
Speaker 1: And how, when was that?
Speaker 2: I think 'I'm Blue' ['I'm Blue (The Gong-Gong Song)'] was released in 1962.
Speaker 1: So you'd been on the road for couple of years?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and so you had to buy your own food?
Speaker 2: Yes and when we were lucky enough to stay in a hotel, you had to pay your own hotel bill, so you know.
Speaker 1: So did, did you then now really not wanna stay in a hotel?
Speaker 2: No, I--whatever the cost was please (laughter), because we were out there you know.  You weren't gonna be abandoned, so I didn't have any money, I just didn't have any money.  I think if you know anything about Tina Turner sh- story when she finally left Ike and searched through her purse she had thirty-six cents, we had no money.  And I think he basically liked it like that, because he was in control, you couldn't leave, you're there.
Story_ID: 520638
Speaker 1: When did The Ikettes start making their own music?
Speaker 2: 'I'm Blue' ['I'm Blue (The Gong-Gong Song)'] was the first release that we had, I would venture to say that Ike [Ike Turner] began to see more revenue by featuring The Ikettes too.  Ike was a very, very savvy and how can I say, I later learned unsavory businessman.  Because he would have one set of Ikettes on the road with him this was after I'd left.  And another set on another show, that he's paying a salary to be The Ikettes.  In my case I help to write and construct our first release, 'I'm Blue' which I got no credit for.  But he did give me a check for a lot of money at, he thought and I thought too.
Speaker 1: What was a lot of money?
Speaker 2: Seven hundred dollars (laughter) royalties for 'I'm Blue' and that's when I got out of the hole.  But he, he saw the group as a way to make more revenue for him.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea how much money that song made him?
Speaker 2: No, but quite a bit as he took the writer's credit, the producer's credit, he did not pay the girls anything.  The original girls on that track with me had quit, so whatever revenue that came from Atlantic Records at that time, he took it all except the seven hundred he gave to me.  I'm pretty sure he didn't give Tina [Tina Turner] anything.
Speaker 1: How did you end up getting money?
Speaker 2: Say that again please?
Speaker 1: If you're the only one who got money did you ask for it, how did you end up getting money?
Speaker 2: I asked for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what other songs did you record as The Ikettes?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure. I think 'I'm Trucking' ['Come On and Truck'] whatever but around this time was when I was deciding I was going to leave the group.
Speaker 1: Why, why were you coming to that decision?
Speaker 2: Well if I am going to, I really appreciate Ike kind of guiding me into the art of songwriting.  But if I'm going to work in that capacity and not really make any money and get any credit, I can't grow.  And he had such a tight rein that it was no place to go, it was almost like Mississippi all over again.  You're, you're just confined.
Story_ID: 520639
Speaker 1: And at this point, you are, well I'm seeing you made, before you left you made 'The Gong-Gong Song' ['I'm Blue (The Gong-Gong Song)']?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you help to write that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And were you paid for so doing?
Speaker 2: No, he gave me seven hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: It was for that or for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For, for whatever the writing and being an artist and so forth, no royalties statements or anything like that no.
Speaker 1: At, at that point you're eighteen years old.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And realizing this feels like being a sharecropper all over again, how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a little older than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, eighteen was when 'The Gong-Gong Song' came, nineteen I think was--
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961] I was around nineteen.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], nineteen when you decided to leave.
Speaker 2: Oh okay I'm getting mixed-up with these years 'cause it's just one long (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about the experience, when you decide that it's time to go this is now a big decision because it, you had a consistent pa- pay.
Speaker 2: No I didn't.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was always in the hole.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, it was never enough, never enough it is, there was nothing like saving any money or doing anything with any money, you were just on the road.  Basically what you would take from that would be that I'm an entertainer, this is what I do.  So I don't have to clean anybody's kitchen or even saying a nine to five is, is modern, but having a job regular you know menial job.  Because none of us had any degrees or skills other than this, so there is somewhat of a status of being an entertainer before people.  But I'm not really an exhibitionist so that didn't, that didn't lure me into wanting to stay.  I really wanted to do something, so if I'm gonna write, which I really began to like to write.  And I was writing my own songs that I never showed him or I was beginning to resent the confines of what was going on.  I don't have any money, I'm not meeting anybody, because it was so close-knit, and in my mind I was thinking this is not gonna last too long for me.  I don't wanna really stay here, I wanna do more.  And an incident happened I can't remember exactly what it was in San Francisco [California] and Ike [Ike Turner] fined me fifty dollars.  It was something I was late or something I don't know what it was, and I said that's it, I'm out of here.  So I had a few friends in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and the next morning when the bus left I wasn't on it.  So Ike had no way of monitoring the bus at that time 'cause he and Tina [Tina Turner] rode separately from us.  So they were gone or they were at a hotel, I don't know where they were, but the bus left and I was not on it.  And I went to L.A. on my own.
Speaker 1: Did you tell anyone?
Speaker 2: The girls knew, the two Ikettes [The Ikettes] knew that I was not getting back on that bus.
Speaker 1: Did Ike try to find you?
Speaker 2: Yes, he did, well as I understand it, he was so disappointed they said not me, "Not the little ugly country girl (laughter) that we got how dare she? (Laughter) How did she have the nerve to walk away from me," so yeah he, he asked around but he I think he was, he was just shocked.  And he wasn't open to asking me to come back that would have been beneath him (laughter) so, so that was that.  And I was on my own, I burned that bridge.
Story_ID: 520640
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I had a few friends, I had a boyfriend who thought that I was the cat's meow so he hustled up money and went in the studio and we recorded.
Speaker 1: Who was he?
Speaker 2: Bobby, Bobby Lexing, Bobby was friends with Charles Wright.
Speaker 1: Who was?
Speaker 2: Who is Mr. Express Yourself, 'Express Yourself,' and Charles Wright was the arranger and co-producer with Bobby.  And we recorded two songs which is bouncing around in the north of England now and is a collector's item.  So I stayed in L.A. for a while.
Speaker 1: What are those two songs?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the name (laughter).
Speaker 1: Let me see if I see it, let me see if I see it.
Speaker 2: Oh my, my, my.
Speaker 1: But anyhow you made two songs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I made--
Speaker 1: And, and then, and did you stay working with them or--?
Speaker 2: I stayed in L.A. and I did a couple of gigs around town, but L.A. was proven to be frustrating, it was so spread out.  The record didn't do much and I got another opportunity.
Story_ID: 520641
Speaker 1: A man named Luther Dixon that I met when I was an Ikette [The Ikettes] came to the club where I was one night and we struck up a conversation.  Luther was, had been given a contract with Capitol Records to form his own record company, Ludix Records.  Luther was also very close with Florence Greenberg who owned Scepter Records.  And talking to Luther he asked me did I wanna come back to New York [New York] and maybe try recording with him.  And I jumped at the opportunity 'cause half my family that left Mississippi was in Brooklyn [New York], where I had no family and just a few friends in L.A., so I left Los Angeles [California] and came to New York.
Speaker 2: And in New York you were then working with Luther and Florence?
Speaker 1: The, the contract that I expected from Ludix Record never materialized, but thanks to Ike [Ike Turner] and, and me wanting to be a songwriter out of New York was bustling with songwriters.  And I got in that community; it was a couple of bars called the C and D [ph.] and the Turf [Turf Restaurant, New York, New York] where the musicians would hang.  There were publishing offices all over the place called Tin Pan Alley, but it was kind of on its way down but it was still thriving.  And so I met a guy Robert Mosley who played wonderful piano, and we began to write together.  And in the course of that, I met [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson and through Valerie, Nick.
Speaker 2: Nick Ashford?
Speaker 1: Yes, and we started writing together.
Speaker 2: And this is around what time now, you're, you're about how old?
Speaker 1: Twenty-five.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What year would that be?
Speaker 2: Actually maybe even younger, looks here like maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --around twenty.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty- yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 520642
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're still a very young woman--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You've moved to New York [New York] and now you're in the, the music writing scene.
Speaker 2: Yeah I'm in New York and it's, it's bustling.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson and Nick Ashford where are they in terms of the writing scene when you meet them, are they already big names?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They've, they're beginning?
Speaker 2: They be, well, they had a record out and they had written some stuff together, but they were in the beginning stages, okay.
Speaker 1: And you joined them in, in as part of the writing team?
Speaker 2: Yes actually it was me and Valerie at first, I met Valerie, Nick was doing something else.  And Valerie and I started writing together they had a couple of Armstead/Simpson songs somewhere there circulating around.  And Nick came back and connected with Valerie and I was there and oh, as singers we were untouchable, so we became a unit, a songwriting unit and a singing unit.  Because we did mostly all of our demos and, and backgrounds for other artist.  And later on for the artist they were producing like Diana Ross and, and Marvin [Marvin Gaye] and all of that.  The, the background singers happen to be Ashford, Simpson, Armstead [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead].
Speaker 1: How long did you work with them?
Speaker 2: I would say we signed to a, the year I don't have I tried to look that up a contract through my connection with Florence Greenberg that on Scepter Records.  We signed a publishing contract with her company--
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 2: Okay, and where did you find this information, I need it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so we begin to establish a sound and work together at Scepter.
Story_ID: 520643
Speaker 1: We wrote 'Let's Go Get Stoned' for Ray Charles.
Speaker 2: Which became a big hit.
Speaker 1: It did.
Speaker 2: Well and can you give me some context around that song?
Speaker 1: Oh it's so innocent, it's so innocent, I think we had been--Florence [Florence Greenberg] gave us an office with a piano.  And we met there every day as if we were going to the office, and that day nothing happened, no magic, no songs, no lyrics no nothing.  And I think it was Nick [Nick Ashford] that said, "Let's go get stoned," and I said, "Yeah come on," and he said, "No, maybe we ought to write this.  Maybe this might be something," so we sat down and it really took about forty-five minute, it's so simple.
Speaker 2: And then it became like Ray Charles had been arrested for possession.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And did some time in rehab I believe what, was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was much later, but it--
Speaker 2: Did that not happen?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, the song is very innocent with us; we were talking about drinking gin you know.
Speaker 2: So, so your innocence song turned into his--
Speaker 1: His--
Speaker 2: --comeback from rehab song?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I guess so, I guess so, yeah.
Speaker 2: It became very popular.
Speaker 1: Yes it was number one R and B hit, I'm not sure the national charts but it's still a favorite today.
Speaker 2: It's interesting sometimes the, how things start is not how they end up, huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 520644
Speaker 1: So what was it like working with, you started with [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Strong personality?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Bubbly personality, you--
Speaker 2: Actually Valerie's, is very laidback.
Speaker 1: Is she?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's very laidback, Nick [Nick Ashford] had the strong personality.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, if I remember correctly, it was me, I met Valerie at a publisher's office, and when I first saw her I thought she was a little snooty.  And I'm looking around who is that little girl over there, she's very tiny.  And we're all laughing and talking and she's sitting quietly by herself and finally she got up and sat at the piano and I was blown away.  And I went over to her, "Hey my name is Joshie [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead] and nice to meet you wow," I just started a conversation.  And we exchanged numbers, and I would do the calling and we finally started doing a few things together.  But Valerie is more laidback; I had at that time the outgoing personality that that clicked with her.
Story_ID: 520645
Speaker 1: So you're working with [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson you're, you're the feisty one she's the laidback one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then there's the inclusion of Nick Ashford.  How is your working relationship, you and the two of them?
Speaker 2: It was very good, very good in the beginning, because we, we had a chemistry together.  We could write a bad song but when we would sing it and pitch it, we could sell it, it sound so good.  So that got us the contract and I'm not sure how long we were with Scepter Records.  Couldn't have been more than a year or two at the least, at the most then there was this separation that I felt.  They had been an act before I came along and it started to be where I felt excluded and finally there was a break, they went to Motown [Motown Records] and I went to Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: So at this point were they a couple?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes they, yes they were beginning to be a couple, now in the beginning the, the relationship was like brother, sister.  Same thing as, as Tina [Tina Turner] talked about with she and Ike [Ike Turner], but yeah they started being a couple and--well I have a great photograph of that too, the two of them they were so happy and hugging and laughing and I'm sitting on the side, really feeling isolated, so.
Speaker 1: How did the split occur?
Speaker 2: Amicably, what happened our contract was over and I think I must have left town and they were approached by Motown.  And maybe 'cause I was not there, but it was more than that, I was not told, but I'm sure that [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy came looking for three writers.
Speaker 1: He did?
Speaker 2: He did, but the two were more than capable of doing the job.
Speaker 1: Well in, well when they went there, they made 'Ain't No Mountain High Enough.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean they made some giant hits.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right after going there.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, they were more than ready, we had cut our teeth, there's some (laughter) at Scepter there's a song that three of us wrote called 'Looks to Me Like it Could Be the Real Thing' [ph.].  So some of these things were a spinoff of work that we had already done.  But in the meantime I think that the three of us had grown tremendously from working together.  They were more than capable of delivering, which they did at Motown, they were very successful.  And Nick is very, was very competitive, so that suited him fine, that atmosphere suited him fine.  I'm not so much as competitive as congenial I like you know so--
Speaker 1: How did you feel about them making a song so similar to what you had made together?
Speaker 2: It, what do you do, you either get a lawyer or you suck it up (laughter).  It was not the same but it was the idea.  So what do you, those kind of things you, they hurt, that's all I can say, it hurt.
Story_ID: 520646
Speaker 1: You moved to Chicago [Illinois], what did you do there?
Speaker 2: Well I married a guy and we formed a record company and I had pretty good success in Chicago with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who did you marry?
Speaker 2: Mel Collins, Melvin Collins who was an ex-policeman who wanted to be in the record business.
Speaker 1: Did you meet him in Chicago or--?
Speaker 2: I met him in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Af- so why did you chose Chicago?
Speaker 2: I had friends that I went to school with in Chicago and New York [New York] was feeling very, it was competitive but I, I started seeing it as cutthroat type of competitiveness.  And I found that distasteful, and with you know my partners [HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson and Nick Ashford] getting closer and I'm being edged out, it was, I, I felt it was better for me to just leave the state.  So you don't have to see it, it's very difficult to be a part of something that's, that you build, and you get to a certain level.  And how can I say it moves on without you, and for no apparent reason other than you're no longer necessary.
Speaker 1: So you moved to Chicago, met Mel Collins and made your own rec- what, what was the company that you made?
Speaker 2: Giant Records, I think our first hit was on a young man named Garland Green, I heard him in a club one night.  And he had this wonderful pleading quality in his voice, and I told Melvin that I can think I can get a hit on him.  So I started working with Garland and we came up with a song called of 'Jealous Kind of Fella,' and it was a hit.  I also wrote 'Casanova (Your Playing Days Are Over)' for Ruby Andrews, Syl Johnson's 'Sock It To Me' ['Come On, Sock It to Me'], "Come On Sock It To Me Baby" (laughter).  I went into the studio and recorded a few things, so I was working.
Speaker 1: And were you making money at this point?
Speaker 2: No, enough, making a living.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Let me put it like that.
Story_ID: 520647
Speaker 1: Now wasn't there some controversy surrounding one of the hits with, with Garland [Garland Green] in terms of your, your credit for the record, let me look here.
Speaker 2: That was a big lie that my husband [Melvin Collins] told in terms of not sharing the money (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was that tell us.
Speaker 2: Oh these stories, they had about four writers on that song, Garland brought to me a skeleton, a couple of chords.  I didn't wanna work with it, but he was very persuasive, so I put together the song, the lyrics, the melody, the background and the story.  My husband at the time was the one doing all the paperwork.  When the copyright came back it had all of these names on it.  So the record is a hit.  And money is coming from somewhere, money is, is due, my husband says that the money was taken by Chess Records, whom the other three writers was signed to.  And they had no right to; he had no right to claim publishing or ownership of their work, so the money went to Chess Records.  It was a big lie (laughter).
Speaker 1: It hadn't gone there?
Speaker 2: No, not at all, I own that copyright today, because when I divorced my ex-husband, the property settlement was that everything that I had written that had my name on it would refer back to me.  And when I got that copyright and it was still under his ownership, I realized that he had lied.
Speaker 1: So he got the money?
Speaker 2: He got the money, this is, listen this is, you know those old stories everybody, the exploitation of the record business.  Even the husband and wife exploitation from Billie Holiday to Dinah Washington to [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore and my, and Aretha [Aretha Franklin], my marriage was no exception.
Speaker 1: How long before you figured it out?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was years.
Story_ID: 520648
Speaker 1: How long were you all married?
Speaker 2: We were married for about five years.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I divorced him, not after five years, we were legally married for twenty years before I divorced him.  So it took about twenty years for me to find out that he had lied.  Because all of the copyrights was in his company's name, and as I said the divorce settlement was that those things would revert back to me.
Speaker 1: Did you ever approach him about that?
Speaker 2: No, no I didn't, oh he told so many lies oh many, many lies in--he's deceased now so, you know let him rest in peace (laughter).  As they said he's dead, good (laughter).
Speaker 1: You talk about the, you know the underbelly of the music industry where there, there's a lot that is shady.
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 1: How, how did you navigate from this point, so you created a record label [Giant Records], you gotten some hits, you're making a living.  Your husband [Melvin Collins] is dishonest, how, what's happening with your business what, what happens with your career at this point?
Speaker 2: I, I still write today, so my creativity was nonstop, it was the distribution of the outlet for it that became a problem.  And so during that time that we broke up, I moved back to New York [New York] and I did a lot of studio work.
Speaker 1: Did you close the record company?
Speaker 2: It finally sent bunkers, okay and I'm not sure that my name was a part of the--I'll tell you something shady (laughter) is that I married him because (laughter) forgive me honey, wherever you are and I know where that is (laughter).  I married the man because he was taking everything, so now that you are my husband, what's yours is mine.  And hence the divorce later on where I was able to retain and get back ownership of my work, a girl has to do what she gotta do (laughter).
Story_ID: 520649
Speaker 1: After that, I just always felt on my own anyway, I've never felt that I had the, the support or the backing.  When I first got to New York [New York] my family was very happy to see me for about two months, and then it was like cut that noise out while I'm singing in the bathroom and writing my songs.  "Cut that noise out and go get you a job."
Speaker 2: So you had moved back to your, your aunt's [Lee Ethel Whitney] home?
Speaker 1: No I never did go back to there--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: After the first time I left New York and went to Chicago [Illinois], when I came back I, I had enough to support myself.  And I supported myself by doing a lot of studio work, and that's when I began to work with people like Bob Dylan and James Brown and Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and Roberta Flack and basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What were you doing with them?
Speaker 1: Doing back-up studio work, I became one of New York's premier contracted backup singers which paid very well.  Along with the jingles, jingles were very popular then.
Speaker 2: And was this under your name or, 'cause at one point you were under an assumed name.
Speaker 1: That was shortly after leaving Ike [Ike Turner] just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --just in case Ike would try to track me down or something.
Speaker 2: Okay so that was a long time before this?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So you are now in New York as a studio singer, meaning when you're backup on recordings?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: As opposed to out on the road?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So can you describe what is that like, is it very different from getting on a bus and going all over the country?  What is the experience of being in a recording studio working with these different people?
Speaker 1: Ah, it is the ideal job because you're stationary.  Okay the road can be, especially today exciting because you're going to exotic places and you're staying in the best hotels and so forth.  But I was stationary, I would get called, especially for jingles, they book you for an hour.  With a possible hour of overtime and you stand there and you sing that jingle, and you could do two sessions, maybe three a day.  With the artist it was different; you sometimes would meet the artist, sometimes not, because recordings are done separately.  The band might be here one day or in one room and the singers the next day and then put the, the vocals on and so forth and so on.  So it was exciting to be a part of these recordings, these people's hit records.  And you're giving them that sound in the background, it is an art, it's an art that I love more than--I can't say more than being a solo artist.  But somewhere in my career from a little girl singing and being a featured soloist in the glee club, I embraced being in the background.  Being wi- a part of a group, I loved that, I loved that sound, and that I think took precedent over me trying to be a solo artist, because I did record solo from time to time.  But it was the ideal job to make a living doing backup in New York City.
Speaker 2: Were you working with one particular studio or a different one?
Speaker 1: Different ones, depending on, upon what studio the audience, I mean the artist was working in.
Speaker 2: So did you have an agent, how were they finding you?
Speaker 1: No you had contractors and the contractors would call certain singers, and then you had producers that would ask for certain singers.  'Cause they wanted to produce a certain sound.
Story_ID: 520650
Speaker 1: Do you remember any special moment working with Bob Dylan?
Speaker 2: Yes, he taught me a great lesson.  Bob Dylan was in the studio, I think the recording I did with him was 'George Jackson.'  With maybe, I would say twelve to fifteen musicians and he had the singers there at the same time, but were, the singers were not recording we were just there.  And as they began to play that song, he began to eliminate players one by one until he was down to three.  And I do believe the ones that got eliminated were the ones that were trying to show how good they were.  And playing over everything and everybody, he eliminated down to something very simple.  And I always remember that about him.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like you were part of, like the, the cultural movement that was happening at the time, because 'George Jackson, the song was about, well you tell me what, what it was about and it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually I didn't know about George Jackson, he was a, a prisoner that was murdered, right?
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: Bob was very socially conscious and folky, he was, he was very heavy, but that's the only time that I worked with him.  And I'm so happy I wasn't eliminated (laughter).
Story_ID: 520651
Speaker 1: So you were not necessarily paying attention to what was going on, in the sense of, George Jackson his, his story was big news at the time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was a member of the Black Panther Party.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he had been arrested and then ultimately killed while in prison.  So were you partly in the bubble of making music, like how, how much were you aware of what's going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Socially conscious?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Of course I was but I wasn't active in any community or social group or activism or anything like that.  I was in a bubble as in terms of working, looking back on it I never wrote any, yes I did maybe, socially conscious type of songs.  My songs took a spiritual edge, I remember a lyric that I did about "circles going around, we keep putting each down.  And I can't live like this, friends misusing friends to bring money in, we built prisons for our bodies but our minds is a thing that we really keep confined."  So I was aware what was going on, but not totally involved in it, no.  I remember I think the March on Washington, I was going through some personal trials, and I just did not go.  I'm sorry to this day that I wasn't a part of that, but I didn't go.  Again I just yeah, I felt my job was to do music, to stay into my music and I have tunnel vision when it comes to that.
Story_ID: 520652
Speaker 1: What was it like to work with James Brown?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Actually you should say Fred Wesley, James came to the studio but it was, he'd be Fred that had us in there singing.  And doing what he wanted us to do to get those tracks for James.
Speaker 1: What was Fred's role?
Speaker 2: Arranger, I would say in my mind producer too, because he put everything together.  And James used to refer to him all the time in those songs, "Hit me Fred, hit me."  It was very exciting, 'cause the music was always funky and exciting.  So to get a call from Fred Wesley to do a James Brown track, humph, yeah anything else on my schedule that's gonna conflict with that, get rid of it.  So it was fun, always fun.
Speaker 1: How often did you work with him?
Speaker 2: I think I might've done every New York [New York] session that they did, but again these things are a blur.  When you are asked to come into the studio and sing a piece of music that you either create on the spot or it's written, most of the time when I left the studio I couldn't remember what I had done.  So it didn't stick until you hear the record again and say oh, okay, all right that's how that sound, okay.  Because again the components would be put together, we might be singing the background and the lead voice is not there, so.
Speaker 1: So was James ever present when you were recording?
Speaker 2: Yes I have pictures of me and James, yes, but he wouldn't perform, he was just there overseeing coming in and out.  And Fred would be directing us and coming up with the vocals.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your interactions with James?
Speaker 2: How would I describe?
Speaker 1: Your interactions with James Brown?
Speaker 2: Oh it was very congenial, he was very nice; he looked at me like who is this (laughter).  I am you know, I'm a little old lady now, so I've calmed down a little bit, but I had a very bubbly friendly personality you know.  And I could back it up with my voice too, so I think in, in the photo that I have of him he's saying he's like presenting me, who is this?
Speaker 1: How were you paid as a studio backup singer?
Speaker 2: That was another positive about being, about doing background and being a studio singer.  I was the member of two unions AFTRA, American Federation of Television and Radio Artists [Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] and SAG, Screen Actors Guild [Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] and we were paid union scales.  (Laughter) Unless like Miss Roberta Flack one day when I, when me and Miss Cissy Houston [HistoryMaker Cissy Houston] was at the microphone said that, "If you do that again, I'll pay you double scale."  And of course we did it again (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so did, did that mean that you got paid for the session and also paid royalties when the song came out?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's just for the session?
Speaker 2: For the session, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 520653
Speaker 1: Now in addition to being a studio performer you performed on Broadway?
Speaker 2: I did, I, I did a little, did a little bit of everything (laughter), (unclear).
Speaker 1: It's okay.
Speaker 2: I did a little bit of everything, I met [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles on Broadway and I knew Melvin Van Peebles's work from Chicago [Illinois].  One thing about Chicago, I had a closet, a walk-in closet full of records, so I listened and I studied mostly everybody's work.  And Melvin was not that popular but he was totally unique, and he had an album called 'Brer Soul.'  And so on Broadway luckily I had just left Detroit [Michigan] doing a session with Ashford [Nick Ashford] and Simpson [HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson], it was a Diana Ross, 'Ain't No Mountain High Enough' session.  I remember that 'cause we sang, we sang, we sang (laughter) and 'Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song' was in the theater there, so I got a chance to see the movie.
Speaker 1: And that was his first movie, right?
Speaker 2: Not quite, he did some stuff in France with, but that was his first American release.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so here's Melvin on Broadway talking to a, a, a guy that I knew who worked for the distributor that distribute my husband's [Melvin Collins] and my record label [Giant Records] out of Chicago.  So I'm meeting Melvin Van Peebles on a level of having been a, a record owner, record label owner and I knew all of his work (laughter) and could repeat it to him, and I had seen the movie.  And so I impressed him a lot, and he was getting ready to how can I, he was getting ready to do Broadway.  He did not cast me in his first show, which was 'Ain't Suppose to Die a Natural Death,' but the second Broadway show called Don't pl- 'Don't Play Us Cheap' with Esther Rolle and Avon Long couple of other good characters.  I was cast in that show, and my first Broadway show.
Speaker 1: And how long was the run for that, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I didn't stay for the complete run (laughter), I think it ran a year.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy it?
Speaker 2: I did, I did, I learned a lot, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is in '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: That's '72 [1972] ooh, I was a nuisance looking through the camera behind the scenes, I did Melvin's vocal arrangements.  Which was a lot more work than being a performer, I could do the performance and do it very well, but my focus was somewhere else.  It was the behind the scenes, which is what I was interested in and wanted to learn about.  But when it came time to sing my number, I could stop the show.
Speaker 1: So you really had two jobs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, self-appointed (laughter).
Speaker 1: And, and why did you leave early?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think it was a dispute or something, and it was time to go, it was just time to go, move on, next, next project.
Story_ID: 520654
Speaker 1: So that was not your, your last experience on Broadway the, the next year in 1973 you performed in the Broadway musical production of 'Seesaw.'
Speaker 2: Yes, I thought that Broadway might be a medium, but I was not ready, I, it's a different mindset.  It is rigid, you have to be on cue, you have to know your lines; it's just different than being a singer or writing a song or something.  It's almost like you're a puppet, you have to love to do stuff like that and, and feel the art in playing characters over and over.  And so after a while, plus I, I've had my problems at, my share of problems with cast members.  Esther Rolle once told me she said, "Don't let everybody see what you can do until you're out there doing it."  There's a lot of competitiveness that goes on and again that's not the environment that, that I thrive under.  I find it distasteful, you know, I'm a country girl, we shared what we had.  We didn't have much but we shared, we didn't keep professional secrets, which we didn't know what to call it back then.   But we didn't keep secrets you know; we were open and kind to each other in, in the community.  And this profession has it's, has its drawbacks, it really can be very cruel.
Speaker 1: So you figured out that Broadway--
Speaker 2: Wasn't the medium--
Speaker 1: Was not your--
Speaker 2: --for me.
Speaker 1: --medium.
Speaker 2: No--
Story_ID: 520655
Speaker 1: The next year 1974 you signed with the Gospel Truth [Gospel Truth Records] label--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Label, which was part of Stax [Stax Records], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So now give me a sense of what Stax was back then, because this is a major label.
Speaker 2: It was, I got there during a very tough traumatic time at Stax for, because before long it was bankrupt.
Speaker 1: So this is towards the end of Stax?
Speaker 2: This is towards the end, I met Al Bell when I was married in Chicago [Illinois] in a little basement playing piano and singing an original song.  And as I understand it, he tried to negotiate with my husband [Melvin Collins] at the time to sign me to Stax.  And he did not want that, he had me under which was supposed to be our label, Giant [Giant Records] where he controlled everything.  I met Al Bell again because 'Don't Play Us Cheap,' the [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles Broadway show, released the soundtrack from that show.  So when I saw Al again and I'm a free agent, he signed me, he gave me a wonderful contract for a lot of money as a writer, as a producer and as an artist.
Speaker 1: This is in 1974, so what is a wonderful contract look like?
Speaker 2: Thirty thousand dollars for each one of those contracts, a guarantee, a one-year contract with four one year options.  I collected the first monies, produced the album, it took me a year 'cause I was a pr- I was determined to give them a masterpiece.  And by the time I completed the art, the album, they could not pick up my option.  I took to the bed for about two weeks, the attorn- the attorney informed me that they could not pick up the option.  In about another six to eight months Stax was no longer a working record company.
Speaker 1: Did, was the album released?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, took a little longer than that, they did release a single, no, they, the, they never got the album.  It ref- referred back to me and I own those masters.
Speaker 1: And you never released it either?
Speaker 2: Yes, I released it.
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so but--
Speaker 2: It can be found on the Collectibles label [Collectibles Records], and it's called Jo Armstead [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead], 'A Stone Good Lover.'
Speaker 1: Nice title.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So you, you had a lot of hope when you went to Stax?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, I did and this man saw me in some of my earlier days too, he believed in my talent and he knew how to give an artist free reign to do what they do.  And you gotta realize too, being a young woman saying I'm a writer and a producer and an artist, I ran upon a lot of stumbling blocks, you know?  I, I, I had a hard time doing that, but I was capable of doing it.
Speaker 1: And indeed that your first single was 'Stumblin' Blocks, Steppin' Stone' ['Stumblin' Blocks, Steppin' Stones (What Took Me So Long)'].
Speaker 2: 'Stepping Stone,' yeah.
Speaker 1: Which was successful?
Speaker 2: It did okay, it did okay.
Speaker 1: And was that the single off of that album?
Speaker 2: Off that album, yeah.
Story_ID: 520656
Speaker 1: So this is now, Stax [Stax Records] is the label that had Otis Redding.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean it was, it was a premier record label, what happened?
Speaker 2: The powers that be--well it was a death of rhythm and blues the beginning of the death of rhythm and blues.  Nelson George's book was very eye-opening to me because I wondered what happened, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which book?
Speaker 2: 'The Death of Rhythm and Blues' [Nelson George], the major companies, Al Bell, how can I say this, Al Bell to expand made a deal with one of the major label, labels.  And they in turn systematically destroyed the label.  During that time it must've been I don't like to use conspiracy but it must have been clear thought that this music has seen it's, it's heyday.  So they stopped signing artist, not because they couldn't make hits anymore but people like Johnnie Taylor and I think even at a point Gladys [Gladys Knight] and all of our major artist couldn't get a contract.
Speaker 1: Because the music was changing?
Speaker 2: Yes maybe.
Speaker 1: So what was happening on the music scene then what, what music was emerging?
Speaker 2: What emerged out of that era was rap, but rhythm and blues was stifled before rap came to be really.
Speaker 1: Well wha- and where did disco fit in?
Speaker 2: That is, well that is within rhythm and blues you know disco was like dance music so.
Speaker 1: So it did not take the place of the more traditional rhythm and blues it was really when as rap came up that was the big shift?
Speaker 2: That was the big shift, but disco you're, you're right about disco.  But I always looked it, at disco as the how can you say, the definition of rhythm and blues put in a, a dance mode.  'Cause rhythm and blues could've been slow, it could've been more bluesy, it could've been up-tempo, it had many components.  Disco to me was just another component of, of rhythm and blues but at a, a beat level.
Speaker 1: Did you ever perform disco?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I'm just wondering if, it seems like it was a shift music wise when, when that occurred, I hear what you're saying but I wonder (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you--what's the distinction; I never knew the distinction really except that here is same format voices, mostly black singers, up-tempo.
Speaker 1: Fair point.
Story_ID: 520657
Speaker 1: So around this time you know when this great opportunity that you had to make the album ['A Stone Good Lover'] using all of your talents and the record company [Gospel Truth Records] folds, right around that same time is when Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina [Tina Turner] split Tina, Tina flees.  This and it became national news she, she stood up.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where were you when this was happening?
Speaker 2: I was in New York [New York]; I think I was still doing studio work, what year was that?
Speaker 1: This is in 1976.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And were you in touch with her at that time?
Speaker 2: No, I was not in touch with her, oh yes I was in the beginning of her ca-, being Tina Turner.  She played a club here, very popular club and I went to see her, and it was fantastic.  This was the beginning of the Tina Turner superstardom situation that miss thing created for herself.  And she was in New York and I went to see her, I also saw her in Chicago [Illinois] after she was really, really big and she invited me to fly out with her in her private jet to some gigs in, in Ohio and some place.  But something happened, I'm not sure why I didn't go with her, but we spent an afternoon together laughing and joking like teenagers, and talking about the old days.
Story_ID: 520658
Speaker 1: In 1977, you worked with Burt Bacharach.
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter).  Yes I, I sometimes describe myself as a person who has done odd jobs and that's one of the odd jobs to replace [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick.  Burt Bacharach was a very difficult man to work with, I don't know how Dionne took it (laughter) but Burt heard a commercial that I had done.  A commercial fo- CARE [CARE USA] for hungry children, and tracked me down, and I really didn't wanna work with Burt, but everybody said, "Oh go ahead, this could be it Joshie [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead]."  And I'm often wondering what is it (laughter) it is escaping me (laughter) and it was an experience, I'm glad it's documented.  I did some pretty good tunes with Burt; I think he inhibited my ability to work with him.  I'll give you a story I played the MGM Grand [MGM Grand Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] with Burt Bacharach, between Burt and Anthony Newley.  And for orchestration purposes and, purposes of doing it live, he needed an ending for the song I was doing.  And I sang it to him and gave it to him and he dismissed it.  Well the next morning when we came back to rehearsal he had to say to me, "Your instinct was right," and had to use the ending that I had given him.  So those kind of things happen a lot being young, being a female when you're working with people who know more than you do, and who are bigger than you.  So the Burt Bacharach experience, I'm glad it happened, but nothing became of it, it was a bad time in his life too.
Speaker 1: So at this point are you going from opportunity to opportunity are you no longer in the studio, what, like what's hap- how are you earning a living?
Speaker 2: I'm still in the studio (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: He heard a studio, a commercial that I had done, but you get called for sessions and still can do the road, you know you're working.  You're a working artist, I was working and I was taking care of my bills and I was also driving my little Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] and my (laughter) and had my little furs and, and so forth and so on, so I was functioning.
Story_ID: 520659
Speaker 1: And at this point you are not married, so you're also dating?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You're working?
Speaker 2: My love life has always been in the pits (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what were you doing for fun?
Speaker 2: Oh I guess work was fun, the, the artistic community is a lot of fun, you know so no, but we did miss one good part (laughter).  Maybe you'll get to it--I don't know.
Speaker 1: What's that, tell me.
Speaker 2: My, one of my odd jobs as Illinois State's first fight manager.
Speaker 1: That's where we are.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So wait, how did we get from New York [New York] to Illinois?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Again, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I would go back and forth.
Speaker 1: So you, you hadn't left New York, you were just--
Speaker 2: Once you get an apartment in New York I would advise anybody never let it go.
Speaker 1: So you have put your stake in the ground?
Speaker 2: Yes, my daughter [Chandra Armstead] was starting her career at the same time around that time too, where are we to, what years are we talking?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure what the year is, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're going up into the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: It looks like that uh-huh, yep.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay so before we get to fighting--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about your daughter, because your daughter now had, as a child she was raised by your mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At one, at what point does she come to you?
Speaker 2: She came to me when she was little, off and on, but that depended on my income and I'd have to send her back home.  And finally when she was about ten she told me she wanted to stay, so she stayed with my mother throughout high school.  The same instructor that, music instructor that instructed me, tutored my daughter, and I think I would send my daughter tape recorders and music and instruments and stuff.  She started to sing.
Speaker 1: In church?
Speaker 2: In church.
Speaker 1: In school.
Speaker 2: In school, uh-huh.  And she only did one year, she got married and she and her husband went to school together and they both dropped out.
Speaker 1: She married someone from--
Speaker 2: From Yazoo City [Mississippi] and she came to New York with me, and so I was able to weave her into the business.  And she did, basically she did stuff on her own, she, I think her first job was with Evelyn "Champagne" King.  And once she was sort of established and had her own friends and stuff and they were taking over the apartment anyway.
Story_ID: 520660
Speaker 1: And things were a little shaky again you know businesswise for me, I went back to Chicago [Illinois].  With my commercial reel, I did a lot of jingles in Chicago which happened to, at that time really be a major hub for advertising.
Speaker 2: Ad- yes, this is in the early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: In the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: And there were, so what agencies were you working with, did you work with the black ones and the mainstream ones or--?
Speaker 1: Mostly the black ones.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to figure out what the name Burrell [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois], but and I worked with mainstream ones because I worked with, oh my goodness how could I forget?  Oh I worked with a producer who did, who wrote these things it was fantas- Paul Griffin, no, Paul (laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't know if I have that.
Speaker 1: Paul Griffin was Valerie's [HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] husband's name, Paul Wilson [Paul David Wilson] at Herschel Commercial [Herschel Commercial, Inc.].  And he, as a producer, did Coca-Cola [Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Georgia], he did a lot of the major products, and so I had a very good commercial reel coming from New York [New York].  And I worked very well in Chicago.
Story_ID: 520661
Speaker 1: So you're doing these jingles, you're engaged in advertising industry which obviously there's, there's good money in advertising.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you become a boxing manager.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is one of your odd jobs, yes?
Speaker 2: One of my odd jobs, I met Alfonso Ratliff, my girlfriend (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Alonzo.
Speaker 2: Alfonso.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: With an F.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: My girlfriend and I were, well first of all when I went to Chicago [Illinois] I subscribed to the paper, I've since stopped subscribing the papers 'cause I can't seem to get rid of them.  The New York Times, The Chicago Tribune you wanna know what's going on.  My girlfriend and I were at the Museum of Natural History [sic. Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, Illinois], I wonder if that's what it's called in Chicago.  Having lunch during Black History Month and this guy, these two guys come in and Alfonso is 6'5".  He looked very strange, I, I describe it as something unsimilar about his character; he had scars in his face.  He had on a jumpsuit, an aviator's cap and what is it, a weightlifter's belt.  And so I noticed him but you know you're, (laughter) you don't wanna stare.  And we kept talking and everything and finally I felt his presence, and I looked up and there's a man standing and he sa- and he introduced himself and said, "You ladies look very good today.  I wanna introduce myself, I'm Alfonso Ratliff, I'm, that's my running coach and I'm training for a fight that's coming up next month and yatta, yatta, yatta."  So I, that was it.  And I went home and I found information on him in the The Tribune about this fight and it was a big Chicago fight.  And one day looking out of my window in Harper Court [Hyde Park, Chicago, Illinois], I had a beautiful little apartment in a quaint little cul-du-sac with cobblestone courtyard and gaslights.  And people played chess and lots of shops and restaurants, which reminded me of New York.  I looked out of my window and there was Alfonso, so I lifted up that window and I said, "Hey Alfonso I met you at the museum, I read about your fight."  So that started a conversation, I invited him up and around four o'clock that morning, I told him, he didn't have to go home, but he had to leave (laugher).  So that started a friendship and the friendship turned into a relationship and with my background he said, "You could manage me."  And boxing is a form of entertainment so and it's licensed by the state, it's not that you say I'm your manager anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: This is a, a legal contract that is filed with the State of Illinois, and I became Illinois' first female fight manager.  With a former world's champion that had been managed by Don King named Alfonso Ratliff, so now I'm playing with the big boys (laughter).  One of my odd jobs, it was so much fun.
Story_ID: 520662
Speaker 1: And how long did you do that?
Speaker 2: His career was in the middle, he lost to Mike Tyson, the fight between he and Mike Tyson whoever would win would fight for the World's Heavyweight Championship.  So of course we know Mike Tyson won that fight and went on to win the World's Heavyweight Championship.  And Alfonso [Alfonso Ratliff], from then on Don [Don King] would do what they call using for fodder so he would fight better and lesser fighters and was losing and winning.  And his promise seemed to have, he seemed to have had his, his day, but I helped to motivate him back to another World's Championship, USBA [United States Boxing Association] Boxing Cruiserweight Championship.  But it was touch and go, and I think the, when we knew it was no longer viable was when George Foreman wanted to fight him.  And we thought at least I did, he didn't and he might have too but he wouldn't dare admit it, that George Foreman would kill him (laughter).  But I used to introduce us when negotiating a contract or dealing with conditions for his fights as the beauty and the beast.  And I would say, "Gentlemen I'm the beast (laughter)," so it was a lot of fun.  I had an idea at one time that I would put together a group of women and we would own us a heavyweight.  I thought that could be the most entertaining and rewarding experience that a lot of women would truly enjoy.  Going to the gym, I used to say, oh if they could just see me now.  The, the trainers would say come on over here, knowing that I (laughter) that I managed Alfonso and was doing very well with his career.  "Come on over here, turn around for the lady (laughter) okay go on over to the, the, what is it, the heavy bag and hit a few.  Now show her, jump a little rope," and I said oh my goodness if they could just see me, the only woman there, it was fun, that was fun.
Speaker 1: How long did that last?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure that might've lasted over two years into three years.
Speaker 1: And how did it dissolve?
Speaker 2: He lost his last fight and we knew that that was the end of his fighting career, and after that he was heavily depressed and not motivated.  And finally he went and stayed with his mama.
Speaker 1: And so the relationship on both levels ended?
Speaker 2: Ended uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Were you still singing during this time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were, you were being the manager?
Speaker 2: I was being the manager, but I was always writing, I was not actively in the studio, something strange happened in the studio, and it happens all the time.  Producers started asking other singers to, "give me the Joshie Armstead [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead] sound," that happens a lot.  I guess it would be a mixture of what they bring and you know what I was doing.  "But give me that Joshie Armstead sound can you?"
Speaker 1: And people told you they were doing it?
Speaker 2: Yeah of course.
Story_ID: 520663
Speaker 1: So after you retire as a boxing manager--
Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: --what's next?
Speaker 2: Oh I think I left Chicago [Illinois] and headed back to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: At well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, what--
Speaker 1: When did you become a clothing designer?
Speaker 2: That is an error; I never designed clothes (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, that didn't happen?
Speaker 2: That did not happen (laughter) I love clothes.
Speaker 1: So scratch this, scratch that?
Speaker 2: Scratch that, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I love clothes and I sold clothes, I do have a little story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When blazers, women blazers started costing seven hundred dollars, I dressed up one day and went down to Bloomingdale's on Michigan Avenue in Chicago, and got a part-time job.  I loved that job too, but I left all of that money there (laughter) buying clothes.  So I think I must've told somebody that and, and they said designing clothes, I never designed clothes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That wasn't true.
Speaker 2: No, my mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] did, my mother would cut a pattern and stuff but I, her, her talent for sewing and, and did not translate over to me, I wish it had, but it didn't.
Story_ID: 520664
Speaker 1: You believe that after you, after your boxing management career ended, you moved back to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did you do?
Speaker 2: Since I've been back to New York, I enrolled in school, I enrolled in The New School of Social Research [The New School, New York, New York] and I earned my B.A. degree.
Speaker 1: In what?
Speaker 2: I started studying psychology, but when the fathers of psychology white men with beards and as dense as it was, I changed my major to the liberal arts, with a concentration in writing.
Speaker 1: When did you graduate?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and two [2002].
Speaker 1: At what age?
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven, sixty-eight.
Speaker 1: So going to school as an adult, what was that was your experience like going to The New School then?
Speaker 2: Well The New School has all kinds of students, it really, really was challenging, mind you I came from the arts.  In a way where we did they say sex, drugs and rock and roll, where we partied a lot, I learned that I was not brain dead, I graduated in the top of my class with a three point eight average.  And it was a lot of fun, I was, I like to engage, I would, I would ask questions, so it was fun to me.  I love ac- academia, I really did, I thrived in that community.
Speaker 1: What made you decided to go back to school at that point?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I didn't wanna get back into the sex, drugs and rock and roll group they're still doing (laughter) they're still there um-hm, they're still there.  It's not like that in terms of so much that's just a cliche that they used, about the era that we were in, but it's always a lot of partying.  It is the nightlife as you know, the clubs, the, even concerts and so forth and so on, and it's, it's just one endless almost party, that's very tiresome if that's your work.  So I didn't wanna hookup with that again.
Story_ID: 520665
Speaker 1: So over the years of, of your career, well we can start back with your [maternal] granddaddy [Lucius Johnson] who was the bootlegger, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you were introduced to that world from a very young age in, in a sense.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The nightlife, but you know in your career truly you matured during a period when drugs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --infiltrated the culture.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And devastated a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did you see and experience in that regard along the way?
Speaker 2: Well at two dollars and the advice that my mother [Rosie Johnson Armstead] gave me, always stuck with me, and I realize I don't have an addictive personality either.  I can party for a while then again, I don't wanna go to another one, and you might not see me for months.  It was devastating, it still is.  It, the business is, is, is infiltrated with drugs, its, a vicious cycle.  Because the--to me, that life is not a normal life, it becomes normal because you're a musician and so forth, but it's not a normal life.  The adoration that high, high, you have people that to get to that level they need drugs, and then to come down from that level they need drugs.  So in its, somebody always there to give it to you, so by me I guess always skirting on the outside, outside of the box, I was never caught up in it.  I was always able to focus on what I wanted to do, I never became the millionaire (laughter) that I had wanted to.  But at certain points, I lived like one.
Story_ID: 520666
Speaker 1: You started another record label.
Speaker 2: Yes, my own, to release my own music and this was before social media had come along to give people a chance to do that, to get their music heard.
Speaker 1: So what, what is the label and when did you start it?
Speaker 2: It's called Preacher Rose [Preacher Rose Records], won't take much imagination to find out where that name came from.  I had recorded some, some going into the studio and recorded some songs that I had written.  I would do that from time to time when I called, when, when I had extra money, my input has not been as heavy as I would like it.  Because I've always financed myself, so I formed a label and sold records in, in the UK [United Kingdom].
Speaker 1: When did you form the label?
Speaker 2: Oh just before I left Chicago [Illinois] 1983 maybe, somewhere around there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and it is ongoing?
Speaker 2: Yes it's ongoing whenever I wanna release something, but it's not a, I'm, I'm just a one-woman's band, its, it's not going to the office every day running a record company (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah well so in, in recent years you, you worked again with Fred Wesley?
Speaker 2: Yes I did that has been the last project which started in 2014 and it is ongoing up to now.
Speaker 1: What, so what is the project?
Speaker 2: The project it's a recording of original tunes, I'm not sure I was going to do a complete album.  The format has changed so much today, nobody's buying albums, nobody's even buying CDs, so and I am not, because of my writing and the way I think and all the things I'm trying to do I am not, I'm a little technically challenged, and so I'm not fully integrated into you know social media.  But I know that there's a place for my music whenever I wanna put it out, just put it out.  In fact when I did this project, I had a little extra money probably the I, IRS [Internal Revenue Service] would've taken it.  And I wanted to go into the studio with live musicians and, and record, and I hooked up with Fred again, and said, "Hey let's do this."  So it was on a whim, came out very, very good, and I still haven't figured out what I wanna do with it.  But I send it out you know free.
Story_ID: 520667
Speaker 1: And in that same year, 2014, you returned to the stage in Brooklyn [New York], New Year's Eve?
Speaker 2: Yeah after thirty-three years and it was not pretty (laughter).
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: I, what can I tell you, the people loved it, I just had an out of body experience like what am I doing here (laughter).
Speaker 1: Where was it, what was it?
Speaker 2: It was in Brooklyn oh my goodness; oh the name of the place is Littlefield's [sic. Littlefield] in Brooklyn, a very nice place.  Produced by, I mean promoted by (laughter) ah what is the guy's name I, these are friends of mine and I can't remember their names.  But anyway that had been trying to get me to do this for five years, and finally I consented.  After my friend, Fred [Fred Wesley] and Mick [Mick Lewis] convinced me that I should do this, I could do it, and so I did.  It was, it was rewarding to know that I could and that people enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you enjoy it?
Speaker 2: It was, as I said, it's, it's work.  You've got to produce, you have got to whatever your insecurities are or whatever you are feeling that has to, you have to hide that.  And you have to put on this persona, and that takes some doing to some people, some people it's natural you know.  So it was really rough, after thirty-three years I didn't have the same instrument my voice, my range had changed, the control was not what it used to be.  I would reach for a note and it wasn't there, it's like oh you know so it was a, an awakening.
Story_ID: 520668
Speaker 1: Would you consider that you are retired now?
Speaker 2: I have been retired since 1996 when I went back to school, but this was like out of the blue, the recording and doing this New Year's Eve gig.
Speaker 1: So over the years, were you able to save money so that in 1996 you could retire and not have to work?
Speaker 2: Well fortunately for me you can retire at fifty-five from AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] and from SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], so I retired and I, I, I get a pension (laughter) and then after I, then after that there was social security.  And then after that, there are little royalty checks that come in, and so yes, I can make it.  There are consistent checks in the mail, being self-employed as a, as an artist, as a singer as a musician all these years has not been easy.  Because it's inconsistent, you never know what you gonna make, how much gonna make and when you gonna make it.  So yeah there are checks in the mail on a regular basis, and I can manage.
Speaker 1: That's a beautiful thing.
Speaker 2: And I do believe that it is how you live your imagination that determines the quality in the way you live, you know so.  Yeah I'm fine.
Story_ID: 520669
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  Well I'm very proud of the fact that I own my work, coming through the business from the time I started that was unheard of.  Everybody know the story of Prince fighting for many years to own his work, I've owned my, owned mine with my ex-husband [Melvin Collins] of course.  I own the rights to my work, and so I hope that people will remember that I did it my way (laughter).  I had the courage to walk away from jobs that people thought were, that that I was crazy.  I think I'm a congenial person that, with a happy personality, no malice, a loving and kind person, so my legacy is that hey, Joshie [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead] was cool.
Story_ID: 520670
Speaker 1: What would you offer as wisdom to someone who might wanna enter this industry today?
Speaker 2: The, being realistic hallivent [ph.], having talent is no guarantee of commercial success, choose whether you would like to be an artist, to express yourself or whether you're striving to become a personality or a celebrity.  I think the way young people are fed the business, the glamorous end of the business they wanna be celebrities.  This is not an easy business, it has casualties, people die, very talented people die over the years from how the business treats them.  So thinking that it's all glamorous it is not, but express yourself if this is what you want to do.  But be realistic you know, what can I say, there's a big misconception that it's a, a great life, it's a hardworking life.
Story_ID: 520671
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: A few, yeah a few, but they are things I regret I didn't do.
Speaker 1: Such as?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well a few people that I did not, how can I say express myself to in a way that they would know that they could probably they wouldn't, but that they could feel the pain that they inflicted.  Few times I've smiled, I think that's from Mississippi when I was devastated, but again never let them see you sweat, you hold it together.  I regret not losing it a couple of times to some powerful people, let me put it like that (laughter) and telling them to go to hell.  Because actually when I look in the mirror, I look at the one that's responsible for me.  So thinking that not expressing myself thinking that if I did it would hurt me, I think that was a mistake that was a regret.  Express yourself anyway, other times you have to suck it up, but you know there are times you have to burn that bridge.  So you know you won't go back that way an- again.  So some things that I didn't do, I wish I had done and those are things to sum it up would have been defending myself, I took it and I moved on.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you would like to share that I haven't asked?
Speaker 2: Sharing?
Speaker 1: Tell about yourself?
Speaker 2: About myself that I wish I had done a better interview (laughter).
Speaker 1: You did a great interview, did a great job, thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you, I'm delighted (laughter).
Speaker 1: We are too.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 520672
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We are looking at my mother, the Reverend, Evangelist Rosie Armstead [Rosie Johnson Armstead], Yazoo City, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and the approximate date?
Speaker 1: That would be around 1982, '83 [1983] maybe.
Speaker 2: This is my grandfather Lucius Johnson, Shine [ph.], the notorious bootlegger and gambler.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And that's your--?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, my mother's father.
Speaker 1: Around what time?
Speaker 2: Don't have a clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my [maternal] great-grandfather and his seven daughters, my grandfather one of his four sons is not included in the photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and your great-grandfather's name, do you know?
Speaker 2: Augustus Johnson [August Johnson].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay do you know anybody else's?
Speaker 2: If you go from left to right.
Speaker 1: Left ooh, left to, I let's go, oh my goodness, left to right I am not certain who they are.  I know directly behind my great grandfather is Aunt Mandy [Amanda Johnson], I know to the far right is Aunt Fletcha [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  See you did.
Speaker 1: I know seated from the right is Aunt Gussie [ph.], I think next to her would be Aunt Mary [ph.]; I'm not sure who the others are.  There's Aunt Fannie [ph.] and I can't remember.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good, that's fine.
Speaker 1: That's me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  About how old?
Speaker 1: I was about four years old, five years old.
Speaker 2: And what about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In kindergarten.
Speaker 2: Is this the same age?
Speaker 1: That's older (laughter) I might've been six, seven.
Speaker 2: The Ikettes, the original Ikettes, from left to right is Jessie Smith, Robbie Montgomery and that's me on the end Joshie Armstead [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead].
Speaker 1: And about when is this?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Is that from an album cover photo or just a (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That's from a book that somebody sent me.
Speaker 1: I have no idea the date of that poster that is the Ike and Tina Turner Revue featuring The Ikettes, and Little Josie as they spelled my name to the right, the bottom right of the poster.
Speaker 2: Yes, that would be aro- that's me around 1966.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Was the, was there an occasion with that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: It has been used for an album cover.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Wow do we wanna use this, that's a nude.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Well, that's your choice. Well you put it in front of the camera already--
Speaker 2: That's from 1976, '77 [1977] the very spiritual time in my life.
Speaker 1: Where were you?
Speaker 2: I was in the field in Connecticut, outside of Westport, Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Okay from left to right would be [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson, my daughter Chandra Armstead, me, and Nick Ashford after one of their concerts.  And my daughter was singing backup with them at the time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Picture of [HistoryMaker] Melvin Van Peebles, 'Don't Play Us Cheap!' at the Barrymore Theatre [Ethel Barrymore Theatre] in New York [New York].  That is from the musical 'Seesaw' on the Broadway stage.
Speaker 2: Publicity photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Approximate date?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976] '77 [1977], '78 [1978].  Publicity photo 1980 something.
Speaker 1: My daughter Chandra approximately twenty years old.
Speaker 2: That is after Tina Turner's triumph concert here in New York at the Platinum [ph.], I think it was the Platinum, after leaving Ike Turner.
Speaker 1: Can you say who you are that's you that's--?
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter) that's me with the hat on, from left to right, Joshie Armstead and Tina Turner.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Publicity photo with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones doing the soundtrack to oh 'The Wiz' (laughter).
Speaker 1: After to my club debut at the Cotton Club in New York City around 1976.
Speaker 2: From left to right Robbie Montgomery, Tina Turner and yours truly Joshie Armstead.
Speaker 1: Around when?
Speaker 2: Two thousand nine [2009], 2010 something like that.
Speaker 1: Same photo Robbie Montgomery, Tina Turner, Joshie Armstead.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988] Alfonso Ratliff, cruiserweight champion and manager, Joshie Armstead, yours truly.
Speaker 2: Alfonso Ratliff, WBC [World Boxing Council] champion, cruiserweight champion.
Speaker 1: Alfonso Ratliff and yours truly.
Speaker 2: The first inauguration of President Barack Obama [HistoryMaker Barack Obama] with my daughter on the stage.
Speaker 1: Here, where's your daughter?
Speaker 2: From left to right, she is second from--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Second from the left.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister Velma [Velma Davis Turner] who is now eighty-six years-old who was once married to Ike Turner.
Speaker 1: These are the musicians in the studio Avatar [Avatar Studios] in New York City, Fred Wesley, my musical arranger, an original session where I am the writer and the artist.
Speaker 2: Two thousand-fourteen [2014] in the studio with Fred Wesley.
Speaker 1: This was the album cover for 'Stumblin' Blocks, Steppin' Stones' ['Stumblin' Blocks, Steppin' Stones (What Took Me So Long)'].
Speaker 2: A picture of my mother Evangelist Rosie Armstead.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Oh that's me in the studio contemplating the sound of an album for Stax Records.
Speaker 1: This is a family photo my mother and her open Bible in the middle, and my daughter seated on the left, the rest are cousins.
Speaker 2: That's your daughter?
Speaker 1: That's my daughter seated on the left.
Speaker 2: Is her father black?
Speaker 1: Yes, he is he is octoroon (laughter).
Speaker 2: I understand what that mean.
Speaker 1: A Mississippi octoroon.
Speaker 2: In the studio with my arranger Paul Riser.
Speaker 1: Publicity studio, I mean photo.
Speaker 2: Who took that picture, do you know?
Speaker 1: Yes, I can't remember his name.
Speaker 2: Do you know what it looks like?  Dwight Carter.
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Dwight Carter.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, okay, do you know him, this looks, he, his work looks like that, beautiful shot.
