Story_ID: 2317
Speaker 1: My name is Samuel Adams.  I'm with The HistoryMakers.  Behind me is Scott Stearns  who'll be the videographer.  And I'm Samuel Adams.  I'll be the interviewer.  May I  have your name?
Speaker 2: I'm Na'im Akbar.
Speaker 1: Could you spell it for me?
Speaker 2: N-A- apostrophe I-M, small I-M.  Akbar.  A-K-B-A-R.
Speaker 1: Could I have today's date?
Speaker 2: It is April 22, 2002.
Speaker 1: Could I have the city and the address, location where we are today?
Speaker 2: We are located on the campus of Florida A and M University [Florida Agricultural and  Mechanical University] in Tallahassee, Florida
Speaker 1: Can I have your date of birth, sir?
Speaker 2: April 26, 1944.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a Professor of Psychology and a private consultant and business owner.
Story_ID: 2318
Speaker 1: What  is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Cauliflower and okra.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Gold, yellow gold.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation or destination spot?
Speaker 2: The West Coast of Africa, particularly around Accra, Ghana.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: This too shall pass.
Story_ID: 2319
Speaker 1: And I'd like to begin with you giving us the names of your mother, father, the spellings  and your siblings in order and their spellings also?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's name was Bessie, B-E-S-S-I-E Geraldine Small Weems.  Her maiden  name was Small.  Her middle name was Geraldine, Bessie, Geraldine, G-E-R-A-L-D-I- N-E, Small, and she -- her, her married name was Weems.  And she was remarried, she  was married a, a second time to a King.  So she was Bessie Weems King.  My father, my  father's name was Luther Benjamin Weems, L-U-T-H-E-R, B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N, W-E-E- M-S.  Luther Benjamin Weems.
Speaker 1: And your siblings?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have no siblings.  I'm an only child, only child.
Story_ID: 2320
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your mother's parents, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My, my maternal grandmother [Estelle Spencer-Small], my mother's mother, passed away when I was four  years old, 1948.  But I do remember her.  She was born in Jacksonville, Florida and came  here as a young girl, was raised by her mother's sister.  And this was like in the early  1900s.  She was born in 1888.  And she came here probably before she was a teenager when  she was about twelve or thirteen years old.  And grew up working primarily as a domestic  and eventually, she became one of the cooks at Florida State College for Women [later  Florida State University, Tallahassee].  And she served in that capacity for many years and she and her  daughters and friends together, you know, used to -- the, the women who went to Florida  State College for Women had to wear aprons as a part of their domestic white- homemaker kind of training.  And the aprons had to be washed and starched every day.  So one of the ways that my grandmother kind of made a side hustle is that she and, she  along with my mother [Bessie Weems-King] and my aunt, her two daughters, and some other girls from the  neighborhood, would, would wash these aprons in a big pot in the backyard.  And they  would bleach them out in the pot and have them -- then they would iron the aprons to  take them back to the coeds of Florida State College for Women.  She passed when I was  very, very young.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any stories being told about what type of woman she was?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was certainly a very religious woman.  That's one of the major stories that  everyone talked about her.  She was very much -- she was a staunch pillar of the  Christian Methodist Episcopal Church.  It was -- well, actually, it was the Colored  Methodist Episcopal Church in those days, the CME church.  And she was a very staunch  pillar in that church and I think that her religious faith was the thing that people thought  about her and you know spoke most highly about her.  I guess in many ways she typified  the kind of the black woman matriarch that somehow was able to do impossible things  with minimal resources.  She actually bought a home, you know, back in the late twenties  [1920s], early thirties [1930s].  And, you know, that became kind of the mainstay.  She,  she, she actually was married twice.  Yeah, her first husband passed away, and my  mother's father [Thomas Weems] was a second marriage.  And so she -- so my mother's two siblings, a bro  -- a sister and a brother were, have different fathers, but they were all, you know, raised  together by my grandmother.  And, you know, the, the, you know, the passion, the, the  compassion and the kindness that people always talked about how she could cook and  would always bring these huge pots for every kind of occasion, if anybody was sick.  And  another thing they used to say about her is that she cried at everybody's funeral.  She was  like the official mourner of the community, and like if anyone passed away, you could be  assured that my grandmother was going to be there and to be the official wailer at those  particular funerals, as a matter of fact.
Story_ID: 2321
Speaker 1: Now, your mother's father [Robert Small]?
Speaker 2: I don't know him very well.  He passed away actually when I was about two.  The only  stories I knew about him was that they say he was a very mean man and they said that he  would punish the children really fairly severely, particularly, my mother's sister and her  brother who were much older and who were not his biological children.  And they used to  hide from him because he would take a huge switch and would spank them good when  they didn't do what he wanted them to do, you know.  So the, the stories about him were  not very positive, you know.  But that's about all that I knew about him.
Story_ID: 2322
Speaker 1: How about your father's parents?
Speaker 2: I remember them very well.  My, my, my father's, father's name, was Thomas Weems.  T-H-O-M-A-S.  And we had called him Pa Bud.  And his mother's name was Alice  Weems.  And we called her Ma Shug.  So they were Pa Bud and Ma Shug.  I spent the  summers with them when I was in grade -- you know, very young, probably from about  the time I was seven, eight years old.  I would -- they lived in Alabama, in rural Alabama,  Henry County, which is near Dothan, Alabama.  And I would go and spend the summers  with them.  They had a farm.  And so this was my rural, Southern experience.  We would  -- I would help them in their, with their farming during the summer and milking the cows  and getting the eggs.  And what I most remember is fighting and running from the snakes.  It looks like there were more snakes in Southern Alabama than any place in the country.  And I remember one, on one occasion, my, my grandfather actually was ill, he was very  ill, and he had to get up out of his bed to come out to shoot a snake that was in one of the  chicken nests, you know.  You know, they were, you know, there, there were mostly  other women around the house and he was the man of the house still.  So he came out to,  you know, to shoot the snake, so.  But they were very kindly people, both were illiterate.  My, my grandfather actually did not learn to read until an adult education program came  somewhere around World War II.  And he began to learn how to at least write his name.  My grandmother was able to, you know, did the bare minimum.  She must have, you  know, maybe finished some of the lower grades in terms of, you know, her education.  So  neither one of them was educated in that sense, but they were -- he was again a very  strong man of faith.  I remember the blessings that he would give at the table, these long,  long, long blessings, which were mini-sermons.  I mean, he wasn't a minister or  anything, but it's just that, you know, at, at, at dinnertime, we had these big long prayers  that were at the table, you know.  Probably, there were few things that I enjoyed more  during that first part of my life than to be able to spend that summertime up in the country  with them.  And outdoor toilet, a pump for water that was actually a well that you had to  pump the water, you know, near the back door.  They had a wood stove.  The food they  prepared was on a wood stove.  And, you know, and all of that was just so romantic for  me.  I mean it was just -- I, I lived in a slightly more urban environment in Tallahassee so  to really go back, go up there was really almost to go back in time.  And the thing that  was the greatest joy for me was to -- they would sit on the porch at night and, you know,  in the, in the late evening and the night and would talk, tell all these stories, talk about,  you know, their childhood and what it was like.  And, you know, and just talk, grown  folks talk.  And I just enjoyed listening to those stories.
Speaker 1: Is there any one story that stands in your mind that they shared with (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I, I can't really put them together.  It's just I, I just remember enjoying the  stories, you know, that, that they, they would talk.  Nothing stands out though.
Story_ID: 2323
Speaker 1: What type of woman was your mom?
Speaker 2: Very -- my mother [Bessie Weems-King], okay.  Both my mother and my aunt, who were the two girls of my,  my, of my grandmother, my maternal grand, grandmother, they both finished college.  In  fact, my, mother received a Bachelor's degree as well as a Master's degree up here at  Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee].  And, my gran -- my  aunt, received a, a Bachelor's degree, a Master's degree, and subsequently got a second  Master's -- I'm sorry, received a Master's degree at Columbia University Teachers  College [New York, New York], and had begun work on her Ph.D, but had a stroke in one of her eyes and was  never -- it was partially blind, was never able to really complete the Ph.D.  But they were  highly educationally motivated, you know.  So my aunt, my mother was really a kind of  a, kind of quiet, low-keyed, very methodical kind of person, very fastidious.  She kept  things, you know, very well organized.  And she was an impeccable dresser.  She liked to  dress, was a sharp dresser, not garish, very conservative, but very tastefully, you know.  Was a tremendous planner and budgeter.  I mean she was able to do just incredible things  with limited amounts of income.  And she had incredible faith.  I mean she believed that  you could pray your way through anything.  And even in the most difficult  circumstances, you know, she believed in prayer in that kind of way.  And it was a very  important part of, of who she was and, you know, what she communicated to me.  I'm the  only child and my parents were -- were actually divorced when I was about, I guess about  ten, about ten years old.  And I was raised, you know, primarily by my mother.  So we  were really very, very close.  I meant I, we were, at the same time, she was a very strong  disciplinarian.  I mean she didn't take no stuff, you know.  And I meant if I'd, if I'd  violated the law, I was punished.  And she was very, you know, consistent about that.  But at the same time, she was extremely, you know, tolerant and compassionate and  really just very indulgent to the degree to which our limited resources permitted that kind  of indulgence, you know.  So for example, I was one of the first kids to be able to sort of  drive the car when I got to be fourteen because she had a car, and she'd let me drive the  car and really trusted me in ways that most parents really didn't trust their children.  But  she had -- she really believed that if I said I was going to do something, I was going to do  it.  And she had no problems with, you know, permitting me to, to, you know, have all  kinds of liberties.  One of the things that she had always told me was that when she was  growing up, her mother had so much confidence in her that she let her take a hundred  dollar bill to school one day, when she was a little girl.  And I mean this was like back in  the twenties [1920s].  And so a hundred dollar bill was major money.  But my, my  grandmother had so much confidence in her that she actually let her take the hundred  dollar bill to school.  So I, when I was in, in middle school I heard these stories for so  long I asked her could I take one cause, you know, she had a hundred dollar bill in her  pocketbook.  And I said, well, could I take the hundred dollar bill to school.  And she let  me take it, you know.  And that was a real kind of day of victory for me, that she had that  kind of faith, that I could take the hundred dollar bill to school and, and brought it home.  I had some, some tempters who wanted to take it from me, but I was able to survive to  get it back as a matter of fact.
Story_ID: 2324
Speaker 1: What type of man was your father?
Speaker 2: My father [Luther Weems, Sr.], who's still living -- my mother passed away about twenty years ago.  But my,  my father's still living; a very low-keyed kind of guy.  He, he eventually finished a  college degree too over, you know, many, many years.  He worked -- he, he, his major  career was actually in the post office.  He was a mailman.  And very different from my  mother's style, he was much more of a, he was a party animal, but a subdued party  animal, in the sense that he really enjoyed entertaining people.  He enjoyed having food  around.  He enjoyed having, you know, drinks around.  He enjoyed company, you know.  And my mother was much more of an organized, organization kind of person.  He was  extremely sensitive.  I think one of the things I remember most about my father and that,  you know, he's still living, was I remember him crying like on any number of occasions.  I remember him crying at his parents' funeral.  Well, he actually had a couple of siblings  to pass away before his parents did even.  And I remember him being extremely upset  and, and really crying very hard at those funerals.  And I mean, you just didn't see very  many men who cried, you know.  And I meant, and that, that was always something just  really sort of impressed me by him.  Because he was, he -- the, the -- when, when my  parents were divorced when I was about nine years, about ten years old, I didn't spend a  lot of time with him, except in the summers.  I would visit him during the summers.  He  was living in Michigan at the time.  And I would always go up and spend the summers  with him, and spend a lot of time.  But -- so during the fairly, you know, when I became a  teenager kind of thing, we, he wasn't around a great deal.  So we didn't, we didn't have  the kind of closeness that I had with my mother.  But he was always kind of a buddy, you  know, he was much of a good uncle than he was a real father.  So he wasn't the one I  would go to for sage advice, you know.  But I, he was someone I could always, like feel  that he would accept things about me that even, that my mother may not accept.  I mean  he could, he could tolerate, you know, things that my mother found intolerable, you  know, in many kinds of ways, you know.  So that, that made him a real kind of buddy in  many ways that was very, that was really a very positive kind of thing.
Story_ID: 2325
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: Actually, my father came from Southern Alabama to, down to Florida to get a job, get  good work, probably just prior to World War, World War II, around I guess the late  thirties [1930s] during, during -- actually, it was during the depression.  And his first  work was the, you know, the, the -- they'd set up these CC camps [Civilian Conservation  Corps Camps] where they were planting trees and things like that.  And so he came  down, got one of those jobs.  Subsequently, just prior to World War II, he began to work  at Cape Blanton [Camp Blanton] over in Stark, Florida.  And Tallahassee and  Jacksonville were the only metropolitan areas in North Florida.  And so when the, the  colored soldiers who were working or the colored civilians who were working at Camp,  Camp Blanton would go out for the weekend, they would come over to Tallahassee.  And  he came over with some other fellows who were also working on this base.  And they  came -- one of them apparently knew my grandmother and came by my grandmother's  house and brought him and some of the other fellows as well.  You know, came by, had  dinner, you know, that kind of thing.  And my mother, he and my mother met during one  of those visits.  And then he began to come up on a regular basis on the weekends and,  and, for a while.  And then eventually, he actually joined the Navy in World War II,  probably about 1940, '41 [1941] or something like that.  And did, you know, join the  Navy, in fact, went in, that was the wartime.  So about midway through the war, I guess  about '42 [1942] or so, you know, he came back whilst in the Navy, and they got  married, you know, here in Tallahassee [Florida].  And then he went back, you know,  into service as a matter of fact where he stayed probably until about '46 [1946], '47  [1947] or something like that.  After, you know, even after the war was over, he stayed.  And then he was in the Reserve after that, you know.  So that's how they met.  They met  by him just sort of coming up to Tallahassee to party and, of course, one of the things that  characterized, you know, deeply segregated Tallahassee in those days, is that basically  most of the entertainment was about pretty much limited to private homes.  And so the  fact that, as I mentioned early, my grandmother owned a home there, modest, but you  know, it was a, one of the few, you know, people, you know, it was one of the few places  where there was actually a home.  And it was near the, the entertainment area that we  now know as Frenchtown [Tallahassee, Florida].  So therefore, when people came to town, they would, you  know, come by her house and, you know, then they'd go up to Frenchtown to party a  little bit.  And so they met in -- his coming to Tallahassee on those kinds of visits led to  meeting my mother.
Story_ID: 2326
Speaker 1: Who was in your household?
Speaker 2: At, at -- when I was growing up?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Actually, just my mother and I.  Just the two of us, right.  My mother's sister lived a  couple of blocks away.  She had no children and so she and her husband lived just a  couple of blocks from my mother and I so I, I kind of lived back and forth between the  two households.  And I always really sort of thought of myself as actually having two  mothers.  And subsequent -- and actually, my mother passed away before my aunt did.  And so she became kind of the continuation of mother, after my, even after my mother  had passed away.
Story_ID: 2327
Speaker 1: Dr. Akbar, what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Go, going to New York.  We, we -- my, my aunt as I mentioned, was doing this Master's  in, at, at, Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  And she moved up there for two years to live  with a, a great aunt, live with an aunt of hers.  And my grandmother [Estelle Spencer-Small], you know, passed  away during the time that she was up there.  And so in the course of the year, after she'd  come from the funeral and everything and gone up there, she became very homesick.  And so she arranged to have my mother and I to come up and visit her in New York.  And so the train ride, you know, to New York was just extremely exciting.  And I mean I  still remember today her standing at the top of the escalator when we came.  You know,  we, we were coming off the train into, you know, Grand Central Station.  I guess that, it  was probably Grand Central Station.  And I remember, you know, you know, that and the  excitement of, of that.  And while we were there, we, you know, saw the Empire State  Building and all of these things.  And it was just like -- for the mind of a -- I guess I was  probably about five years old, and I mean it was just awesome.  It was just the most  awesome thing I, I have ever remembered.  I guess that's why I've become like a lifetime  traveler.  So I now live on the road.  I've spent most of the last thirty years of my life  living on the road.  And I think that the fascination of that first trip really stood out.
Speaker 1: Literally impacted you.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 2328
Speaker 1: What, what was your household like?  How did it work, you and your mother [Bessie Weems-King] pretty  much being in there alone?  How did that work?
Speaker 2: I was a real kind of companion in many ways.  It, like, when I, when I reached -- when I  became a teenager, I guess about thirteen or so, we kind of alternated shifts in terms of  taking care of the house.  I mean by -- well taking care of like the, the, the major kind of  preparations.  So I had a week to prepare breakfast.  So I would get up on those  mornings, and I would fix breakfast for the two of us.  She would go -- before she went  off to work and, and before I went off to school.  And then on, in the alternate weeks, she  would prepare breakfast.  So she had her week to prepare breakfast.  I had my week to  prepare breakfast.  And we really kind of, you know, really shared the responsibilities of  the household itself, you know.  Interestingly enough, I guess I'm really beginning to feel  very old here.  We, we really didn't have television until I was in about sixth grade.  There was no television in Tallahassee [Florida].  So I remember Sunday nights, actually  sitting around the radio, listening to Jack Benny ['The Jack Benny Show'] and 'Amos  and Andy,' and all of these radio kind of dramas.  I mean that was a Sunday night  entertainment for us, for us to sit there and listen to, you know, the Sunday night radio,  you know, programs.  And, of course, there was just lots of, you know, visiting and  conversation.  I mean like, as I said, back and forth at my aunt's house, and, you know,  lots of friends in the neighborhood.  I mean like the houses were entertainment centers.  I  mean people spent lots of time visiting.  And kind of like the highlight for me was to sort  of like go with them, you know, visiting other people and have people come to visit to  our house as well, particularly, if they had children, too, 'cause being an only child, just  to be able to be with other children was a major kind of coup for me.  And, plus the  neighborhood was really like an extended family kind of neighborhood.  I mean carrying  on the tradition that my grandmother [Estelle Spencer-Small] had, as having kind of like the community center  house, in other words.  My mother, when she ul-- ultimately built her own house, that  became kind of the community center as I was growing up.  So most of the kids in the  neighborhood sort of came through my house.  You know, that's where we'd sort of hang  out, play baseball in the backyard, football in the yard.  And then, you know, even, you  know, games and stuff inside the house as well.  So we spent a lot of time, you know,  doing that.  So it was that whole kind of social network that really was the most enjoyable  part of my growing up.
Story_ID: 2329
Speaker 1: Since you were an only child and people always say that there are so many different  psychoses that go with that, I'm going to ask you, what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: An overly nice child.  I was a real nice kid.  And I really was fairly well disciplined,  serious about studies, you know.  I mean from the very beginning I mean I real, really  liked things like, unusual in the sense I, you know, I really liked reading and all those  kinds of things.  And a part of it was that I was really raised by these schoolteachers.  You know, my mother was a schoolteacher, even though she later became a school  administrator.  And my aunt was a schoolteacher.  And probably, I guess probably even  an earlier memory, the, the New York memory was my, my Aunt taking me to school  with her.  She was principal, she was principal of one of these, rural schools that had  about five different grades in one classroom.  And there was a big potbelly stove that,  when they got there in the morning, she'd have to put on the lunch on the stove.  They  had to prepare the lunch for children.  It, usually a big pot of stew or, or soup or  something.  So the stove served doubly to keep the school room, this one-room  schoolhouse, kind of warm, as well as that's where the food was prepared as well, you  know.  And so she would take me there, and I would sit in the classes with the younger  kids.  And she would have me like writing stuff and learning stuff, you know, very -- and  this was preschool.  I mean I was, I was attending nursery school, but this would be  vacation times when I would go with them.  So the thing is, is that, you know, writing  and saying words and reading and stuff was just, they just put a lot of emphasis on that.  I  mean they used to be, make a big deal of my giving speeches and saying, you know, like  making certain kinds of statements very early.  And that kind of experience like, you  know, really created a kind of a studiousness, you know, about me, you know.  But I  wasn't -- I mean I was, I was not a -- I was really kind of a soft boy.  You know, I was  not very much into athletics and stuff like that, and really much, very much impacted by  these women who raised me, you know.  And -- but, but it really gave me -- oh, and then,  another thing, as I began to get into school, I got very involved with a, a children's  theater group here at Florida A and M's [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee]  campus, there was a woman who really kind of specialized in children's theater for black  kids on black colleges.  She was the wife of the Director of the Drama Department here.  Her name was Irene Edmonds.  And her husband was Randolph C. Edmonds who was  the Chairman of the Theater Department here.  But she had, had sort of like pioneered a  children's theater program.  And, so probably when I was in first or second grade, I got  involved with her with this children's theater.  And like throughout my childhood, all the  way through middle school, each year we did a major production, 'Peter Pan,' 'The  Emperor's New Clothes,' 'Peter Gynt' the 'Sleeping Beauty,' so forth and so  on.  And each year I became kind of -- I had a starring role in one of these plays.  So I  started -- and it, and it was like a really holistic kind of cultural thing. Not only did we do  the theater, but she like did, you know, music appreciation stuff.  She like, you know, we  learned, you know, we learned dance and certainly articulation.  You know, it was  something that she really made a key part of that whole thing.  So, I was really kind of  like really into being an actor before I got to middle school good.  And I had no idea that  would become one of the, kind of the tools for the rest of my life because I still do much  of what I do as a result of that early speech training that I got, you know, by working with  the, the, the children's theater.  So my involvement with the children's theater, you know,  was kind of like one of my primary kind of recreational things all the way through the  elementary grades and for middle school.
Story_ID: 2330
Speaker 1: So take me back to that childhood in Tallahassee [Florida], what sights, sounds and  smells bring you back to that place?
Speaker 2: We, one of the reasons I came, I moved back to Tallahassee [Florida] after finishing my  degree and getting married and things like that and came back here about twenty-some  years ago was because there are so many things, even with the tremendous changes in  Tallahassee, that still bring back those memories.  There is a very old lady who I visit  now on a regular basis and our visits are always on her front porch.  And somehow I like  sitting on the front porch and watching people pass and talking on the front porch.  It  goes back to the thing I was telling you about the Alabama and the, the way I sort of grew  up.  And people in the south and particularly in small towns like this really kind of lived  on their front porches.  And this was like a really kind of center of life and activity.  I  mean and everything sort of went on from counseling -- from between the kitchen table  and the front porch was, you know, you didn't have any air conditioning, you know.  And  it got hot in those houses, so that's where we had to spend our time.  So I think that those  even now, with an air-conditioned house, I like to sit on the front porch.  I have a porch.  And to be able to sit out there and, particularly, in the early evening and to feel that kind  of breeze, that whole thing sort of brings back to me what it was like growing up in  Tallahassee, you know.
Story_ID: 2331
Speaker 1: Dr. Akbar, you told us, you touched on the fact that your neighborhood was like an  extended family and people travel around as communal atmosphere.  Are there, is there  anyone in that neighborhood when you're growing up that's like a mentor to you or guide  to you, people you extremely admired?
Speaker 2: You know, it was a very interesting -- cause one of the things that characterized those  neighborhoods, I, I grew up in Frenchtown [Tallahassee, Florida].  And at  the same time that it was, it, it, it later got the reputation of being kind of the, the ghetto,  lower-income kind of area.  At the time that I grew, it was a very diverse and  heterogeneous community.  The funeral director lived on one corner.  A minister lived  right around the corner.  The doctor lived one block up the street.  The other physicians --  a couple other physicians had their office like a block and a half away.  And, you know,  people were, were domestics, laundry workers or maintenance workers.  I mean we had  everything in that community, all right there together.  And the, that heterogeneity, you  know, like it really gave us kind of like a cross section of the whole black community.  So there were schoolteachers, preachers, teachers, laundry workers, domestics, all right in  the same neighborhood.  They're waving at each other across the street.  And I mean it  wasn't that somehow you lived in the poor black community.  You lived in the black  community, and we were all right there together.  So as a result of that then, we had  influences from the whole gamut.  We had influences from very, very spiritually  powerful people who never finished school.  Simultaneously, we were, you know,  influenced and interacted with on a regular basis, people who had Master's degrees and  even doctorate degrees, you know, who lived in the same neighborhood.  So all these  people like, you know, they're very much -- I mean I can, you know, Mrs. Strong who  was the director of the funeral home, you know, right down the street, lived one block,  was my mother's [Bessie Weems-King] soror, when they were growing up.  But my -- she was the mother -- she  was in, in the, in the same sorority as my mother.  And she was kind of almost like, kind  of a godmother.  And, just a very prissy lady, just prissy, and I meant, you know, she was  the kind who never stepped outside of the door unless her hair was absolutely  immaculate.  You never saw her in the grocery store, anywhere, looking anything other  than like she's walked out of the, you know, what, I guess the, out of the, the most  elegant kind of environment.  You know, just very moral, socially sensitive, just very  bourgeois people.  But bourgeois in a black sense, I mean like, they really understood  that there, you know, that they, that our communities represented excellence at the  highest form.  And they expected that of themselves and they expected that of the  children, you know.  Sister Mattie Pope who -- I called her Sister Mattie because she  went to my mother's church, you know.  And, so she is, was almost always kind of a part  of the family as well, you know.  And, she was always the one who would take me, teach  me my Sunday school speech, my, my speeches for Christmas programs and Easter  programs.  And she was also the Sunday School teacher for, you know.  And at the same,  she cooked some of the best muffins in the world.  So whenever she cooked some of  those good cornbread muffins, she'd always call me over to have a couple of those  cornbread muffins too.  So I'm saying, all these people.
Story_ID: 2332
Speaker 1: Let me tell you something, I, I -- when I was about twelve, I got, I had a paper route.  And the, the newspaper route was in  my community.  It was a afternoon, paper route, except on Sunday mornings.  And  basically, it was in the Frenchtown area [Tallahassee, Florida].  In, in fact,  my aunt and my mother, they were my customers as well.  They also helped me deliver  the papers on days when it got rainy and stuff too.  But on Sunday mornings, sometimes  it would take me almost two hours or three hours to deliver a thirty-minute paper route  because I would have several breakfasts at people's houses as I moved around, you know,  through the neighborhood.  So when I got to Eva Manning's house, you know, she'd fix  some fried fish.  So she had a little piece of fish and grits for me to come in.  And then I  got to Sister Mattie's house, and Sister Mattie had some, you know, some cornbread  muffins.  I would get to my aunt's house, she'd fix some biscuits, you know.  So I'd be  eating all along the paper route.  And the thing of it is, is that I was delivering the paper,  but I'd be -- all these were my mothers.  All these were my mothers, your, Reverend  Bright.  Went up to Reverend Bright's house and he wanted to, you know, find out how I  was doing in school, but I delivered his paper, you know.  So I'd have to talk to him and  explain, you know, what was going on with them.  Then, of course, I would go by Ms.  Strong's house and she'd be sitting there.  And she'd be on the porch, and she'd be  expecting me as well.  So I'm saying, it was a regular kind of visitation with this  extended family system that, that, you know, came that was really kind of played out with  the paper route.
Story_ID: 2333
Speaker 1: Is there, is there anyone now, this extended family that you're having, in, inside the  neighborhood, are you cognizant at that time that, the types of influences they're having  upon you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  No, I -- it,it was just, it was just the way it was.  You know, one of the things  that and we'll probably talk about this later, but one of the things is that I never had a  peer conversation with a white person until I was a freshman in college.  In other words,  we interacted with the white community only as kind of like peripheral presence.  I mean  we didn't -- it was another world.  We didn't go into that world.  That world didn't come  into our -- it invaded our world from time to time, but not, not to any appreciable degree.  My doctor, my lawyer, my preacher, my teacher, my dentist, everybody I dealt with was  black.  My world was completely black.  And basically, I never thought of it in any other  way.  I mean like, you know, my -- as I mentioned, my grandmother worked as a, a cook  up at Florida State College for Women [later Florida State University, Tallahassee].  But we weren't  permitted to even go onto the campus.  We could pass along the street, but if we ventured  over into the campus, as children even, we'd be put in jail.  I mean like black children  couldn't go on Florida State College for Women, that became Florida State University's  campus.  I mean we couldn't even, you know, venture into that community.  Downtown,  of course, there was segregated counters in the lunchroom, in the, in the stores.  And, you  know, we could go into the stores and things to buy clothes, but there was no kind of real  interaction.  So I didn't at that time understand what was happening.  But what I  subsequently understood is that I was raised in a community of black autonomy, you  know, black people took care of ourselves.  We had our own businesses.  We had our  own enterprises.  We had our own religious -- we had our own educational centers.  And  everything that constituted life was run and were modeled by black people.  And then, of  course, I lived in Tallahassee and Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical  University, Tallahassee] had a profound impact as well.  So we had professional, you know, things as  well, which constituted the totality of community.  So we couldn't imagine or that I  couldn't imagine a world where black people weren't able to take care of themselves  because that's the way that we kind of grew up.  I didn't know that then because I always  was kind of like tantalized by this other world out there, you know, the, the world that we  were quote, unquote "segregated" from which was supposed to be the world that we  should really kind of aspire for and a really desirable world.  So at the same time that we  got a, kind of this message that somehow our world was not quite as good as their world,  what actually got communicated was that our world was more than capable of taking care  of itself.  It was, you know, we had a great deal of pride as I mentioned, the way Ms.  Strong carried herself, and the way Reverend Bright, you know, always like, you know,  talked about education.  And the way that Aunt Eunice required me to learn my speeches  and the way all these people, you know, like were impacting on me.  They were giving  me all these values about, you know, black excellence and capability and being able to  be autonomous and self-determining.  I mean all those kinds of things, which later  became a part of my ideology, was really a part of my upbringing.  And it was a part --  the, the only upbringing I really knew.  So, no, I was not aware of what I was learning  while I was learning.  But retrospect, all that I became was a consequence of that.
Story_ID: 2334
Speaker 1: Now, can you explain how that sense of community and the sense, that sense of blacks  having that own world you lived in extended into your school?
Speaker 2: Well, the school was kind of the center of that world in many ways, and not only my  school, but I lived -- it was a very interesting kind of, of split that existed because I lived  like within one block of the major public black high school, Lincoln High School, which  was located in Frenchtown [Tallahassee, Florida].  And even though  Frenchtown, as I said, had this like complete diversity in terms of economic status and  things like that, the, the center of what Frenchtown representated was really identified with  Lincoln High School.  And that was the center of education and learning.  And every --  even all the way back to the time of John G. Riley, who was the first black principal of  the high school, old Lincoln High School, you know.  And I mean he was a member, by  the way, of my mother's church.  And as a little boy, I remember him, you know, being  the superintendent of Sunday School, he was about ninety-some years old and retired  then.  But I'm saying those images of educational excellence were the clear images that  prevailed.  So the impact then, the, the impact of the school as a center of learning for the  entire Leon County [Florida] black community was right up the street from my house.  And my aunt taught there and, I mean, it was just very much a part of what my  experience was like.  But in addition to that, I attended school over at Florida A and M's  [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] law, not law school, not, not at that  young age, at their lab school.  And the lab school was like, you know, a grade one  through twelve and it was like, again, a part Florida A and M University.  So essentially,  I grew up on Florida A and M University's campus, you know, even though we were,  you know, down in the elementary grades, first and second grade, third grade, like all of  the people there just about, the majority of the teachers were either wives or husbands or  affiliated with University professors.  Of course, the univers -- the school itself was the  place where practice teachers came from early.  So we had a great deal of interaction with  the University.  So we really didn't even distinguish ourselves very much.  We called  ourselves the "baby rattlers."  And the Rattlers [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical  University, Tallahassee, mascot], of course, was the big rattler.  And we sort of saw ourselves as being  kind of like the, the little mascots of the big university.  So we, we felt very much a part  of that center of that environment.  So, again, the social life, the, the entertainment life,  basically, the way we lived as a community, it was really very much centered and  dictated by that.  And this is one of the things I think that made Tallahassee [Florida]  maybe somewhat different from most southern towns of a comparable size.  Whereas  those other towns may be like Tallahassee, where pretty much the social and the cultural  life was pretty much dictated by the church, Tallahassee's social and cultural life was  primarily dictated by the educational centers.  I mean, but we had, you know, strong  influential churches, Reverend [c. K.] Steele and, you know, many,  many others, many years later that has had profound social and civic and political impact.  But the real kind of center of the life of the black community in Tallahassee were these,  were these educational environments, you know.
Story_ID: 2335
Speaker 1: What advantage do you feel that that created for you --
Speaker 2: Oh, it made me --
Speaker 1: -- in Tallahassee?
Speaker 2: Oh, it made me a lifetime commit, you know, gave me a lifetime commitment to learning  in scholarly, into scholarship.  I meant like I believe that there's probably nothing more  powerful for human beings than this process of learning and education.  And I mean I,  and I guess I was sort of bred on that, and I mean and my whole socialization in this  community has sort of fed that.  And I meant so, you know, it's not accidental that I end  up, you know, in academia and things like that because it was very much influenced that  kind of im-- impact.  But another kind of thing too, and, unfortunately, this is not very,  very well documented.  The vast majority of the graduates of Florida A and M [Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] High School, I mean like, you know-- it was a  fairly small school.  The entire school from probably first grade to twelfth grade was  probably never more than 500 students in all.  And each year the graduating class  probably was like 35, maybe maximum 40 people.  But of those 35 or 40 people,  probably each year 80 to 90 percent of them went on to college.  And it was almost an  inevitability that somehow you were -- that's the 13th grade.  So you'd go on through 12  grades down here in the, in the high school.  And the 13th grade is FAMU [Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee].  And that's where most of the, of the students  went.  Most of them, by the way, did come to FAMU and very, very few went away.  But  everybody went on, you know, sort of assumed college to be the next step.  So that, that  made it a very different kind of environment.
Story_ID: 2336
Speaker 1: Who were your academic nurturers at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical  University, Tallahassee]?
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, Mrs. Wright, my fifth grade teacher, who was a little short lady who seldom  smiled, but always required you to diagram sentences and do it effectively, and whose,  whose approval was a tremendously powerful thing for me.  Mrs. Lang, another -- she  was a, a English teacher in the middle school, you know, who again, very kindly, again,  articulate -- and the, and the thing about these people is that they were just like,  excellence was the motto.  I mean there was no question about-- this issue of black  inferiority and what black people couldn't do and underachievement, that was absolutely  unheard around -- we didn't know anything about that.  I mean we really thought that we  were as good as anybody.  And once in a while we were impacted by the segregationist  message out there that we were really in these segregated schools because we were  inferior.  But ba-- basically, the message we always got is that we were as good as  anyone and probably better than most.  And they expected us to be able to do that, you  know.  So Ms. Lang and Ms. Wright and Ms. Seabrooks, my second grade teacher.  The  principal, actually, of the school, Matthew Esterous who actually became the Principal of  the school probably when I was in about fifth or sixth grade and actually remained there  for probably another thirty years or so, but he was a real strict disciplinarian.  I remember  my hand still aches from this tread off of a tire that he would spank us in our hands with  when we were either disturbing classes or doing that we weren't supposed to do, you  know.  In those days, you could, you could spank kids and you wouldn't have to go to  court.  We would, of course, sue him today, if he did those kinds of things.  But in those  days, you know, that kind of corporal discipline was legitimate.  And he took full  advantage of it.  But I mean, but those, those people served -- and, and the coaches.  I  mean and again, I told you that I wasn't athletic.  But the coaches were fathers and that  they'd, and that they didn't just coach the team.  I mean they were concerned about the  lives of the boys.  And I mean they were very, very much committed to that, not just the  physical development, but, you know, the moral development, the hygiene and things like  that.  And in fact, the coaches, I mean even though I was kind of like the bookworm type,  they involved me as I got in senior high school, they made sure that I was a part of that,  of the, of the athletic life.  So I was a scorekeeper for the basketball team.  I was the  statistician for the football team.  So I got a chance to make all the games and go with the  football players, and every place, the basketball team.  I mean so I was there in the  athletic life even though I wasn't a real, a player.  And I mean, and, and they made a  conscious effort to make sure that I was balanced, you know, that somehow I wasn't just  kind of like the nerd, egghead over there doing the academic thing with the girls, that  somehow I was a part of the boys' community too because, you know, because of that  involvement with the athletics, which, which I thought was a kind of a, a sensitive  understanding of the need for that kind of balanced development.  And they really did  serve, you know, as, as really fathers in many ways for us.
Story_ID: 2337
Speaker 1: Now, who specifically played the role of being the substitute or the surrogate father that --
Speaker 2: for me?
Speaker 1: -- for you, yeah?
Speaker 2: Probably no one in particular.  Kind of like a, a conversion of several people.  My  mother's brother who interestingly enough was a, a weekend alcoholic, he, he worked  five days a week immaculate -- he cooked in one of those school cafeterias and one of the  best cooks in the world.  And from Monday morning until Friday afternoon, he was  absolutely starch, stiff, sober.  On Friday night till Sunday night, he was drunk as a dog.  And, and I, we, we -- so he had this kind of, all this is kind of multiple personality in  terms of that.  But he, often he served in many ways as a kind of like a role model during  those five days of the week when he was sober, you know.  And, and that he would  always come by in the mornings on his way to, on his way to school, you know.  And,  you know, wanted to make sure that my mother was okay, I was okay, and things like  that.  And, you know, in many ways, he was a real kind of support for that.  But in  addition to that, I was very much involved in, you know, growing up in the church.  So  the ministers were very important.  There were several, Reverend Wardlow (unclear),  Reverend Armster (unclear), and Reverend Wardlow and Reverend Armster especially  were, you know, really kind of active in terms of being an influence on me.  And then, of  course, as I said, the principal of the school, Mr. Esterous, you know, Coach  Montgomery, Coach Lang, these were the high school coaches when I was coming  through.  They were, you know, very influential as well.
Story_ID: 2338
Speaker 1: And you keep referring to yourself as egghead and nerd, I heard these (unclear), what  type of student were you?
Speaker 2: A very good student.  I was a very good -- I mean like from the very beginning, I always  kind of, you know, I kind of excelled, always in the top, you know, one or two, you  know, of, of the class, from the beginning to the end.  In fact, in the first grade, I was kind  of identified as the -- there was a young girl in the class with me named Brenda and I  were sort of like the, the, the official mascots of the school, in the sense that we were sort  of seen as like your, I guess most likely to succeed, even from the first grade, you know.  Brenda subsequently left that high school and she -- left that school before we finished  middle school, actually.  But she was replaced by Cynthia.  And Cynthia was the  valedictorian.  I was the salutatorian.  We were kind of like one and two all the way  through high school, you know.
Speaker 1: So who was nurturing this, this (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Everybody.  I mean like it was just, like I said earlier, it was all these people.  I mean it  was like everybody from Ms. Wright and Ms. Lang, Ms. Edmonds, you know, at the  children's theater.  I mean like, you know, I mean she really cultivated this kind of like  sensitivity to the arts in ways that you didn't even imagine would have existed like, you  know, in rural southern, you know, 1950s Tallahassee, Florida, you know.  But, I mean  like we were doing, as, as I said, we were doing Peter Gynt, you know.  We were doing,  you know, plays and the music and the understanding Tchaikovsky's, you know, music  scores to go along with those kinds of things.  And then these are the things that were just  like a part of my regular routine.  And I got lots of, you know, getting lots of praise and  applause from that.  I meant like, you know, the, the plays that we would do at the  children's theater during, each year when we did these major plays, the schools, the  county schools would all be let out.  And they would bring them on buses over here  [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] to Lee Auditorium for the children to  see the plays, you know.  So, I mean, I was kind of known throughout the city as that,  you know, that little boy who was in those plays who could learn those long speeches,  you know.  And I mean so that was a, it was just a very cultivated, you know, kind of  idea that that was kind of like what was expected, you know, of me.  And then, of course,  I told you, you know, my aunt, you know, herself, you know, -- my aunt was more of an  intellectual than my mother was.  My mother finished her Master's and she was an  administrator.  She was a very pragmatic person.  I mean she could budget money.  She  could get things done, and she was just a very practical kind of person.  And my aunt was  just much more of a the tickler for details.  I mean she was very much, I mean much more  of a scholarly type.  And so she would lead and, you know, in learning and memorizing  and reading and all those kinds of things.  And she really encouraged that very early as  well.
Story_ID: 2339
Speaker 1: Well, actually, there, there weren't a lot of extracurricular activities other than the things  I mentioned to other -- those schools were primarily sports oriented kinds of things.  Now, of course, there was student government, the school newspapers, you know, and  those kinds of things.  So I was also very active in all of those things from the earliest  days.  I believe and I think we kind of engineered an elementary school paper even before  I got to the high school paper.  And then ultimately the school yearbook and those kinds  of things too.  And whenever there were things that, that, you know, activities that went  on -- I remember when I -- it must have been about, probably ninth or tenth grade.  And  every year during the homecoming celebration, you know, we'd, we'd had, you know, all  these various activities getting ready for homecoming, the usual high school kinds of  things.  Well, I wrote a play for the, for the assembly, for the, for the school, for the --  what do you call it, the kind of a spirit assembly they have, you know, coming up to the  homecoming game.  And, you know, I sort of wrote the play where we actually had a  funeral and we kind of like eulogized our opponent and, you know, all the people.  I  mean it was a real funeral, I meant that, that I sort of scripted.  So by this time I was  really like using my, my skills from theater to actually even begin to, you know, kind of  write plays, all that kind of thing.  So then, you know, we were doing those kind of  things.  So those were the extra curricular things that we were doing there.  And still, and  remember all, all of this time I was still involved with the children's theater which was  here on campus [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee].  And it was kind of  extra curricular, but it wasn't a part of the high school directly itself.
Story_ID: 2340
Speaker 1: How did those skills you attained at the Children's Theater and acting in the plays segue  to your leadership abilities?
Speaker 2: I, I think that the ability and the willingness and the courage to sort of like stand in front,  you know, the kind of take-charge, kind of direct things, and take responsibility for where  things would go, had a, came out of those early kinds of activities to a great extent.  So  being able to, you know, to be on the stage in front of all these people and to be able to  do those kinds of things, really, were the kind of early experiences that made that very  much a part of me.  But there was also another part of me too that, that I really very much  identified with these teachers who I was so much a part -- who were so much a part of my  life.  And so one of the things, one of my favorite games was playing school.  And I was  always the teacher and the principal and I, and I would have all the kids in the  neighborhood, the younger ones because as they got a little older and, of course, they  kind of strayed away from my, the, the "Luther Academy" that I was, started.  But, I, you  know, we would go and we would get fruit cartons and we would make desks, you know,  and we would actually, and I would have them to come to school.  And we would  actually -- I would be teaching them.  You know, this was like -- I must, I couldn't have  been more than eight or nine years old.  And so all the kids in the neighborhood would  come into my, my afternoon academy where I was teaching.  I mean this was long before  I even knew, had any idea of any kind of leadership as such.  It was just sort of like what  I, what I did.  It was very much a natural kind of thing.  And then, of course, it was  cultivated by all these people around me and the kinds of things they were doing.
Story_ID: 2341
Speaker 1: Now, even though there's the insular institution of the black community in Frenchtown  [Tallahassee, Florida] and things going on there, during this time, there's  the Tallahassee Bus Boycott?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Talk about that and explain what's going on?
Speaker 2: That was the latter part of high school.  By that time, I was really, you know, that really  began about my junior year in high school, so it was the last two years of high school that  it was going on.  And it, it became very close to me because Reverend [C. K.] Steele, who was the local leadership of the bus boycott, his children were all  attending FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] High.  His second eldest son was my, was my classmate, very, very  good friend.  And his elder son was a year older than I was and he was a very good friend  as well.  And he had younger, some younger children too who I, you know, I knew them  all.  But we used to, since they lived in Frenchtown [Tallahassee, Florida] as  well and came to -- went to school on the campus, over at Florida A and M [Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee], we had to sort of like move back and forth.  So  actually before the boycott started, we used to catch the bus together to come from  Frenchtown over to the campus to go to school.  And so when the bus boycott started,  then the whole process of us getting back and forth from Frenchtown to the campus area  became a kind of like a, kind of a joint thing that we had to all kind of navigate together.  So when they organized the carpools and things like that, then the, the carpools that were  organized by Reverend Steele's church where my friend Henry and Charles -- you know,  that, that was Reverend Steele's children, they, of course, like he had to be involved in  that.  Now, I did not directly involve, was in -- I was not involved with the boycotts  directly.  In the sense that Henry was, Henry -- actually, when they began to desegregate  the, to confront, I guess to begin to protest about the segregated lunch counters here in  Tallahassee [Florida], Henry, along with the Florida A and M University students who  were involved in the bus boycott, was a part of all those demonstrations.  So he was  very -- so he went to jail, as a matter of fact.  And I just remember just being horrified  that, you know, that Henry was in jail.  You know, I couldn't believe he was in jail.  And  we went down to the jail, I meant, you know, I remember that a group of us from the high  school, you know, went down to the jail and was standing outside the windows sort of  yelling, you know, in there, you know.  Are you all right?  Is Henry all right in these?  And things like that, so I immediately sort of saw it.  I remember that one of the days --  this was during the days of the bus boycott, the police, you know, shot tear gas into a  crowd of us.  We were getting out of school, and we were getting out of school and then  some of the, the, the bus boycotters, mostly students and so forth were having a protest  demonstration.  And, and somehow in our progression from home across town, we ran  into the protest, some of the protesters.  Henry was a part of them, you know, Henry and  his brothers.  And, you know, the police came and they shot the tear gas and stuff, and  people just scattered and panicked, you know, and that was my experience with that.
Story_ID: 2342
Speaker 1: So there is one thing that is curious to me, Frenchtown, what is the origin of that name?
Speaker 2: The, the, the origin -- the original concept of Frenchtown [Tallahassee,  Florida] had to do with like the French settlement that was in the, during the French  colonization of, of Florida, when the French, you know, -- you know, Florida was under  those kind of six flags, the Spanish to French so forth and so on.  And so during the time  that the French had colonized this part of Florida, they lived in that area that, that we  know was Frenchtown.  In fact, [Bonaparte] Napoleon's nephew, Prince  Murat, is actually buried a cemetery that's right on the edge of Frenchtown.  It's the old  Episcopal cemetery right here in Tallahassee [Florida].  And Prince Murat and his wife  were buried here because they were sent over by Napoleon during the col -- colonial time  to really sort of like begin to establish this as a French colony.  And he and his wife both  lived and died here.  So that was the old French settlement.  Now, of course, coming out  of the, the Civil War [1861-1865], you know, that area for whatever reason became kind  of like the nucleus of what became the black community.  So that older, oldest, older  parts of the black -- well, there were two.  There was one, there was a downtown area  that came -- that was known as Smokey Hollow [Tallahassee, Florida].  And Smokey Hollow was a, a kind of like a very low-income, you know, old area that  was right in the downtown area in Tallahassee, right, kind of east of down -- east of  downtown.  And, but before that time, like the majority of the oldest community was the  Frenchtown community.
Speaker 1: You know, I'd, I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you how did the name Smokey Hollow come  with that?
Speaker 2: You know, I really don't know.  I think it had to do with the fact that most people like  relied upon, like fireplaces and actually did their cooking, you know, like on kind of open  hearth kinds of things or wood stoves.  And so there was a lot of smoke there, but that's  the way that the people really lived.  I mean in these, you know, very small, shotgun  shacks kinds of things.  And so it really kind of id -- identified the fact that, usually when  you went down there, you could always smell something smoking and cooking because  that's where they heated as well as, like, you know, had to eat down there, prepared their  food.
Story_ID: 2343
Speaker 1: How in your mind do you justify or come to a logical reasoning or rationale to what's  going on?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I knew what was happening.  And I mean, and, and I knew that it was  really very, very important in terms of like the beginning of it.  You know, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was a very good friend of Reverend [C. K.] Steele's.  He'd come to Tallahassee [Florida] on any number of occasions, like for mass  meetings.  They were held at, at Bethel Baptist Church [Tallahassee, Florida], it was a very essential part of  what was happening, and certainly there was a lot of talk about it at the school and things  like that.  And I think it was just like, it was a very vibrant part of the community.  And I  guess our sense was, was that -- and it, and it, it's interesting because, as I mentioned  earlier, there was no real sense of injustice, you know.  The fact is, is that white people  lived in their world.  We lived in our world.  And even though on some bigger plane, the  reality is, is that it was real unjust because we lived where we lived, not with equal access  to opportunity, not with all the other things America was supposed to be, but we were  actually forced to live where we were.  And even though we'd done a fantastic job of  making the adaptation and making life go with it, the bottom line is that we were actually  ghettoized.  We were forced to be where we were.  And I mean and even though we, you  know, had gone to the, to the back doors of restaurants to get food, even though we'd  used the colored lunch counter, even though downtown Tallahassee at the City Hall had a  colored and a black fountain; even though, you know, we used to have to travel, if we  went from here to Jacksonville [Florida], we dare not have to go to the bathroom  anywhere because if at all there would be a colored restroom, while there was one for  white men and white women, that we didn't dare go to, even if you bought gasoline, I  mean.  And these were things we just sort of like took for granted, sitting in the back of  the bus, that, in fact, if white people got on the bus, which they didn't do too often on our  bus line that kind of ran from Frenchtown [Tallahassee, Florida] to Bonds to  Florida A and M's [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] campus.  And so  there were rarely white people on, but if white people got on the bus for some reason,  then, of course, we had to make sure we got out of the front seats to let them sit, you  know, in the front of the bus.  And, and so I think kind of growing up with that.  It was  only as the bus boycott began to come, as the sit-in's began to come, that we began to  even interpret that as something that was wrong and incorrect.  And I think that what  began to emerge as we came into the junior and senior year, you know, was the kind of  idea that, you know, this is wrong, and this does need to be addressed, and this does need  to be -- you do need to confront it, even though the price you may pay for doing so may  be great, such as going to jail.  You know, such as being, you know, tear gassed, you  know, such as being, you know, hurt, losing your jobs.  I mean, like that was one of the  things that my family, my mother [Bessie Weems-King] was very sensitive to because she was an administrator  for the Leon County School Board [Florida].  She was a school lunch supervisor.  She  kind of supervised the program, the lunchroom program, the school lunch program for all  the colored schools, if you will.  So in those days, anyone who didn't act right, regardless  of what your position was, didn't nobody care if you had a Master's degree and twenty  years, you know, service.  That didn't mean anything.  Ultimately, if a red neck on the  school board decided that these Negroes were getting out of hand, then, of course, that  would be the end of your job, and without any kind of contest or any kind of protest.  One  of the things that happened to Reverend Steele's wife, who was also a teacher, is that  once Reverend Steele initiated the bus boycotts, she could never find a job teaching in  Leon County after that.  No one would hire her.  None of the principals of the Negro  schools would hire her.  She lost her job at the school where she was teaching.  And  basically, for the rest of her life, she never was able to really teach in Leon County again  because, basically, the word had gone out, you know, like that Steele Negro is causing  problems and therefore, make sure his wife doesn't get a chance to, you know, to, to, you  know, to, to earn anything in the school system.  So even though we had our own system,  there was always this shadow government that was dictating how it should be  determined, you know, which is why, you know, many of the kinds of, many of the kinds  of things about, you know, the [Marcus] Garvey movement and the other kinds of  things dealing with black consciousness never really got down here.  I meant the Nation  of Islam, all those things were pretty much in the urban areas.  Those kinds of ideas just  never penetrated, you know, the, you know, the black community down in the south.  And, you know, especially and with Tallahassee as well.  But it was almost -- it was as I  said, just almost kind of like a, a multiple personality, a schizoid reality.  It was that their  world was the white world; ours was the black world.  And I think that only did those  worlds begin to clash as we began to move into the whole Civil Rights Movement [1955- 1965].
Story_ID: 2344
Speaker 1: Now, I understand your saying Reverend [C. K.] Steele was the initiator  of the change.  Your mother [Bessie Weems-King] and some of the other people in the community, were they  accepting of it?
Speaker 2: They were frightened of it.  They were frightened.  I mean my recollection is my mother  being very frightened of what would happen because, you know, Tallahassee [Florida]  was really a red -- a redneck area.  It was really, kind of a real interesting discrepancy  because Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee] was really a fairly small school.  And  Florida State didn't have nearly the impact on the Tallahassee white community that  Florida, Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] had on the  Negro, on, on the Negro community here.  That is that the culture, the educational  achievement, you know, the other kinds of influences that had that, that I talked earlier, it  so, so powerfully impacted the African American community here, rich and poor in  Tallahassee.  That didn't happen in terms of Florida State did not have a parallel impact  on the Tallahassee white community.  So that was a very elite, closed community of  educators.  And most people around here were basically hicks.  And they were basically  kind of rednecks.  And they were very mean people.  They were really very mean.  And  Gadsden County [Florida], which is the adjoining county over here, Quincy [Florida] and Havana [Florida], really had plantations right up until the early  seventies [1970s].  I meant like literally people living and working their entire lives on,  while on plantations.  And I mean with all of the accoutrements of slavery.  And there  were people being beaten, I mean I remember boys who used to go work from my  neighborhood in the tobacco fields over in Quincy during the summers.  That was kind of  like a summer job.  And they would come through, through the black community to pick  them up on a big truck and take them over in Quincy.  And I, base -- they literally would  beat these boys if they didn't, you know, didn't, didn't perform at a certain level.  I mean  with sticks, just like in slavery.  I mean this was an accepted kind of thing.  My point is,  is that the vindictiveness, the vengeance and the white supremacy, you know, in this  town was so incredibly thick that, you know, that, that, that, you know, my family who  had been here for, you know, like -- well, they were into their second generation at that  point.  My mother had been, my mother and my aunt and so forth had been there all their  lives and they had kind of excelled in spite of all the kinds of barriers that were there.  And they really were very frightened of the, of how white people would react to that.
Story_ID: 2345
Speaker 1: I meant they were afraid of losing their jobs.  They were afraid of the violence that white  people would perpetrate.  They, you know, lynchings were not, were not distant.  I mean  they knew that people did get lynched and the people were around this area, you know,  not in Tallahassee proper, but certainly in, in Woodville [Florida] and Crawfordville  [Florida] and over in Havana [Florida], those people were, you know, many, many black people  were lynched in those areas.  And so they were frankly quite frightened.  And they were  really concerned that I not get involved because they didn't want me to bring that kind of  problem, you know, you know, to, to our community directly, and really concerned even  about, you know, Henry and Reverend [C. K.] Steele's children.  I mean I, I remember hearing,  hearing these conversations, you know, like, you know, oh, my God, what's going to happen to those children, you know, like.  And when they got a -- like I said, when they got  arrested and had to go to jail and things like that, I mean they just really saw it as a very  horrible thing.  But my family, as was the case with many people, did not mobilize to  support of that.  Really the people who most mobilized were some of the people who  were independent.  There was a man who owned a couple of grocery stores, Mr. Speed.  And he was a very prominent kind of leader, but he was kind of independent of like, you  know, people being able to close his store down if you will.  There were, of course, the  ministers.  There were several doctors even who were able to be actively involved.  But  so many of the so-called kind of bourgeois or the middle-class black people and I meant  middle-class, I use that term advisedly because middle-class is poor people but we were  doing much better than lots of other people who were just, you know, kind of, you know,  blue-collar workers.  But Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] was a major employer of many, many black  people who were doing fairly well.  And the other major employer were, was the public  school system.  And so those two places were primarily dependent on, you know, white,  you know, white approval.  So Florida A and M's faculty dare, would dare not stand up.  In fact, you know, even though there's a revisionist influence of history, FAMU [Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] was very upset about this bus boycott going on.  Now, they've claimed in retrospect, but Reverend [Moses G.] Miles, I mean like, you know, who was  the dean of students at that point, I mean he basically forbade our students to be involved  in this kind of thing.  I mean he was vehemently, you know, opposed to the bus boycott  going on.  Not only him, but I mean people were really basically, threatening to throw  students out of school for even getting involved in this thing.  I mean it was really viewed  -- cause I mean basically, Dr. [George W.] Gore [Jr.], who was the president of  FAMU, they pretty much told him, look, you better quiet them Negroes down over there  or you're going to be gone and that school is going to be closed up down.  I mean this is  what the governors and the legislators here in Tallahassee pretty much told him.  And Dr.  Gore was a puny little man who was a little scholar of the early days, a real skinny man,  real nervous.  He'd always had his hand in his pocket, and his, his jacket pocket, you  know, was held tight to his body.  And, but they pretty much -- yeah, but he -- they could  never find him for an interview cause he'd always leave town or not be available when  the interviews things came up.  I mean he was tho -- thoroughly intimidated.  But that  was true of most of the faculty as well as most of those people, you know, such as my  family who were employed by the school board.  It was really dangerous to get involved  in any of those things.
Story_ID: 2346
Speaker 1: Now the fear that existed in the community for these, some of these older individuals,  and even you parents, did that fear seep down to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We were -- I was frightened about it too.  But I was really (unclear).  I was  frightened -- in fact, most of us were.  I mean we were really kind of frightened about  what would be consequences of this, you know.  I mean we, we really kind of had this  tremendous admiration, I mean I, I remember that Henry, Reverend [C. K.] Steele's second son who was in my class, Henry became a real hero for me because  I just was really proud of the fact that he was taking all these chances, you know.  But  most of us were really very much intimidated by the consequences of what would  happen.  And we really -- and, you see, we really believed that there were no limits to  what white people would do to us.  I mean we really felt they would kill us.  I mean --  cause we'd seen, I mean we had been, as children, you know, we'd heard, you know, the  Emmett Till stories and we'd seen, we'd seen, you know, like incidents that had  happened like in this area of people being, of, of, of young black children being beaten,  you know, not by policemen, just by rednecks out for sport.  And so we did not, you  know, crosses had been burned.  You know, Reverend Steele's house was shot into, like,  you know, people threw bricks through is house, you know.  And I mean like, you know,  I used to go by to visit, you know, with his kids and stuff.  And I mean, and when this  started happening, we would go through there and like, you know, there were bullet holes  all in the front door, you know.  And, you know, they showed me bullet holes in the  house where people, you know, white people had driven by at night shooting in the  house.  So this was not a fantasy.  I mean, you know, these people were out to, would  kill, out to kill us.  And we really didn't know -- and who are you going to call?  The  police?  Well, they were the worst ones.  There was a guy named, who was the Sheriff,  named Frank Stottlemeyer.  And he was known to, to kill anything black that was  moving, you know, if he didn't like it, you know.  And so we really felt in many way  kind of helpless in an environment like that.
Story_ID: 2347
Speaker 1: So how do you balance that you have this extremely nurturing black community, then  you have this outside community where your life is taken arbitrarily -- or can be taken  arbitrarily?
Speaker 2: It, it's a, it's a buffer.  I mean it, it's like the power of black love, you know.  It's almost  like with all of this inimical, these inimical forces outside, you know, we were just fairly  convinced that as long as we stayed in our place, in our own communities, no harm could  come to us.  We felt safe and secure there.  And as long as we weren't intruded upon  from the outside or, in fact, went outside of the limits of that, sort of, but, you know, sort  of like "the stay in your place" was also something that we sort of took, you know, as, as  a kind of like a dictate for how we should deal with the environment. Which is why this  whole Civil Rights Movement [1955-1965] thing was so, such an upheaval, you know,  because we really had been socialized for generations to sort of stay in our place.  And  the reward we got for that was the tremendous amount of support that we got.  And as I  told you the, you know, it was this kind of dual standard.  We felt that we were as good  as anyone in the black world, you know, but we understood the black world was very  different, you know, from the white world.  And that idea really somehow carried us in  the midst of all these things going on, 'cause it was outside. And it was really not until  the Civil Rights Movement came along that we felt a real clash in those worlds because  white people stayed in their place, we stayed in our place.  If we didn't bother them, they  wouldn't bother us.  So there was no real -- even though we knew that potential for  violence among white people was there, we didn't have any way to taste it.  We didn't  have any confrontation with it because basically we stayed within the comfortable  confines of our own communities.
Story_ID: 2348
Speaker 1: Now, you're (unclear) into high school.  You're about to graduate high school.  What are  your thoughts?  What are you going to do?  Where are you going to go?  And what are  you going to do after you graduate?
Speaker 2: Wanted to be a doctor for as long as I could remember.  I mean I remember in the third  grade when the teachers first asked to put in your permanent folder, you know, your  cumulative folder you know, what do you want to be when you grow up?  I wanted to be  a doctor, and by the time I got to sixth grade, I had refined that to wanting to be a  pediatrician.  And so probably from third grade all the way through high school, I was  going to be a pediatrician.  I went to -- I mentioned earlier that I spent the summers with  my father [Luther Weems, Sr.] in Ann Arbor [Michigan].  And I was starting when I was in about ninth grade  I think.  And so for the last four years of like, you know, middle school, end of middle  school to high school, I spent those summers, you know, with him.  And it -- I met Ann  Arbor, and I met the University of Michigan, you know.  And so my, my, my stepmother  at that point was working in one of the research centers of the University of Michigan.  So I mean I used to go up to, to, up to the University of Michigan Hospital with her and,  you know, it was around the area and so I'm  --  this was just, this is where I wanted to go  to medical school.  I decided I was going to Michigan to medical school and began in the  summers of my junior, the summers of my sophomore and junior year to really just kind  of research medical schools to find out where the best medical schools were.  Somehow I  had skipped over undergraduate school.  I don't know why I thought that I could just like  go directly into medical school, but I just sort of, in my research, I really was just  thinking about the medical school.  I hadn't even dealt with the, the whole idea of  undergraduate school.  And, and actually, it was the latter part of my senior year that I  decided I was going to actually go to Michigan where my father lived.  I was very  familiar with Ann Arbor to go there to undergraduate school.  But the interesting thing  that happened, is I was accepted at Michigan, you know, as an undergraduate, you know,  to start in the fall and I became frightened, like at the -- like towards the end of my senior  year in high school, I just really became -- I didn't think I could make it.  I just really said  that I don't, you know, I'm good at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical  University, Tallahassee] High.  I'm good in this environment, but I've never competed with white  kids.  In fact, when I took the, the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test], I had to go over to  FAM -- Florida State [Florida State University, Tallahassee] it.  They weren't offering it at FAMU in  those days.  And you didn't need it to get into Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and  Mechanical University, Tallahassee] and most of the students went to Florida A and M.  But I had  decided to apply to Michigan, and so I had to go over to Florida State to take the SAT.  I  was the only black kid in that entire auditorium with about 300 white kids.  I had never  been in that, in a room with that many white people before in my life.  And I was taking  a test.  So here I am like, you know, partially intimidated, partially dealing with the outer  definitions because I was no longer insulated within the confines of this black  community where I felt competent and comfortable and everything like that.  Now, I was  there with white people.  And I, actually, I did fairly well on the test.  I don't know how I  did it today because I could not get over the fact that I was here on Florida State's  campus, by the way, because that's where they held the test on a Saturday, with all these  white kids, just me, and all my life I had not even been permitted to go on the campus.  So, you know, just to even be on the campus was a major breakthrough, you know, for  me.  So what happened is that towards the -- after I was accepted in the spring of my  senior year, I really got cold feet.  And I said I'm not going to go to the University of  Michigan.  I'm scared.  And I decided instead to go to Eastern Michigan University.  And  Eastern is about seven miles from Ann Arbor in a little place called Ypsilanti, Michigan.  And  we had friends, my father had friends who lived over in Ypsilanti.  So I knew about  Eastern.  And so I decided late that summer, you know, to apply late that spring to  Eastern Michigan and really started there.  And with the idea that I could never make it at  Michigan, and I would sort of go there to get my feet wet, you know.  And went to  Eastern my freshman year, you know, and ended up 3.0 or something like that, and then I  transferred over to the University of Michigan my sophomore year and went all the way  through there.  But the idea was that I was going to Michigan as an undergraduate only  because I was going to ensure that I got into the medical school.  And I figured that if I  went there as an undergraduate, I could really get into Michigan's medical school.  And  by the way, during the, my, my thinking about this, being a pediatrician from the  University of Michigan, I never imagined I could do it with all these white people.  I  mean that, that image never hit me until the time came for me to begin to get ready to go  to undergraduate school that, that spring.  And I had to rethink the whole thing, you  know.  But, you know, I survived all of that.  I certainly, I subsequently ran into  chemistry and changed my medical aspirations and chose psychology after that.
Story_ID: 2349
Speaker 1: Now, the instance where you take this test --
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: -- and you're intimidated by going into a highly Caucasian environment?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Is that the first time a negative mental image about being black hit you?
Speaker 2: I guess in a way that had direct impact.  I mean it had been, it had been abstract in other  kinds of settings.  You know, I'd certainly seen the way, you know, people talked about  us on television.  I'd certainly read things about that.  You know, I'd read everything  from 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' to, you know, I probably read Richard Wright and other  things.  So I mean I knew those realities were there, but I had not had any kind of real  direct confrontations with it before this time where I was personally being put on a scale,  measured in this like comparison with the, in, in the white scale, if you will.  So it was  just very intimidating, you know, to be in that kind of setting.  You know, certainly,  schools were not desegregated then.  I'd never, you know, you know, so that I didn't even  know anyone, except for my summers up in, in Ann Arbor [Michigan], I didn't even know any black  kids who had gone to school with white kids, you know.  So all I had was this mythology  of the fact they were all very brilliant, even when I got to Eastern Michigan [Eastern  Michigan University, Ypsilanti].  When I took my freshman composition class and after I finally  got up enough nerve to speak up, and then found the white kids in the dorm coming to  me for me to read over their papers and I turned in my first compositions and got A's on  them and stuff like that, I mean I was shocked.  I mean I was shocked that everybody  white was not brilliant.  I meant to find out that white people were stupid was probably  the most, the most revealing experience of my life, not all white people, of course.  But  to find out that actually there were stupid white people, you know, people who really did  not know basic stuff that I knew very well.  I mean that was just like extremely revealing  to me.  I mean I was a freshman in college by that time, but that first experience of like  taking that exam with those white kids on Florida State's [Florida State University, Tallahassee]  campus was like a real, real kind of shattering experience for me.  But not shattering  because I, as I said, I did okay on the exam.  And, but I certainly was very conscious of  the fact that I'm now moving into another world where I, I was intimidated, a very  intimidating other world.
Story_ID: 2350
Speaker 1: What are the race relations like for you as a student  and the other black students at this majority Caucasian institution?
Speaker 2: They were very good.  I mean like they, they were very, very good.  I found a real  camaraderie among the students who would -- you know, it was almost like in those days,  I was kind of a mascot, you know, a little southern black boy, you know, up here in the  midst of, you know, these industrialist sons and daughters, you know.  All these kids, you  know, who were coming out of Detroit [Michigan] and Hamtramck [Michigan] and all  these places, people whose, you know, parents really were kind of, General Motors  executives and things like that, both at Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] and at Eastern  [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti].  Then, during that time, certainly I think it was a very  close net, a close connection between the Jewish students and black students.  So I was  kind of, really kind of very much adopted by Jewish students, who somehow felt a kind  of a sense of camaraderie, you know, with me.  In fact, they were the first ones who --  because one thing about Jewish students is that, you know, they really didn't care what  color you were or what anything else or what religion you were or anything else.  If they  saw the possibility to advance themselves, and they could do that by interacting with you,  they didn't, you know, they didn't care.  They didn't, they didn't mind asking for help,  you know.  So if they found out that I was doing very well in the class that they were  taking, they wanted to get out the class.  And so they didn't care about coming to a black  person to ask me with the paper.  They didn't know what a wonderful, polishing it was  doing for my ego to be able to help white students, you know, like write a paper or to be  able to, you know, prepare for the biology test.  But, you know, but they certainly were  very comfortable in doing that, plus, of course, they'd gone to school with black kids in  the City of Detroit and things like that.  So they, I was not unusual to them, but they were  very unusual to me.  And I was treated extremely kind there.  I mean very, very kind and  never had any kind of incidents.  All of the teachers were extremely supportive that  freshman year over at, at Eastern Michigan and then, subsequently, at the University of  Michigan as well.  So I can't remember actually until graduate school that there were  ever any kind of racial incidents, you know.
Story_ID: 2351
Speaker 1: Well, it is, it is something to be reckoned with in terms of the paradigm.  And I think  reckoning, coming to grips with it, as a legitimate paradigm is the thing that's frightening  for them.  You know, they -- it's all right as long you're under the ausp -- auspices of  Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but when you begin to define reality from another kind of frame of reference  and begin to raise some fundamental questions about what's missing in European  scholarship, once you begin to raise those kinds of things and do it in a legitimate kind of  way, and the world starts listening to you, then, you know, you're, you're not acting like  a good house Negro.
Story_ID: 2352
Speaker 1: What brings about the change of your major?
Speaker 2: The, the confrontation with chemistry which made me -- I, I really had to struggle to get  through that freshman general chemistry.  And the conclusion was that if I have to work  this hard to get through general chemistry, I'll never make it through organic, inorganic  and all the other chemistries that I have to do.  So it was just a recognition of the reality  that I was not a physically, a physical science person.  Despite the fact I had done very  well in high school, it was nothing as challenging as that.  So but what I, but, what I did  know was that I wanted to be a healer.  And I, but I had, but I guess even at that age, you  know, eighteen years old, I, I pretty much knew that somehow what I wanted to do was to  be a healer.  And I accepted the fact -- and, and the, the, the view, the information that I  had about psychology at that point is that it was a way to become a healer without having  to take chemistry.  And the idea that I could be a healer and not have to take chemistry  was very appealing to me.  That was why I chose psychology.  And so when I got to [the University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor] that sophomore year, transferred, and they asked me,  you know, what would I want, what, what did I want to major in, I said, "psychology."  Had never had a psychology course.  Really had never met a psychologist.  And really  didn't -- the only thing I knew about it was that it was like these people who helped  people solve problems, and for me, that was a good way to do healing without having to  somehow like, you know, go through the chemistry class again.  And so I chose  psychology.  Now, interestingly enough, I probably -- if I had known what psychology  was really about, I probably wouldn't have chosen it because it really turned out to be  much more research and other kind of stuff that was really very dull and uninteresting to  me.  And even in clinical psychology, you know, a lot of testing and things like that  which had nothing to do with what I really wanted to do.  The only thing I really wanted  to do was really psychotherapy.  And that was a very small part of the -- that I didn't get  to till very, very late, you know, in the profession, you know, as a psychologist in, in  training to be a psychologist.  And the unfortunate thing was that I got kind of trapped in  it.  So once I had gone through a couple of years majoring in psychology, I was going to  have to -- if I'd even considered going into another field, I'd have been in college for,  you know, an extended period of time, which I did not intend to do.  So I sort of pursued  psychology cause I got stuck in it and then, you know, and, and then kept in mind my  earlier agenda of wanting to go to, at that point, which was an exceptional graduate  school in psychology, which was the University of Michigan.  So my original plan to go  to Michigan's outstanding medical school became my plan to Michigan's outstanding  graduate school in psychology.  And I was able to make that.
Story_ID: 2353
Speaker 1: Now, while you're there, majoring in Psychology, are there any mentors or anyone, did  you see any professors that were saying, encouraging you or that you're learning from or  that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: There were several professors -- by the way, I, I'd never had a white -- I never had a  black professor in psychology.  In fact, once I got to [the University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor],  I never had another black professor, period, for the next years of my undergraduate and  graduate life, never had another black professor.  That's not true.  One woman who was  graduate student, a black woman, who was a graduate student in Spanish at Michigan,  taught me one semester of undergraduate Spanish. Other than that, my entire  undergraduate and graduate training were all white professors.  A couple of them became  very, very good mentors for me.  One was actually a woman who was a, a teaching  fellow.  And she, she really became, you know, just very supportive of me and, you  know, began to help me -- I was taking, it was my first experimental lab course.  And so  she helped me, let me do some other kinds of things.  And then she taught, introduced me  to one of the major professors in the department and got him to put me on as a research  assistant, as an undergraduate.  And, you know, she sort of facilitated my meeting him,  and he, you know, sort brought me in where he became a mentor for me as well.  Ed  Walker.  And even though he was an experimental psychology, an area that I had no  interest in, he was a big name in the department.  And my working for him subsequently  was a very powerful influence in my being able to get into the department there as a, as a  graduate student.  But I worked with him.  And then the -- my professor in, in abnormal  psychology, was also a, a young professor at that point.  His name was Howard  Wolowitz.  And he was kind of fascinated by my work, and I did some, you know,  research with him very early in terms of, of cultural factors, particularly, how black  people respond in mental health settings or how -- what is the definition of mental health  for black people versus white people?  So he was fascinated by that, and I began to work  with him as an undergraduate.
Story_ID: 2354
Speaker 1: Now, during this experience, undergrad and through your grad school, you say, you said,  you had only, except for the one Spanish semester, Caucasian professors?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how were desires (a) shifting to "I want to use this psychology in regards to  African Americans or blacks" and how was it being and (b) how were your Caucasian  professors responding to this?
Speaker 2: Okay.  That, I, I began to be haunted by my upbringing.  And I meant by this time, it  wasn't just like black, but different.  It was like, you know, black is who I am.  And like,  you know, somehow this, this, this work, this study which never mentions me has to  somehow be inclusive of me and my experience.  So it was certainly not a part of the  curriculum.  It was not a part of the classes.  It was not a part of my studies.  So I was  trying to always kind of translate what I was learning about quote, unquote "psychology  in general" to, how to better understand African American people.  And so whenever I  had to do a paper, I would want to do it in terms of some aspects of the African American  experience, how does this impact on black people and black families, on, you know,  black child rearing.  So I would want to go do that.  Not very much research, not very  much available.  One of the reasons that [Howard] Wolowitz, the abnormal  psychology teacher, became such an influence because he didn't know anything about  that -- he too, by the way, was Jewish -- he didn't know anything about that experience,  but he was interested in my interest in it.  And he encouraged me to, you know, research  it and review it and so forth and so on.  And so I went and found some of Kenneth  Clark's work and some of the other people who had done work.  By that -- during that  time, there were two psychoanalysts who had done this book -- it was called 'The Mark  of Oppression' -- and they had done kind of like a psychoanalytic study of black men and  the impact that racism and being black and growing up in America had on their  personalities.  And so it was the first kind of connection between all this psychoanalytic  psychology I was learning and how to apply it to understanding black people.  So I did,  you know, a couple of papers for, you know, Wolowitz and I eventually actually got a  directed independent undergraduate honors thesis working with him, where I began to  pursue that same kind of study.  So even though there was not a real, there was, there was  not a real support network for that and even though the majority of the professors, of  course, had absolutely no interest in that, nor did they even know of my interest because I  did what I was, I was, you know, I had to do in their classes.  The support that I was able  to get from Wolowitz, you know, permitted me to begin to pursue those things  independently.
Story_ID: 2355
Speaker 1: Now what is going on socially that's really affecting your mindset.  I mean like --
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: -- what's pointing your direction like my mindset is going with a more black or African  American (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was the sixties [1960s].  It was the middle of the sixties.  You know, I'm in college  now.  This is like 1961 to '65 [1965].  This is the heart of the Civil Rights [Movement, 1955-1965] -- the riots are breaking out around the country.  I mean like, you  know, everything else is happening.  I mean all of these things are happening, mostly in  the south.  So at the same time that I was here when the bus boycotts and the sit-ins  began, you know, this is kind of like nationwide, Civil Rights Movement.  You know,  the, the voters' registration campaigns in Mississippi, the bombings in Birmingham  [Alabama], I mean all those kinds of things were taking place while I was at [the University of] Michigan  [Ann Arbor].  And Michigan was a very liberal environment.  I mean like  this was a place -- in, in those days, liberal was not a dirty word.  I mean people actually  believed in justice.  I mean white people, black people, really believed that justice was  correct.  And I mean even though these were often very pampered, very elitist kind of  white people from their backgrounds, they were genuinely concerned about social  justice.  And many of those people, like from Michigan, as well as from NYU [New York  University, New York] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], you know,  went to Mississippi and died down there, and really did things I never did in terms of  (unclear) doing the freedom bus rides and things like.  So all of this was happening.  Malcolm X comes to campus and does a lecture, you know.  I didn't know who he was.  I  wasn't exactly sure how I felt about this strange rhetoric I was hearing, but that was  happening, you know.  They were beginning to do, there was, there was black theater.  And they had plays.  There was Barbara Ann Teer out of Detroit [Michigan] who was  doing, like, kind of like black revolutionary theater, you know, began to take place and  they would come to Ann Arbor's [Michigan] campus.  There was the, there was a group  that known as the Topographical Society, and they began to somehow like, chart out the  way the cities were constructed in order to be able to implement the King Alfred Plan,  and that is to be able to, in fact, lock black people up and put them in concentration  camps if the riots continued.  Of course, I was down the street from the riots that broke  out in Detroit, like in the latter part of my undergraduate career, '65 [1965], '66 [1966]  thereabouts.  And so, but I, so I knew -- all of that was very near even though, again, I'm  in another insulated environment.  Ann Arbor is very different from Detroit, you know,  so even though that stuff was very nearby, we were kind of having the dialogue, kind of  processing it, intellectualizing it and so forth and so on.  And the action was taking place  in Detroit.  But I was safely in Ann Arbor, away from the action, but it was very much a  part of the environment.  What was very clear was that I had a responsibility to, to  translate whatever I was doing to a source, a resource for black people.  And by the time  I got into graduate school, most of the few of us who were in grad school -- I mean I was  the only one in clinical psychology.  I was only the second black student Michigan had  ever had in clinical psychology.  There were two or three others in, in social psychology  and things like that.  A very large number, relatively large number of black law students,  but we formed kind of like -- there was a black community on campus that kind of  networked across those fields.  And in the, I guess about the third or fourth year, about  the third year of my graduate training, you know, we formed the Black Action Movement  which was, in fact, an undergraduate, graduate, com -- combination and faculty, of people  who sort of came together.  It was during the time of all the other kinds of protests, you  know, we closed down the campus.  For about three weeks the school was discontinued,  demanded the establishment of cultural centers and all the other stuff that was happening  on other major campuses.  So all of this was happening around me at the same time I was  going to undergraduate school.  And then we were always having this other dialogue, that  is, other black students and black faculty, were having this -- we're beginning to have  this dialogue of what does the psychologist stuff have to do with the black people?  And  what does the social work stuff have to do with black people?  I mean what does  education, you know, getting this piece to the education -- what does this have to do with  black people?  So those questions were a very prominent part of what we were doing  even though we were doing fairly mainstream, academic kinds of, of training.  I mean  we, we stuck with do -- I mean I was, I was trained as a strict psychoanalytic Freudian- type psychologist.  I mean the psychology that I knew best was Freudian theory.  And I  mean not only was that, not only was that strange for white people, it was bizarre for  black people.  But even under those circumstances, that somehow I felt compelled, you  know, using the kind of the, the, Kardiner [Abram Kardiner] and Ovesy [Lionel Ovesy]  model I had talked about, that 'Mark of Oppression,' I felt compelled to try to translate  that and make this applicable to black people in some kind of way.  And so we were all  doing that, regardless of what fields we were in.
Story_ID: 2356
Speaker 1: And while you're attempting to make that applicable and attempting to interpret it for the  confines and parameters of the African American community, those fears that you had  back when you were in Tallahassee [Florida], the fears of white vengeance or  repercussions if you stand up --
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: -- are those still there or have you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: They've, they've gone.  They've gone and a lot of the things that drove them away were  things, you know, [Dr. Martin Luther] King's death, the riots that broke out, the,  the greater kind of impact of the, the kind of the black radical statement, you know, the  [Black] Panthers.  And those were the, you know, Leroi Jones's [later  Imamu Amiri Baraka] poetry and his plays, you know.  I mean there were so many thing  -- influences that were going on culturally and intellectually that really were kind of like  purging.  Well, first of all, it did two things.  It sort of brought up the bitterness about that  and the things that I had never experienced directly that, you know, somehow, I'd  somehow had just sort of lived with and sort of held down and sort of endured, you  know, in ways that -- you know, as I, I said, that kind of protected, in that insulated  environment.  So a lot of that bitterness, you know, began to sort of come up as well.  But  the, the kind of, the, the de -- deification of white people because one of the things that  I'd grown with was this kind of deified notion that in my own world, white people were  very smart.  They were also right, always right.  And even when they were wrong, they  were right.  And the only thing you had to do was to kind of logically talk with them and  they'd see it right.  And then to actually begin to discover that wasn't the case, you know,  that somehow that kind of rational dialogue did not change them, you know, that they  still remained entrenched in this kind of thing that made them see themselves different,  began to be something I had to come to grips with.  I had to also deal with the fact that I  had internalized a lot of the kind of inferiority statements about who I was, the  intimidation about not going to [the University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor], you know, at the  very beginning of my career.  I meant things I'd never really even thought about, I really  was, I, I really had internalized.  I really did not feel -- I thought I was as good as any  other black person, I did not feel I was as good as white people.  I mean and even the  dumbest white person I thought was smarter than I was, you know.  And the, the whole  kind of sense then that I was going to the mountaintop of excellence when I was going to  Michigan to get me a superior education, you know.  And I really thought that I was  going to a much better place than my classmates who went to FAMU [Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] and one or two went to Morehouse [Morehouse  College, Atlanta, Georgia] and two people who went to these black schools.  I mean I just knew I was  going to a much better place.  And, and I just was, you know -- but that was a part of the  internalization of that kind of inferiority that we'd, we'd learned, in spite of the fact that  we had the kind of the buffers around us.  So learning to interact with extremely brilliant  black people, you know, professors, not my, in psychology, but people who were around  that environment, the increasing number of like students who were, you know, in the law  school, as I said.  You know, members of the Panthers and these other people were  beginning to be a part of our organization.  And really come in contact with these things  and hear and experience things I'd never experienced before was a very, very revealing  kind of discovery of what my own capabilities were.
Story_ID: 2357
Speaker 1: What do you choose to be your dissertation?
Speaker 2: The dissertation is a continuation of the same theme that I started as an undergraduate.  Dr. [Holowitz] Wolowitz, very interesting enough, became my major professor.  And he had accepted, you know, I'd done this undergraduate work with him in terms of  looking at paranoids.  His, his research was in paranoid schizophrenia and the kind of --  and the thing that was kind, the way that we were able to kind of wed our interest, he was  interested in, he was very much psychoanalytic, but he was very much interested in, like  how social factors kind of shaped these psychoanalytic kinds of notions that went on with  people.  So it wasn't, it wasn't strictly inner dynamics, Oedipus complex kind of stuff,  but it was sort of like how those things got played out in the social setting.  And so he  then could relate to my interest in understanding how social factors impacted on the  psychology of black people.  So this first paper I did as an undergraduate for him sort of  started with that.  Later on, in undergraduate school, I mean in graduate school, once I  was in grad school, I continued to work with him, you know, some of his kind of work.  And, of course, on other, other things as well.  But by the time I got to the dissertation,  I'd already done most of my papers on -- aspects of African American personality  development.  What, you know, how did black people become black people?  The old  issues of self-esteem and how oppression affected the self esteem of black people?  How  that affected the motivation?  How we got in, engaged in like self-destructive kinds of  things as a result of that?  Then focusing on a lot of that 'Mark of Oppression.'  I'd  discovered the Kenneth Clark studies about the dolls and how black people rejected  themselves because they were black.  I was fascinated about the whole psychology of  like, you know, rejecting ourselves because of our skin color and our hair, and really  seeing ourselves as being less attractive.  And I understood that to be a psychological  kind of thing.  So I'd done my, you know, work and research on those kinds of issues.  So  the dissertation then was to look at a comparison between black and white paranoid  schizophrenics.  And my argument was that black people ought to be paranoid if they got  good sense.  And that even though, you know, it is conceived of as being a form of  mental illness to suspicious of environment, to feel that the environment is out to get you,  basically, that's good sense if you are black people.  And so I sort of set up a study,  again, using some of Wolowitz's social measures, and really kind of argued, and really  with the hypothesis that if I look at normal black men and look at paranoid black men,  they probably are more alike than they are different, you know.  And, as opposed to  white paranoid men who, in fact, are paranoid not because there's any social reality for  it, but just because they crazy, you know.  And my argument is that the black paranoids  may be crazy, but they also are dealing with some realities that are much deeper than just  that.  And that's the, that's the dissertation I did.  In fact, I found that to be the case.  Nobody would ever publish the study.
Speaker 1: The academy received it.
Speaker 2: They did not.  They did not.  I, I -- the dissertation was accepted.  I had, you know, it was  accepted by, you know, really prom -- a committee of very good people in the  department.  They were impressed by the research.  They were impressed by the quality  of the research and Wolowitz thought that I would be able to, you know, get it published.  But they, they wanted no parts of that.
Story_ID: 2358
Speaker 1: Now, when it doesn't get published --
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: -- because this is, I mean the path of the type of psychology you're attempting to go  down, what's that tell you?  What's that give you a sight of?
Speaker 2: It says go do it yourself.  And that kind of opened the door to my beginning to think of  independent forums and independent mechanisms for getting my ideas out there.  And  very early in my professional career, at the very beginning of it, when I ended up at  Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I'll get to that shortly, but when I, the very earliest part  of my career was my affiliation with the Association of Black Psychologists, which was  the beginning -- it was in its earliest stages.  And we were find -- you know, we were  formulating a journal.  We were having national conventions where papers were  presented.  So I then began to us this forum as the avenue by which I would do my  scholarly work.  And I very quickly just simply backed off of going mainstream research.  And I mean I didn't try to submit any other papers.  Let me see.  I think that -- I might  have submitted one other paper to a mainstream journal some years later.  And it was  accepted.  I, I don't remember exactly what it was.  But I never pursued that, that avenue  again.  I mean I, I chose instead to follow a kind of a market of like black scholarship.  And I, you know, pretty much stayed there.
Story_ID: 2359
Speaker 1: So at this point in time, you received your Ph. D. and so please tell us the name on your  degree?
Speaker 2: Oh, the name on the degree is Luther B. Weems, Jr.  That was my name and it had been  up until the, through the PhD and up until the beginning of my first job.  And that was the  name that I was born and named at birth, a junior.  I was named after my father.  And that  was the name that I continued with.
Story_ID: 2360
Speaker 1: So you go get your first job.  How does this come about?  You --
Speaker 2: Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Oh, yeah, you know, what happened is that, it, it, you  know, the, the saga of black institutions is, of course, a very interesting saga now that,  that follows me throughout my life.  I had had the opportunity during the last year in  graduate school to move around HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities]  with a research project that was at the [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor] School of Education.  The School of Education was looking at how HBCUs had utilized a -- some government  program, I don't remember what it was, 'Title' something or other.  And so the  University of Michigan had gotten an evaluation grant for us to go around and sort of  interview administrators, faculty directors in these programs, on the various campuses.  So it gave me a chance -- that, it was for an entire summer and half of the year, of moving  around HBCU campuses, interviewing people, and visiting the campuses.  The thing that  was just so exciting for me was like to be around all these black people again.  I mean  that was just thrilling because I had been -- it had been ten years now since I'd been --  almost ten years since I'd been really in environments where there were black people  pretty much running those environments.  And so that got me excited about, I wanted to  go back to an HBCU.  And certainly the most exciting of the HBCUs were in Atlanta  [Georgia], the Atlanta schools.  And so I really became very excited about the possibility  of teaching at Morehouse.  And this was like the last year of graduate school.  I was  finishing my Ph. D.  And so in typical fashions the way I'd done, I'd sent my resume and  a letter of interest to Morehouse.  Well, who know where it, it end, it ended up.  It never  got to whoever was supposed to do the hiring.  And I mean I wrote a couple of letters and  never got any response at all.  So by this time I'm determined I'm getting back south and  I'm getting back near black people some kind of way.  And so I actually interviewed, I  wrote Emory University.  I sent Emory in Atlanta a resume as well.  And, you know, and  a letter of inquiry, and they invited me for an interview.  By the way, I also was invited  for an interview at Florida State University [Tallahassee]. I did that only because it's sort of like a, sort  of a vendetta against Florida State, like since my grandmother had worked there as a  maid and I had grown up unable to even walk on the campus, I wanted to at least give  them the chance to hire me, you know.  So I interviewed at Florida State as well.  Emory  interviewed me.  I expressed to Emory my interest, if that, if I came to Emory, I would  like very much to have some kind of connection with the Atlanta University, you know.  I  would love to be able to do that.  It turns out that one of the faculty members, a fellow by  the, a professor by the name of Boyd McCandless, who had done a lot of research on  black child development, black adolescent development.  He was a very good friend of a  Jewish woman who was acting chair of the Morehouse Psychology Department.  And she  was acting chair because actually they had been trying to find an African American male  to make full-time chair, including her.  She didn't want the position as full-time chair.  She wanted to help them actually find, you know, a black psychologist for that.  So Boyd  McCandless put me in contact with Faye Goldberg who was the acting chair over at  Morehouse, and they were willing to work out a kind of an agreement so I could like  teach a class at Morehouse, do some research there and be on the faculty of Emory.  Well, I went to see the President and the Dean.  I said, well, like, really, Dr. [Hugh Morris] Gloster, I really wanted to come to Morehouse and I sent an application,  you know, to the department or to the school, and I sent my resume, and I never got a  response.  And the fact that I'm interviewing over at Emory is because Morehouse never  responded.  And he said, "Oh, how could that have happened?"  Basically, long story  short, they pretty much said, well, look, we'd like to have you and, you know, if you  would like to come.  And I said, "This is where I wanted to come.  This is what I really  wanted to do."  Well, of course, I made my first ethical error as a black psychol -- as a, as  a professional psychologist, and that is, I refused to accept Emory's offer and took a  position at Morehouse, which Emory never forgave me for.  I mean I, I was a persona  non grata in, in mainstream psychologists' circles for years thereafter and particularly  coming to Atlanta.  I was never able to get any kind of support from, from over at Emory  except from the, this Boyd McCandless man who, you know, was on the faculty.  But  that, they, they, they always resented the fact that I had the nerve to somehow turn down  their offer to go to Morehouse when in fact, they were the ones who sort of arranged this,  you know, part-time commitment, you know.  At the same time I got it, I, I was offered a  position at Florida State.  I didn't accept that either, you know.
Story_ID: 2361
Speaker 1: Now, you're at Morehouse as a professor, some of the experiences that become life  experiences --
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: -- that changed you there.  Speak about that.
Speaker 2: Fantastic.  I mean the, the first most exciting thing were the students.  I was very young.  When I went to Morehouse, I was, I had just turned twenty-six and I had a Ph. D.  And so  I was really closer to the age of most of my students than I was to my colleagues.  And so  I was very much identified, you know, with the students.  And, in fact, at that point, I was  a bachelor and basically, my job was my life.  And so I would be in my office early in the  mornings, sometimes around 6:00, and students would look out Mays Hall and see my off  -- my, my light on in my office and come over there, and we'd start the day, you know,  these conversations that were ongoing.  And then, you know, I would have classes that I  taught in the department, ultimately, you know, became chairman of the department as  well.  But what I did is that in the, in the course of those years there, I developed just  incredibly intense intellectual mentorships with the students who I worked with.  And  some of the brightest young people I'd ever met before in my life.  And it was in this  environment of a, of a black institution that was just so rich in so many  ways and with so many of the kind of the things I was so familiar with having grown up  in Tallahassee [Florida] with the influence from Florida A and M University [Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] and stuff like that.  So it was like in many ways  going back home in a, in another kind of environment at a, at another kind of level.  So I,  I not only taught students psychology, but we had this whole kind of learning to be black  men kind of experience that was holistic, you know.  And so from early in the morning  when they would meet me there and come down to my office until classes started.  Then  they'd go to their classes and some of them would be in my classes during the course of  the day.  We would go to lunch together.  We'd go down to the bottom and get a fish  sandwich or something, still always conversations.  Always -- we were constantly talking  and constantly learning and teaching with each other and sharing ideas about, you know,  black people, the development of black people in general.  And, you know, from there,  you know, I'd come back, teach my afternoon classes, do what I needed to do.  Then in  the evening, I'd take home a carload of them in my Volkswagen.  And we'd go to my  house and I'd cook dinner, conversation continued, you know, until late at night.  I'd  bring them back to campus, you know, dump them off and then, you know, then, then the  day would start again.  And this went on for like, you know, really pretty much for almost  five years.  And so I took one group of students, like who came in about the same year I  did, all the way through their undergraduate experience.  And, of course, I had students  from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and from Clark [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So it wasn't just, you know, just a, a  male thing as Morehouse is, but it was really like was, you know, a really co-educational  environment.  So there would be sisters from Spelman who were, you know, psych  majors who spent a great deal of time with us.  And we really built a real kind of  intellectual community.  Simultaneously there were people -- there was a woman who  was in the, our English department who became a very, very good friend of mine, Gloria [Wade] Gayles.  And she taught African America humanities.  And she  was probably the most brilliant, insightful, creative woman.  She was the, she was the  first black woman who was really a black woman.  And she loved to be that, you know.  And she just was just excited about, you know, the kinds of things I was trying to do with  psychology and stuff and she just really encouraged, you know, this kind of, of black  intellectual dialogue to go on.  And so we became extremely good friends and, you know,  really kind of supported each other.  And there were two or three other, you know,  faculty people around as well who we formed, you know, that kind of support network,  but mostly, it was the students.  It was my students, certainly at Morehouse, certainly  from, in Spelman and the other schools who really became both my sons, my mentees  and my friends.  I mean, in fact, my -- I don't know where any of the people I went to  school with exist.  I never, I never saw those white people ever again.  A few of the  black students who were in graduate school with me, we remained friends throughout my  career.  In fact, one very, very good friend of mine became kind of like my, my colleague  in terms of, of the development of African psychology.  I'll talk about him later.  But the  majority of my close, lifetime friends who I became -- who became, you know,  groomsmen in my wedding, became the godparents to my children, I became godparents  to their children, our children have grown up together over the years, were students who I  met at Morehouse and have maintained, you know, that relationship over the years.  And  -- so that was the richest experience of my entire career.  I learned more during that time.  I was in, I was really just like in an intellectual heaven.  I mean I -- we were just  constantly engaged in trying to understand black people.  And it wasn't Ivy -- Halls of  Ivy kind of thing or Ivory Tower.  We really were involved in community projects and  mentoring in the schools, working -- I was working in the mental health center.  You  know, so we were trying to deal with people's problems simultaneously.  So the whole  kind of connection between the community and the University was maintained very  closely, you know.
Story_ID: 2362
Speaker 1: And then the ultimate change that came about was that as I began to  work with these students about what do we do to make life different for black people,  you know?  How do we begin to build institutions that make a difference?  Educational  institutions.  Health institutions.  Financial institutions.  Economic plans.  What do you  begin to do?  How do we begin to do this and implement it?  And, you know, we were  talking with people like the [Black] Panthers and other community  organizations, lots of things were going on in Atlanta [Georgia] in the early seventies  [1970s].  But probably the most impressive thing is what the Nation was doing, the  Nation of Islam.  And so we were reading the 'Muhammad Speaks' newspaper about the  farmland that was being bought, Elijah Muhammad was getting ready to build a hospital  and all these things.  We knew that there was a school there.  Now, at the same time I  knew all this, I wasn't too interested in getting too close to find out.  It was kind of like a  cult kind of thing and I mean even though I knew about Malcolm [X] and, you  know, had read the 'Autobiography of Malcolm X,' I kind of knew ideologically, but it was  really kind of, you know, those Black Muslims are kind of strange people, you know.  I  mean they're doing good stuff for black people, but really they're kind of different.  You  know, they don't, they don't believe in Jesus and, you know, you know, they -- if you  don't, if you don't believe in Christ and if you're black, something must be wrong with  you.  So I mean it, it is kind of a, a remote thing, even though it was fascinating.  Turned  out a couple of students who were at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] were members of  the Nation [of Islam].  And, of course, they had a heavy proselytizing kind of thing.  Of course, they  were always with you with the paper, the bean pies and the invitation to the temple.  And  I resisted the invitation for like a couple of years.  And, in fact, I even assigned my  students to go to the temple and listen to the message and bring a report back.  I mean  they had to do a paper, you know, this is a, a black institution in the black community.  You go and find out.  Now, I wouldn't go.  I mean I, I just sort of like didn't feel very  safe, not safe in the sense of any personal danger, but I just -- it was something kind of  scary about that, that group.  These students of mine who were members of the -- the  student, these students at Morehouse who were in the Nation, eventually got me to go on,  on one Sunday afternoon or something like that.  I went.  And we began to give it some  serious consideration in terms of studying, listening to what they were saying.  I read  'Message to the Black Man,' Elijah Muhammad's book.  And then I really began to go  fairly frequently, like, you know, once or twice a week.  I would go, by the way, always  armed with my little mentees.  So me and my other psych majors and some of my other  students from Morehouse, we'd all go together, you know.  And then the, the final thing  that happened -- this was about 1972, about my second year at Morehouse.  I'd been  going to the, to the temple for about two or three months.  Minister [Louis] Farrakhan came to Tallahassee [Florida] -- I, I'm sorry, came to Atlanta and spoke at a  mass, you know, kind of a gathering, a mass rally there.  And I went to hear it.  And it  was almost as if -- it was the most, it was the most unusual experience I've ever had.  It  was almost as if he was speaking directly to me with everything he said.  I meant every  allegory he used, every issue he discussed, every challenge that he raised to black people,  everything he said were either the things that I had been saying about what the needs of  our people were as well as things that I sort of knew we needed to do and think about.  It  was almost what -- he was giving me all the answers to the unanswered questions that I  had.  I walked out of there in a daze.  I mean like that night when I left there were people,  you know, students who had gone, always with my students.  They were with me too.  And, you know, they were trying to, they were responding to it.  They're kind of excited  about what he said.  And I was in a stupor.  I mean it was like I was, I was just drugged.  And I didn't understand, I mean I, I just, like, like I'd been taken someplace else.  And it  took me a few days to really kind of get myself reconnected, you know.  The next time I  went to the, to the temple, I put on a suit, a tie, and I really went with the idea of I've got  to go listen to this, you know, and to give it a serious consideration, and began to sort of  like really struggle with, can I do this?  You know, can I become a part of this?
Story_ID: 2363
Speaker 1: I had a colleague, a very good friend of mine who had been at [the University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor] with me, Phil McGee, who became a very good friend.  He was in psychology,  I was in psyche; he was in social experimental psychology, I was in clinical.  But we  became -- we were the only two peo -- black people who were in psychology and so  we'd begun this whole dialogue at Michigan.  He, he had done his coursework at Iowa  State University [Ames], but he'd come to Michigan to complete his dissertation.  And so he was  there doing research for his dissertation with a professor at Michigan.  And we became  friends.  We became very good friends.  And we began to have this dialogue about black  psychology.  When he finished his degree, he went back to California where he was from.  I came to Atlanta [Georgia].  We remained very good friends.  He went to Stanford  [University, Stanford, California].  When he got to Stanford, there was a professor in the psychology  department who actually, whose background was in communications, but he was in the  social psych department.  His name was Cedric Clark.  Cedric Clark, then, I met through  Phil McGee.  And Cedric joined the Nation [of Islam].  And Cedric is this  incredibly insightful intellectual, just an incredibly bright man.  He was probably one of  the most well-read, young black men I'd ever met.  I mean philosophy.  He could under - - he could weave in everything from physics to philosophy to theology and it all made  sense.  I mean he's just an incredibly brilliant man.  So these conversations I began to  have with, with, with Cedric, even prior to his going to the Nation, and then when I had  this interest in the Nation and then found out that Cedric had gone in the Nation, then I  really was fascinated.  And he came, you know, I, I went out to San Francisco  [California], talked with the, (unclear) talked with him.  And he subsequently came to  Atlanta [Georgia], and we began to talk about the Nation. Long and the short of it, I  eventually -- well, applied for my X, and that is like, applied for membership to join the  Nation.  And the rest is history.  I mean it really sort of really changed so much about my whole paradigm.
Story_ID: 2364
Speaker 1: Now, the fascinating thing is that I'm at a Baptist, black college in  Atlanta [Georgia] and there were some very interesting reactions to that process.  There  were distinguished professors there, Dr. Melvin Watson and E.A. Jones and Dr. E. B.  Williams and Dr. McBay [Henry McBay] who were these stalwart, good, conservative  Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] professors.  They were the epitome of the Morehouse  tradition.  And here was this little upstart, radical, little black man over there in  psychology who was already questionable because he never wore suits and ties and he  was -- wore a red -- he had a red, black and green watchband.  And he had all these  radical pictures on his walls, very atypical of the Morehouse man and certainly the  Morehouse professor.  And then I had the nerve to become a Black Muslim.  So they had  real problems with that.  I mean and there were rumors and discussions about the  appropriateness of that conduct.  Interestingly enough, there was a, kind of a silent  support from President [Hugh] Gloster who almost communicated in kind of  strange ways a kind of a secret support of that whole kind of thing.  I mean he was kind  of fascinated, you know, by, by my doing it and so forth.  And, you know, he was very  proud of the kind tradition that I bought to the department because I really, had really  built a good department there as well.
Story_ID: 2365
Speaker 1: And so I joined the Nation [of Islam] and that, of course,  began to sort of shift my energies and my emphasis and things because I spent a lot of  time, you know, with the Nation.  I began to have my bowtie and baldhead.  I'd gone  from my little mini-Afro that I had and my (unclear) revolutionary Black Panther-looking clothes to really becoming like, you know, the clean-cut Black Muslim  with the suit, white shirt and a tie and also selling the newspaper on Saturdays.  I would  go out with the brothers to sell newspapers on the corner, which was a whole different  experience for me to really confront, you know, our people on the front lines and trying  to, you know, proselytizing and selling the, you know, the 'Muhammad Speaks'  newspapers.  And then I really became very engrossed in Elijah Muhammad's ideology,  not so much the content of it, but the process of building a mythology that was geared  towards shifting the consciousness of black people from slaves to independent people  and to begin to think independently.  And his whole idea, the key thing that constantly  came back to me that really became kind of for me a motto, is that the ultimate power of  people is self knowledge, knowledge of self.  And this whole idea of knowledge of self  being the foundation for self-help and all of the other kinds of things that were there  really was the thing that psychologically brought me into, you know, accepting the  ideology.  And the thing that really fascinated me was that in coming into the Nation, I  met people who were successful resolutions of all the problems I tried to deal with as a  psychologist: drug addicts, former prostitutes, people who had been recidivists in prison  systems all of their lives since teenagers, had been going in and out of prisons, people  who had all kinds of family psychological problems, all kinds of addictions.  But these  people were healed.  Now, these were the same, these were parallel to the people I was  working with in the community mental health centers using my skills as a psychologist  and getting nowhere, getting absolutely nowhere, knowing that there was something  about the psychology of black people, of how we had internalized our oppression that led  us to be unable to break those kinds of addictive and mental health chains that create our  problems for us, you know.  And so the key that I got from, you know, Elijah  Muhammad was the idea that once black people began to know who they are and respect  who they are and what they can do, then not only can they begin to break away from the  destructive habits of the society that has oppressed us, but it can also begin to break us  away from dependency on white (unclear), white supremacy and white people period.  And so to begin to think independently that way became an extremely -- was  intellectually very liberating.  And that began to affect the way I wrote psychology.  And  I began to then write about the psychology of black people casting us as being a  continuation of African genius as opposed to deviations from European development.  And what, what that means is that the way I'd learned psychology, the way that I'd been  educated was to think of black people as being deviant Europeans.  And that the way to  perfect ourselves was to become masters of European-American technology, European- American art, European-American psychology, European-American sociology,  European-American economics.  And the only way that we could really become equal  and effective was to become as much like white people as we could.  And that was the  underlying philosophy of what I was trying to do, I, I had been doing. But the thing that I learned by going to the Nation [of Islam] was to begin to think of black  autonomy, not, not hostility or even separation in the literal sense that Elijah Muhammad  talked about, but to begin to think of us as being able to think independently, to be able to  conceptualize our worlds independently, and to be able to build our reality again  independently.  And, of course, I'm being -- coming back now is this childhood  experience of having been raised in the black community where black people weren't  inferior.  Black people weren't incompetent.  Black people were capable.  Black people  were able to be doctors.  Black people were able to develop their own businesses.  So I  was being, able to rediscover that in the ideology of the Nation, reintroduced without the  intimidation of the white world because what happened was that white people were kind  of defined out of our reality, you know.  People thought of the Nation as being haters of  white people, you know, the "white devils" kind of thing.  But basically, we were put on a  kind of a like a mindset of being so involved with our own self-development, we didn't  have time to hate anybody, you know.  So it's almost like, you know, no one ever calls  Jews anti-white or anti-Christian.  They simply call them Jews, I mean, they are involved  in themselves.  They cultivate their culture.  They cultivate their own communities.  They  cultivate their own history.  They cultivate their own nation, you know.  And no one  thinks of that as being anti-anything.  And in many ways, the Nation, even though its  rhetoric sounded anti-white, it was really much more kind of like a pro-self-affirming,  "look what we can do when we do for ourselves."  And that's the way I began to filtrate  that thinking into the way I wrote about psychology, what I wanted to do with  psychology, what I wanted to teach with psychology.  So I then began to sort of expand  what was growing all the time as this kind of like ethnocentric approach to psychology.  Ethnocentric being black approach to psychology as being the way I began to deal with  that whole thing.
Story_ID: 2366
Speaker 1: Was there any written books or anything, you can pull from to see,  the way you were about to go and move psychology?
Speaker 2: No, we were invent -- we were inventing it as we went along.  I wanted to come back to  mention to you again this, these people who, who became really kind of key in terms of  this whole scholarly development that became, what we call African Psychology.  One of  those people was my, my very good friend who I met, Phil McGee, who became my kind  of connection with the Stanford [University, Stanford, California] group.  And Stanford was where  Cedric Clark was, who I mentioned to you.  And their graduate student was Wade  Nobles.  Now, Wade Nobles was finishing a graduate degree in psychology at Stanford  University.  Through my connection with Phil, the four of us became kind of the  Africanist group in the Association of Black Psychologists.  So each year at their  conventions, you know, we would do a major kind of presentation and dealing with this  whole kind of redefinition of black people as basically African people.  And to begin to  somehow talk about psychology within the context of us continuing an African way of  life as opposed to being deviations from a European way of life.  And Cedric and I were  very much directly influenced by the Nation [of Islam] in our thinking.  And both  Phil and Wade, who never joined the Nation, were also very much influenced by those  kinds of ideas.  In fact, Wade's wife became an active member of Nation for a period of  time.  And so all of that became very much a part of the way that we began to sort of like  develop this whole kind of paradigm of what became kind of Africentric psychology.  Interestingly, Dr. Molefi Asante some years later did the first book on Afrocentricity and  he mentioned at the very beginning of the book that like, you know, this whole kind of  notion of beginning to think of black scholarship from an African context with that  whole paradigm shift where we began to see the world from our center, whether it's  economics, whether it's art, whether it's theater, whether it's literature, whether it's  psychology, whatever it is, to think of it from our center.  He sort of like, he, he  referenced the black psychologists, the African psychologists as having, you know, sort  of started that paradigm.  And he had reference to the work that, you know, the four of us  had done.  We did a paper back in, in -- it was actually published in first issue of the  'Journal of Black Psychology.'  It was called "Voodoo or IQ: An Introduction to African  Psychology."  And we really kind of laid out -- the four of us, Phil McGee, Wade  Nobles, Cedric Clark and myself, laid out the perimeters of this like paradigm of  beginning to think of the world, you know, from this kind of Africentric, you know, point  of view, and the, the work we began to do.  So Wade coming in experimental  psychology, he began to get research grants to study the black family.  And to study the  black family, not as a deviant European family, but as an African family.  So he began to  look at notions like the extended family system.  He began to look at things about the role  of spirituality in the black family.  And he began to look at how, when that family was  working well, people performed better in schools, staying away from socially deviant  kinds of behaviors.  So he began to like empirically demonstrate that when black people  acted consistent with being African, we didn't -- we (unclear), we had more successful  lives.  You know, I began to sort of write much more in terms of the whole kind of  importance of us understanding who we were as a means of finding mental health, you  know.
Story_ID: 2367
Speaker 1: Now, this transition into the Nation [of Islam] actually ushered me into the  next phase of my life because it was at the end, it was at the death of Elijah Muhammad  that the Nation was going through a major transition.  And we thought initially, at least,  that that transition was going to be kind of like to mainstream the Nation.  And whereas  the Nation had been a very closed community, politically, educationally, all these  wonderful things the Nation was doing were like locked within the confines of the Nation  of Islam.  So we had our own schools: they were Muslim schools, they were not black  schools, you know.  We had our businesses, but they were Black Muslim businesses.  They were not black community business -- we had our restaurants, you know, where we  didn't have any pork in them.  We didn't have no soul food there.  We had like, you  know, good, good cuisine based on, you know, 'How to Eat to Live' as written by Elijah  Muhammad.  So it was a very, it was very alienated from the rest of the black  community.  So one of the things that, of course, Malcolm [X] had always  talked about was that he felt that the Nation was too isolated from the rest of the black  community.  And that had something to do with his tensions with Elijah Muhammad, you  know, and subsequently, you know, his kind of like establishment of another kind of  movement.  So when Elijah Muhammad died and, and his son Wallace Muhammad came  in, the initial kind of impression we had, "okay, this is going to be kind of like an  expansion of the Nation where we're going to become a world kind of leadership group  for the whole of the black community."  We're going to show -- you know, we have  sixty-seven independent black schools in America already.  So we're going to show  black people how to use the resource of their own community, have their own  independent schools.  And we've got all these acres of farmland, you know.  We're  gonna bring together Tuskegee's [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] agriculture department, some of  the other agriculture schools, and we began to like show them how we can begin to like  really develop these things for ourselves, you know.  Here we have all these businesses.  We have our own newspaper.  All of the things that black people needed, the Nation had.  But they were closed within the confines of the Nation.  So we thought then that Wallace  Muhammad was committed to expanding the Nation, the Black Muslims, for the good of  the whole black community.  Well, we had a surprise.  But before I get to that, though,  before, but for the first year or so, several of us moved -- quite a few people moved to  Chicago [Illinois].  I gave up my job at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I resigned and  said I'm going to work with the Nation and basically, to, you know, whereas I, I wrote, I  remember writing the President [Hugh Gloster] a very nice letter saying, you know, I really appreciate,  you know, the, the job that the HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] is  doing, but we need to impact the whole world.  And the Nation is about to do that and  I'm going to go and work with them, you know, a very grandiose kind of illusion.  But I  went to Chicago and I was put over the Office of Human Development.  And it was  supposed to be kind of like the use of my psychology.  It was really my dream.  You  know, here was a way that I could begin to institutionalize these things.  I was going to  write literature to help black people develop ourselves.  I was doing articles for the,  national, international newspaper, 'Muhammad Speaks.'  I began to do, put together these  little pamphlets that subsequently became my books over the years.  And basically, the  work that we were doing was trying to -- then there was a, a couple other professors, Dr.  Lonnie Shabazz, Abdulalim Shabazz, who was a brilliant mathematician, Ph. D.  mathematician, came in as well.
Story_ID: 2368
Speaker 1: Tell me about your experiences in Chicago [Illinois] when you go there to become, to  work directly within the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: The first year was really exciting.  I mean I -- because all these people came, Sonia  Sanchez was in the Nation [of Islam].  She came there.  Minister [Louis] Farrakhan was moved out to Chicago, so he was working there.  So I was able to begin  to interact with all of the major leadership of the Nation of Islam, Muhammad Ali was,  you know, very active at the Nation at that point.  Khalilah Ali, who he was still married  to at the time, was very active around -- so all these people who had been sort of icons,  like for the black community as a whole and certainly for the Nation, became my  colleagues.  We were all kind of working together.  What happened, however, like shortly  after the first year I was in Chicago, it really became fairly clear that the real agenda that  Imam Wallace Muhammad had was to really kind of transform the Nation primarily into  an Orthodox religious movement.  And to really kind of de -- de-culturalize its, its  impact.  So, the move he began was to get rid of the businesses, really the schools  themselves began to -- he closed the schools down in most parts of the country and  eventually kind of phased out the schools altogether.  And basically to convert the Nation  from being like a, kind of like a social, cultural movement to being exclusively a  religious movement.  And, and this was very different from what we'd expected.  However, during the beginning of that year, like, you know, we began to do some of the  things that I indicated in terms of writing those pamphlets and things like that.  And by  the end of two years, it was much that the Nation was going in another direction  altogether, you know.  So those of us who had moved to Chicago, one, one very brilliant  man who was a lawyer out of Richmond [Virginia], his name was Sa'ad -- well his name  Gerard X. Green he became Sa'ad El-Amin, who subsequently became a city councilman  and major prosecutor and a judge out of Richmond when he went back.  But he'd moved  to Chicago, two or three accountants from PriceWaterhouse out of New York [New  York] had moved to Chicago.  So we brought together this kind of brain trust of people  who were kind of like parts of various [Black] Muslim communities around the country, parts of  the Nation who (unclear) like, the (unclear) all centered there in Chicago.  But it didn't go  the direction, you know, that we had anticipated.  But it was be -- it, it, it introduced me  to a national network of people, number one.  And it began to give exposure to the ideas  that I'd been working with on a national basis as well because my articles were in the  national newspaper of 'Muhammad Speaks.'  I did the -- I, I published the first little  pamphlets, the first one being, I think, 'The Community of Self' and then which I  subsequently revised.  And then a couple of others that I did as well which became like  these little readable pamphlets that people could use to begin to develop and understand  their psychology as black people.  So that was the start of the work that, you know,  subsequently I, I expanded much later on.  So I spent those two years there.  After finding  out that the Nation was really not going to go that kind of way, really going much more  to a religious movement, then I went to back to work at Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia].
Story_ID: 2369
Speaker 1: One very, very important piece.  I can't leave this out.  I met my wife [Renee Akbar].  I  met my wife during this, this particular time and started my family.  And it was a really  kind of interesting thing.  As I told you, I was a bachelor at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and when I joined the Nation [of Islam], I still was unmarried and then  courtship became a very formalized kind of thing within the Nation.  You didn't just see  a nice looking sister and say I want to talk to you.  It had to be handled through various  channels within the confines of the Nation.  So when I moved to Chicago [Illinois] and  began to, you know, it was kind of like a national spokesman and, and minister within the  Nation, then wherever I went around the country, people were introducing to the  available, potential mates for me, you know, because I needed to have a family.  That was  a part of being a good Muslim man.  And actually met the woman who I subsequently  married who was a part of the mosque in New York [New York].  And, you know, we're  introduced and, and we began to formally court through the Muslim system.  And within  about a year after we met, you know, we got married.  And we began our family and, and  my, my -- actually, within the course of those two years, I, we -- I met her.  We had our  courtship.  We got married and just at the time I was leaving Chicago, my first daughter  was born.  So we did a lot in two years time in terms of, you know, the transition in my  life.
Story_ID: 2370
Speaker 1: So we moved to, to Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia] at the end of the  summer.  I found myself looking for a job because whatever it was I was being paid to do  at the Nation [of Islam] had been kind of dissolved and I had to find a job quick.  And I was able to join the psychology department at Norfolk State, spent a couple of  years there.  What happened at Norfolk State, interestingly enough is that it attracted --  one piece I left out too was that when I joined the Nation, I didn't join it by myself.  A lot  of my students from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] joined as well, about five or six of  them -- about six students from Morehouse and about three of the sisters from Spelman  [College, Atlanta, Georgia] all joined the same -- within the, say within a year's time.  So that, of  course, didn't help my reputation either because I was accused of kind of proselytizing  students into the Nation by some of those people who had doubts about my work anyway,  about the things I was doing with this cult that I was joining.  So that, that, that raised the  eyebrows as well.  But once I went to Norfolk State, some of those students, not all in the  Nation, just some of the students from the AU Center [Atlanta University Center, Georgia] who I  had taught, two of the sisters from Spelman, about four or five of the students from  Morehouse came to Norfolk State because I was there and got into -- became a part of the  Master's program.  And they finished a Master's in community psychology during the  two years I was there.  And so the community that had started in Atlanta [Georgia]  continued during the time that I was there in, you know, Norfolk State.
Story_ID: 2371
Speaker 1: And then, after two years at Norfolk [State University, Norfolk, Virginia], I said, look, if I can leave and live in Norfolk, I can go back home.  And I began to investigate coming back to Tallahassee [Florida].  Had a very similar  experience in terms of our moving back to Tallahassee that I had in going to Morehouse  [College, Atlanta, Georgia], that is, that I had written to Tallahassee, I mean I'd written to  Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] to the psychology  department expressing my desire to be considered for a faculty position here.  And as  happened with Morehouse, I'd gotten no response to that letter of application.  But, of  course, I was coming to Tallahassee on a regular basis to visit my family.  So on one of  those trips I arranged by personal contact through the chairman of the psychology  department, Dr. Joseph Awkard here at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical  University, Tallahassee], you know, to, to, to let me interview.  And he took me to the Vice President  of Academic Affairs, a woman by the way, who had known me since I was back in those  plays I told you about because she'd been at FAMU forever.  And at that point, she was  the Academic Dean.  The president was Walter Smith, and she was the Dean, and she,  you know, had the ultimate kind of word for hiring and firing.  And so Dr. Awkard, you  know, (unclear), you know, had a position had a position within the department.  He  introduced me to her as a potential candidate.  And basically, a long story short, she  pretty much rejected that application.  I subsequently found out indirectly that she was  somewhat concerned about the kind of radicalism that I brought, excuse me (cough).  She  was somewhat concerned about the radical reputation that I had at that point and was  afraid that it may cause some problems with a state-supported institution.  And some  legislators still (cough) excuse me, not liking, you know, the kind of position I, I had.  Plus, by this time, I was no longer Luther Weems.  I was Na'im Akbar.  And clearly by  my name, had somehow like joined the ranks of this, you know, questionable, kind of  radical group.  So she refused to permit, permit Dr. Awkard to hire me.  Well, by this  time, I was determined to come back to Tallahassee and we were able to -- there was a  director of Black Studies over at Florida State [University, Tallahassee], Dr. William  Jones.  And he arranged to hire me in Black Studies while paying for my first year to  teach in psychology as well because you had to be based in a discipline.  You couldn't  just be in Black Studies.  And so the psychology department of -- agreed to accept me as  a Visiting Professor for that one year, you know, in psychology and in Black Studies.  Well, subsequently we were able to make it to other, make other arrangements where I  actually got hired in psychology while continuing to teach in Black Studies.  And twenty- two years later, I'm still there.
Story_ID: 2372
Speaker 1: You arrive at Florida State [University, Tallahassee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As a professor, but there's a point in time during this period in the early eighties [1980s]  that you become what can be called or labeled a celebrity academician.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Explain the other side.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm really not sure.  A part of it had to do with, during that two years that I was  with the Nation [of Islam], I was, I, I had a lot of exposure by way of the Nation  in cities around the country.  For an example, one of the kinds of things that I did was  that I had an interview on one of the -- like when I would go into cities to speak as a  representative of the Nation, I would do radio shows and television programs locally.  And actually, my initial contact with one of the producers from one of the national shows  was that this woman was a producer for a local Detroit [Michigan] talk show that I had  done.  It was called 'Dennis Wholey's Late Night America.'  It was subsequently, sub --  what do you call it? -- syndicated.  But when I went on the program was pretty much,  pretty much like a local kind of T.V. show.  That same producer who worked with  Dennis Wholey subsequently became one of Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] producers.  And  some years later, she remembered me and invited me to the 'Oprah Show.'  I'm not  exactly sure how Phil Donahue and some of these other people, but their producers  somehow or other, had sort of heard of me by virtue of the kind of exposure I'd gotten in  terms of the national things I'd done through the Nation.  And so by the time that I had --  even though I'd left Chicago [Illinois], those, that network had already been created.  And I began to be invited to do, you know, national presentations and things like that and  began to be invited to a lot of the television shows as well.  Because even though my  work had centered around psychology, I'd really begun in many ways, began to articulate  a lot of the issues that black people held in general.  And, you know, so whether -- I think  Donahue was doing something on racism or something like when I went on his show the  first time.  I think Oprah, the first time I went on her show, she was doing something  about changing facial features.  Black people who were trying to look like white people  and the psychological meaning of that, was the first time, you know, I'd gone to her  show.  And again, she found out about, about me by way of her producer who I'd met in  Detroit.  So that kind of, you know, swole. Of course, I mean, but you don't need but one  or two of those kinds of national opportunities and, you know, people begin to sort of see  you as, you know, some kind of little mini-spokesman.
Story_ID: 2373
Speaker 1: And for the most part, you're -- or for the total, your psychology is not based in what any  mainstream psychology book (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, it's not.
Speaker 1: You created, you and your three brothers, --
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: -- created an entirely different psychology which you've put forth in your books and in your speeches and when you've been on television?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: If you can explain how this psychology has been received over the past twenty years that  you've been putting it forth -- in the ac -- in the academy, in the academic academy?
Speaker 2: Okay.  It began with a great deal of resistance.  I mean it was kind of identified with a  kind of radical fringe and not a serious scholarship.  And, you know, it was sort of like  interpreted as kind of like "Black Power" stuff, you know, and more rhetoric than any kind  of real substance.  But as a consequence of the, you know, the research that Wade [Nobles] did, the kind of writings that, you know, that I, that I began to do, the writings  that, you know, that Phil McGee began to work in terms of melanin.  We all became kind  of legitimate scholars in many ways.  Phil McGee became the Dean of Ethnic Studies at  San Francisco State University [California].  Cedric Clark, who became later, Saayid Katid, became a  faculty person at San Francisco State as well.  They began to bring to -- put together the  first kind of textbooks in black psychology, primarily edited by Reginald Jones who was  a psychologist, who was an older psychologist actually, but he was a good, he was a  scholar.  We kind of began to pull together pieces of, of work that was going on in the  field.  And in this first volume of black psychology, it was kind of like headlined by  Wade Nobles's article as well about African Psychology as well as one by Cedric Clark.  I didn't have one in that first edition at all.  But the two of them, you know, did.  And it  kind of laid the format for what black psychology was all about.  We were continuing to  do these national presentations every year.  As I mentioned earlier, we had done this kind  of sentinel piece called 'Introduction to African Psychology,' that had really become a  part of how people understood black psychology.  And so there was hesitancy about that  at first, I mean with the kind of the mainstream black psychologists who were still  primarily members of the American Psychological Association, even though the  Association of Black Psychologists was started as kind of like a caucus.  It was kind of a  black caucus.  And they really hadn't thought of it as being like an independent  movement in psychology.  And so they were not willing to buy into that.  They being  people, for example, like Dr. Kenneth Clark who never viewed the Association of Black  Psychologists as a legitimate organization.  In fact, he refused to accept an award that  was given to kind of like the founding fathers of black psychology.  He said he was a  black psychologist.  He was a psychologist and he refused to have anything to do with  any organization that identified itself as being black.  And I mean that was the position  that he had taken.  And, and he represented probably the handful of kind of mainstream existing psychologists prior to the early seventies [1970s] when there was a real large  number of black psychologists.
Story_ID: 2374
Speaker 1: In fact, the black psychologists that began to come into  existence because I mean prior to probably 1970, there were probably less than fifty  black psychologists in America.  And, in fact, there's a book that's done by Dr. [Robert V.] Bob Guthrie that's called 'Even the Rat Was White,' and this book sort of documents the  history of black psychology in America.  And he says that like as late as 1968, there were  only thirty-two Ph. D.'s [Doctors of Philosophy] in, black Ph. D.'s in psychology in America.  Now, there were  other people with Ed. D.'s [Doctors of Education] and other kinds of combined things, but in terms of people you  could refer to as psychologists, there were only thirty-two.  So that means then that the  field grew following what happened at the founding of the [Association of] Black Psychologists, was when the black psychology members of the  APA confronted the APA, the American Psychological Association, and pretty much  demanded that they begin to require programs that were accredited to make a minimum  number of, of -- a minimum number of their enrollment to be black students, to begin to  supply a development of black psychologists.  So over the next ten years, that number  quadrupled and now there are several thousand.  But it began with that kind of effort to  try to practice affirmative action, to make the blacks -- to the make the psychologists  become responsible for dealing -- doing away with this historical absence of black  psychologists.  As I told you, 1965 I'm the second student in clinical psychology at the  University of Michigan [Ann Arbor], the University of Michigan being one of the largest programs in  psychology in America.  The first graduate in psychology from Florida State University [Tallahasee]  was 1968.  They didn't graduate their first graduate until 1968.  And that was pretty much  throughout the nation.  So there were almost no psyche -- black psychologists (unclear).  So the Association then served as the foundation for beginning to develop that whole  kind of network of black psychologists.  And we grew with the organization.  So in many  ways, the Association of Black Psychologists was a very greatly influenced by the  thinking of this kind of radical group of African-centered psychology that I was a part of.
Speaker 2: Even if the APA [American Psychological Association] or these psychology departments  around the country were prepared to bring in more blacks at that time, before (unclear),  the classes that were offered would these new oncoming black psychologists been able to  help black people?
Speaker 1: No, it was the same kind of training that I'd received and the rest of us had, had received.  The thing that made the difference was the Association of Black Psychologists.  I mean  that organization gained an alternative framework and form for the development of  different kinds of research ideas, different kinds of practice ideas.  It even permitted  young scholars to be able to legitimately do research in their dissertations and begin to  do, you know, a, acquire tenure at universities by being able to do research that was  referenced initially in things like the 'Journal of Black Psychology.'  So we began to  build a legitimate academic field that had no support in any institutional basis.  And even  today, I mean this is 2002, today there still is not one program that is a Ph. D. program in  psychology that offers the kind of orientation that we have come to identify as being the  orientation of a paradigmatic approach of black psychology.  So it did not exist.  So  essentially, we have had to create ourselves, each generation, that there have been black  psychologists.
Story_ID: 2375
Speaker 1: Now, what's it going to take for black psychologists, for black psychologists now to  reach back into the classroom in these departments to have it, have them restructured?
Speaker 2: We need institutions that we control.  We would have to have institutions where we could  engage in bringing together a critical nucleus of scholars who offered that kind of  perspective to begin to do that.  Now, what has happened is that over the years, we have,  in fact, begun to affect so many of the young black psychologists just with an  introduction of some Wade Nobles's ideas about the family, some of my things about  personality, some of the work that Phil McGee and Frances [Cress] Welsing did about melanin.  And so there's been a young group of psychologists who  have used and sort of integrated this, these ideas into their mainstream training.  And they  now have gone back, they are mentors. Dr. Thomas Parham at the University of  California-Irvine, he's the chairman, and he's a, in the counseling, the director of the  counseling center out there.  And so he then has provided internships and other kinds of  experiences.  Dr. Joseph Baldwin, Colby Cambone, who is the chairman of the  psychology department at Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical  University, Tallahassee] he started a Master's program that was an African psychology approach to  psychology.  So what we had then was the opportunity for students to actually get a  Master's in black Psychology and then go on into Ph. D. programs.  Now, those students  have subsequently become both practitioners and teachers who are doing the same kind  of thing.  The thing that's missing as we speak even today is that there's no institution  that we can identify as being in place that specializes in the preparation and the training  of African-centered psychologists, regardless of their race.  But the, the different  ideology that suggests this kind of approach that provides, provides an ethnocentric  addressing of the issues that we face as a community.
Story_ID: 2376
Speaker 1: The African American community and, without a doubt, has never received or never has trusted psychologists.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how do you bridge that relationship to get African Americans to understand that it's  okay to accept psychological assistance?
Speaker 2: By becoming an advocate, yeah, rather than a, an adversary.  In other words, like  psychologists had been put into the role of being adversaries to the black community.  So  we became the ones who put your child in special ed. [special education].  We became  the ones who somehow took your child out of the mainstream class.  We became the ones  who locked you up in a hospital because operating within the confines of that Eurocentric  paradigm, we became policemen, basically.  We became the mental health cops and,  therefore, we're not primarily advocates for our communities.  One of the things that  we've done as African-centered psychologists is that our work has grown over the years  to become an advocacy work.  So whether it's my book, 'Breaking the Chains of  Psychological Slavery,' whether it's Wade Nobles, someone like, working with families  in Oakland, California and helping unwed mothers to begin to understand how they could  still be African women, whether it's like people like Linda James Myers and some other  people who grew up with rites of passage programs around the country.  One of my  students from Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Benson Cooke, up at George Mason  University [Fairfax, Virginia], whose like done books and trainings with, with rites of passage programs.  I  mean we have a generation of people who've seen black psychologists only in an  advocacy position.  So what is the consequence of that now is that we have all these  people who call us from all over the country wanting to find a black psychologist to talk  to.  You know, not a psychologist, you know, they still think of psychology in a negative  sense.  But they are now willing to bring their child or bring themselves or go sit down  and talk to a black psychologist because for them, I mean and this is around the country,  we have a whole -- we have a, we have a generation of young black people -- and not so  young, whose experience with psychology has been this group of advocates, you know.  So they identify with people like this.  For an example, probably the widest audience for  my books are brothers in prison.  I mean I, -- there're probably more Na'im Akbar books  in prison -- in fact, I would challenge you to probably walk through any prison in this  country and say, do you know anybody who's a psychologist?  And I'm sure they would  say Na'im Akbar, you know.  And that, and it's almost like it's, it's become almost kind  of like a cult literature within the prisons.  But what does that mean?  That means though  that they have come to think of me as a psychologist, as somebody who's a resource for  positive development for the black community.  So they've read 'Visions for black  Men.'  They've read 'Breaking the Chains of Psychological Slavery' so when they want  to talk about how to make their lives better, they want to know how to become the men  who I described in 'Visions for Black Men.'  When they want to talk about their families,  they want to talk about how to get their young -- sons and daughters to go from mis- education to education.  So I believe that that way of serving the role as an advocate, you  know.  And I mean even things like the celebrity piece of like the television shows, I  mean many people ran into me the first time when they saw me on [The] Oprah [Winfrey Show] talking about 'Visions for Black Men' or some, you know, some other  T.V. program, always in a position of saying, we have been robbed of our psychological  health in a system that has not worked to our well being.  And our responsibility is to take  our power back and to begin to define ourselves and operate as human beings dealing in  the world of human beings who have to respect ourselves, an empowering kind of  message.  So the concept then of a psychologist is not somebody who -- a black  psychologist, is not somebody who's putting them in a mental hospital or somebody who  thinks you're crazy.  But it's somebody who has this kind of empowering message.
Story_ID: 2377
Speaker 1: So what do you see the role of African American psychologists today in bringing about  that role?
Speaker 2: I, I really see that the next generation's responsibility in psychology is to do institution  building.  That is that we need ways to not simply have a message of empowerment, but  to create institutions that do that.  So we need African American psychologists on the  boards of private schools that are helping people develop curricula to not only grow our  children intellectually with content about history, content about economics, content about  math and science, but information about themselves as cultural creatures, you know.  We  need psychologists to be engaged in addressing the kinds of self destructive issues we  have as a community, the, the way that addictions are part of the whole kind social nexus  system that operates to our demise.  I mean the, I think the, the importance of having  psychologists, for an example, serve as even consultants to entertainers and  understanding -- one of the, the really profound things I think the Minister [Louis] Farrakhan has done very recently with the rappers and the hip hop community is  to go to them to do therapy, actually.  I mean he, you know, he's going as a minister, he  really has gone to them as therapy to show them the psychological impact of the work  that they are doing on the young people who listen to their words and the potential that  that mechanism has to bring power and strength to our communities.  Now, that's the role  of psychology, to begin to serve as a support, as a resource, as a consultant, if you will,  for those kinds of things that impact our young people.  So our young people are much  more impacted by the rappers than they are by the new educational curriculum being set  up in Washington, D.C. in the Department of Education.  I mean no one cares anything  about new paradigms of teaching and technology in terms of what really will impact our  kids.  What really will impact our kids are these kinds of popular media images that begin  to shape the concept that to somehow think critically is dumb and to be a thug is  intelligent.  And until you can get people to begin to believe that thinking is legitimate  and being a thug is just what that is, nothing, then that -- you can't even get people into  technology curriculum, all these other kinds of fancy things.
Story_ID: 2378
Speaker 1: We mentioned earlier the fact that, the differences between African Americans and  Caucasians, could you speak to that point?
Speaker 2: Let me begin, let me, let me very clear.  I believe a human being's ultimately human,  period.  I mean I, I think that there's just, there're basic kinds of things of like loving and  growing and transforming and consciousness that characterizes being human.  The way  that people learn to do that and express that and experience that and fulfill their humanity  is done through a cultural modality.  The inescapable reality is that we have lived as  African people in a white supremacist, Eurocentric culture.  That is that we live in a  culture that has been established to affirm the acquisition of the highest human potential  of people of European descent.  The culture's been structured that way.  That is that  access to education, the, the definition of heroines and heroes, the definition of  competence and power builds on the way to help European Americans continue to excel  in world leadership and in the excellent, in, in, in achieving excellence for their humanity.  Our history in the Western world has not been geared towards the, the acquisition of  those things.  So whereas every white child learns their story of America as being the  place that [Christopher] Columbus discovered is a very strategic way to build a kind of sense of  psychological ownership of Europeans of America, you know.  The fact that there is no  place where African Americans learn their connection with America means then that we  never get that kind of ownership.  So we don't have the same, same sense of  responsibility of building for generations yet unborn to help them become the astronauts  who are going to outer space to build a sense of world discovery and that, that's not a part  of what the American dream is all about.  So when I talk about the differences between  African Americans and European Americans, I'm not talking about anything different in  the genetic structure.  Contrary to some of my colleagues, I don't believe that melanin  separates us totally as human specimen.  I do believe, however, that culture does.  And I  believe that culture is exactly what the biologists refer to culture as being.  It's an  environment for growth.  And culture is environment that stimulates and facilitates the  highest human growth, meaning that people recognize their strengths.  They recognize  their weaknesses.  They work towards transforming themselves to become effective,  spiritual and mental beings.  They master their lower selves and become higher selves  and they engage in transforming the environment to be a richer place for human beings to  live.  That's what the human process is about.  And my argument is, is that my  responsibility as an advocate for people who have been, who have been left out of that  process, is to empower them to be able to do for themselves what other people do for  themselves.  And that's the whole thing, that's the whole argument about where this thing  needs to be going.
Story_ID: 2379
Speaker 1: Now for that process to be totally achieved and for African Americans and the African  American community to be cleansed and brought to a certain point, what role can the  psychologists, combined with the black church, do to bring that about?
Speaker 2: I think that the black church is really the only indigenous institution we have.  It's been  contaminated as well, but it is an institution that has somehow like -- in many ways, it has  evolved independent of its creation.  So it was created, it was given to the black people,  to the slaves as a means to further their enslavement.  And it, it evolved as being a haven  by which we could begin to find an affirmation of our peoplehood. Contrary to the  teaching of the cursive hand; contrary to the teaching that the deity was a white man and  in, in opposition to even those images, the church has become an environment to begin to  stimulate us spiritually, provide for us in terms of mental refuge and solace and to begin  to build some kind of peace.  And I believe that that's ultimately, that healing process, is  ultimately what the psychologists are all about.  One of the key parts of African-centered  psychology, black psychology was the recognition that you cannot talk about the human  being unless you talk about the spirit.  That spirit is an essential part of what the human  being is all about.  The locale for how we had talked about spirit has been in the black  church.  And we have brought within the confines of the black church the tradition of the  African spirit system, you know, the fact that human beings were conceptualized and  understood as being fundamentally spiritual creatures.  And the black church has  operated from that paradigmatic point of view.  So I see a complete compatibility  between the work of spiritual healing and development that the psychologist is committed  to and the work of the traditional role of the black church.  Now, of course, black  churches are led by people who have gone to white theological seminaries who believe  that the images of the Renaissance painters are the real images of Jesus and his mother and  The Last Supper.  They really believe the Leonardo DaVinci really painted a picture just  like a Polaroid photograph of a white man who was the Son of God.  And I believe that  that's very detrimental to our psychological well-being.  But that represents, I think, only  a flaw in the system because, in spite of itself, I believe that the black church has  generated a kind of like a spiritual in -- insularity that has actually been able to provide a  healing for our people.  If we can protect it and not let it become a commercialized,  materialistic, non-spiritual system, in the same way that if we can protect psychology  from losing its soul again, as it has in European American psychology, then I think that  both of them working together can become a healing mechanism to transform our  communities and our people.
Story_ID: 2380
Speaker 1: You said that one of the centerpieces of the African American psychology is  that you recognize that the spirit exists.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Does that exist in mainstream?
Speaker 2: Indeed not, indeed not.  In fact, if there is a fundamental difference between European  American psychology or Eurocentric psychology and Afrocentric psychology, is the  differences and assumptions about what is critical about the human makeup.  Eurocentric  psychology believes that the fundamental thing to know about human beings is what they  do.  Behavior is all that counts and trying to change behavior is their focus.  African  psychology, the African approach to the human being believes that ultimately, the soul,  the spirit is what people are really all about.  That's what really counts.  So if we change  the spirit or transform the spirit, the behavior follows.  So the focus has always been on  transforming the spirit and not just altering the behavior.  Whereas Euro, Euro, Euro  centric psychology and Euro-centric religion is about a behavioral iss -- system as  opposed a spiritual system.  And spiritual and, I, I speak -- I refer to as a consciousness of  a higher plane of reality, a realization that reality is only inferred from what we see, what  we touch and what we experience with the five senses.  But it is, in fact, no more than a  representation of a higher plane of reality that ultimately is under the rulership of a divine  creator.
Story_ID: 2381
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My hope is that we will build for generations unborn, with the belief that our  children who are not yet born will be able to do what any other people of this planet have  been able to do, and that is, make the planet a better place for human beings to live.  And  that, that's my hope.  That is, that we will move beyond the psychological chains of  slavery that makes us still look to other people other than ourselves for direction.  It  makes us still dislike ourselves.  It still has internalizing systems of self-destructiveness  that makes us somehow view ourselves as lesser than other human beings.  And that we  would somehow be able to be healed from this imitative compulsion, this need to try to  be like other people rather than to comfortably and assuredly be who we are, you know.  My concern, my concern is that it is so very easy to continue in the hypnosis, the, the  impact of slavery and the, the whole power of the kind of post-traumatic stress syndrome  is so powerful that it can continue to blind us to the very realities we are living in.  And  one of the most frightening things for me is to live in an era where increasingly our  young people don't understand the realities of the world that we're living in.  I mean they  don't know why [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] died.  They don't know why Harriet  Tubman is a heroine.  They don't know the struggles of the Rosa Parks.  They don't  know how they got to be where they are.  They really think that they're products of the  Mayflower.  They really believe that they're simply just another one of [Christopher] Columbus's children, that the Statue of Liberty was about them.  They don't  understand the unique relationship that we have to this nation and the special  responsibility that we have to the world.  And the absence of that consciousness robs us  of the tremendous gifts of the millions of people who died in order to make it possible for  us to be here.  To be able to betray the trust of that blood price, that blood sacrifice, is to  me robbing us of our birthright, and robbing us of our responsibility to restore the human  spirit to the planet.  And I don't believe anyone can do it but us because we are the only  ones who have endured the world at its worst and have been able to preserve our  humanity and our spirit in spite of that.  And I believe that's a lesson that we need to  teach all of humanity.  And the frightening thing for me is the possibility that we may, in  fact, lose our birthright and lose our opportunity by identifying with the very people who  tried to destroy us.
Story_ID: 2382
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be saying?
Speaker 2: Akbar was unrelenting in his belief in the integrity and the power of black people to  know themselves and make the world a better place.  I want that memory, that  recognition that this was somebody who loved his people so intensely that everything that  his life was about was ultimately geared towards that whole liberation process, that he is  a part of a community of people who since the first day, whether back to [Joseph] Cinque, and Nat, Nat Turner and Denmark Vesey and all of those great warriors who  never gave up the struggle for restoring us again to our greatness as a people.  I want to  be put in that community.  I want to be in that number and remembered as a part of, of  some, of -- a part of that genera -- trans-generation of soldiers who continued to labor to  restore us to our greatness as a people.
Speaker 1: And what would you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: My ideas, the ideas that have, I've been blessed to have come through me.  I think that  I'm a vessel.  I think that, I don't think that I'm brilliant.  I don't think that I'm create --  creative by myself.  I really think I'm a vessel.  I've been blessed to be able to be a  channel for higher truths and for higher realities and for truths that have always been  here.  And I want to be remembered for being able to be a good vessel or a good channel  for those higher truths.
Story_ID: 2383
Speaker 1: That's my father and myself on a beach in Toledo, Ohio during the summer that I was  visiting with him.  That's about the summer of Aug -- 1958.  I was about fourteen years  old.  That was one of those many summers that I spent in Ann Arbor [Michigan] and  Toledo, Ohio.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar and Father on Toledo, Ohio Beach (1958)] [Toledo, Ohio] [Photo Courtesey of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2384
Speaker 1: That's, that's me.  That's  Luther Weems, Jr.  I was President of the Student Council.  That's my senior year at  FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee] High School.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar (Luther Weems, Jr) as High School Senior (1961)] [Tallahassee, FL] [Photo Courtesey of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2385
Speaker 1: This was in 1973 during my first visit to Africa.  This was attending a conference, an  international conference on African Psychology.  When they said African Psychology,  they were really just talking about the continent, but I'm standing there speaking with  another African American psychologist who was attending that conference, to the, to the  left is Dr. Art Mathis.  He was teaching in the department of psychology at, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] Meharry University [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  And the, the gentleman in  the middle is a psychologist who was teaching at the University of Ibadan, in Ibadan,  Nigeria.  And then I'm standing there with my arms folded, saying great ideas about  something.  But that's at the University of Ibadan, that's in 1973.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar wih Dr. Art Mathis and Nigerian Psychologist at the University of Ibadan, Nigeria (1973)] [Ibadan, Nigeria, West Africa] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2386
Speaker 1: That's 1987 when I received the Martin Luther King Scholarship Award over  at Florida State University [Tallahassee].  And I'm being greeted by the late Reverend Herbert  Alexander who was kind of like the heir apparent to Reverend C.K. Steele, a very  important activist as well as a professor at Florida A and M University [Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee].  He was attending the banquet where I'd been  awarded this annual award.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Rev. Herbert Alexander (1987)] [Tallahassee, FL] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2387
Speaker 1: That's Luther Weems, Jr., eight years old.  I was -- that's my Easter  suit.  And I figured I was really pretty sharp as you can see.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar (Luther Weems, Jr) at Eight Years Old on Easter Sunday (1952)] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2388
Speaker 1: This is one of the exciting experiences.  This is my daughter and I are  standing on the, on the wall of the Elmina, Cape Coast, I'm sorry the Elmina slave  dungeons in, in Ghana, West Africa in 1994, the year that she finished high school.  I'm  sorry, that's not right.  In 1995, the year she took, finished high school, I took her to visit  West Africa.  And we were there at the slave dungeons together.  That's Shaakira Akbar.  That's my older child, my old -- my daughter.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar and Daughter, Shaakira, at Elmina Slave Castle in Ghana, West Africa (1995)] [Elmina Slave Castle, Ghana, West Africa] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2389
Speaker 1: That's actually my daughter again with my in-laws.  That's my, my wife's  mother and father who also traveled with us that year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We're standing at the coast, also by the dungeons.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Shaakira Akbar with Maternal Grandparents in Ghana, West Africa (1995)] [Ghana, West Africa] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2390
Speaker 1: That's my nuclear family there.  That's my father, my aunt is sitting in the chair.  That's Aunt Eunice.  My mother is there  in the background.  That's Bessie, my mother and then, of course, I'm the one with the  glasses.  Now, this -- we're together at my graduation party after I finished my  undergraduate degree at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor] in 1965.  So this was at my father's  house in Ann Arbor [Michigan].  And he was having kind of a reception following my,  my graduation.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Mother, Bessie; Father, Luther; and Aunt, Eunice (1965)] [Ann Arbor, MI] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2391
Speaker 1: Oh, this is the family portrait.  This is my wife, Renee sitting next to me, of course, the  twin that's standing next to her is Tareeq Akbar and the twin that's standing next to me  on, on -- to my left, is Mutaqee Akbar.  Mutaqee is spelled M-U-T-A-Q-E-E.  Tareeq is  spelled T-A-R-E-E-Q.  And between the two of us, that's Shaakira.  They are probably  about 8 years old and 10 years old, respectively.  Shaakira being 10 and the boys are  about 8 years old.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Wife, Renee, and Children, Shaakira, Tareeq, and Mutaqee (circa 1987)] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2392
Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken with me and Minister [Louis] Farrakhan.  The National Saviors' Day Convention was held in Accra, Ghana in 1995.  And I was there at Minister Farrakhan's guesthouse.  And I, I was attending the Saviors'  Day Convention and was a guest Minister Farrahkan's at the guesthouse that evening.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Minister Louis Farrakhan in Accra, Ghana (1995)] [Accra, Ghana, West Africa] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2393
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me at a convention at the University of Louisville [Kentucky] in  probably 1997.  That's probably about a year or two before the passing of the  distinguished gentleman with the hat on in the middle, it is the distinguished scholar Dr.  John Henrik Clarke.  And the man to the, on the other side is also the distinguished  educator and scholar, Dr. Asa Hilliard.  And we were all presenters together at a, the  Black Family Conference of the University of Louisville.  And I think that's '98 [1998].  Let me see.  About 1998 or thereabouts.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Drs. John Henrik Clarke and Asa Hilliard at the University of Louisville (circa 1998)] [Louisville, KY] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2394
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me in my early days after joining the Nation of Islam.  This was Luther X, and I have my bowtie and my close-cut hair and my sharp three-piece  [Black] Muslim suit.  And I was on the faculty at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar (Luther X) (1973)] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2395
Speaker 1: This is during my first visit to Kemet, to Egypt in 19 -- oh, God -- 80 --  say about 1984 or '85 [1985].  And this is at the Temple of Edfu.  And I'm standing next  to the statue of Horus, a hawk-headed deity.  And this was during the time that I was  beginning to understand the importance of Egyptian culture, Kemetic culture in terms of  the development of African culture.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar at the Temple of Edfu, Upper Egypt (circa 1985)] [Temple of Edfu, Egypt] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2396
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is 1996.  This is two years after I had taken my daughter for the first time.  We  are also sitting on the wall of -- actually, this is actually Cape Coast Castle, which is one  of the two slave dungeons there in Cape Coast-Elmina, West Africa.  And I'm standing --  I'm there with my sons.  That's Tareeq directly next to me with the glasses on the top of  his head, and that's Mutaqee next to him.  And we're standing on the, on the, the wall at  Cape Coast Castle.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Sons, Tareeq and Mutaqee, at Cape Coast Slave Castle, Ghana (1996)] [Cape Coast Slave Castle, Ghana, West Africa] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2397
Speaker 1: This is a, a gathering of, of Afrocentric scholars at a major conference on the mental  health of black people.  It was held in Columbus, Columbus, Ohio in 19 -- can't make  out what that, 1995.  Good, thank you.  In 1995, it always helps to have a date on the  picture.  Now, in this picture, there, there're some significant scholars.  If you sort scan  from the left to the right, the second person from the left is Dr. Asa Hilliard, next to him  is the very important Afrocentric scholar, Dr. Molefi Asante.  I'm next to him.  Next to  him is the founder of Kwanzaa, Dr. Maulana Karenga.  Next to Dr. Maulana Karenga is  the distinguished Afrocentric, Afro -- Afrocentric psychologist, one of the few women  whose been in the forefront of the Afrocentric psychology movement, Dr. Linda James  Myers at Ohio State University [Columbus].  Next to her is the famous psychiatrist, Dr. Frances [Cress] Welsing.  And at the end, the, people in between there are, are  planners who were part of this Afrocentric training project in Ohio.  And at the very end  is Tony Brown, famous journalist from 'Tony Brown's Journal.'
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Tony Brown and Drs. A. Hilliard, M. Asante, M. Karenga, L. James Myers, F. Cress Welsing (1995)] [Columbus, OH] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2398
Speaker 1: In, in 1995, when I went to Ghana, I was "instooled" as a chief, what is known  as a development chief, nkosohene, at Abo -- Abono lakeside.  That's A-B-O-N-O, in,  near Kumasi, Ghana.  And this has me dressed as a chief with my umbrella carrier behind  me, like at a ceremony kind of welcoming me to the village.  And my name as the chief  was, I was named Nana, which means king, Owusu, O-W-U, O-W-U-S-U, Nkwantabisa  the Third.  Owusu Nkwantabisa the Third.  That's N-K-W-A-N-T-A-B-I-S-A, Nana  Owusu Nkwantabisa the third.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar "Instooled" as Development Chief in Abono Village, Ghana (1995)] [Abono, Ghana, West Africa] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2399
Speaker 1: This is actually a picture that was taken at a conference in Selma, Alabama in 19 --  during the time I was living in Chicago [Illinois] -- in 1976.  And that's, of course, Dick Gregory,  who's one of the presenters at the conf -- conference in the insert picture photo to the left.  Tyrone Brooks sitting next to me with the large Afro.  He was a activist scholar in  Atlanta.  And to my left is Dr. Ralph Abernathy, distinguished colleague of Dr. Martin  Luther King, Jr. who was, who was also on the program that I, where I was speaking in,  in Alabama.
Speaker 2: [Newspaper Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Dick Gregory, Tyrone Brooks and Dr. Ralph Abernathy in Selma, AL (1976)] [Selma, AL] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2400
Speaker 1: Taken of Khalilah Ali, taking a picture of  me.  At that point, that was during the time I was working in Chicago [Illinois].  Khalilah Ali, of  course, is Muhammad Ali's wife and mother of most of his children.  And she was, at  that time, working as a photographer for the 'Muslim Journal' newspaper.  And she was  in my office in Chicago taking a picture of me while the story was being done on her by  'Jet' magazine.
Speaker 2: [Newspaper Photo -- Na'im Akbar with Khalilah Ali in Chicago, IL] [Chicago, IL] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2401
Speaker 1: Okay, this is October 16, 1995 at the Million Man March and I was one of the speakers at  the early session.  That's on the Capitol steps in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar Speaking at the Million Man March, Washington, D.C. (10/16/1995)] [Washington, D.C.] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2402
Speaker 1: Okay, in this photograph, I'm pouring libation at the inauguration of my very good  friend and student from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], Dr. Adib Shakir.  He was being inaugurated  as the President of Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] in 19 -- in 1989.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar Pouring Libation at Inauguration of Tougaloo College President, Dr. Adib Shakir (5/13/1989)] [Tougaloo, MS] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
Story_ID: 2403
Speaker 1: Senior Prom, my Senior year.  This is my date that year, Joan Bailey.  She was a  classmate of mine, had been in school with me since first grade, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 2: [Photo -- Na'im Akbar (Luther Weems, Jr.) on Senior Prom with Joan Bailey (1961)] [Tallahassee, FL] [Photo Courtesy of Dr. Na'im Akbar]
